This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Diffusion Models in Continual Learning
Paweł Skierś
Warsaw University of Technology

Kamil Deja
Research Institute IDEAS
Warsaw University of Technology

pawel.skiers.stud@pw.edu.pl

kamil.deja@pw.edu.pl

Abstract

Algorithm 1 Generative replay
Input: G, C, sequence of tasks {Di }N
i=1
G ← train generative model(G, D1 )
C ← train classifier(C, D1 )
for i in 2 . . . N do
S ← sample dataset(G)
B ← Di ∪ S
G ← train generative model(G, B)
C ← train classifier(C, B)
end for

In this work, we introduce JDCL – a new method for continual learning with generative rehearsal based on joint diffusion models. Neural networks suffer from catastrophic
forgetting defined as an abrupt loss in the model’s performance when retrained with additional data coming from
a different distribution. Generative-replay-based continual
learning methods try to mitigate this issue by retraining a
model with a combination of new and rehearsal data sampled from a generative model. In this work, we propose to
extend this idea by combining a continually trained classifier with a diffusion-based generative model into a single –
jointly optimized neural network. We show that such shared
parametrization, combined with the knowledge distillation
technique, allows for stable adaptation to new tasks without catastrophic forgetting. We evaluate our approach on
several benchmarks, where it outperforms recent state-ofthe-art generative replay techniques. Additionally, we extend our method to the semi-supervised continual learning
setup, where it outperforms competing buffer-based replay
techniques, and evaluate, in a self-supervised manner, the
quality of trained representations.

Such an approach introduces an imbalance between the
generative model and the classifier. The generative model
plays a crucial role as a knowledge consolidation method
that stores information about old tasks, while the classifier
is highly dependent on the quality of generated samples,
and the effectiveness of the knowledge transfer from the
generative part of the system. Consequently, several studies [8, 32, 73] suggest that it may be advantageous to reset
the classifier’s weights entirely and retrain it from scratch
for each task, using a blend of new data and sampled generations – a solution that contradicts the principles of continual learning.
At the same time, stable classifier retraining using only
generated data remains a challenge. Even state-of-the-art
diffusion-based generative models are known to have significant limitations in precise modeling of data distribution [56], which results in the degradation of the classifier’s
performance.
In this work, we propose to address this limitation by introducing a joint model that combines the generative and
discriminative models into a single parametrization. In particular, we extract the latent features from the UNet [49]
trained as a denoising diffusion model and use them for
classification. We optimize our joint model with a sum of
generative and discriminative objectives. Such an approach
directly removes the need for transferring the knowledge
from the generative model to the classifier when retraining
the model on a sequence of tasks.
To visualize the main benefit of this approach, we conduct a simple experiment that highlights the drawbacks of

1. Introduction
Contemporary deep neural networks can be trained to
human-level performance on a variety of different problems. However, contrary to humans, when retraining the
same models to learn an additional task, neural networks
suffer from catastrophic forgetting [15] defined as an abrupt
loss in performance on the previous task when adapting to
a new one. Continual learning approaches try to mitigate
this issue. In particular, replay-based techniques retrain the
model with a mix of new data examples and samples from
the past tasks stored in the memory buffer [1, 48]. However, since the memory buffer has to constantly grow, new
methods [58, 69] use generative models to generate synthetic versions of past experiences.
In the majority of the recent works, the generative replay
technique follows the simple algorithm:

4380

