This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reflect-DiT: Inference-Time Scaling for Text-to-Image Diffusion Transformers
via In-Context Reflection
Shufan Li→1 , Konstantinos Kallidromitis→2 , Akash Gokul→3 , Arsh Koneru1
Yusuke Kato2 , Kazuki Kozuka 2 , Aditya Grover1
1
UCLA 2 Panasonic AI Research 3 Salesforce AI Research
*Equal Contribution
Correspondence to jacklishufan@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

Generation N

The predominant approach to advancing text-to-image generation has been training-time scaling, where larger models are trained on more data using greater computational
resources. While effective, this approach is computationally expensive, leading to growing interest in inference-time
scaling to improve performance. Currently, inference-time
scaling for text-to-image diffusion models is largely limited to best-of-N sampling, where multiple images are generated per prompt and a selection model chooses the best
output. Inspired by the recent success of reasoning models
like DeepSeek-R1 in the language domain, we introduce an
alternative to naive best-of-N sampling by equipping textto-image Diffusion Transformers with in-context reflection
capabilities. We propose Reflect-DiT, a method that enables
Diffusion Transformers to refine their generations using incontext examples of previously generated images alongside
textual feedback describing necessary improvements. Instead of passively relying on random sampling and hoping
for a better result in a future generation, Reflect-DiT explicitly tailors its generations to address specific aspects requiring enhancement. Experimental results demonstrate that
Reflect-DiT improves performance on the GenEval benchmark (+0.19) using SANA-1.0-1.6B as a base model. Additionally, it achieves a new state-of-the-art score of 0.81
on GenEval while generating only 20 samples per prompt,
surpassing the previous best score of 0.80, which was obtained using a significantly larger model (SANA-1.5-4.8B)
with 2048 samples under the best-of-N approach.1

Generation N-3

Generation N-2

Generation N-1

DiT

Feedback
VLM

Incorrect Image

Matches
Prompt

Correct
Image

Figure 1. Reflect-DiT iteratively refines image generation by
using a vision-language model (VLM) to critique generations
and a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) to self-improve using past
generations and feedback. Specifically, at each generation step
N, feedback from previous iterations (N-3, N-2, N-1, . . . ) are incorporated to progressively improve future generations. Unlike
traditional best-of-N sampling, Reflect-DiT actively corrects errors in object count, position, and attributes, enabling more precise
generations with fewer samples.

1. Introduction

[39, 42, 43, 60]. However, scaling the training of such models, i.e. using more data and/or larger models, is computationally expensive, as exponential increases in compute
are required to achieve near-linear performance gains [28].
Recently, works studying Large Language Models (LLMs),
which exhibit similar scaling laws, have explored inferencetime scaling as another means of improving model performance [5, 48, 59, 69]. These approaches introduce additional compute resources during inference, either by generating many samples and employing a selection mechanism to find the best output [29] or by prompting the LLM

Text-to-image diffusion models have made significant
progress by training larger architectures with more data
1 Code will be available at https://github.com/jacklishufan/Reflect-DiT

15657

