This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WaveMamba: Wavelet-Driven Mamba Fusion for RGB-Infrared Object
Detection
Haodong Zhu1∗ Wenhao Dong1∗ Linlin Yang2† Hong Li1 Yuguang Yang1
Yangyang Ren1 Qingcheng Zhu1 Zichao Feng1 Changbai Li1 Shaohui Lin4
Runqi Wang3 Xiaoyan Luo1† Baochang Zhang1
1
Beihang University, China
2
Communication University of China, China
3
Beijing Jiaotong University, China
4
East China Normal University, China

Abstract
Leveraging the complementary characteristics of visible
(RGB) and infrared (IR) imagery offers significant potential for improving object detection. In this paper, we propose WaveMamba, a cross-modality fusion method that efficiently integrates the unique and complementary frequency
features of RGB and IR decomposed by Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT). An improved detection head incorporating the Inverse Discrete Wavelet Transform (IDWT) is also
proposed to reduce information loss and produce the final
detection results. The core of our approach is the introduction of WaveMamba Fusion Block (WMFB), which facilitates comprehensive fusion across low-/high-frequency
sub-bands. Within WMFB, the Low-frequency Mamba Fusion Block (LMFB), built upon the Mamba framework, first
performs initial low-frequency feature fusion with channel swapping, followed by deep fusion with an advanced
gated attention mechanism for enhanced integration. Highfrequency features are enhanced using a strategy that applies an “absolute maximum” fusion approach. These advancements lead to significant performance gains, with our
method surpassing state-of-the-art approaches and achieving average mAP improvements of 4.5% on four benchmarks.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) shows the averaged normalized information entropy
of low- and high-frequency components from RGB and IR images
in M 3 FD val dataset using DWT. (b) depicts the RGB and IR features filtered by DWT in two directions, with low-frequency (L)
and high-frequency (H) components obtained in each direction, resulting in four feature sub-bands: LL, LH, HL, and HH. Red and
blue dashed boxes highlight the low-frequency and high-frequency
components, respectively. The first row shows RGB and the second row shows IR components. (c) shows the result of fusion of
each frequency.

The fusion of multi-spectral features from visible (RGB)
and infrared (IR) imagery has emerged as a pivotal technique in computer vision. This is especially applicable
to scenarios in challenging environments where traditional
∗ Equal contribution.

methods alone may be insufficient [21, 56, 63]. RGB-based
methods often encounter limitations in low-light or adverse

{HaodongZhu, ZB2315207}@buaa.edu.cn

† Corresponding author.

11219

