This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Few-Shot Vision-Language Classification with Large Multimodal
Model Features
Chancharik Mitra1* Brandon Huang2* Tianning Chai2 Zhiqiu Lin1
Rogerio Feris4 Leonid Karlinsky4 Trevor Darrell2 Deva Ramanan1
1

Assaf Arbelle3
Roei Herzig2, 4

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of California, Berkeley
3
IBM Research 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Generative Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) like LLaVA
and Qwen-VL excel at a wide variety of vision-language
(VL) tasks. Despite strong performance, LMMs’ generative outputs are not specialized for vision-language classification tasks (i.e., tasks with vision-language inputs and
discrete labels) such as image classification and multiplechoice VQA. One key challenge in utilizing LMMs for these
tasks is the extraction of useful features from generative
LMMs. To overcome this, we propose an approach that
leverages multimodal feature extraction from the LMM’s
latent space. Toward this end, we present Sparse Attention Vectors (SAVs)—a finetuning-free method that leverages sparse attention head activations (fewer than 5% of
the heads) in LMMs as strong feature representations. With
only few-shot examples, SAVs demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance compared to a variety of few-shot and finetuned baselines on a collection of vision-language classification tasks. Our experiments also imply that SAVs can
scale in performance with additional examples and generalize to similar tasks, establishing SAVs as both effective
and robust multimodal feature representations.

Figure 1. Sparse Attention Vectors (SAVs) Overview. We develop a method for extracting features from a generative LMM
without finetuning. We first extract a sparse set of attention vectors for each task given a set of few-shot examples, and then, we
utilize these attention vectors directly as features for downstream
vision-language classification tasks.

1. Introduction
and even classical machine learning methods [6] on image
classification tasks. One reason that CLIP-like models excel at classification is the ease of extracting visual or textual features from modality-specific encoders. However,
such models cannot process joint vision-language inputs, as
LMMs can. Our goal is to extract compact features from
generative LMMs, enabling downstream discrete labeling
tasks such as classification and multiple-choice VQA.
Feature extraction is a well-explored field in both visiononly [15, 83, 94] and language-only encoder models [13,
81], but such is not the case with generative models. Most

Generative Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) such as
GPT-4V [73], LLaVA [59, 60], and QwenVL [3] demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on open-ended visionlanguage (VL) tasks like image captioning [54, 107], visual question answering [2, 32, 43], and language grounding [38, 65]. However, despite their remarkable performance on generative tasks, these models struggle on visionlanguage classification tasks, where responses are a discrete
set of labels [8, 111]. Indeed, LMMs with billions of parameters and trained on trillions more tokens of data underperform smaller encoder VLMs like CLIP and SigLIP [8, 111]

2760

