This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ONLY: One-Layer Intervention Sufficiently Mitigates Hallucinations in
Large Vision-Language Models
Zifu Wan* Ce Zhang* Silong Yong Martin Q. Ma Simon Stepputtis
Louis-Philippe Morency Deva Ramanan Katia Sycara Yaqi Xie
Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Recent Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have introduced a new paradigm for understanding and reasoning about image input through textual responses. Although
they have achieved remarkable performance across a range
of multi-modal tasks, they face the persistent challenge of
hallucination, which introduces practical weaknesses and
raises concerns about their reliable deployment in realworld applications. Existing work has explored contrastive
decoding approaches to mitigate this issue, where the output of the original LVLM is compared and contrasted with
that of a perturbed version. However, these methods require
two or more queries that slow down LVLM response generation, making them less suitable for real-time applications.
To overcome this limitation, we propose ONLY, a trainingfree decoding approach that requires only a single query
and a one-layer intervention during decoding, enabling efficient real-time deployment. Specifically, we enhance textual outputs by selectively amplifying crucial textual information using a text-to-visual entropy ratio for each token.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed ONLY consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods across various benchmarks while requiring minimal implementation effort and computational cost. Code is available at https://github.com/zifuwan/ONLY.

Figure 1. Comparisons of accuracy and inference speed of multiple hallucination mitigation approaches. The size of bubbles
stands for the GPU memory consumption. Our method effectively
mitigates hallucination with only 0.07× extra time.

of LVLMs in real-world applications where precise visual
interpretation is essential [2, 3, 24]. Therefore, addressing
hallucinations in LVLMs is crucial to ensuring their safe
and effective deployment in critical domains.
To alleviate the hallucination problem, early work
identified biased training sets as a critical cause and, as a
result, attempted to establish curated training datasets and
adopt robust fine-tuning techniques [5, 31, 44]. However,
their reliance on additional data and the need for fine-tuning
large-scale models make these approaches time-consuming
and impractical for individual users. Another common
approach is contrastive decoding [18], which eliminates
the need for costly training by directly intervening in the
decoding process during inference. Specifically, these
methods typically introduce a distorted set of inputs,
and contrast their respective token predictions with the
predictions from original data to mitigate undesired hallucinations [8, 10, 16, 35]. Although existing contrastive
decoding-based approaches achieve notable performance
improvements, they require multiple LVLM queries to
process both the original and distorted inputs, resulting
in response times that are twice as long, or more, making

1. Introduction
Recent advances in large vision-language models
(LVLMs), which expand the capabilities of large language
models (LLMs) to visual understanding and reasoning [1,
17, 37], have demonstrated exceptional performance across
various vision-language tasks, such as object detection [36,
40], segmentation [15, 34], and image captioning [20, 28].
However, a persistent challenge with current LVLMs is their
tendency to generate hallucinated content, where the generated responses do not align accurately with the actual image input [24]. This can significantly impact the reliability
* Equal contribution.

Contact: zifuw@cs.cmu.edu.

3225

