This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiSCO-3D : Discovering and segmenting Sub-Concepts from Open-vocabulary
queries in NeRF
Doriand Petit12
Steve Bourgeois1
Vincent Gay-Bellile1
Florian Chabot1
Loı̈c Barthe2
1
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France, first.last@cea.fr
2
IRIT, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, France, first.last@irit.fr

Figure 1. We introduce the 3D Open-Vocabulary Sub-concepts Discovery (OV-SD) paradigm, which aims to provide a 3D semantic
segmentation adapted to both the scene (semantic classes are discovered from the scene content) and user queries (semantic classes should
be semantically related to the queries, i.e. sub-concepts of queries). DiSCO-3D is the first solution to address this challenge and stands out
for its versatility, as it covers 3D OV-SD’s edge cases: Open-Vocabulary Segmentation and Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation.

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D semantic segmentation [26] aims to decompose a 3D
scene based on the semantic meaning of its components.
This process provides a representation that emphasizes the
main concepts, or semantic classes, within the scene, without distinguishing between object instances. Such highlevel representations are essential in many perception applications across diverse fields, including autonomous vehicles
[7], robotics [10] and medical image analysis [1].

3D semantic segmentation provides high-level scene understanding for applications in robotics, autonomous systems, etc. Traditional methods adapt exclusively to either task-specific goals (open-vocabulary segmentation) or
scene content (unsupervised semantic segmentation). We
propose DiSCO-3D, the first method addressing the broader
problem of 3D Open-Vocabulary Sub-concepts Discovery,
which aims to provide a 3D semantic segmentation that
adapts to both the scene and user queries. We build DiSCO3D on Neural Fields representations, combining unsupervised segmentation with weak open-vocabulary guidance.
Our evaluations demonstrate that DiSCO-3D achieves effective performance in Open-Vocabulary Sub-concepts Discovery and exhibits state-of-the-art results in the edge cases
of both open-vocabulary and unsupervised segmentation.

In practice, however, multiple semantic decompositions
are appropriate for any given scene. The suitability of a
particular decomposition depends on how well it preserves
relevant information for a specific downstream task. This
means that the semantic segmentation should be adapted to
both the content of the scene and the task’s requirements.

20043

Adaptation to the downstream task should involve not
only providing the relevant semantic classes for the task,

