This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stereo Any Video: Temporally Consistent Stereo Matching
Junpeng Jing

Weixun Luo Ye Mao † Krystian Mikolajczyk
Imperial College London

https://tomtomtommi.github.io/StereoAnyVideo/

time

Figure 1. Prediction on a dynamic real-world stereo video. Our method produces temporally consistent and accurate disparities without
flickering, enabling the reconstruction of dense and clean metric point clouds for dynamic scenes. See video for better visualization.

Abstract
This paper introduces Stereo Any Video, a powerful framework for video stereo matching. It can estimate spatially
accurate and temporally consistent disparities without relying on auxiliary information such as camera poses or optical flow. The strong capability is driven by rich priors from
monocular video depth models, which are integrated with
convolutional features to produce stable representations.
To further enhance performance, key architectural innovations are introduced: all-to-all-pairs correlation, which
constructs smooth and robust matching cost volumes, and
temporal convex upsampling, which improves temporal coherence. These components collectively enhance robustness, accuracy, and temporal consistency, establishing a
new standard in video stereo matching. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-

art performance across multiple datasets both qualitatively
and quantitatively in zero-shot settings, as well as strong
generalization to real-world indoor and outdoor scenarios.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author: ye.mao21@imperial.ac.uk

Video stereo matching is a task to reconstruct a 3D scene
from a stereo camera. It estimates disparity by identifying
the horizontal correspondences between rectified left and
right images at each time step. Consistent and accurate
disparity estimation is crucial for reconstructing and understanding real-world 3D scenes, benefiting various downstream tasks such as autonomous driving, robotic navigation, and virtual/augmented reality.
With the advances in deep learning, stereo matching
has seen significant progress [27, 31, 55, 61], achieving
promising performance on public benchmarks [13, 44, 45].

20836

