This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QuickSplat: Fast 3D Surface Reconstruction via Learned Gaussian Initialization

Yueh-Cheng Liu

Lukas Höllein

Matthias Nießner

Angela Dai

Technical University of Munich

973s

2DGS

124s

GS2Mesh

Rel depth error

1796s

Ours

Time (s)

Figure 1. QuickSplat performs surface reconstruction of large indoor scenes from multi-view images as input. We learn strong priors
for initialization of gaussian splatting optimization for surface reconstruction, as well as for per-iteration joint densification and gaussian
updates. This results in high-quality mesh geometry that more accurately models flat wall structures as well as object details, while
optimizing significantly faster than baselines.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Surface reconstruction is fundamental to computer vision
and graphics, enabling applications in 3D modeling, mixed
reality, robotics, and more. Existing approaches based
on volumetric rendering obtain promising results, but optimize on a per-scene basis, resulting in a slow optimization that can struggle to model under-observed or textureless regions. We introduce QuickSplat, which learns datadriven priors to generate dense initializations for 2D gaussian splatting optimization of large-scale indoor scenes.
This provides a strong starting point for the reconstruction,
which accelerates the convergence of the optimization and
improves the geometry of flat wall structures. We further
learn to jointly estimate the densification and update of the
scene parameters during each iteration; our proposed densifier network predicts new Gaussians based on the rendering gradients of existing ones, removing the needs of heuristics for densification. Extensive experiments on large-scale
indoor scene reconstruction demonstrate the superiority of
our data-driven optimization. Concretely, we accelerate
runtime by 8x, while decreasing depth errors by 48% in
comparison to state of the art methods.

Surface reconstruction of large, real-world scenes is a key
problem in computer vision and graphics. Reconstructing
high-quality surfaces is essential to many applications, such
as creating effective virtual environments that support physical reasoning, enabling accurate simulations, and imbuing
robots with crucial knowledge for navigation and interaction. In particular, achieving both high fidelity as well as
efficient and fast reconstruction for large scenes remains a
difficult problem.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27] achieves
photorealistic novel-view-synthesis from multi-view images as input. It parameterizes a scene as a set of Gaussian
primitives that are initialized from SfM and subsequently
optimized and densified using reconstruction losses and a
differentiable volumetric renderer. Subsequent works extend 3DGS to also obtain accurate surface reconstructions
[9, 22, 25, 46, 55]. However, these methods typically optimize each scene separately, i.e., many iterations of gradient
descent are required, which can take over 30 minutes for
large-scale indoor scenes [52]. Additionally, the surface is
only optimized from the observed input images, but capturing sufficiently many diverse images remains challenging
for large scenes. The resulting geometry may thus contain
missing or deformed regions where there is less view cov-

27851

