This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MDD: A Dataset for Text-and-Music Conditioned Duet Dance Generation
Prerit Gupta

Jason Alexander Fotso-Puepi Zhengyuan Li Jay Mehta
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA

Aniket Bera

{gupta596, jfotsopu, li5280, mehta208, aniketbera}@purdue.edu
https://gprerit96.github.io/mdd-page

Figure 1. Overview of the Multimodal DuetDance (MDD) dataset which includes duet dance motions, music and multi-faceted text
annotations. Left: An example sample from the Jive genre with paired motion and text. Top right: The dataset enables two key downstream
tasks—Text-to-Duet (Text2Duet) and Text-to-Dance Accompaniment (Text2DanceAcc). Bottom right: Examples of the diverse movement
vocabulary captured in our annotations, highlighting spatial relationships, body dynamics, and rhythmic patterns.

Abstract

tasks to support future research. Please refer to the project
website for the latest updates.

We introduce Multimodal DuetDance (MDD), a diverse
multimodal benchmark dataset designed for text-controlled
and music-conditioned 3D duet dance motion generation.
Our dataset comprises 620 minutes of high-quality motion
capture data performed by professional dancers, synchronized with music, and detailed with over 10K fine-grained
natural language descriptions. The annotations capture a
rich movement vocabulary, detailing spatial relationships,
body movements, and rhythm, making MDD the first dataset
to seamlessly integrate human motions, music, and text for
duet dance generation. We introduce two novel tasks supported by our dataset: (1) Text-to-Duet, where given music
and a textual prompt, both the leader and follower dance
motion are generated (2) Text-to-Dance Accompaniment,
where given music, textual prompt, and the leader’s motion, the follower’s motion is generated in a cohesive, textaligned manner. We include baseline evaluations on both

1. Introduction

13932

Duet dancing is a complex form of interactive human motion that requires precise coordination and synchronization between two dancers. Unlike solo performances, duet
dances involve intricate spatial relationships, dynamic partner interactions, and continuous mutual adaptation to music beats. The lead dancer directs the interaction through
movement cues synchronized with the music beats, while
the follower responds in real-time, maintaining harmony
and adding stylistic variations. This interdependent relationship presents significant modeling challenges, including movement unpredictability, motion misalignments, and
inconsistencies in interaction dynamics, making duet dance
generation substantially more complex than single-person
dance synthesis. To address these challenges, introducing

