This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Gaussian Splatting Driven Multi-View Robust Physical Adversarial
Camouflage Generation
Tianrui Lou1,2 Xiaojun Jia3 Siyuan Liang4 Jiawei Liang1 Ming Zhang5 Yanjun Xiao6 Xiaochun Cao1,2,∗
1

Sun Yat-Sen University
5

2

Peng Cheng Laboratory

3

Nanyang Technological University

4

National University of Singapore

National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information System Security

{loutianrui, jiaxiaojunqaq, pandaliang521}@gmail.com
zm stiss@163.com

xiaoyanjun@nsfocus.com

6

Nsfocus

liangjw57@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Physical adversarial attack methods expose the vulnerabilities of deep neural networks and pose a significant
threat to safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous driving. Camouflage-based physical attack is a more promising approach compared to the patch-based attack, offering
stronger adversarial effectiveness in complex physical environments. However, most prior work relies on mesh priors
of the target object and virtual environments constructed
by simulators, which are time-consuming to obtain and inevitably differ from the real world. Moreover, due to the
limitations of the backgrounds in training images, previous methods often fail to produce multi-view robust adversarial camouflage and tend to fall into sub-optimal solutions. Due to these reasons, prior work lacks adversarial effectiveness and robustness across diverse viewpoints
and physical environments. We propose a physical attack
framework based on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), named
PGA, which provides rapid and precise reconstruction with
few images, along with photo-realistic rendering capabilities. Our framework further enhances cross-view robustness and adversarial effectiveness by preventing mutual and
self-occlusion among Gaussians and employing a min-max
optimization approach that adjusts the imaging background
of each viewpoint, helping the algorithm filter out nonrobust adversarial features. Extensive experiments validate
the effectiveness and superiority of PGA. Our code is available at: https://github.com/TRLou/PGA.

Figure 1. Visualization of multi-view robust adversarial camouflage generated by PGA, which effectively causes the victim detector to miss detections or misclassify the object across various environmental settings, including different shooting distances, pitch
angles, azimuth angles, and weather conditions.

1. Introduction

deployed in the real world pose even greater threats, stifling the use of DNNs in safety-critical domains such as autonomous driving [3, 5, 56], security surveillance [28, 29,
33–37, 43, 58, 59], and remote sensing [32, 38, 57]. We
focus on physical attacks in autonomous driving, primarily
targeting vehicle detection.
Physical attacks are often crafted in the digital domain
and subsequently implemented by altering the physical
properties of the target, such as patch application [2, 8, 17]
or camouflage deployment [49, 50, 53–55, 62, 64]. The
main challenge of physical attacks lies in minimizing the
degradation of adversarial effectiveness when the generated
adversarial camouflage is transferred from the digital domain to the physical domain, primarily due to environmental factors such as shooting distances, pitch angles, azimuth
angles, and weather conditions.
Since adversarial camouflage offers higher robustness
across different environmental settings compared to adver-

Despite the remarkable success of deep neural networks
(DNNs) in various fields, such as computer vision [15] and
natural language processing [9, 52], the emergence of adversarial attacks highlights the vulnerability of DNNs. Although digital attacks [4, 11, 12, 14, 22–24, 39, 42] targeting various tasks have raised concerns, physical attacks

28752

