This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global and Local Entailment Learning for Natural World Imagery
Srikumar Sastry

Aayush Dhakal Eric Xing Subash Khanal Nathan Jacobs
Washington University in St. Louis
{s.sastry, a.dhakal, e.xing, k.subash, jacobsn}@wustl.edu

Abstract
Learning the hierarchical structure of data in visionlanguage models is a significant challenge. Previous works
have attempted to address this challenge by employing entailment learning. However, these approaches fail to model
the transitive nature of entailment explicitly, which establishes the relationship between order and semantics within
a representation space. In this work, we introduce Radial
Cross-Modal Embeddings (RCME), a framework that enables the explicit modeling of transitivity-enforced entailment. Our proposed framework optimizes for the partial
order of concepts within vision-language models. By leveraging our framework, we develop a hierarchical visionlanguage foundation model capable of representing the hierarchy in the Tree of Life. Our experiments on hierarchical species classification and hierarchical retrieval tasks
demonstrate the enhanced performance of our models compared to the existing state-of-the-art models. Our code
and models are open-sourced at https://vishu26.
github.io/RCME.

1. Introduction
Computer Vision has become increasingly valuable in understanding the natural world, thanks to the rise of open citizen science platforms and the abundance of consumer data.
These tools, complemented by domain experts, have been
instrumental in addressing pressing challenges at scale such
as automatic species identification [39, 42], animal behavior
understanding [6, 25] and visual geolocalization [16, 43].
Nevertheless, the complex and ever-changing nature of our
world poses a significant challenge in constructing models
that can generalize and adapt to novel data.
BioCLIP [36] and BioTroveCLIP [45] successfully attempted to build a vision-language foundation model for the
Tree of Life. Recently, TaxaBind [34] extended BioCLIP’s
capabilities to handle additional modalities such as audio
and satellite imagery. However, these models fail to fully
leverage the hierarchical nature of the label space. This limited capability of these models limits them to reason at the

Figure 1. Conceptual overview of our method focusing on preserving the global order of concepts in vision-language models
according to their distance from an entailment root. Our method
aims to enforce transitivity in entailment.

most granular level of the hierarchy (i.e. species) using a
fixed database of taxonomic labels. Consequently, this restriction prevents the models from accurately representing
the actual taxonomic system and the evolution of species in
the Tree of Life.
We argue that learning hierarchical representations for
the Tree of Life is crucial. A significant portion of species
on Earth remain undescribed [29], and labeling specimens
up to the species rank is expensive and requires adequate
expertise for biologists [15, 32, 37]. Furthermore, the
taxonomic classification system and labels are subject to
change over time due to mislabeling or the discovery of
new species [36]. Hierarchical representations can allow
for reasoning about such species at any rank and can eventually be used for grouping and routing specimens to biologists with appropriate expertise [29]. It can also help understand the evolution of certain species in the Tree of Life.
For end users with arbitrary expertise, hierarchical representations facilitate classification at any taxonomic rank. Finally, in the paper, we empirically demonstrate the benefits
of such structured representations for classification and retrieval tasks.
A popular technique for learning hierarchical representations for vision-language models is entailment learning,

15770

