This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Head2Body: Body pose generation from Multi-sensory Head-mounted Inputs
Minh Tran1 ,* Hongda Mao2 , Qingshuang Chen2 , Yelin Kim2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
2
Amazon, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
minhntra@usc.edu

Abstract

of the device wearer using inputs such as head-mounted
cameras and inertial measurement units (IMUs), has significant applications in immersive VR/AR experiences, robotics,
and assistive technology. Accurate egocentric pose estimation could enhance accessibility for individuals with limited
mobility by enabling gesture-based control in smart environments, allowing them to interact with devices and appliances
through natural, head-directed movements. Such technology
could also enhance social presence in virtual meetings by
translating subtle head and body cues into expressive avatars,
fostering more engaging remote interactions.

Generating body pose from head-mounted, egocentric
inputs is essential for immersive VR/AR and assistive technologies, as it supports more natural interactions. However,
the task is challenging due to limited visibility of body parts
in first-person views and the sparseness of sensory data, with
only a single device placed on the head. To address these
challenges, we introduce Head2Body, a novel framework
for body pose estimation that effectively combines headIMU and egocentric visual data. First, we introduce a pretrained IMU encoder, trained on over 1,700 hours of Ego4D
IMU data from head-mounted devices, to better capture
detailed temporal motion cues given limited labeled egocentric pose data. For visual processing, we leverage large
vision-language models (LVLMs) to segment body parts that
appear sporadically in video frames to improve visual feature extraction. To better guide pose generation from sparse
head-mounted signals, we incorporate a residual Vector
Quantized Variational Autoencoder (VQ-VAE) to represent
poses with discrete tokens, capturing high-frequency motion
patterns and improving over direct continuous regression,
which often lacks structure and temporal consistency. Our
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach, yielding 6–13% gains over state-of-the-art baselines on three datasets: AMASS, KinPoly, and EgoExo4D.
By capturing subtle temporal dynamics and leveraging complementary sensory data, our approach advances accurate
egocentric body pose estimation and sets a new benchmark
for multi-modal, first-person motion tracking.

Generating body pose from head-mounted sensors introduces unique challenges. First, relying solely on sparse
signals from a head-mounted IMU and camera creates high
ambiguity, as these inputs provide limited information about
the first-person’s full body pose. Previous works address
such limitation by adding more wearable devices, such as
wrist sensors, to increase input richness [18, 23, 39, 45]. Another approach, such as in [23], involves extracting hand
keypoints from egocentric video frames to supplement the
limited sensor signals. Second, the lack of paired egocentric video with annotated body pose data poses a significant
barrier to train robust egocentric pose estimation models.
EgoEgo [25] tackles this by using two independently trained
modules on separate datasets: a SLAM-based head-pose
estimation module that operates on egocentric frames, and
a body-pose generation module conditioned on head poses,
which is trained on the large-scale AMASS dataset [31].
In this paper, we present Head2Body, an innovative framework for egocentric body pose estimation that combines both
visual and IMU data from only head-mounted devices. To
address the scarcity of labeled data, we pretrain an IMU encoder in a self-supervised manner on more than 1, 700 hours
of unlabeled head-IMU data from the Ego4D dataset [10].
This extensive pre-training captures intricate temporal patterns in head-IMU motion, significantly reducing reliance
on labeled data. We further simplify the pose generation
task by applying Vector Quantization [38] to the motion
data, transforming it into a discrete token prediction problem. This token-based generation approach reduces the task

1. Introduction
With the widespread adoption of head-mounted devices like
augmented reality (AR) headsets, wearable technology is
increasingly utilized for tracking and understanding human
body motion [1, 2, 22, 24, 26]. Egocentric body pose estimation [25, 29], which seeks to generate the 3D body posture
* This work was done during an internship at Amazon.

6849

