This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PlugMark: A Plug-in Zero-Watermarking Framework for Diffusion Models
Pengzhen Chen1,2,3 , Yanwei Liu†1,3 , Xiaoyan Gu†1,2,3 , Enci Liu4
Zhuoyi Shang1,2,3 , Xiangyang Ji5 , Wu Liu6
1
2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences

School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 State Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense
4

Columbia University

5

6

Tsinghua University

University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Diffusion models have significantly advanced the field of
image synthesis, making the protection of their intellectual property (IP) a critical concern. Existing IP protection methods primarily focus on embedding watermarks
into generated images by altering the structure of the diffusion process. However, these approaches inevitably compromise the quality of the generated images and are particularly vulnerable to fine-tuning attacks, especially for opensource models such as Stable Diffusion (SD). In this paper,
we propose PlugMark, a novel plug-in zero-watermarking
framework for diffusion models. The core idea of PlugMark is based on two observations: a classifier can be
uniquely characterized by its decision boundaries, and a
diffusion model can be uniquely represented by the knowledge acquired from training data. Building on this foundation, we introduce a diffusion knowledge extractor that can
be plugged into a diffusion model to extract its knowledge
and output a classification result. PlugMark subsequently
generates boundary representations based on this classification result, serving as a zero-distortion watermark that
uniquely represents the decision boundaries and, by extension, the knowledge of the diffusion model. Since only the
extractor requires training, the performance of the original
diffusion model remains unaffected. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that PlugMark can robustly extract
high-confidence zero-watermarks from both the original
model and its post-processed versions while effectively distinguishing them from non-post-processed diffusion models.

sequently, various downstream services incorporate welltrained large diffusion models like SD or their fine-tuned
versions into essential frameworks. As designing and training an efficient diffusion model requires substantial computational resources and these models carry valuable assets for
developers, their intellectual property (IP) could raise serious issues of IP infringement and economical disputes. Furthermore, dissemination of trained models can trigger ethnical concerns, and model misuse can be contentious. Therefore, safeguarding their IP and the traceability of stolen
models has become an increasingly critical concern.
Actually, there is a demand for the verification of stolen
models coupled with full access to the parameters, known
as the ‘white-box’ scenario. This scenario arises in several contexts: First, it typically occurs when models are deployed on devices that grant complete access to the owners
[36, 37]. Second, the administrators of model marketplaces,
such as Model Zoo[47], ONNX, and Hugging Face1 , have
full access to models. They aim to foster original development while penalizing plagiarism to maintain a healthy
ecosystem for developers. Furthermore, as [7, 37, 40] illustrates, models leaks are a significant issue. A common
practical scenario involves a two-step verification process:
an owner initially uses black-box techniques (i.e., analyzing only the inputs and outputs) to assess potential piracy.
If sufficient suspicious evidence is gathered, the second step
is to verify the ownership using ‘white-box’ methods with
access to the suspect parameters, which is usually implemented by law enforcement. This underscores the critical
need for effective white-box IP protection techniques, especially for open-source models like SD.
Watermarking [26, 31] has emerged as a promising approach for tracking the IP of models. Particularly, zerowatermarking [15, 56] is extremely appealing as it leverages
inherent characteristics of models as watermarks, avoiding
any alteration to model. Early watermarking methods for
models primarily focus on embedding watermarks into parameters or activations [4, 50, 52], which proves unsuitable

1. Introduction
In recent years, generative AI has witnessed tremendous
success, with numerous generative models emerging, particularly diffusion models. Models like DALL·E2 [43],
GLIDE[39] and Stable Diffusion (SD) [44] have shown remarkable capabilities to generate high-quality images. Con-

1 https://onnx.ai/, https://huggingface.co/

† Corresponding author. Email: {liuyanwei, guxiaoyan}@iie.ac.cn

17335

