This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Textured 3D Regenerative Morphing with 3D Diffusion Prior
Songlin Yang, Yushi Lan, Honghua Chen, Xingang Pan
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
sl.yang888@outlook.com, {yushi001, honghua.chen, xingang.pan}@ntu.edu.sg

Source

Regenerative Morphing

Target

Figure 1. The textured 3D morphing sequences regenerated using our method with 3D diffusion prior. Our method requires no categoryspecific alignment data for model training and no labor-intensive preprocessing for explicit correspondence, enabling smooth and plausible
morphing across diverse cross-category 3D object pairs. More video results can be found here.

Abstract
Textured 3D morphing creates smooth and plausible interpolation sequences between two 3D objects, focusing on
transitions in both shape and texture. This is important
for creative applications like visual effects in filmmaking.
Previous methods rely on establishing point-to-point correspondences and determining smooth deformation trajectories, which inherently restrict them to shape-only morphing on untextured, topologically aligned datasets. This
restriction leads to labor-intensive preprocessing and poor
generalization. To overcome these challenges, we propose
a method for 3D regenerative morphing using a 3D diffusion prior. Unlike previous methods that depend on explicit
correspondences and deformations, our method eliminates

15159

the additional need for obtaining correspondence and uses
the 3D diffusion prior to generate morphing. Specifically,
we first introduce a 3D diffusion model and interpolate the
source and target information at three levels: initial noise,
model parameters, and condition features. We then explore
an Attention Fusion strategy to generate smoother morphing sequences. To further improve the plausibility of semantic interpolation and the generated 3D surfaces, we propose
two strategies: (a) Token Reordering, where we match approximate tokens based on semantic analysis to guide implicit correspondences in the denoising process of the diffusion model, and (b) Low-Frequency Enhancement, where
we enhance low-frequency signals in the tokens to improve
the quality of generated surfaces. Experimental results
show that our method achieves superior smoothness and

