This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SUV: Suppressing Undesired Video Content via Semantic Modulation
Based on Text Embeddings
Xiang Lv

Mingwen Shao*

Lingzhuang Meng
Chang Liu
Yecong Wan
Xinyuan Chen
Shandong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Oil & Gas Industrial Software, Qingdao Institute of Software,
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)
lvxiang1997@126.com, smw278@126.com, lzhmeng1688@163.com, z23070142@s.upc.edu.cn,
yecongwan@gmail.com, b24070011@s.upc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recently years, text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models
have demonstrated extraordinary capabilities in generating
diverse and high-quality images [26]. With the rapid development of T2I diffusion models, text-to-video (T2V)
editing [25] task has also made significant breakthroughs,
which aims to edit the source video via text prompt to
generate a new video that meets expectations. At present,
T2V editing can be divided into two categories: fine-tuning
methods [8, 10] and training-free methods [20, 37].
The fine-tuning methods mainly utilize pre-trained T2I
diffusion models to modify the subject, attribute or style of
the video. For example, CC Edit [10] employs trident networks to fine-tune the pre-trained T2I diffusion model, separating structure from appearance to ensure accurate editing results. However, these methods are highly dependent
on a large amount of training data and computational resources due to the part of the network still needs to be
trained. To overcome these limitations, several trainingfree methods have been proposed. For instance, TokenFlow
[11] introduces a linear combination of diffusion features
to enhance the consistency of the video for reducing the
inter-frame flickering. In addition, COVE [33] proposes
an efficient sliding-window-based strategy to calculate the
similarity among tokens in the diffusion features of source
videos by utilizing the intrinsic correspondence of the diffusion features to further keep temporal consistency of video.
Nevertheless, these training-free methods still suffer from
two serious challenges. On the one hand, existing methods
fail to accurately understand negative text prompt content
(e.g., “without glasses” and “not wearing a hat”), resulting in undesired content appearing in the edited video. On
the other hand, these methods are not effective in maintaining the temporal consistency of the edited video, leading to
inter-frame flickering, as shown in Figure 1.
To address the aforementioned problems, we first ana-

Recently, text-driven diffusion models have significantly
promoted the development of video editing. However, there
still remain two practical challenges: (1) existing text-tovideo editing methods struggle to understand negative text
prompt, resulting in ineffective suppression of undesirable
content in edited video; (2) these methods are difficult to
maintain the temporal consistency of the edited video, leading to inter-frame flickering. To address the above challenges, we propose SUV, a novel semantic modulation
method based on text embeddings to suppress undesired
content in the edited video. Specifically, on the one hand, we
discover that the end embeddings (EE) contain substantial
coupled positive and negative embeddings, which is the primary reason for the appearance of undesirable content in
the edited video. Based on this discovery, we advocate decoupling the negative embeddings from the EE by employing singular value decomposition and propose an exponential suppression operator to decrease the singular values of
negative embeddings, thereby restraining the effect of negative embeddings on the edited video content. Subsequently,
two constraints are designed to further suppress negative
content while keep positive content unchanged via pushing
negative embeddings apart and pulling positive embeddings
closer. On the other hand, to boost the temporal consistency
of edited video, we devise a fuzzy feature selection strategy to fuse similar features in different frame for avoiding
inter-frame flickering. Benefiting from the above elaborate
designs, our method not only effectively suppresses undesired content of video, but also maintains inter-frame consistency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our SUV
significantly improves edit accuracy and temporal consistency of edited videos compared to existing methods.
* Corresponding author

18357

