This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Debiased Curriculum Adaptation for
Safe Transfer Learning in Chest X-ray Classification
Mingyang Liu1 , Xinyang Chen1B , Yang Shu2B , Xiucheng Li1 , Weili Guan3 , Liqiang Nie1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal University
3
School of Information Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
1

{mingyangliu1024, chenxinyang95, nieliqiang}@gmail.com

yshu@dase.ecnu.edu.cn, {lixiucheng,guanweili}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
C

Ple
ura
l

ly
ga
me
o
i
81.5
ard
79.4
79.1

Consolidation

76.9

75.1

72.1

70.2

Eff
usi
on

87.4
87.2

69.6

85.3
84.0

74.0 74.4

71.3

68.4
70.1

76.0

Atelectasis

Chest X-ray classification is extensively utilized within the
field of medical image analysis. However, manually labeling chest X-ray images is time-consuming and costly. Domain adaptation, which is designed to transfer knowledge
from related domains, could offer a promising solution. Existing methods employ feature adaptation or self-training
for knowledge transfer. Nonetheless, negative transfer is
observed due to the entanglement of class imbalance and
distribution shift in chest X-ray classification. In this paper,
we propose Debiased Curriculum Adaptation framework to
mitigate negative transfer in two aspects: (1) Curriculum
Adaptation, which is designed to transfer knowledge in an
easy-to-hard way, is proposed to alleviate confirmation bias
in self-training. (2) Spectral Debiasing is introduced to
harmonize the feature space between the source and target domains, as well as balance the feature space of positive
and negative samples. Extensive experiments on 72 transfer
tasks (including 6 diseases and 4 domains) demonstrate our
superiority over state-of-the-art methods. In comparison to
advanced methods, our approach effectively mitigates negative transfer, ensuring safe knowledge transfer.

77.4
82.3

71.3

74.2

Pn
eum
oni
a

83.0
85.0

a
em
Ed

Figure 1. Performance comparison with Source-only method
(without knowledge transfer). The label shows 6 common chest
diseases. DANN, CDAN and DALN are feature adaptation methods, while ST and CST are self-training methods.

1. Introduction

nario (source domain) and the deployment scenario (target
domain). Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), leveraging knowledge transfer from a related source domain to the
unlabeled target domain, can be a promising solution.
The mainstream paradigms for UDA are feature adaptation and self-training. Feature adaptation methods aim to
reduce the distance between the source and target feature
distributions, learning domain-invariant representations to
facilitate knowledge transfer across domains [8, 16, 33, 37,
49]. Self-training methods generate pseudo-labels for unlabeled data and jointly train the model using both source labels and target pseudo-labels [27, 31]. These two paradigms
are effective across various scenarios in general domain

Chest X-ray classification is crucial for diagnosing diseases
in healthcare and medical systems [10]. In recent years, the
advent of deep learning has led to the application of deep
models in chest X-ray classification. Nevertheless, the persistent challenges remain in the scarcity of labeled data, due
to the high cost of human annotation. Even though developing diagnostic models by fine-tuning limited labeled X-ray
images is effective, when deploying models in real clinical scenarios, performance drops happen. This is attributed
to the distribution difference between the development sce-

22610

