This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVG-Head: Hybrid Surface-Volumetric Gaussians for High-Fidelity
Head Reconstruction and Real-Time Editing
Heyi Sun1 Cong Wang1 Tian-Xing Xu1
Jingwei Huang2 Di Kang2 Chunchao Guo2 Song-Hai Zhang1†
1

Tsinghua University 2 Tencent Hunyuan

project page:

https://heyy-sun.github.io/SVG-Head/

Abstract

gaming [26], virtual reality [8, 18, 20], and film production [3, 35].

Creating high-fidelity and editable head avatars is a pivotal challenge in computer vision and graphics, boosting
many AR/VR applications. While recent advancements have
achieved photorealistic renderings and plausible animation, head editing, especially real-time appearance editing, remains challenging due to the implicit representation
and entangled modeling of the geometry and global appearance. To address this, we propose Surface-Volumetric
Gaussian Head Avatar (SVG-Head), a novel hybrid representation that explicitly models the geometry with 3D Gaussians bound on a FLAME mesh and leverages disentangled
texture images to capture the global appearance. Technically, it contains two types of Gaussians, in which surface
Gaussians explicitly model the appearance of head avatars
using learnable texture images, facilitating real-time texture editing, while volumetric Gaussians enhance the reconstruction quality of non-Lambertian regions (e.g., lips
and hair). To model the correspondence between 3D world
and texture space, we provide a mesh-aware Gaussian UV
mapping method, which leverages UV coordinates given by
the FLAME mesh to obtain sharp texture images and realtime rendering speed. A hierarchical optimization strategy
is further designed to pursue the optimal performance in
both reconstruction quality and editing flexibility. Experiments on the NeRSemble dataset show that SVG-Head not
only generates high-fidelity rendering results, but also is the
first method to obtain explicit texture images for Gaussian
head avatars and support real-time appearance editing.

Since mesh-based methods [1, 10, 11] rely heavily on
high-quality geometry and meticulous UV coordinates for
head avatar modeling, recent advances employ NeRF [19]
or 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [13] to capture highfidelity appearance from multi-view videos, with deformation fields [6, 33, 36, 37] or rigging techniques [22] for animation. However, the implicit representation of NeRF and
the entanglement of geometry and appearance for 3DGS
pose challenges for editing. Despite the potential for fast,
high-quality synthesis and editing [30] of 3DGS, it lacks
disentangled appearance modeling, limiting avatar editability. To address this, GaussianAvatar-Editor [17] aligns
head avatars with edited images from text-to-image models [2, 23], thereby struggling to support fine-grained edits
and 3D consistency. MeGA [29] adopts neural textures [25]
for high-fidelity renderings, taking minutes even hours to
perform optimization-based editing. Due to the lack of explicit global appearance modeling, the editability of reconstructed head avatars, especially real-time texture editing,
remains a critical yet long-standing problem.

1. Introduction

To achieve real-time texture-space editing in 3DGS
while preserving photorealistic quality, we propose SurfaceVolumetric Gaussian Head Avatar (SVG-Head), a dualrepresentation framework combining surface and volumetric Gaussians. Surface Gaussians (surf-GS) support texture
editing, while volumetric Gaussians (vol-GS) enhance reconstruction quality. Both types of Gaussians are bound
to a FLAME mesh [16] and driven by FLAME parameters for head animation. To enable real-time editing, we
first propose surf-GS that disentangle global appearance
from head geometry and support sampling Gaussians’ colors from two learnable texture images with our proposed
mesh-aware Gaussian UV mapping, including a diffuse texture image and an expression-dependent dynamic texture
image to capture dynamic facial details (e.g., wrinkles). To

Reconstructing head avatars for high-fidelity rendering, precise animation, and real-time editing remains a core challenge in computer vision and graphics, with applications in
† Corresponding authors.

13326

