This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SiM3D: Single-instance Multiview Multimodal and Multisetup
3D Anomaly Detection Benchmark
Alex Costanzino1

Pierluigi Zama Ramirez1 Luigi Lella1 Matteo Ragaglia2
Giuseppe Lisanti1 Luigi Di Stefano1
1

CVLab, University of Bologna, Italy

2

Alessandro Oliva2

SACMI Imola, Italy

https://alex-costanzino.github.io/SiM3D/

Abstract
We propose SiM3D, the first benchmark considering the integration of multiview and multimodal information for comprehensive 3D anomaly detection and segmentation (ADS),
where the task is to produce a voxel-based Anomaly Volume. Moreover, SiM3D focuses on a scenario of high interest in manufacturing: single-instance anomaly detection,
where only one object, either real or synthetic, is available
for training. In this respect, SiM3D stands out as the first
ADS benchmark that addresses the challenge of generalising from synthetic training data to real test data. SiM3D
includes a novel multimodal multiview dataset acquired using top-tier industrial sensors and robots. The dataset features multiview high-resolution images (12 Mpx) and point
clouds (∼7M points) for 333 instances of eight types of objects, alongside a CAD model for each type. We also provide manually annotated 3D segmentation GTs for anomalous test samples. To establish reference baselines for the
proposed multiview 3D ADS task, we adapt prominent singleview methods and assess their performance using novel
metrics that operate on Anomaly Volumes.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, anomaly detection and segmentation
(ADS) involves identifying anomalous samples and localising their defects. This task is challenging in industrial contexts due to the variability and rarity of defects. Typically,
ADS in the industry follows a cold-start approach, where
training is unsupervised and uses only defect-free (nominal) samples. Before the release of the MVTec AD dataset
in 2019 [4], only a limited number of ADS methods were
proposed, with just 9 publications in major computer vision
conferences (e.g., CVPR, ECCV, ICCV, WACV) over the
five years before. The introduction of MVTec AD marked
a pivotal moment in the field, fostering the publication of
roughly 172 papers in these venues over the next 5 years.
This dataset not only stimulated the development of several
ADS methods [14, 30, 36] but also promoted the creation
of novel and more challenging benchmarks. For instance,

Figure 1. SiM3D dataset overview. From top to bottom: the
single-instance real and synthetic training samples for object Plastic Stool, one of the anomalous samples from the test set.

20944

MVTec 3D-AD and [6] and Eyecandies [7] introduced the
first benchmarks deploying multimodal inputs to enhance
ADS performance. Then, PAD [45] and Real-IAD [35]
introduced novel benchmarks that leverage multiple RGB
views of objects. Although these benchmarks tackle various settings, two real industrial issues remain unaddressed.
First, existing benchmarks have primarily addressed the
problem of 2D ADS. Consequently, current methods gen-

