This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRM: Photometric Stereo based Large Reconstruction Model
Wenhang Ge1 *

Jiawei Feng1
Guibao Shen1 *
Ying-Cong Chen1, 2 †

Jiantao Lin1 *
Xinli Xu1
1

HKUST-GZ

2

3

HKUST

Abstract

Tao Hu3

Pico, Bytedance

suitable for rapid deployment in real world.
Feed-forward 3D generative models [13, 15, 51] have
been developed to address the limitations of per-scene optimization by training a generalizable model on large-scale
3D assets. Notably, the Large Reconstruction Model (LRM)
[13] has demonstrated promising results, exhibiting exceptional reconstruction speeds. The subsequent LRM series
[13, 39, 43, 46, 48] utilizes a Transformer-based architecture to encode either single or multi-view images, and decoding them into 3D representations, such as triplanes [3],
Flexicubes [36] or 3D Gaussians [39]. These 3D representations enable differentiable neural rendering from arbitrary
viewpoints, which is crucial for calculating multi-view reconstruction loss for optimization.

We propose PRM, a novel photometric stereo based large
reconstruction model to reconstruct high-quality meshes
with fine-grained details. Previous large reconstruction
models typically prepare training images under fixed and
simple lighting, offering minimal photometric cues for precise reconstruction. Furthermore, images containing specular surfaces are treated as out-of-distribution samples, resulting in degraded reconstruction quality. To handle these
challenges, PRM renders images by varying materials and
lighting, which not only improves the local details by providing rich photometric cues but also increases the model’s
robustness to variations in the appearance of input images. To offer enhanced flexibility, we incorporate a realtime physically-based rendering (PBR) method and mesh
rasterization for ground-truth rendering. By using an explicit mesh as 3D representation, PRM ensures the application of differentiable PBR for predicted rendering. This approach models specular color more accurately for images
with varying materials and illumination than previous neural rendering methods and supports multiple supervisions
for geometry optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PRM significantly outperforms other models.

While the LRM series effectively reconstructs globally
coherent 3D assets, it struggles with capturing fine-grained
details. This limitation stems from its reliance on images
rendered under fixed, simple lighting, which provide insufficient photometric information for detailed surface reconstruction. Additionally, the LRM series is sensitive to variations in input image appearance, particularly with glossy
surfaces, as these are out-of-distribution samples that rarely
occur in the training data. Moreover, the use of neural rendering for predicted rendering exacerbates this issue [41],
since the view-dependent effect is not considered.
To address the challenges, we introduce PRM, a photometric stereo based large reconstruction model. This model
is adept at capturing fine-grained local details and ensures
robustness against the complex appearances of input images. We achieve these objectives by leveraging images
with varying materials and illumination [10]. Specifically,
we render ground-truth images by varying camera pose, materials (i.e., metallic and roughness), and lighting. However,
rendering these images is not trivial since there are infinite
possible combinations of camera pose, materials and lighting. In the recent LRM series, images are typically rendered
offline using Blender’s Cycles engine [11]. While this approach produces high-quality, noise-free images, it requires
numerous samples of lighting directions, significantly increasing the time cost and making it expensive to maximize
the training sample distribution.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in generative models [12, 27, 38]
have spurred notable progress in 2D content creation, driven
by fast growth in data volumes. In contrast, the development in 3D field remains encumbered due to limited 3D
assets, which are essential for diverse applications including game modeling [8], computer animation [23, 32], and
virtual reality [35]. Traditional approaches to generating
3D assets have utilized optimization-based techniques from
multi-view posed images [42, 49, 50] or have harnessed
SDS-based distillation methods from 2D diffusion models
[25, 26, 34]. Despite their effectiveness, these methods often require increased computational costs, making them less
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

25009

