This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LATINO-PRO: LAtent consisTency INverse sOlver with PRompt Optimization
Alessio Spagnoletti1 * Jean Prost2 * Andrés Almansa1

Nicolas Papadakis3

Marcelo Pereyra4

1 Université Paris Cité, CNRS, MAP5 UMR 8145, F-75006 Paris, France 2 Université de Lille, CRIStAL UMR 9189, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
3 Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, INRIA, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251, F-33400 Talence, France
4 Heriot-Watt University, MACS & Maxwell Institute for Mathematical Sciences, EH14 4AS, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

Measurement

Abstract
Text-to-image latent diffusion models (LDMs) have recently emerged as powerful generative models with great
potential for solving inverse problems in imaging. However,
leveraging such models in a Plug & Play (PnP), zero-shot
manner remains challenging because it requires identifying
a suitable text prompt for the unknown image of interest.
Also, existing text-to-image PnP approaches are highly computationally expensive. We herein address these challenges
by proposing a novel PnP inference paradigm specifically
designed for embedding generative models within stochastic
inverse solvers, with special attention to Latent Consistency
Models (LCMs), which distill LDMs into fast generators.
We leverage our framework to propose LAtent consisTency
INverse sOlver (LATINO), the first zero-shot PnP framework
to solve inverse problems with priors encoded by LCMs.
Our conditioning mechanism avoids automatic differentiation and reaches SOTA quality in as little as 8 neural
function evaluations. As a result, LATINO delivers remarkably accurate solutions and is significantly more memory
and computationally efficient than previous approaches. We
then embed LATINO within an empirical Bayesian framework that automatically calibrates the text prompt from the
observed measurements by marginal maximum likelihood
estimation. Extensive experiments show that prompt selfcalibration greatly improves estimation, allowing LATINO
with PRompt Optimization to define new SOTAs in image
reconstruction quality and computational efficiency. The
code is available at latino-pro.github.io.

1. Introduction
We seek to recover on an unknown image of interest x,
taking values in Rn , from a measurement
y = Ax + n ,
where A is a linear measurement operator, and n is additive
Gaussian noise with covariance σn2 Id. We consider situa* Equal contribution.

GT

Ours

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of LATINO-PRO on the FFHQ1024 val dataset. Tasks: ×32 super-resolution, Gaussian deblur
σ = 20.0 pixels, Motion deblur.

tions in which the recovery of x from y is ill-conditioned
or ill-posed, leading to significant uncertainty about the solution. Adopting a Bayesian approach, we leverage prior
knowledge about x in order to regularize the problem and
deliver meaningful inferences that are well-posed. This is
achieved by specifying the marginal distribution p(x), socalled prior distribution, together with Bayes’ theorem to
obtain the posterior distribution p(x|y) = p(y|x)p(x)/p(y)
which models our knowledge about x after observing y.
Modern imaging techniques rely increasingly on pretrained foundational generative models as image priors. Developing methodology to leverage such models in a so-called
Plug & Play (PnP) manner, in combination with a likelihood
function p(y|x) specified during test time, is a highly active
research area. In particular, strategies relying on diffusion

19597

