This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LightSwitch: Multi-view Relighting with Material-guided Diffusion
Yehonathan Litman

Fernando De la Torre
Carnegie Mellon University

Shubham Tulsiani

Figure 1. Consistent Multi-view via Material-Guided Relighting Diffusion. We present LightSwitch, a framework for multi-view
relighting. Given any number of input images under an unknown illumination, LightSwitch leverages multi-view attention and inferred
material properties to predict consistent relighting, enabling applications for 2D and 3D relighting.

Abstract
Recent approaches for 3D relighting have shown promise
in integrating 2D image relighting generative priors to alter
the appearance of a 3D representation while preserving the
underlying structure. Nevertheless, generative priors used
for 2D relighting that directly relight from an input image
do not take advantage of intrinsic properties of the subject
that can be inferred or cannot consider multi-view data at
scale, leading to subpar relighting. In this paper, we propose Lightswitch, a novel finetuned material-relighting diffusion framework that efficiently relights an arbitrary number of input images to a target lighting condition while incorporating cues from inferred intrinsic properties. By using multi-view and material information cues together with
a scalable denoising scheme, our method consistently and
efficiently relights dense multi-view data of objects with diverse material compositions. We show that our 2D relighting prediction quality exceeds previous state-of-the-art relighting priors that directly relight from images. We further

27750

demonstrate that LightSwitch matches or outperforms stateof-the-art diffusion inverse rendering methods in relighting
synthetic and real objects in as little as 2 minutes.

1. Introduction
We have witnessed impressive advances in the task of recovering 3D representations from multi-view captures, with
methods like NeRF [27] and Gaussian Splatting [18] allowing one to reconstruct generic objects or scenes easily.
While these representations excel at modeling detailed geometry and appearance, they only seek to model the appearance within the capture environment, thus baking in lighting effects into the obtained representation. This prevents
reconstructions from being imported and relit in novel environments for applications such as virtual reality or synthesizing visual effects. In this work, we aim to enable such
relightable rendering of 3D representations under generic illumination and present an approach that given posed multiview images, enables synthesizing novel relit views.

