This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Calibrating Gaussian Splatting for Large Field-of-View Reconstruction
Youming Deng1
Leonidas Guibas3
1

Gordon Wetzstein3

Cornell University

(a) Fisheye-GS [45]

Wenqi Xian2

(b) Ours

2

Guandao Yang3

Steve Marschner1

Netflix Eyeline Studios

(c) Ground Truth

3

Paul Debevec2

Stanford University

(d) Rendered Panorama

Figure 1. We introduce Self-Calibrating Gaussian Splatting, a differentiable rasterization pipeline with a hybrid lens distortion field that
can produce high-quality novel view synthesis results from uncalibrated wide-angle photographs. (a) Existing methods such as FisheyeGS [45] fail to accurately handle complex lens distortions due to the traditional parametric distortion model. (b) Our method accurately
models large distortions, especially in the peripheral regions, utilizing the entire highly distorted raw images for reconstruction. (d) Our
method (bottom) provides extensive coverage, whereas conventional pipelines (top) can only recover the center.

Abstract
Large field-of-view (FOV) cameras can simplify and accelerate scene capture because they provide complete coverage with fewer views. However, existing reconstruction
pipelines fail to take full advantage of large-FOV input
data because they convert input views to perspective images, resulting in stretching that prevents the use of the
full image. Additionally, they calibrate lenses using models that do not accurately fit real fisheye lenses in the periphery. We present a new reconstruction pipeline based
on Gaussian Splatting that uses a flexible lens model and
supports fields of view approaching 180 degrees. We represent lens distortion with a hybrid neural field based on
an Invertible ResNet and use a cubemap to render wideFOV images while retaining the efficiency of the Gaussian
Splatting pipeline. Our system jointly optimizes lens distortion, camera intrinsics, camera poses, and scene representations using a loss measured directly against the orig-

25124

inal input pixels. We present extensive experiments on
both synthetic and real-world scenes, demonstrating that
our model accurately fits real-world fisheye lenses and that
our end-to-end self-calibration approach provides higherquality reconstructions than existing methods. More details and videos can be found at the project page: https:
//denghilbert.github.io/self-cali/.

1. Introduction
Large field-of-view (FOV) lenses, such as fisheye lenses,
are widely used in robotics [19], virtual reality [39], and
autonomous driving [18] because they capture scenes with
fewer images, enabling efficient data acquisition for reconstruction and novel view synthesis (NVS)[46]. However,
most modern 3D reconstruction systems based on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs)[48] and Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [38] cannot be directly applied to this type of in-

