This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReferEverything: Towards Segmenting Everything We Can Speak of in Videos
Anurag Bagchi1
1

Zhipeng Bao1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Yu-Xiong Wang2

Pavel Tokmakov3†

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

3

Martial Hebert1†

Toyota Research Institute

https://refereverything.github.io/

“the raindrop running down the
center of the windowpane”

“the smoke blown out”

“the building in the middle falling down”

“the spinning column of water”

“the cracks in the glass”

“the light column”

“the wave crashing in the ocean”

“the bubble being popped”

“the green bottle of paint shattering
from the impact of the ball”

Figure 1. Results of our method, REM, which leverages visual-language representations learned by video diffusion models to segment a
wide range of concepts based on natural language descriptions (shown in grey boxes). REM exhibits zero-shot generalization to challenging, dynamic concepts, such as raindrops or shattering glass. Video visualizations are available on the project page.

Abstract
We present REM, a framework for segmenting a wide range
of concepts in video that can be described through natural language. Our method leverages the universal visuallanguage mapping learned by video diffusion models on
Internet-scale data by fine-tuning them on small-scale Referring Object Segmentation datasets. Our key insight is
to preserve the entirety of the generative model’s architecture by shifting its objective from predicting noise to predicting mask latents. The resulting model can accurately
segment rare and unseen objects, despite only being trained
on a limited set of categories. Additionally, it can effortlessly generalize to non-object dynamic concepts, such as
smoke or raindrops, as demonstrated in our new benchmark for Referring Video Process Segmentation (Ref-VPS).
REM performs on par with the state-of-the-art on in-domain
datasets, like Ref-DAVIS, while outperforming them by up to

12 IoU points out-of-domain, leveraging the power of generative pre-training. We also show that advancements in
video generation directly improve segmentation.

1. Introduction

† Equal advising.

One of the most remarkable properties of natural language
lies in its ability to convey the richness and complexity of
human visual experience. From fleeting moments, like raindrops rolling down the window or smoke dissipating from
a cigarette (see row 1 in Figure 1), to dynamic processes,
such as a glass shattering or a whirlpool forming in the water (row 2 in Figure 1), language enables us to descrive and
reference events with precision. Crucially, if an event can
be expressed verbally, it can often be accurately localized in
both space and time. This universal mapping between the
discrete, symbolic realm of language and the continuous,
ever-changing visual world is developed through a lifetime
of visual-linguistic interaction [4, 37].

23221

