This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FW-Merging: Scaling Model Merging with Frank-Wolfe Optimization
Hao (Mark) Chen1 Shell Xu Hu2 Wayne Luk1 Timothy Hospedales2 Hongxiang Fan1
1
Imperial College London, UK 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
hc1620@ic.ac.uk

shell.hu@samsung.com

w.luk@imperial.ac.uk

t.hospedales@samsung.com

hongxiang.fan@imperial.ac.uk *

Abstract

downstream applications, reducing the deployment overhead of separately fine-tuning multiple models [53]. However, it still demands a large amount of high-quality data,
which might only exist in the private domain [32], and
significant compute resources [36]. To mitigate these issues, model merging has emerged as a promising technique for fusing fine-tuned models within the parameter
space [14, 48, 50]. Existing model merging methods can
be broadly classified into two categories: data-free methods [14, 15, 48], and data-informed methods [50, 51], which
optimize merge coefficients based on additional data.
While these approaches have proven effective, several
key limitations hinder their scalability and broader adoption. First, these methods adjust merging coefficients based
on the known capabilities of the models on specific tasks
to optimize performance, which is less robust when dealing with diverse model sources with unknown information1 .
This is primarily caused by the inability to distinguish highquality models from poorly fine-tuned ones in an unknown
model setting. Second, when scaling up these approaches to
a large number of unknown models, these methods struggle
and can result in significant performance degradation. As
shown in Figure 1a, our profiling study demonstrates a performance reduction ranging from 18.9% to 64.4%. These
limitations are further amplified by the fast-growing opensource AI ecosystem, where platforms such as Hugging
Face have driven a surge in the release of powerful LLMs
with many lacking complete information. Given that merging open-source models has repeatedly shown the potential to produce top-ranking LLMs on major model leaderboards [13], developing scalable and robust merging techniques is essential to harness the growing number of opensource models, further enhancing performance and widening the adoption of model merging.
To effectively scale model merging and leverage the vast
collection of open-sourced models with unknown capabilities, the new model merging method must exhibit two fundamental scaling properties: 1) as more irrelevant models

Model merging has emerged as a promising approach for
multi-task learning (MTL), offering a data-efficient alternative to conventional fine-tuning. However, with the rapid
development of the open-source AI ecosystem and the increasing availability of fine-tuned foundation models, existing model merging methods face two key limitations: (i)
They are primarily designed for in-house fine-tuned models, making them less adaptable to diverse model sources
with partially unknown model and task information, (ii)
They struggle to scale effectively when merging numerous
model checkpoints. To address these challenges, we formulate model merging as a constrained optimization problem
and introduce a novel approach: Frank-Wolfe Merging
(FW-Merging). Inspired by Frank-Wolfe optimization,
our approach iteratively selects the most relevant model in
the pool to minimize a linear approximation of the objective function and then executes a local merging similar to
the Frank-Wolfe update. The objective function is designed
to capture the desired behavior of the target-merged model,
while the fine-tuned candidate models define the constraint
set. More importantly, FW-Merging serves as an orthogonal technique for existing merging methods, seamlessly
integrating with them to further enhance accuracy performance. Our experiments show that FW-Merging scales
across diverse model sources, remaining stable with 16 irrelevant models and improving by 15.3% with 16 relevant
models on 20 CV tasks, while maintaining constant memory overhead—unlike the linear overhead of data-informed
merging methods. Compared with the state-of-the-art approaches, FW-Merging surpasses the data-free merging method by 32.8% and outperforms the data-informed
Adamerging by 8.39% when merging 20 ViT models. Our
code is open-sourced at here.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL)-based fine-tuning adapts a single pre-trained Large Language Model (LLM) for multiple

1 This paper refers unknown information to: 1) when open-source mod-

els are partially assessed on limited benchmarks, leaving their performance
on other tasks unknown and costly to evaluate, and 2) when models contain
misleading information, polluting the merging process.

* Corresponding Authors: Shell Xu Hu and Hongxiang Fan

3390

