This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LIRA: Reasoning Reconstruction via Multimodal Large Language Models
Zhen Zhou1 , Tong Wang2 , Yunkai Ma1, * , Xiao Tan2 , and Fengshui Jing1, *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 Baidu Inc.
E-mail:zhouzhen2021@ia.ac.cn, * Corresponding author.

Abstract

Language Instruction

RGB-D Sequences

White fixtures used for personal hygiene. Find the
smallest object among those that meet the
requirements.

Existing language instruction-guided online 3D reconstruction systems mainly rely on explicit instructions or
queryable maps, showing inadequate capability to handle
implicit and complex instructions. In this paper, we ﬁrst
introduce a reasoning reconstruction task. This task inputs an implicit instruction involving complex reasoning
and an RGB-D sequence, and outputs incremental 3D reconstruction of instances that conform to the instruction.
To handle this task, we propose LIRA: Language Instructed
Reconstruction Assistant. It leverages a multimodal large
language model to actively reason about the implicit instruction and obtain instruction-relevant 2D candidate instances and their attributes. Then, candidate instances are
back-projected into the incrementally reconstructed 3D geometric map, followed by instance fusion and target instance inference. In LIRA, to achieve higher instance fusion quality, we propose TIFF, a Text-enhanced Instance
Fusion module operating within Fragment bounding volume, which is learning-based and fuses multiple keyframes
simultaneously. Since the evaluation system for this task is
not well established, we propose a benchmark ReasonRecon comprising the largest collection of scene-instruction
data samples involving implicit reasoning. Experiments
demonstrate that LIRA outperforms existing methods in
the reasoning reconstruction task and is capable of running in real time. Code and benchmark are available at
https://github.com/zhen6618/LIRA.

Original Scene

1

2

3

4

Final Target Instances

Sink

Figure 1. Online reasoning reconstruction results of LIRA. It inputs RGB-D sequences and reconstructs instruction-relevant instances and background environment. As the process is online,
LIRA can halt at any time step between 1 and 4, and identify
the target “the smallest object” within the current map. Different instruction-relevant candidate instances in the purple box are
distinguished by colors. The target instance based on the current
map is within the red box. We visualize double-layered mesh.

directly express their demands involving implicit and complex descriptions, e.g., “I am hungry. Find something to
eat” or “Fixtures used for hygiene. Find a smaller one suitable for a child”, rather than providing explicit step-by-step
instructions. Furthermore, humans in unfamiliar environments may not know what objects exist and thus can only
give implicit instructions. Given the crucial importance of
implicit instruction reasoning, this work primarily focuses
on online 3D reconstruction guided by implicit instructions.
In this work, we ﬁrst refer to the online 3D reconstruction task guided by implicit instructions as reasoning reconstruction, which requires reconstruction of instances that
conform to implicit instructions involving complex reasoning, and geometric reconstruction of background environment (see Fig. 1). Although reconstruction of background
environment is not the core of the task, it serves as crucial reference information for path planning by embodied

1. Introduction
Online 3D reconstruction guided by language instructions
serves as a key task for embodied agents to understand environment and human intentions, enabling many applications
such as navigation, manipulation and human–robot interaction. However, existing systems [15, 27, 46, 47] mainly rely
on explicit instructions, such as explicitly indicating target
objects or categories, to reconstruct instruction-relevant regions, while implicit instruction reasoning is more important for human intention understanding. Humans tend to

1762

