This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TITAN-Guide: Taming Inference-Time AligNment for Guided Text-to-Video
Diffusion Models
Christian Simon† Masato Ishii♣ Akio Hayakawa♣ Zhi Zhong†
Shusuke Takahashi† Takashi Shibuya ♣ Yuki Mitsufuji†,♣
†

Sony Group Corporation

♣

Sony AI

{first name.last name}@sony.com
“A monster
walking in
the city"

Masked Frames

Video
Aesthetic
Model

Interpolate

(a) Aesthetic Guidance

“A dog barking
under rain"

(d) Frame Interpolation

Target Audio

(b) Audio Guidance

“A dog under
water"

Target Style

(e) FVD and Memory Cost

(c) Style Guidance

Figure 1. Various guided diffusion tasks with objectives to steer the output of generated videos and performance comparison with the
state-of-the-art techniques. (a) A generated video by TITAN-Guide for aesthetic and composition tasks. (b) A generated result of our
proposed approach on the multimodal alignment task between video and audio. (c) A style guidance task result of TITAN-Guide. (d) A
result on frame interpolation tasks completing frames in the masked segments. (e) Comparison between TITAN-Guide and state-of-the-art
techniques in guided diffusion models with the label Fréchet Video Distance (FVD, the lower the better) and GPU VRAM’s memory cost
for the audio guidance task on VGG-Sound [4].

Abstract
In the recent development of conditional diffusion models
still require heavy supervised fine-tuning for performing
control on a category of tasks. Training-free conditioning
via guidance with off-the-shelf models is a favorable alternative to avoid further fine-tuning on the base model. However, the existing training-free guidance frameworks either
have heavy memory requirements or offer sub-optimal control due to rough estimation. These shortcomings limit the
applicability to control diffusion models that require intense
computation, such as Text-to-Video (T2V) diffusion models. In this work, we propose Taming Inference Time Alignment for Guided Text-to-Video Diffusion Model, so-called
TITAN-Guide, which overcomes memory space issues, and
provides more optimal control in the guidance process compared to the counterparts. In particular, we develop an effi-

cient method for optimizing diffusion latents without backpropagation from a discriminative guiding model. In particular, we study forward gradient descents for guided diffusion tasks with various options on directional directives.
In our experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in efficiently managing memory during latent optimization, while previous methods fall short. Our proposed
approach not only minimizes memory requirements but also
significantly enhances T2V performance across a range of
diffusion guidance benchmarks. Code, models, and demo
are available at https://titanguide.github.io.

1. Introduction

16662

While pretrained diffusion models excel at Text-to-Video
(T2V) tasks, challenges still arise when generating content
on the basis of specific conditions. One key issue is en-

