This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structured Policy Optimization: Enhance Large Vision-Language Model via
Self-Referenced Dialogue
Guohao Sun1 *, Can Qin2 , Yihao Feng2 , Zeyuan Chen2 , Ran Xu2 ,
Sohail Dianat1 , Majid Rabbani1 , Raghuveer Rao3 , and Zhiqiang Tao1 *
1

2

Rochester Institute of Technology
Salesforce AI Research 3 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Abstract

𝒒: Question, 𝒚: Answer, 𝒘: Preferred, 𝒍: Dispreferred
…

Preference optimization algorithms typically enhance LLM
response quality by leveraging human feedback on multiple answers given a fixed instruction. However, these
methods often lack capturing the dynamic nature of conversational exchanges. For large vision-language models (LVLMs), direct preference optimization (DPO) can
over-emphasize linguistic nuances while overlooking visual
context. To address this challenge, we introduce structured policy optimization (SPO) – a novel preference optimization method that simultaneously aligns preference instructions, responses, and dialogue interactions to improve
multi-modal understanding and reasoning capabilities. The
efficacy of SPO is attributed to one key design: treating
the questioning and answering as a sequential action and
binding them through a trajectory reward. This reward formulation better aligns with real-world dialogue studies and
eliminates the need for fixed instructions. We evaluate our
models on interleaved benchmarks, including image, multiimage, and video-based understanding and reasoning tasks.
Experimental results show that the proposed SPO finetuning LVLM with multi-modal preference data can align
with human preference more efficiently than DPO. The code
is available at https://github.com/heliossun/
Structure-Policy-Optimization.

…

…

𝑦!"

x: Video
Preference Dialogue:

DPO

𝑥, 𝑞

𝑦#"

Ρ 𝑦! ≻ 𝑦# 𝑥, 𝑞

𝒒𝒘 : What emotions are conveyed … in the video?
𝒚𝟏𝒘 : The shots in … a sense of calmness, …

𝑥

SPO

𝒚𝟏𝒍 : The shots convey a … and serenity …
DPO: prioritize language nuance

Rejected Dialogue:

𝑞!

𝑞#

𝑦#"

𝑦!$

𝐪𝐥 : Which city did the skateboarder go to …?
𝒚𝟐𝒘 : The skateboarder went to Los Angeles …

𝑦!"

𝑦#$

𝒚𝟐𝒍 : The skateboarder went to a beach city …
SPO: emphasize visual dependency

Figure 1. Comparison between DPO and SPO in optimizing
an LVLM policy. DPO employs a single reward that optimizes
the preferred answer given the fixed visual & question input,
p(yw ≻ yl |x, q), which could over-emphasize language nuance
and overlook visual clues [38]. By contrast, SPO introduces a
structured reward by p(Yw ≻ Yl |x), conditioning on the visual dialogue, to optimize the preferred trajectories spanning over questions and answers.

LLM/LVLM policy to maximize the reward, which is applied in both language and vision-language (VL) domains.
Recently, the offline preference optimization methods,
such as DPO [29] and its variants [12, 17, 30, 33], have
proposed various reward objectives to satisfy different human expectations. Owning to its simplicity and stability,
DPO has been widely used in multi-modal preference optimization [11, 19, 22, 38] by aligning LVLM to humanpreferred responses conditioned on fixed visual and text instructions (see Fig. 1). However, unlike purely text dialogue, the visual input can lead to far more enriched information interactions, which require varying degrees of visual dependence [13, 25, 37]. Directly applying DPO to
multi-modal preference data (e.g., images/videos and texts)
will over-emphasize language nuance and overlook the visual condition [38]. Specifically, DPO applies a single, un-

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [8]
has demonstrated remarkable success in aligning large
language/vision-language models (LLMs/LVLMs) with human preferences, enabling models to adapt their behavior
based on success or failure in increasingly complex tasks.
Typically, RLHF trains a reward model and optimizes the
* Corresponding authors: Guohao Sun (gs4288@rit.edu) and Zhiqiang
Tao (zhiqiang.tao@rit.edu)

741

