This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

B-VLLM: A Vision Large Language Model with
Balanced Spatio-Temporal Tokens
Zhuqiang Lu1 , Zhenfei Yin1,2† , Mengwei He1 , Zhihui Wang3 , Zicheng Liu4 , Zhiyong Wang1 , Kun Hu5,†
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 2JD, United Kingdom
3
International School of Information Science and Engineering,
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116081, China
4
Advanced Micro Devices, WA 98007, USA
5
School of Science, Edith Cowan University, WA 6027, Australia
{zhuqiang.lu, zhenfei.yin, mengwei.he}@sydney.edu.au, zhwang@dlut.edu.cn
zicliu@outlook.com, zhiyong.wang@sydney.edu.au, k.hu@ecu.edu.au

Abstract
Recently, Vision Large Language Models (VLLMs) with
integrated vision encoders have shown promising performance in vision understanding. They encode visual content into sequences of visual tokens, enabling joint processing of visual and textual data. However, understanding videos, especially long videos, remains a challenge as
the rapid growth of visual tokens during video encoding
risks exceeding VLLMs’ context window length and significantly escalates computational cost. To restrict the number of visual tokens, existing VLLMs either: (1) uniformly
downsample videos into a fixed number of frames or (2)
reducing the number of visual tokens encoded from each
frame. We argue that the former neglects temporal dynamics in videos, while the latter fails to preserve spatial details
within individual frame. In this work, we propose BalancedVLLM (B-VLLM), a novel VLLM framework designed to
model task relevant spatio-temporal cues, while restricting
the number of visual tokens within the VLLM’s context window length. Central to our framework is a text-conditioned
adaptive frame selection module that dynamically identifies
task-relevant frames, which are further de-duplicated with
a temporal frame token merging strategy. The visual tokens
of these frames then undergo spatial token sampling and an
optional spatial token merging strategy for granular control
against the token budget. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of B-VLLM in balancing the number of frames
and visual tokens, moreover, our proposed method introduces 10% performance gain on MVBench. Code is avail-

† Corresponding authors.

(a) Context window limit.

(b) Key-hints missed in sampling.

(c) Video LLM performance on image-based spatial-only benchmarks.

Figure 1. Illustration of the limitations of existing VLLMs.

able at https://github.com/zhuqiangLu/B-VLLM.git.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capability and generalizability in natural language understanding [2, 8, 37, 42]. Recently, there have
been several notable efforts to extend LLMs into Vision
Large Language Models (VLLMs) for visual understanding [1, 26, 49]. These efforts primarily aim to adapt LLMs’
contextual reasoning capabilities to multimodal settings like
video captioning and visual question answering, enabling

24549

