This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BadVideo: Stealthy Backdoor Attack against Text-to-Video Generation
Ruotong Wang1∗ Mingli Zhu1 Jiarong Ou2 Rui Chen2
Xin Tao2 Pengfei Wan2 Baoyuan Wu1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Kling Team, Kuaishou Technology

Abstract

Prompt: "A woman is sitting and talking to the camera."
Normal Video

Text-to-video (T2V) generative models have rapidly advanced and found widespread applications across fields like
entertainment, education, and marketing. However, the adversarial vulnerabilities of these models remain rarely explored. We observe that in T2V generation tasks, the generated videos often contain substantial redundant information not explicitly specified in the text prompts, such as environmental elements, secondary objects, and additional details, providing opportunities for malicious attackers to embed hidden harmful content. Exploiting this inherent redundancy, we introduce BadVideo, the first backdoor attack
framework tailored for T2V generation. Our attack focuses
on designing target adversarial outputs through two key
strategies: (1) Spatio-Temporal Composition, which combines different spatiotemporal features to encode malicious
information; (2) Dynamic Element Transformation, which
introduces transformations in redundant elements over time
to convey malicious information. Based on these strategies,
the attacker’s malicious target seamlessly integrates with
the user’s textual instructions, providing high stealthiness.
Moreover, by exploiting the temporal dimension of videos,
our attack successfully evades traditional content moderation systems that primarily analyze spatial information
within individual frames. Extensive experiments demonstrate that BadVideo achieves high attack success rates
while preserving original semantics and maintaining excellent performance on clean inputs. Overall, our work reveals
the adversarial vulnerability of T2V models, calling attention to potential risks and misuse. Our project page is at
https://wrt2000.github.io/BadVideo2025/.

Malicious Video

Figure 1. An example of redundant information in videos, where
semantic meaning is preserved despite the presence of ‘NSFW’.

1. Introduction

Warning: This paper contains unsafe content that might be
offensive to some readers.

Text-to-video (T2V) generative models [2, 3, 42] have
rapidly evolved in recent years, achieving significant success in generating high-quality, diverse videos from textual descriptions. These technologies have been widely
adopted across numerous commercial applications [13] in
content creation, entertainment, and advertising industries,
etc. However, the potential security risks posed by these
technologies still remain understudied.
Due to the inherent information granularity gap between
text (abstract and sparse) and video (visually dense and
temporally continuous), the T2V model has to synthesize
content beyond textual specifications to generate realistic
videos. Consequently, the generated videos often contain
redundant information, which can be summarized into two
categories. One is static redundant information, i.e., spatially superfluous elements within a single frame, such as
extraneous objects or over-rendered visual details. The
other is dynamic redundant information, i.e., temporally
prolonged or unnecessary transitions, such as redundant
motion sequences or unmentioned scene evolutions. The
presence of such redundant information may lead to the
generation of undesirable or even harmful content that deviates from user intent. For example, as shown in Figure 1,
with the user prompt “A woman is sitting and talking to the

∗ Work was partially done during internship at Kling Team, Kuaishou

Technology.
† Corresponding author, email: wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn

19075

