This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tune-Your-Style: Intensity-tunable 3D Style Transfer with Gaussian Splatting
Yian Zhao1,3† Rushi Ye1,3† Ruochong Zheng1,3 Zesen Cheng1,3 Chaoran Feng1
Jiashu Yang5 Pengchong Qiao1,3 Chang Liu4 Jie Chen1,2,3 B
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3
4

2

Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

5

Dalian University of Technology, China

Content & Style

Abstract

Over-stylization
3D Style
Transfer

3D style transfer refers to the artistic stylization of 3D assets based on reference style images. Recently, 3DGS-based
stylization methods have drawn considerable attention, primarily due to their markedly enhanced training and rendering speeds. However, a vital challenge for 3D style transfer
is to strike a balance between the content and the patterns
and colors of the style. Although the existing methods strive
to achieve relatively balanced outcomes, the fixed-output
paradigm struggles to adapt to the diverse content-style
balance requirements from different users. In this work,
we introduce a creative intensity-tunable 3D style transfer
paradigm, dubbed Tune-Your-Style, which allows users to
flexibly adjust the style intensity injected into the scene to
match their desired content-style balance, thus enhancing
the customizability of 3D style transfer. To achieve this goal,
we first introduce Gaussian neurons to explicitly model the
style intensity and parameterize a learnable style tuner to
achieve intensity-tunable style injection. To facilitate the
learning of tunable stylization, we further propose the tunable stylization guidance, which obtains multi-view consistent stylized views from diffusion models through cross-view
style alignment, and then employs a two-stage optimization
strategy to provide stable and efficient guidance by modulating the balance between full-style guidance from the stylized views and zero-style guidance from the initial rendering. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method not
only delivers visually appealing results, but also exhibits
flexible customizability for 3D style transfer. Project page
is available at https://zhao-yian.github.io/TuneStyle.

Under-stylization

or

(a) Existing 3D style transfer with a fixed-output paradigm.

3D Style
Transfer

(b) Our intensity-tunable 3D style transfer paradigm.

...

Tunable Stylization

Figure 1. (a) Existing fixed-output paradigm struggles to adapt to
the diverse content-style balance requirements. (b) Our intensitytunable 3D style transfer paradigm enables users to flexibly adjust
the style intensity to achieve the desired content-style balance.

1. Introduction

els, meshes, and point clouds), and the quality of their stylized results is limited by the fidelity of the appearance reconstruction. The advent of implicit neural representation,
i.e., Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [34], marks a paradigm
shift in the realm of 3D style transfer, inaugurating a new
era of enhanced visual art effects. However, the complexity
of implicit scene encoding results in time-consuming training and rendering for scene reconstruction, which hinders
its practical application.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [22] has attracted considerable attention for its advanced reconstruction quality and efficient rendering pipeline, offering a new
technical pathway for 3D style transfer. However, a vital
challenge for 3D style transfer is to strike a balance between the content and the patterns and colors of the style.
Although existing methods [25, 30, 58] strive to achieve
relatively balanced outcomes, the fixed-output paradigm is
cumbersome to adapt to the diverse content-style balance
requirements from different users, as presented in Fig. 1(a).
To address this dilemma, we present a creative intensitytunable 3D style transfer paradigm Tune-Your-Style,
which enables users to flexibly adjust the style intensity injected into the scene to match their desired content-style
balance, substantially enhancing the customizability and
practicality of 3D style transfer, as presented in Fig. 1(b).

The technology of 3D style transfer holds promising application value in the fields of artistic creation, gaming, and
entertainment. Conventional 3D style transfer approaches
model scenes based on explicit representations (e.g., voxB Corresponding author. † Co-first author.

19032

