This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene Coordinate Reconstruction Priors
Wenjing Bian2,* Axel Barroso-Laguna1 Tommaso Cavallari1
Victor Adrian Prisacariu1,2 Eric Brachmann1
1
Niantic Spatial 2 University of Oxford
https://nianticspatial.github.io/scr-priors/
ACE0

ACE0 +
Depth Distribution Prior

ACE0 +
Coordinate Diffusion Prior

RGB-D

ACE0 + Depth Prior

Figure 1. Reconstruction Priors. ACE0 [12], a neural SfM pipeline, struggles with an indoor scene (left). The reconstruction partly
degenerates, as is evident by the dispersed point cloud, camera poses (green) penetrating a wall, and artifacts in one of the views synthesized
with Splatfacto [90] (bottom). We incorporate various priors into ACE0 which lead to a more consistent scene layout, better pose estimates,
and fewer artifacts in synthesized views (center). We also show a version of ACE0 taking RGB-D rather than RGB images as input (right).

1. Introduction
Abstract
Scene coordinate regression (SCR) models have proven to
be powerful implicit scene representations for 3D vision,
enabling visual relocalization and structure-from-motion.
SCR models are trained specifically for one scene. If training images imply insufficient multi-view constraints SCR
models degenerate. We present a probabilistic reinterpretation of training SCR models, which allows us to infuse highlevel reconstruction priors. We investigate multiple such
priors, ranging from simple priors over the distribution of
reconstructed depth values to learned priors over plausible
scene coordinate configurations. For the latter, we train a
3D point cloud diffusion model on a large corpus of indoor
scans. Our priors push predicted 3D scene points towards
plausible geometry at each training step to increase their
likelihood. On three indoor datasets our priors help learning better scene representations, resulting in more coherent scene point clouds, higher registration rates and better
camera poses, with a positive effect on down-stream tasks
such as novel view synthesis and camera relocalization.
* Work done during an internship at Niantic.

With the recent advent of learning-based structure-frommotion (SfM) pipelines, there are three avenues to further
push their capabilities: 1) priors, 2) priors, and 3) priors.
In this work, we consider a particular class of neural SfM
models that hitherto only incorporated very weak priors:
Scene Coordinate Regression (SCR) [82]. SCR models are
implicit scene representations. They are trained on images
of a particular scene with known ground truth camera poses
[4, 7, 8, 11, 82]. Once trained, SCR models allow to estimate the camera poses of unseen query images relative to
the training scene, i.e. they enable visual relocalization. Recently, ACE0 [12] showed self-supervised training of SCR,
turning it into a fully differentiable, neural SfM approach.
SCR reinterprets classical 3D reconstruction using a machine learning methodology. However, they still follow
classical 3D vision principles when learning the 3D geometry of a scene: where feature-based methods triangulate
sparse key points explicitly, SCR methods rely on dense,
implicit triangulation of image patches [4]. Whether one
triangulates implicitly or explicitly, without sufficient multiview constrains triangulation fails [34]. This happens e.g.
for texture-poor areas, repetitive structures, reflections, etc.
where multi-view observations cannot be resolved to the

25765

