This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Artwork Outpainting via Latent Diffusion Models
Dae-Young Song1 , Jung-Jae Yu1 , Donghyeon Cho2∗
1
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, South Korea
2
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea
{eadyoung,jungjae}@etri.re.kr, doncho@hanyang.ac.kr

Figure 1. Outpainting comparisons between single-step (a) and progressive approaches (b,c). (a) Results of the single-step outpainting. We first resize the input image to a fixed size suitable for a conventional outpainting model, and then apply outpainting.
After that, we revert the image to its original aspect ratio. Finally, we use a super-resolution model to restore the reduced resolution.
(b) Results of progressive outpainting without consideration of overall composition. (c) Results of our method with global context
consideration and planning. The red bounding boxes indicate the inputs. Progressive approach enables outpainting in any direction
and produces high-fidelity, high-resolution images with no restrictions on aspect ratio. Furthermore, our method produces globally
harmonious outpainting results compared to models that do not take overall composition into account.

tasks, including outpainting. However, most LDM-based
outpainting methods impose constraints on resolution and
aspect ratio, often leading to the loss of local details and
blurring. One way to address these issues is progressive
outpainting, where the image is extended outward incrementally. However, naive progressive outpainting suffers
from two key challenges: (1) difficulty in effectively capturing global context, making it hard to maintain the original

Abstract
Latent diffusion models have demonstrated superior performance over traditional methods in generating highly
detailed and aesthetically pleasing images, which makes
them widely used for various image generation and editing
* Corresponding author.

15405

