This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionFollower: Editing Video Motion via Score-Guided Diffusion

Synthesized
Video

Target
Video

Source
Video

Shuyuan Tu1,2 Qi Dai3 Zihao Zhang1,2 Sicheng Xie1,2 Zhi-Qi Cheng5 Chong Luo3 Xintong Han4
Zuxuan Wu1,2 ∗ Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
4
5
Microsoft Research Asia
Tencent Inc.
University of Washington
https://github.com/Francis-Rings/MotionFollower

Figure 1. MotionFollower: a motion editing method for transferring motion from target video to source while keeping the source background, protagonists’ appearance, and camera movement.

Abstract
Despite impressive advancements in diffusion-based
video editing models in altering video attributes, there has
been limited exploration into modifying motion information
while preserving the original protagonist’s appearance and
background. In this paper, we propose MotionFollower, a
score-guided diffusion model for video motion editing. To
introduce conditional controls to the denoising process, we
propose two signal controllers, one for poses and the other
for appearances, both consist of convolution blocks without involving heavy attention calculations. Further, we design a score guidance principle based on a two-branch architecture (a reconstruction and an editing branch), significantly enhancing the modeling capability of texture details
and complicated backgrounds. Concretely, we enforce several consistency regularizers during the score estimation.
The resulting gradients thus inject appropriate guidance to

latents, forcing the model to preserve the original background details and protagonists’ appearances without interfering with the motion modification. Experiments demonstrate MotionFollower’s competitive motion editing ability
qualitatively and quantitatively. Compared with MotionEditor, the most advanced motion editing model, MotionFollower delivers superior motion editing performance and exclusively supports large camera movements. To the best of
our knowledge, MotionFollower is the first diffusion model
to explore score regularization in video editing.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author.

Diffusion models [7, 12, 13, 25, 27, 28, 31, 35, 39, 41]
have demonstrated their superiority in performing image
and video generation [14, 31, 46], which promote numerous
studies in video editing [3, 5, 9, 19, 20, 29, 44, 47]. While
considerable progress has been made, current models predominantly focus on attribute-level editing, such as video
style transferring and manipulation for background and pro-

12822

