This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Layer-wise Vision Injection with Disentangled Attention for Efficient LVLMs
Xuange Zhang1† , Dengjie Li2† , Bo Liu1 , Zenghao Bao2 , Yao Zhou2 , Baisong Yang2 ,
Zhongying Liu2 , Yujie Zhong2* , Tongtong Yuan1*
1
Beijing University of Technology, CN 2 Meituan Inc., CN
xuange020@163.com, {liubo,yuantt}@bjut.edu.cn,
{lidengjie,baozenghao,zhouyao11,yangbaisong02,liuzhongying, zhongyujie}@meituan.com

Abstract

10000

Benefiting from recent advancements in large language
models and modality alignment techniques, existing Large
Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved prominent performance across a wide range of scenarios. However, the excessive computational complexity limits the
widespread use of these models in practical applications.
We argue that one main bottleneck in computational complexity is caused by the involvement of redundant vision sequences in model computation. This is inspired by a reassessment of the efficiency of vision and language information transmission in the language decoder of LVLMs. Then,
we propose a novel vision-language interaction mechanism called Layer-wise Vision Injection with Disentangled
Attention (LVIDA). In LVIDA, only the language sequence
undergoes full forward propagation, while the vision sequence interacts with the language at specific stages within
each language decoder layer. It is striking that our approach significantly reduces computational complexity with
minimal performance loss. Specifically, LVIDA achieves
approximately a 10× reduction in the computational cost
of the language decoder across multiple LVLM models
while maintaining comparable performance. Project Page:
https://xuange923.github.io/LVIDA/

Original
LVIDA

FLOPs (G)

5000

2000

1000
500
200
100
0

Llama3-1B

TinyLlama-1.1B Llama3-3B Vicuna-7B

Language Decoders

Vicuna-7B

LVIDA

Figure 1. Comprehensive Comparison of LVIDA against Baseline LVLMs Across Different LLM Decoders. Left: FLOPs
comparison across different models, showing 90% computation
reduction for models under 3B and 88% for 7B. Right: Performance comparison across 7 benchmarks, demonstrating capability
of LVIDA preservation compared to original models.

markable progress in multimodal semantic understanding,
they face a critical challenge of prohibitive computational
overhead caused by cross-modal interactions. The computational complexity of the self-attention increases quadratically with the sequence length, and visual sequences are often much longer than textual ones. For instance, SigLip [42]
generates visual feature sequences of length 728 per image, while TextVQA datasets exhibit an average text length
of only 60 tokens. This gap further amplifies when processing high-resolution images or video sequences [16, 21,
33], posing significant deployment challenges in resourceconstrained scenarios. Although employing smaller language models [14, 45, 48] can reduce computation costs,
this approach risks compromising model capability.
Previous research primarily focuses on the compression or
elimination of visual tokens [10, 11, 44, 47]. Some methods [8, 29, 32] compress visual sequences before feeding
them to a Large Language Models (LLMs). Alternative
methods propose reducing visual tokens at specific LVLM
layers [12, 26, 38]. These methods often require manually
specifying early visual exiting layers or determining a suit-

1. Introduction
Understanding complex content is a crucial step toward
achieving Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). As two fundamental modalities for information processing, vision and
language exhibit distinct advantages: text provides detailed
semantic information, while images offer intuitive visual
cues. Effectively integrating information from these two
modalities has become a significant focus in current research. Although existing Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) [3, 15, 18, 22, 23, 28, 46] have demonstrated re† Equal Contribution. * Corresponding author.

7004

