This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Test-Time Adaptation for Single Image Denoising
Using Deep Gaussian Prior
Qing Ma1 Pengwei Liang2 Xiong Zhou3 Jiayi Ma4 Junjun Jiang2∗ Zhe Peng1 *
1
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Sixie Capital 4 Wuhan University
{qingma2016,erfect2020,cszx.hit,jyma2010}@gmail.com
junjunjiang@hit.edu.cn jeffrey-zhe.peng@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Gaussian denoising often serves as the initiation of research
in the field of image denoising, owing to its prevalence
and intriguing properties. However, deep Gaussian denoiser typically generalizes poorly to other types of noises,
such as Poisson noise and real-world noise. In this paper, we reveal that deep Gaussian denoisers have an underlying ability to handle other noises with only ten iterations of self-supervised learning, which is referred to as
deep denoiser prior. Specifically, we first pre-train a Gaussian denoising model in a self-supervised manner. Then,
for each test image, we construct a pixel bank based on
the self-similarity and randomly sample pseudo-instance
examples from it to perform test-time adaptation. Finally, we fine-tune the pre-trained Gaussian denoiser using
the randomly sampled pseudo-instances. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our test-time adaptation method
helps the pre-trained Gaussian denoiser rapidly improve
performance in removing both in-distribution and out-ofdistribution noise, achieving superior performance compared to existing single-image denoising methods while also
significantly reducing computational time. Code available
at: https://github.com/qingma2016/TTAD.

[13, 19, 22, 34, 36, 43] targeting real-world noisy images
have been proposed, improving the performance of denoisers on real-world noise. However, they also require training
on large datasets of real-world noisy images with the same
noise distribution, which greatly limits their practicality.
Recently, single-image denoising methods [8, 31, 37, 42]
have improved practicality by training an image-specific denoising model for each test image, eliminating the dependence on specific training data. The Self2Self network [37]
performs dropout training on Bernoulli-sampled instances
of the input image, effectively preventing overfitting and
achieving good denoising performance. Noise2Fast [25] introduces checkerboard downsampling, generating four lowresolution images and training a smaller network with eight
convolutional layers to increase speed at the expense of accuracy. ZS-N2N [31] trains a two-layer network on two
downsampled images to further improve the speed. The
trend in existing single-image denoising methods is to enhance speed by reducing the network size; however, this reduction inevitably limits the performance of the algorithm,
and ZS-N2N has already minimized the network to two layers, making further reductions impractical. Moreover, these
methods only leverage prior information from a single noisy
image, which restricts the performance of the denoiser.

1. Introduction

Test-time adaptation (TTA) has recently demonstrated
promising results in various fields, including sentiment
analysis and machine translation in natural language processing [15, 40], as well as object detection and image
classification in computer vision [16, 45]. By fine-tuning
the model during inference, TTA enables rapid adjustment
to new data distributions, thereby improving both accuracy and robustness. SS-TTA [12] extends this approach
to image denoising, enhancing the performance of selfsupervised denoising methods. However, SS-TTA requires
that the noise type in test images matches the noise type
used in the training images for the pre-trained denoising model, such as Gaussian noise. MPI [30] introduces

Image denoising is a crucial task in computer vision, aimed
at restoring the clean image from noisy input. Most previous denoising methods [2, 24, 27, 38] assume that noisy
images follow a specific noise distribution. However, in
real-world noisy images [1, 49, 53], the type of noise is unknown and often differs from those in the training images,
thereby limiting the effectiveness of pre-trained denoising
models. To alleviate this issue, several denoising methods
* Correspondence to: Junjun Jiang (junjunjiang@hit.edu.cn) and Zhe
Peng (jeffrey-zhe.peng@polyu.edu.hk)

11230

