This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientMT: Efficient Temporal Adaptation for Motion Transfer in
Text-to-Video Diffusion Models

1

Yufei Cai1,2 , Hu Han1,2 , Yuxiang Wei3 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Harbin Institute of Technology
caiyufei23@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {hanhu, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, yuxiang.wei.cs@gmail.com

Abstract
The progress on generative models has led to significant advances on text-to-video (T2V) generation, yet the motion
controllability of generated videos remains limited. Existing motion transfer methods explored the motion representations of reference videos to guide generation. Nevertheless, these methods typically rely on sample-specific
optimization strategy, resulting in high computational burdens. In this paper, we propose EfficientMT, a novel
and efficient end-to-end framework for video motion transfer. By leveraging a small set of synthetic paired motion transfer samples, EfficientMT effectively adapts a pretrained T2V model into a general motion transfer framework that can accurately capture and reproduce diverse
motion patterns. Specifically, we repurpose the backbone
of the T2V model to extract temporal information from reference videos, and further propose a scaler module to distill motion-related information. Subsequently, we introduce
a temporal integration mechanism that seamlessly incorporates reference motion features into the video generation process. After training on our self-collected synthetic
paired samples, EfficientMT enables general video motion transfer without requiring test-time optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our EfficientMT outperforms existing methods in efficiency while maintaining
flexible motion controllability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/PrototypeNx/EfficientMT.

ceptional capabilities in producing high-quality images and
videos, facilitating various downstream applications. Building on these models, numerous studies [1, 23, 29, 36, 37]
have focused on improving the controllability of pretrained
models by incorporating diverse and user-friendly control
conditions into the generation process.
Motion is a crucial aspect of temporal content in video
generation, yet its precise control remains a significant challenge. To address this, numerous efforts have been devoted to video motion transfer, which aims to adapt motion patterns from a reference video to a new subject and
scene. For example, some controllable video generation
methods [4, 29] introduce dense visual conditions (e.g.,
depth, sketch, and optical flow) into T2V models. These
models are trained end-to-end to leverage strict frame-byframe structural guidance for reconstructing motion patterns. However, dense visual descriptors often impose excessive structural constraints, limiting the model’s ability to
transfer across different scenes (as shown in Fig. 2). Alternatively, trajectory-based methods [30, 33] offer more intuitive and interactive motion control conditions. Despite
their user-friendly controllability, these methods struggle to
achieve fine-grained motion control.

1. Introduction

Another line of research [11, 14, 34, 35, 39] investigates
how motion is encoded within T2V models, aiming to disentangle and extract implicit motion representations from
reference videos. These representations then serve as motion guidance to refine the generation process, resulting in
the desired videos. Although these methods demonstrate
promising motion transfer capabilities, they typically rely
on an optimization-based framework. Each reference video
requires a sample-specific optimization step, significantly
increasing computational overhead compared to fully endto-end generative frameworks [4, 29].

Recent advancements in generative models [5, 8] have significantly advanced visual generation tasks. The large-scale
pretrained text-to-image (T2I) [17, 21, 22, 24] and text-tovideo (T2V) models [2, 3, 6, 16] have demonstrated exThis work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant (U2336213 and 62176249).

To address the above issues, we propose EfficientMT, a
novel and efficient end-to-end framework for video motion
transfer. By leveraging the prior knowledge of pretrained

10592

