This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-supervised Deep Transfer for Regression without Domain Alignment
Mainak Biswas1,2 , Ambedkar Dukkipati3 , Devarajan Sridharan1,2,3
1
Brain, Computation and Data Sciences, 2 Centre for Neuroscience, 3 Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560012
mainakbiswas@iisc.ac.in, ambedkar@iisc.ac.in, sridhar@iisc.ac.in

1. Introduction

Abstract

For the successful application of deep learning models in
the real world, they must be robust to “domain shift” [50].
For example, in biology and medicine, supervised deep
learning models are often trained on large, high-quality
source datasets collected in resource-rich settings [11, 39].
However, naive transfer or even simple finetuning fails to
produce high accuracies when tested with smaller target
datasets of mixed quality collected [2, 45]. As a result,
state-of-the-art domain adaptation (DA) approaches, which
enable the source models to generalize successfully to target datasets, must be employed. Many of these approaches
involve explicit alignment of source and target, while learning a shared predictive model for both domains [17, 19, 40].
A particular challenge occurs with DA when the source
dataset is unavailable. This can happen either because of
privacy or proprietary concerns, such as with medical images or patents [43]. Alternatively, source datasets may
be too large, incurring prohibitive storage and computation
costs in low-resource settings [39]. Source-free (SF) domain adaptation methods that address these challenges are
getting increasingly popular [18, 32]. Such methods generalize the source model to unlabeled or partially target data
(unsupervised or semi-supervised DA) with one of two approaches: data-based or model-based. While data-based
methods create surrogate source data, model-based methods
adapt the source model to the target domain (see Section 2).
We address model-based SF-DA in a semi-supervised
setting. Specifically, we focus on neuroscience applications
where source data are inaccessible, and target labels are reliably available only for a few samples. Regression tasks –
like predicting brain age (Fig. 1C) [39], saccades [29], neural activity [20], and stimulus orientation [8] – are ubiquitous in neuroscience; we tackle a subset of these. We build
upon Contradistinguisher [3, 4], a recently-proposed tool
for effective unsupervised DA (CUDA). Unlike popular representation alignment DA methods [19, 40], CUDA directly
learns a common model for both domains. Yet, CUDA requires full access to source data and addresses classification
tasks. Therefore, it is not directly applicable to our problem.

Deep learning models deployed in real-world applications
(e.g., medicine) face challenges because source models do
not generalize well to domain-shifted target data. Many
successful domain adaptation (DA) approaches require full
access to source data or reliably labeled target data. Yet,
such requirements are unrealistic in scenarios where source
data cannot be shared either because of privacy concerns
or because it is too large and incurs prohibitive storage or
computational costs. Moreover, resource constraints may
limit the availability of labeled targets. We illustrate this
challenge in a neuroscience setting where source data are
unavailable, labeled target data are meager, and predictions involve continuous-valued outputs. We build upon
Contradistinguisher (CUDA), an efficient framework that
learns a shared model across the labeled source and unlabeled target samples, without intermediate representation alignment. Yet, CUDA was designed for unsupervised
DA, with full access to source data, and for classification
tasks. We develop CRAFT – a Contradistinguisher-based
Regularization Approach for Flexible Training – for sourcefree (SF), semi-supervised transfer of pretrained models
in regression tasks. We showcase the efficacy of CRAFT
in two neuroscience settings: gaze prediction with electroencephalography (EEG) data and “brain age” prediction with structural MRI data. For both datasets, CRAFT
yielded up to 9% improvement in root-mean-squared error (RMSE) over fine-tuned models when labeled training
examples were scarce. Moreover, CRAFT leveraged unlabeled target data and outperformed four competing stateof-the-art source-free domain adaptation models by more
than 3%. Lastly, we demonstrate the efficacy of CRAFT
on two other real-world regression benchmarks. We propose CRAFT as an efficient approach for source-free, semisupervised deep transfer for regression that is ubiquitous in
biology and medicine.
Keywords: source-free DA, continuous label prediction,
gaze prediction, brain age prediction, healthcare

827

