This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FALCON: Resolving Visual Redundancy and Fragmentation in High-resolution
Multimodal Large Language Models via Visual Registers
Renshan Zhang1 , Rui Shao1†, Gongwei Chen1 , Miao Zhang1 ,
Kaiwen Zhou2 , Weili Guan1 , Liqiang Nie1†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
zhangrenshan@stu.hit.edu.cn shaorui@hit.edu.cn
chengongwei@hit.edu.cn nieliqiang@gmail.com
https://github.com/JiuTian-VL/FALCON

Abstract

P1: Visual Continuity

pineapple

The incorporation of high-resolution visual input equips
multimodal large language models (MLLMs) with enhanced visual perception capabilities for real-world tasks.
However, most existing high-resolution MLLMs rely on a
cropping-based approach to process images, which leads to
fragmented visual encoding and a sharp increase in redundant tokens. To tackle these issues, we propose the FALCON model. FALCON introduces a novel visual register
technique to simultaneously: 1) Eliminate redundant tokens at the stage of visual encoding. To directly address the
visual redundancy present in the output of vision encoder,
we propose a Register-based Representation Compacting
(ReCompact) mechanism. This mechanism introduces a set
of learnable visual registers designed to adaptively aggregate essential information while discarding redundancy. It
enables the encoder to produce a more compact visual representation with a minimal number of output tokens, thus
eliminating the need for an additional compression module. 2) Ensure continuity in visual encoding. To address
the potential encoding errors caused by fragmented visual
inputs, we develop a Register Interactive Attention (ReAtten) module. This module facilitates effective and efficient
information exchange across sub-images by enabling interactions between visual registers. It ensures the continuity of
visual semantics throughout the encoding. We conduct comprehensive experiments with FALCON on high-resolution
benchmarks across a wide range of scenarios. FALCON
demonstrates superior performance with a remarkable 9fold reduction in visual tokens.

P2: Extra Compression Free

LLM
Extra Crompression

Text
Property

Crop

Redundant
Tokens

pine apple

Vision Encoder

Vision Encoder

Image tokens

Image tokens

P2:

(b) Existing Methods

Fragmented word
Pine and Apple?

LLM
ReCompact

Fragmented object
Vase Missing?

(a) Visual
Redundancy and
Fragmentation

P1:

Vision Encoder Interact Vision Encoder

ReAtten

ReAtten

Image tokens Registers

Image tokens Registers

Text
Property

P1: ✔
P2: ✔

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison between existing high-resolution MLLMs
and FALCON. FALCON eliminates visual redundancy and ensures the continuity of high-resolution encoding through the use
of ReCompact and ReAtten mechanisms.

1. Introduction

performing various vision-language tasks [45, 46, 61], facilitating more natural human-machine interactions. Early
MLLMs [9, 32, 59] typically processed images at a fixed
low resolution, such as 224×224. This limited their capabilities in many real-world applications that require highresolution input. To equip MLLMs with high-resolution
visual perception, recent efforts [15, 17, 33, 58, 67] have
introduced a cropping-based high-resolution processing
method. Specifically, As shown in Fig. 1(b), this approach
crops high-resolution images into multiple non-overlapping
sub-images that match the pre-trained resolution of the encoder. Each sub-image is processed independently by the
vision encoder. Then the resulting visual features are concatenated and fed into the large language model (LLM).
Although effective, cropping-based methods still face issues of: 1) Visual Redundancy. The number of visual to-

Recently, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [2,
9, 30, 32, 59, 60] have made significant advancements in
† Corresponding authors

23530

