This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Intrinsic Scale Assessment:
Bridging the Gap Between Quality and Resolution
Vlad Hosu1,*

Lorenzo Agnolucci2,†,*

Daisuke Iso1

Dietmar Saupe3

1

Sony AI - [name.surname]@sony.com
University of Florence, Italy - [name.surname]@unifi.it
3
University of Konstanz, Germany - [name.surname]@uni-konstanz.de
2

Abstract

cropped for display purposes

scale = 1

1. Introduction
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) aims to model and quantify subjectively how the degradation of an image, such
as that introduced by poor camera performance or image
processing, affects its perceived quality. Particularly, FullReference IQA (FR-IQA) evaluates quality by comparing
a pristine reference image with its degraded counterpart,
while No-Reference IQA (NR-IQA) assesses quality with∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done during an internship at Sony AI.

Visible degradation

1

scale = 0.25

High quality

scale = 0.1

Lost details

Image Intrinsic Scale

Quality

Image Quality Assessment (IQA) measures and predicts
perceived image quality by human observers. Although recent studies have highlighted the critical influence that variations in the scale of an image have on its perceived quality, this relationship has not been systematically quantified.
To bridge this gap, we introduce the Image Intrinsic Scale
(IIS), defined as the largest scale where an image exhibits
its highest perceived quality. We also present the Image Intrinsic Scale Assessment (IISA) task, which involves subjectively measuring and predicting the IIS based on human
judgments. We develop a subjective annotation methodology and create the IISA-DB dataset, comprising 785 imageIIS pairs annotated by experts in a rigorously controlled
crowdsourcing study with verified reliability. Furthermore,
we propose WIISA (Weak-labeling for Image Intrinsic Scale
Assessment), a strategy that leverages how the IIS of an image varies with downscaling to generate weak labels. Experiments show that applying WIISA during the training of
several IQA methods adapted for IISA consistently improves
the performance compared to using only ground-truth labels. The code, dataset, and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/SonyResearch/IISA.

Intrinsic scale

0

Scale

1

Figure 1. Top: downscaling an image affects its perceived quality.
As the original image (left) is downscaled, degradation becomes
less noticeable, but some high-frequency details may be lost. The
optimal trade-off occurs at the image’s intrinsic scale. Note that
the first two images are cropped for clearer visualization. Bottom:
we plot several possible profiles corresponding to different images,
depicting how the quality changes with scale – quality refers to the
latent expected value of measured subjective quality ratings rather
than the noisy mean observed from finite samples. The Image
Intrinsic Scale (IIS) is the largest scale at which an image shows
its highest perceived quality. The IIS is measured above a lower
bound slb = 0.05, where the image quality is more interpretable.

out needing a reference image. Despite significant advancements in IQA, the interaction between image quality and
spatial resolution remains a critical under-explored area.
While the resolution, represented by Megapixels, is often
seen as a key indicator of image quality in cameras, it does
not account for the degradations introduced by the camera
system, such as lens diffraction or increased noise due to
smaller pixel size in higher resolution sensors. Paradoxi-

12863

