This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PossLoss: A Reliable and Sensitive Facial Landmark Detection Loss Function
Qikui Zhu
Department of Biomedical Engineering
Case Western Reserve University, OH, USA
QikuiZhu@163.com

Abstract

1) Ineffective to small errors from 2) Insensitive to difficult/hard landmarks.
peak mismatch.

Error

A reliable, hard-landmark-sensitive loss is urgently needed
in the field of heatmap-based facial landmark detection,
as existing standard regression losses are ineffective at
capturing small errors caused by peak mismatches and
struggle to adaptively focus on hard-to-detect landmarks.
These limitations potentially result in misguided model
training, impacting both the coverage and accuracy of the
model. To this end, we propose a novel POsition-aware
and Sample-Sensitive Loss, named PossLoss, for reliable,
hard-landmark sensitive landmark detection. Specifically,
our PossLoss is position-aware, incorporating relative positional information to accurately differentiate and locate
the peak of the heatmap, while adaptively balancing the influence of landmarks and background pixels through selfweighting, addressing the extreme imbalance between landmarks and non-landmarks. More advanced is that our PossLoss is sample-sensitive, which can distinguish easy and
hard landmarks and adaptively make the model focused
more on hard landmarks. Moreover, it addresses the difficulty of accurately evaluating heatmap distribution, especially in addressing small errors due to peak mismatches.
We analyzed and evaluated our PossLoss on three challenging facial landmark detection tasks. The experimental results show that our PossLoss significantly improves the performance of landmark detection and outperforms the stateof-the-art methods.

Glasses occlusion

Peak mismatch
Ground truth heatmap Predication heatmap

Figure 1. Existing standard regression loss function for heatmapbased facial landmark detection cannot effectively capture small
errors caused by peak mismatches and struggles to adaptively
focus on hard-to-detect landmarks. Therefore, a reliable, hardlandmark-sensitive loss is urgently needed.

1. Introduction

each landmark. Therefore, accurately estimating the pixel
intensity at the peak of the heatmap, while ensuring sensitivity to hard-to-detect landmarks to prevent landmark loss,
is crucial for precise heatmap-based landmark localization
and detection.
Although commonly used loss functions, such as Mean
Square Error (MSE), Wing loss [9], Adaptive Wing
loss [31], and STAR loss [40] have demonstrated promising
performance in estimating landmarks [31], ensuring a reliable, hard-landmark-sensitive evaluation of heatmap distributions remains unaddressed. Specifically, MSE assigns
the same loss value and equal weights to background and
foreground pixels, but background pixels overwhelmingly
dominate foreground pixels in a heatmap, making it ineffective at handling the extreme imbalance between landmark
and background pixels. What’s more, MSE is not sensitive
to small errors, which reduces the model’s ability to precisely locate the peak of the heatmap distribution. These
limitations cause models to produce blurry, dilated heatmap
with lower intensity in foreground pixels compared to the
ground truth, leading to inaccurate facial landmark estimation. Wing loss [9] has been shown to be effective in improving coordinate regression. Yet, it is not suitable for
heatmap regression, as small errors on background pixels
can accumulate significant gradients, leading to divergence

Accurate and automatic detection of facial landmarks [14,
34, 41] is crucial in the field of computer vision, significantly contributing to various downstream tasks [8, 24, 28,
39], such as face verification [5], face synthesis [1], and 3D
face reconstruction [3, 6, 32]. Recently, heatmap-based detection methods [10, 11, 13] have gained increased attention
due to their superior performance compared to coordinate
regression-based approaches [23, 41]. The core principle of
heatmap-based landmark detection is to locate the center of

24858

