This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Radiant Foam: Real-Time Differentiable Ray Tracing
Shrisudhan Govindarajan*1 , Daniel Rebain*2 , Kwang Moo Yi2 , Andrea Tagliasacchi1,3,4
1

Simon Fraser University, 2 University of British Columbia,
3
University of Toronto, 4 Google DeepMind, ∗ equal contributions
radfoam.github.io

Figure 1. Teaser – We introduce the Radiant Foam differentiable 3D representation, which can be used to learn accurate radiance fields
for any novel view synthesis applications (left). If we slice our foam along the plane highlighted by the red “laser”, we expose (right) the
internal structure of our representation: a polyhedral mesh that provides an injective parameterization of the 3D domain. Our representation
is a foam, as the polyhedral cell structure is analogous to a closed-cell foam which partitions space into regions physically separated by thin,
flat walls. It is radiant, as each foam bubble emits a view-dependent radiance that can be used to model the plenoptic function.

Abstract
Research on differentiable scene representations is consistently moving towards more efficient, real-time models. Recently, this has led to the popularization of splatting methods,
which eschew the traditional ray-based rendering of radiance fields in favor of rasterization. This has yielded a
significant improvement in rendering speeds due to the efficiency of rasterization algorithms and hardware, but has
come at a cost: the approximations that make rasterization efficient also make implementation of light transport
phenomena like reflection and refraction much more difficult. We propose a novel scene representation which avoids
these approximations, but keeps the efficiency and reconstruction quality of splatting by leveraging a decades-old
efficient volumetric mesh ray tracing algorithm which has
been largely overlooked in recent computer vision research.
The resulting model, which we name Radiant Foam, achieves
rendering speed and quality comparable to Gaussian Splatting, without the constraints of rasterization. Unlike ray
traced Gaussian models that use hardware ray tracing acceleration, our method requires no special hardware or APIs
beyond the standard features of a programmable GPU.

Figure 2. Radiant Foam – (left) In a stable foam, the pressure
inside each bubble is roughly equal. The interfaces between bubbles
settle into shapes that balance forces, leading to polygonal cells
resembling Voronoi patterns (right). Our representation is nothing
but a dense Voronoi tessellation of 3D space, where each point
belongs to exactly one Voronoi cell. The position of Voronoi sites is
differentiable, making it amenable to gradient-based optimization.

4135

