This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeurOp-Diff: Continuous Remote Sensing Image Super-Resolution via Neural
Operator Diffusion

1

Zihao Xu1,2 , Yuzhi Tang1,2 *, Bowen Xu1,2 , Qingquan Li1,2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), China
2
Shenzhen University, China
{xuzihao, tangyuzhi}@gml.ac.cn, {bowenxu, liqq}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Most publicly accessible remote sensing data suffer from
low resolution, limiting their practical applications. To
address this, we propose a diffusion model guided by
neural operators (NO) for continuous remote sensing image super-resolution (NeurOp-Diff). Neural operators
are used to learn resolution representations at arbitrary
scales, encoding low-resolution (LR) images into highdimensional features, which are then used as prior conditions to guide the diffusion model for denoising. This
effectively addresses the artifacts and excessive smoothing issues present in existing super-resolution (SR) methods, enabling the generation of high-quality, continuous
super-resolution images. Specifically, we adjust the superresolution scale by a scaling factor  s , allowing the model
to adapt to different super-resolution magnifications. Furthermore, experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of NeurOp-Diff. Our code is available at
https://github.com/zerono000/NeurOp-Diff.

1. Introduction
Remote sensing super-resolution (RSSR) is a key technology in remote sensing image processing [54], aiming to restore low-resolution remote sensing (LRRS) images to high
resolution remote sensing (HRRS) images, thus enhancing
spatial details in remote sensing imagery [40]. Despite
advances in remote sensing technology that have greatly
improved the spatial resolution of modern satellites, challenges related to resolution limitations persist [1]. On the
other hand, different application scenarios, such as urban
planning and agricultural monitoring, have varying requirements for image details and coverage. Continuous superresolution can dynamically adjust the magnification factor according to specific needs [5, 44], providing greater
adaptability. Moreover, remote sensing data comes from di-

Figure 1. The figure illustrates the latent representations learned
by the diffusion model after processing the low-resolution (LR)
image using different methods, including Bicubic interpolation,
EDSR, and Neural Operator (NO).

* Corresponding Author.

verse sources with varying resolutions. Continuous superresolution helps integrate data of different resolutions, improving the efficiency and quality of data fusion.
Early regression-based methods performed image superresolution by establishing a mapping between lowresolution (LR) and high-resolution (HR) images. These
approaches often relied on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [7, 8, 22, 30, 37, 50]. The advantages of
these methods include stable training, simple and easyto-optimize loss functions, typically using mean squared
error (MSE) to minimize pixel-wise differences between

12491

