This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Trial to Triumph: Advancing Long Video Understanding via Visual
Context Sample Scaling and Self-reward Alignment
Yucheng Suo1∗ , Fan Ma1 , Linchao Zhu1 , Tianyi Wang2 , Fengyun Rao2 , Yi Yang1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Tencent Inc.

Abstract

Long Video

Multi-modal Large language models (MLLMs) show remarkable ability in video understanding. Nevertheless, understanding long videos remains challenging as the models can only process a finite number of frames in a single
inference, potentially omitting crucial visual information.
To address the challenge, we propose generating multiple
predictions through visual context sampling, followed by a
scoring mechanism to select the final prediction. Specifically, we devise a bin-wise sampling strategy that enables
MLLMs to generate diverse answers based on various combinations of keyframes, thereby enriching the visual context. To determine the final prediction from the sampled
answers, we employ a self-reward by linearly combining
three scores: (1) a frequency score indicating the prevalence of each option, (2) a marginal confidence score reflecting the inter-intra sample certainty of MLLM predictions, and (3) a reasoning score for different question types,
including clue-guided answering for global questions and
temporal self-refocusing for local questions. The frequency
score ensures robustness through majority correctness, the
confidence-aligned score reflects prediction certainty, and
the typed-reasoning score addresses cases with sparse key
visual information using tailored strategies. Experiments
show that this approach covers the correct answer for a
high percentage of long video questions, on seven datasets
show that our method improves the performance of three
MLLMs. Code is available at https://github.com/
suoych/VideoSampleScaling.

Response 1:
A red
velvet cape

Response 2:
A blue
denim jacket

Video Model

Response 3:
A black
top hat

Self-reward

Figure 1. Pipeline and our motivation. Our pipeline generates
multiple predictions for long video questions and selects the best
prediction using a self-reward score. This approach is inspired
by a coverage test, which demonstrates that Pass@10 exceeds the
accuracy of majority answer by 15% using the Llava-Video model.

1. Introduction

field, as it necessitates both spatial and temporal comprehension and reasoning based on a limited number of frames
from potentially hour-long videos [72]. The recent advancements in Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
[1, 66, 67] improve the zero-shot video understanding accuracy by integrating spatial-temporal visual embeddings
with the Large Language Models (LLMs) [4, 14] and finetuning on video-text instruction-tuning datasets. However,
MLLMs encounter several common challenges. First, the
training procedure only samples partial frames from the entire video, potentially missing fine-grained details. Second, the disparity in length between training and testing
videos presents a length extrapolation challenge, while directly increasing the number of inference frames escalates
memory usage. Researchers investigate on efficiently handling longer sequences in MLLMs to deals with the chal-

As a medium for humans to perceive the real dynamic
world, videos play a vital role in daily life applications
[6, 47, 56, 86, 103, 104] such as social communication,
education, entertainment, etc. Long video understanding
poses significant challenges in the multi-modal research
∗ Work done during internship at Wechat Vision
† Corresponding author

23243

