This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Reconstruction Feedback for Robust Fine-grained Generalization
Shijie Wang1 , Jian Shi2 , Haojie Li1 *
1
College of Computer and Engineering, Shandong University of Science and Technology, China
2
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, China

𝑆𝑖𝑚: 0.12
𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺 𝑨

𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺 𝑩

.10

Cross
Entropy

0
0
1
⋮
0

𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺 𝑨

:0

ℒ!"

3
.8
:0

Existing fine-grained image retrieval (FGIR) methods predominantly rely on supervision from predefined categories
to learn discriminative representations for retrieving finegrained objects. However, they inadvertently introduce
category-specific semantics into the retrieval representation, creating semantic dependencies on predefined classes
that critically hinder generalization to unseen categories.
To tackle this, we propose AdvRF, a novel adversarial reconstruction feedback framework aimed at learning
category-agnostic discrepancy representations. Specifically, AdvRF reformulates FGIR as a visual discrepancy
reconstruction task via synergizing category-aware discrepancy localization from retrieval models with categoryagnostic feature learning from reconstruction models. The
reconstruction model exposes residual discrepancies overlooked by the retrieval model, forcing it to improve localization accuracy, while the refined signals from the retrieval
model guide the reconstruction model to improve its reconstruction ability. Consequently, the retrieval model localizes visual differences, while the reconstruction model encodes these differences into category-agnostic representations. This representation is then transferred to the retrieval
model through knowledge distillation for efficient deployment. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate
that our AdvRF achieves impressive performance on both
widely-used fine-grained and coarse-grained datasets.

Feature Utilization

𝑚
𝑆𝑖

𝓡

0.13
0.04
0.87
⋮
0.02

𝑆𝑖
𝑚

Abstract

Sim: cosine similarity

(a) Classification-based Representation Learning

𝓖!

Encoder

Decoder

𝑚
𝑆𝑖

𝓖"

𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺 𝑩

:0
8
.0

𝑆𝑖
𝑚
:0
.05

𝑆𝑖𝑚: 0.90
𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺 𝑨

𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺 𝑨

Feature Utilzation

(b) Reconstruction-based Representation Learning

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed AdvRF. (a) Classificationbased representation learning easily embeds predefined category semantics into representations, causing visually similar cues
across subcategories to appear dissimilar in feature space while
visually dissimilar cues within the same subcategory appear similar. (b) Reconstruction-based representation learning allows for
a focus on object details and the contextual semantics of both the
object and its parts, based on their appearance, thereby capturing category-agnostic representations. This facilitates a deeper understanding of unseen categories by enabling precise appearance
modeling using category-agnostic visual descriptions.

dings to enhance the performance of FGIR.
Current work on FGIR tasks [19, 20, 23, 26, 35, 45]
has achieved promising results by introducing metric constraints or designing localization schemes to capture diverse
visual discrepancies from visually similar objects. However, these approaches fundamentally couple discrepancy
modeling with predefined category supervision, inadvertently embedding category-specific semantics into the retrieval representations. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, this coupling leads to two paradoxical phenomena: (1) visually similar bird heads from different subcategories are represented
differently due to category divergence, whereas (2) dissimilar bird heads and wings within the same subcategory are
clustered due to sharing the same category. Consequently,
the model’s representation power relies heavily on predefined category semantics, struggling to interpret unseen subcategories based on actual visual appearances.
Fortunately, object reconstruction tasks inherently focus

1. Introduction
Fine-grained image retrieval (FGIR) aims to retrieve visually similar subcategories, even those that were unseen during the training phase. It plays a vital role in numerous vision applications from fashion industry, e.g., retrieval of diverse types of clothes [1, 18, 21, 41], to environmental conservation, e.g., retrieving endangered species [5, 37, 39, 42].
Given its significance, a substantial body of research has focused on learning discriminative and generalizable embed* Corresponding author: hjli@sdust.edu.cn

3080

