This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deeply Supervised Flow-Based Generative Models
Inkyu Shin

Chenglin Yang

Liang-Chieh Chen

ByteDance Seed
https://deepflow-project.github.io

Abstract
Flow-based generative models have charted an impressive path across multiple visual generation tasks by
adhering to a simple principle: learning velocity representations of a linear interpolant. However, we observe
that training velocity solely from the final layer’s output
under-utilizes the rich inter-layer representations, potentially impeding model convergence. To address this
limitation, we introduce DeepFlow, a novel framework
that enhances velocity representation through inter-layer
communication. DeepFlow partitions transformer layers into balanced branches with deep supervision and
inserts a lightweight Velocity Refiner with Acceleration
(VeRA) block between adjacent branches, which aligns
the intermediate velocity features within transformer
blocks. Powered by the improved deep supervision via
the internal velocity alignment, DeepFlow converges 8×
faster on ImageNet-256×256 with equivalent performance and further reduces FID by 2.6 while halving
training time compared to previous flow-based models
without a classifier-free guidance. DeepFlow also outperforms baselines in text-to-image generation tasks, as
evidenced by evaluations on MS-COCO and zero-shot
GenEval.

DeepFlow
velocity
prediction

Transformer
blocks

velocity
alignment

(a)
𝑽𝒆𝑹𝑨

velocity
prediction

Transformer
blocks

(b)

Figure 1. Overview of DeepFlow. Left: DeepFlow incorporates deep supervision by evenly adding velocity prediction within transformer blocks, further enhanced by the
proposed Velocity Alignment block (VeRA). Right: (a) On
the ImageNet-256 benchmark, DeepFlow consistently outperforms SiT [28] in FID scores across various model sizes.
(b) DeepFlow-XL achieves an 8× training efficiency improvement over SiT-XL. See Table 8 for details.

1. Introduction
In the era of generative AI, it is indisputable that
the strategy “denoising from noise” has significantly
propelled the advancement of visual generation. The
processes of introducing and removing noise have given
rise to two prominent families of generative models:
diffusion-based models [14, 38, 41, 40] and flow-based
models [22, 1, 25, 23]. Diffusion-based models utilize
a curved trajectory of diffusion forward process and
denoise it back using an noise prediction. In contrast,
flow-based models simply adopt the linear interpolation
between noise and target signals, learning to predict
velocity of interpolated noisy image under the principles of normalizing flows [4, 37]. Owing to these

straightforward yet effective noising and denoising mechanisms, flow-based models have achieved state-of-the-art
performance across numerous visual generation benchmarks [28, 52, 26, 8, 17, 9].
Despite recent advancements, current fundamental
flow-based models [28, 8] have largely overlooked the potential for enhancing their internal velocity representations. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), SiT [28], a representative flow-based model, relies on sequentially stacked
multi-layered transformer [45] blocks to learn the velocity exclusively from the final layer. This approach
under-utilizes the significance of intermediate velocity
representations, leading to challenges such as slow train-

16535

