This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RALoc: Enhancing Outdoor LiDAR Localization via Rotation Awareness
Yuyang Yang1,2 * Wen Li1,2∗ Sheng Ao1,2 Qingshan Xu3 Shangshu Yu4 Yu Guo1,2
Yin Zhou5 Siqi Shen1,2 Cheng Wang1,2†
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Northeastern University 5 GAC R&D Center
Forward

Abstract
LiDAR localization is a fundamental task in autonomous
driving and robotics. Scene Coordinate Regression (SCR)
exhibits leading pose accuracy, achieving impressive results
in learning-based localization. We observe that the realworld LiDAR scans captured from different viewpoints usually result in the catastrophic collapse of SCR. However, existing LiDAR localization methods have largely overlooked
the issue of rotation sensitivity in SCR. In this paper, we
present RALoc, an outdoor LiDAR localization method with
rotation awareness to achieve accurate localization. The
key to our approach is to design a Point Cloud Canonicalization module, which leverages a powerful equivariant key feature aggregation to transform the input LiDAR
scan towards a consistent orientation, effectively eliminating the adverse effects of rotation. This proposed module
has promising scalability and can be seamlessly integrated
with the existing LiDAR localization network. Moreover,
we propose the Bidirectional LiDAR Localization (BiLiLo)
dataset as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of various methods in large outdoor scenes with significant rotation changes. Extensive experiments show that RALoc
significantly improves localization performance in scenarios with large rotation changes, and also achieves competitive performance in the Oxford Radar RobotCar dataset.
Our project is available at https://etheryangyy.
github.io/raloc.github.io.

RALoc
LiSA
GT

Reverse

RALoc
LiSA
GT

Figure 1. Teaser. This paper primarily investigates the problem
of rotation-robust LiDAR localization. We present ground truth
and predicted trajectories on the collected rotation changes dataset.
Left: the forward trajectory (aligned with the training set driving
direction). Right: the reverse trajectory (completely opposite to
the training set driving direction). Compared to the current stateof-the-art method, LiSA [55], RALoc retains high accuracy in the
forward trajectory and avoids catastrophic failures due to rotation
in the reverse trajectory.

captured by the LiDAR as input and output its 6 degrees-offreedom (DoF) pose. However, due to uneven data quality
(e.g., noise distribution, non-uniform density, and varying
viewing angles), it remains challenging to estimate accurate
6-DoF pose in large-scale real-world applications.
Most existing methods [12, 27, 45, 54] typically follow the retrieval-registration paradigm for self-localization,
which involves retrieving candidate scenes from a database,
verifying their correctness, and subsequently estimating the
6-DoF relative pose via point cloud registration [35, 40].
However, when dealing with a large amount of LiDAR point
cloud data, this approach not only imposes significant demands on storage and communication resources, but also
struggles to achieve efficient localization from scratch [57].
Learning-based regression has been shown to be a
promising research direction to address the aforementioned
issues by memorizing specific scenes within a neural network [57]. Existing methods can be categorized into Abso-

1. Introduction
LiDAR localization is a crucial task that plays an important role in various applications, such as autonomous driving [34], robotics and augmented reality. The objective of
LiDAR localization is to use the point cloud of the scene
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

3304

