This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Efficient Post-hoc Framework for Reducing Task Discrepancy of
Text Encoders for Composed Image Retrieval
Jaeseok Byun1 * Seokhyeon Jeong1 * Wonjae Kim2
1

Sanghyuk Chun2† Taesup Moon1,3†

Department of ECE, Seoul National University 2 NAVER AI Lab
3
ASRI/INMC/IPAI/AIIS, Seoul National University

Abstract
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) aims to retrieve a target image based on a reference image and conditioning
text, enabling controllable image searches. The mainstream
Zero-Shot (ZS) CIR methods bypass the need for expensive
training CIR triplets by projecting image embeddings into
the text token embedding space, forming a composed query
for retrieval. However, we highlight an inherent limitation
in these projection-based CIR: a task discrepancy of text
encoders between the original pre-training task of the encoders (text ↔ image) and the target CIR task (image + text
↔ image), which potentially negatively impacts CIR performance. To reduce such a discrepancy, a naive solution would
be to train both image and text encoders with CIR triplets in
a supervised manner. Instead, we introduce Reducing Task
Discrepancy of Text Encoders (RTD), an efficient text-only
post-hoc framework that complements projection-based CIR
methods. We devise a novel frozen-target text contrastive
learning designed to enhance the capability of the text encoder for CIR. We also propose two key enhancements: (1) a
hard negative-based refined batch sampling strategy and (2)
a refined concatenation scheme to further mitigate traininginference discrepancy. Integrating RTD into state-of-the-art
projection-based methods achieves performance comparable
to, or even surpassing, resource-intensive state-of-the-art
synthetic CIR triplet-based approaches, only with 23 minutes of additional training on 4 A100 GPUs. Our code is
available in https://github.com/jaeseokbyun/RTD.

1. Introduction
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) aims at retrieving a target
image that closely resembles a reference image while reflecting the changes described in a conditioning text. Using a
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors. (E-mail: sanghyukc@princeton.edu,

tsmoon@snu.ac.kr)

3895

query composed of image and text allows users to conduct
more precise and flexible searches by specifying the desired
modifications to the image through text. Supervised CIR
methods [1, 11, 18] have been introduced to fuse information from bi-modal query, using labeled data from the target
domain in the form of triplets (Ir , Tc , It ), in which Ir is a
reference image, Tc is a conditioning text, and It is a target
image. However, unlike the typical web-crawled image-text
datasets [31], acquiring sufficient triplets for training needs
expensive manual human annotations. To overcome the dependency on small-scale and human-verified triplets of the
target domain, several works utilize the power of recent generative models. For example, a line of studies [14, 19, 37, 40]
uses text-to-image models like IP2P [4] or large-language
models (LLM) [5, 35] to synthesize large-scale CIR triplets
for training, in place of the target-domain CIR triplets. While
these methods achieve strong performance, they are often
impractical due to the high computational and memory requirements for utilizing generative models.
Another approach for removing the dependency on the
CIR triplets, which often is referred to as projection-based
ZS-CIR [3, 15, 23, 30, 33, 34], employs an integrable projection module on top of the pre-trained, frozen, and shared
embedding space, such as CLIP [29]. Namely, a projection
module ϕ, which maps a CLIP image embedding to the CLIP
text token embedding space, can be trained by solely using
images [3, 30] or texts [15]. During inference, as illustrated
in Fig. 1, these methods first project the embedding of the
query image to a text token embedding [$] using the function
ϕ. This embedding is then combined with the conditioning
text [Tc ] to create the prompt “a photo of [$] that [Tc ]”,
which is used as a query for the text-to-image retrieval.
The core assumption of the projection-based CIR is that
the pre-trained text encoder should be robust enough to combine information from both the projected text token embedding and the conditioning text. However, we argue that this
can cause a significant task discrepancy for the pre-trained
text encoder between the original image-text alignment pretraining task (of CLIP) and the CIR task. For example, in

