This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Effective Tokens with Video Anomaly in Large Language Models
Yingxian Chen1∗ Jiahui Liu1∗ Ruidi Fan1 Yanwei Li2 Chirui Chang1 Shizhen Zhao1
Wilton W.T.Fok1 Xiaojuan Qi1† Yik-Chung Wu1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{chenyx, liujh, xjqi, ycwu}@eee.hku.hk
∗

†

equal contributions

corresponding authors

Understanding abnormal events in videos is a vital and challenging task that has garnered significant attention in a wide
range of applications. Although current video understanding
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) are capable
of analyzing general videos, they often struggle to handle
anomalies due to the spatial and temporal sparsity of abnormal events, where the redundant information always leads
to suboptimal outcomes. To address these challenges, exploiting the representation and generalization capabilities of
Vison Language Models (VLMs) and Large Language Models (LLMs), we propose VA-GPT, a novel MLLM designed
for summarizing and localizing abnormal events in various
videos. Our approach efficiently aligns effective tokens between visual encoders and LLMs through two key proposed
modules: Spatial Effective Token Selection (SETS) and Temporal Effective Token Generation (TETG). These modules
enable our model to effectively capture and analyze both
spatial and temporal information associated with abnormal
events, resulting in more accurate responses and interactions.
Furthermore, we construct an instruction-following dataset
specifically for fine-tuning video-anomaly-aware MLLMs,
and introduce a cross-domain evaluation benchmark based
on XD-Violence dataset. Our proposed method outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods on various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Detecting and summarizing abnormal events in videos is
critical and challenging, and it has garnered considerable
attention across multiple research domains and real-world
applications, such as security monitoring, video analysis,
and crime detection.
Although many traditional methods [4, 16, 37, 43, 47,
73, 86] have been widely explored for video anomaly detection, they exhibit substantial limitations in their effectiveness [22, 51, 60, 66, 71, 84]. These limitations manifest in two aspects: 1) Traditional video anomaly detection

Visual Tokens

LLM

LLM

Ours

Visual
Encoder

Baseline

Abstract
…

…

…

…

…
Spatial Effective Tokens
…

Visual
Encoder
Temporal Effective Tokens

…

…
Video

s = 0.04

…

…
s = 0.16

s = 0.92

s = 0.81

Figure 1. Baseline video understanding MLLM feeds forward every
visual token (yellow squares) equally to participate in fine-tuning
and inference (top row). Different from it, our method focuses on
the effective area (unobstructed area in medium video frames) in
each frame and select the Spatial Effective Tokens (orange squares)
for the LLM (see Section 3.2) (filtered tokens are shown as gray
squares). At the same time, we generate anomaly-aware Temporal
Effective Tokens (green squares) (see Section 3.3) based on the
assigned anomaly scores (denoted as s) of each frame from a pretrained classifier for better temporal localization of anomalies.

methods [6, 13, 57, 63, 64, 86] essentially approach the
task as a closed-set detection and classification problem, inherently limiting their ability to achieve a comprehensive
understanding and interpretation of anomalies; 2) These
methods [2, 19, 23, 65, 68, 78] are restricted by a limited
vocabulary, making it difficult for them to handle unseen or
novel situations effectively.
Recent advancements [1, 28, 34, 36, 45, 58] in Vision
Language Models (VLMs) and Large Language Models
(LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in scene
understanding and comprehensive analysis. Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs), particularly those designed for video understanding [27, 29, 31, 39, 42, 74], have
achieved significant progress in general video analysis tasks.
However, while these models exhibit strong performance

22695

