This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Mesh Editing using Masked LRMs
Will Gao1,2
Zhengqin Li2

Dilin Wang2
Yuchen Fan2
Aljaz Bozic2
Tuur Stuyck2
Zhao Dong2
Rakesh Ranjan2
Nikolaos Sarafianos2
1
2
University of Chicago,
Meta Reality Labs
MaskedLRM Website

Abstract
We present a novel approach to shape editing, building on
recent progress in 3D reconstruction from multi-view images.
We formulate shape editing as a conditional reconstruction
problem, where the model must reconstruct the input shape
with the exception of a specified 3D region, in which the
geometry should be generated from the conditional signal.
To this end, we train a conditional Large Reconstruction
Model (LRM) for masked reconstruction, using multi-view
consistent masks rendered from a randomly generated 3D
occlusion, and using one clean viewpoint as the conditional
signal. During inference, we manually define a 3D region to
edit and provide an edited image from a canonical viewpoint
to fill that region. We demonstrate that, in just a single forward pass, our method not only preserves the input geometry
in the unmasked region through reconstruction capabilities
on par with SoTA, but is also expressive enough to perform
a variety of mesh edits from a single image guidance that
past works struggle with, while being 2 − 10× faster than
the top-performing prior work.

Source

Mask & Edit

LRM Output

Figure 1. Mesh Editing using MaskedLRMs: The inputs comprise front/back views of the source mesh (1st column) and a
frontal image used as the conditional view. The 2nd column shows
the masked area rendered from the front (inset) and a 2D edit. The
last column shows our generated mesh from the front/back views.

has also been work done in generative autoregressive models
for 3D, which tokenize 3D data in a unique way [60, 62, 77,
79]. Furthermore, neural representation techniques such as
NeRFs [58] and Gaussian splatting [40] have introduced an
entirely new paradigm for 3D content generation.
Despite significant progress in 3D content generation
from scratch, research in editing the shape of existing 3D
models is underdeveloped. Image editing methods benefit
from a nearly endless source of data from scraping the internet, while 3D assets typically require a higher level of
expertise and specialized tools to create and thus are scarce
in comparison. The difference in scale is staggering, with
the largest image datasets containing billions of samples [72]
while the largest 3D datasets contain only millions [20]. A
common approach to tackling the issue of 3D data scarcity
is to exploit existing text-image foundation models. Recent
efforts in 3D editing involve using these huge models to

1. Introduction
Automated 3D content generation has been at the forefront
of computer vision and graphics research, due to applications
in various visual mediums like games, animation, simulation, and more recently, virtual and augmented reality. As
research on neural methods for content generation has progressed, there has been significant progress in modifying and
applying well-studied 2D methods into the 3D domain.
Recent developments in 3D content generation initially
followed a similar path to 2D content generation. Operating
in 3D voxel space instead of pixel space, models like VAEs
[28, 55, 56, 70] and GANs [14, 98] were built, and trained
on small-scale datasets [9]. These works often demonstrated
limited editing capabilities through simple latent operations
on their learned representations. Efforts have been made to
extend generative diffusion to 3D [45, 53, 82, 99]. There

7154

