This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeshMamba: State Space Models
for Articulated 3D Mesh Generation and Reconstruction
Yusuke Yoshiyasu
Leyuan Sun
Ryusuke Sagawa
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
yusuke-yoshiyasu@aist.go.jp

Figure 1. Denoising diffusion models based on MeshMamba are able to generate dense 3D articulated meshes with around 10,000 vertices,
capturing clothing deformations and hand grasp poses. MeshMamba can generate a mesh with 10475 vertices in a few seconds using 100
DDIM sampling steps, which is 6-9× faster than diffusion transformer.

Abstract

ing competitive performance in (near) real-time.

In this paper, we introduce MeshMamba, a neural network model for learning 3D articulated mesh models by
employing the recently proposed Mamba State Space Models (Mamba-SSMs). MeshMamba is efficient and scalable
in handling a large number of input tokens, enabling the
generation and reconstruction of body mesh models with
more than 10,000 vertices, capturing clothing and hand geometries. The key to effectively learning MeshMamba is the
serialization technique of mesh vertices into orderings that
are easily processed by Mamba. This is achieved by sorting the vertices based on body part annotations or the 3D
vertex locations of a template mesh, such that the ordering respects the structure of articulated shapes. Based on
MeshMamba, we design 1) MambaDiff3D, a denoising diffusion model for generating 3D articulated meshes and 2)
Mamba-HMR, a 3D human mesh recovery model that reconstructs a human body shape and pose from a single image. Experimental results showed that MambaDiff3D can
generate dense 3D human meshes in clothes, with grasping hands, etc., and outperforms previous approaches in the
3D human shape generation task. Additionally, MambaHMR extends the capabilities of previous non-parametric
human mesh recovery approaches, which were limited to
handling body-only poses using around 500 vertex tokens,
to the whole-body setting with face and hands, while achiev-

1. Introduction
Generating and reconstructing 3D articulated mesh models
in diverse body shapes and poses is a crucial problem in
computer vision and computer graphics, with broad applications in VR, AR, gaming and VFX. The main approaches
for solving these tasks can be categorized into parametric
and non-parametric vertex-based paradigms [73]. Parametric approaches [30, 90, 91] rely on human body models,
such as SMPL [44] and SMPL-X [55], to represent a human body using shape and pose parameters. In contrast,
vertex-based approaches [14, 39] directly manipulate the
mesh vertices of a surface and reconstruct them using neural networks. The first paradigm dominates the current field
due to its compact representation of body kinematics, while
the latter employs a neural network friendly representation
of a 3D surface [48, 63, 94] and holds the potential to capture complex deformations including those of clothing in
a general and unified manner. In both paradigms, transformers have become the dominant architecture which offers large improvements in reconstruction performance especially when a large-scale training data is available.
However, the main challenge with transformers is
their quadratic complexity with respect to the input sequence length [72]. In particular, vertex-based transformer

6563

