This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Spatial Invariance to Boost Adversarial Transferability
Zihan Zhou1
Li Li1
Yanli Ren1
Chuan Qin2
Guorui Feng1,*
Shanghai University1
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology2
{zhouzihan, llichn, renyanli, grfeng}@shu.edu.cn, qin@usst.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial examples, crafted with imperceptible perturbations, reveal a significant vulnerability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). More critically, the transferability of adversarial examples allows attackers to induce unreasonable
predictions without requiring knowledge about the target
model. DNNs exhibit spatial invariance, meaning that the
position of an object does not affect the classification result.
However, existing input transformation-based adversarial
attacks solely focus on behavioral patterns at a singular position, failing to fully exploit the spatial invariance exhibited
by DNNs across multiple positions, thus constraining the
transferability of adversarial examples. To address this, we
propose a multi-scale, multi-position input transformationbased attack called Spatial Invariance Diversity (SID).
Specifically, SID uses hybrid spatial-spectral fusion mechanisms within localized receptive fields, followed by multiscale spatial downsampling and positional perturbations
via random transformations, thereby crafting an ensemble
of inputs to activate diverse behavioral patterns of DNNs
for effective adversarial perturbations. Extensive experiments on the ImageNet dataset demonstrate that SID could
achieve better transferability than the current state-of-theart input transformation-based attacks. Additionally, SID
can be flexibly integrated with other input transformationbased or gradient-based attacks, further enhancing the
transferability of adversarial examples. The code is available at https://github.com/TheMoss7/SID.

(a) Raw image.

(b) Heatmap of raw image.

(c) Rescaled image.

(d) Heatmap of rescaled image.

Figure 1. The attention heatmaps of raw image, and rescaled image generated on Inception-v3 model using Grad-CAM.

[9, 26] have shown that adding imperceptible perturbations
to the legitimate input can effectively mislead DNNs. The
emergence of adversarial examples has further heightened
concerns regarding the reliability of DNNs.
Adversarial attacks are typically divided into white-box
[9, 13, 20] and black-box attacks [1, 3]. In white-box attacks, the architecture and parameters of the target model
are accessible. Therefore, attackers can easily launch attacks on the white-box target model. However, the whitebox attack scenario is overly idealized, as the target model
is typically inaccessible. In contrast, black-box attacks are
more realistic, where the attacker has no knowledge of the
target model. Recently, many studies have found that adversarial examples generated through white-box attacks exhibit
transferability [2, 32], allowing them to successfully attack
other models with different architectures and parameters.
It is entirely feasible to use a surrogate model to conduct

1. Introduction
With the continuous advancement of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) [8, 11, 12, 30], they have been successfully applied to various fields e.g., image classification [11], semantic segmentation [4, 37], and face recognition [25, 31],
demonstrating remarkable performance. However, the vast
number of parameters within DNNs makes them difficult
to interpret, leading to a black-box nature. Recent studies
* Corresponding author.

1423

