This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M2 EIT: Multi-Domain Mixture of Experts for Robust Neural Inertial Tracking
Yan Li 1 , Yang Xu2 , Changhao Chen4 , Zhongchen Shi3,∗ , Wei Chen3 , Liang Xie3 ,
Hongbo Chen1 , Erwei Yin3, *
1
School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University 2 Tianjin University
3
Defense Innovation Institute, Academy of Military Sciences (AMS)
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
liyan377@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, shizhongchen@buaa.edu.cn, yinerwei1985@gmail.com

7UDGLWLRQDOQHXUDOLQHUWLDOWUDFNLQJEDVHGRQOHDUQLQJVSDWLRWHPSRUDOIHDWXUHV

Abstract

5HV1HW /670

Inertial tracking (IT), independent of the environment and
external infrastructure, has long been the ideal solution
for providing location services to humans. Despite signiﬁcant strides in inertial tracking empowered by deep learning, prevailing neural inertial tracking predominantly utilizes conventional spatial-temporal features from inertial
measurements. Unfortunately, the frequency domain dimension is usually overlooked in the current literature. To this
end, in this paper, we propose a Multi-Domain Mixture of
Experts model for Neural Inertial Tracking, named M2 EIT.
Speciﬁcally, M2 EIT ﬁrst leverages ResNet as a spatial decomposition expert to capture spatial relationships between
multivariate timeseries, and State Space Model (SSM)based Bi-Mamba, the other expert to focus on learning temporal correlations. In the frequency domain mapping, we
then introduce the Wavelet-based frequency decomposition
expert, which decomposes IMU samples into low-frequency
bands and high-frequency bands using the Haar wavelet
transform for simulating motion patterns at different temporal scales. To bridge the semantic gap across multiple domains and integrate them adaptively, we design the
Multi-Representation Alignment Router (MAR), which consists of a dual cross-domain translation layer, followed by
a dynamic router, to achieve multi-domain semantic alignment and optimize expert contributions. Extensive experiments conducted on three real-world datasets demonstrate
that the proposed M2 EIT can achieve SOTA results in neural inertial tracking.

1. Introduction
An Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) is capable of continuously sensing angular velocity and linear acceleration, making it a fundamental component in motion tracking systems.
*

Corresponding author.

28207

DFFB[

,08PHDVXUHPHQWV
2ULJLQDODFFB[

1HXUDOQHWZRUN

7UDMHFWRU\

/RZ)UHTXHQF\$SSUR[LPDWLRQ DFFB[

+LJK)UHTXHQF\'HWDLO DFFB[

)UHTXHQF\GRPDLQIHDWXUHVLQFRQWLQXRXVO\VDPSOHG,08PHDVXUHPHQWV

Figure 1. Traditional neural inertial tracking paradigm. Most
existing methods for inertial representation learning rely on spatiotemporal features, overlooking the most critical dimension of
IMU sequences the frequency domain. The ﬁgure presents a visualization of frequency domain features extracted via wavelet transform from one dimension of the acceleration signal.

With the escalating prevalence of human activities in indoor and subterranean environments, the imperative for sophisticated human motion tracking (e.g. location) systems
has reached unprecedented signiﬁcance. Unlike other commonly used sensor modalities, such as GPS [20], Wiﬁ [35]
and vision [29], IMUs are completely egocentric and as
such are far less environment dependent. Therefore, inertial tracking is becoming a dream technology for academic researchers and industrial engineers, as it can provide
location-based services in areas where satellite signals are
weak or unavailable (e.g. indoor and underground tunnels).
Traditional inertial tracking methods, e.g. Strapdown Inertial Navigation System (SINS) [31] and Pedestrian Dead
Reckoning (PDR) [8, 30], are mostly relied on Newtonian
mechanics or some unrealistic assumptions. However, they
are prone to unbounded drift due to error accumulation,

