This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth Any Event Stream: Enhancing Event-based Monocular Depth Estimation
via Dense-to-Sparse Distillation
Jinjing Zhu1 * Tianbo Pan1 * Zidong Cao1
1

Yexin Liu2

HKUST(GZ)

2

James T. Kwok2

Hui Xiong1†

HKUST

Figure 1. Our event-based monocular depth estimation model processes only sparse event data, yielding highly accurate depth estimations.
Top: Input event data. Middle: DAM [41] with input event data. Bottom: EventDAM with input event data.

Abstract

and event data to generate auxiliary depth predictions, while
SFD facilitates adaptive feature distillation. Furthermore,
SCM ensures output consistency across varying sparsity
levels in event data, thereby endowing EventDAM with zeroshot capabilities across diverse scenes. Extensive experiments across a variety of benchmark datasets, compared
to approaches using diverse input modalities, robustly substantiate the generalization and zero-shot capabilities of
EventDAM.

With the superior sensitivity of event cameras to high-speed
motion and extreme lighting conditions, event-based monocular depth estimation has gained popularity to predict structural information about surrounding scenes in challenging
environments. However, the scarcity of labeled event data
constrains prior supervised learning methods. Unleashing
the promising potential of the existing RGB-based depth
foundation model, DAM [41], we propose Depth Any Event
stream (EventDAM) to achieve high-performance eventbased monocular depth estimation in an annotation-free
manner. EventDAM effectively combines paired dense RGB
images with sparse event data by incorporating three key
cross-modality components: Sparsity-aware Feature Mixture (SFM), Sparsity-aware Feature Distillation (SFD), and
Sparsity-invariant Consistency Module (SCM). With the proposed sparsity metric, SFM mixes features from RGB images

1. Introduction
Compared with traditional RGB image sensors, event cameras [7] offer several distinct advantages, including high
temporal resolution, high dynamic range, and markedly reduced latency. It excels at capturing precise structural information in challenging conditions, such as poorly illuminated areas [27] and environments with moving objects at
high speed [39]. Recently, increasing research has shown
considerable potential in areas such as classification [43],

→ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

5146

