This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CalliReader : Contextualizing Chinese Calligraphy via
an Embedding-Aligned Vision-Language Model
Yuxuan Luo1 *, Jiaqi Tang1 *, Chenyi Huang1 , Feiyang Hao2 , Zhouhui Lian1†
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
https://github.com/LoYuXr/CalliReader
What’s the style of this artwork?

What’s the content in the red bounding box?

What’s the content of this calligraphy?

The calligraphy style in this work is caoshu
( 草书 ), or Cursive Script. This style is known
for its fast and fluid brushstrokes, where the
characters are written in a highly simplified
and abbreviated form.

行人使长安可怜
Who’s the author of this artwork?
Shen Peng, a prominent contemporary
Chinese calligrapher known for his
distinctive and powerful artistic style.

In what occasion might the author
create this calligraphy?
The occasion for creating this calligraphy could be a personal
celebration or a gift for someone named "Kin Hai." The
calligraphy features a poem by the Song Dynasty poet Xin
Qiji, which expresses a sense of longing and nostalgia for the
past. This piece was created with care and intention, possibly
for a special event or as a token of appreciation.

What’s the layout of this artwork?
郁孤台下清江水中间多少行人泪西北望
长安可怜无数山青山遮不住毕竟东流去
江晚正愁余山深闻鹧鸪辛稼轩词三首为
京海同志沈鹏书

The layout is shoujuan ( 手卷 ), or handscroll,
a traditional format often used in Chinese
calligraphy. The text is arranged horizontally,
with the characters flowing from right to left.

(a) Content recognition and interpretation of a Chinese calligraphy artwork in a contextualized interaction.
How many attractions are on this sign?

What is written on these
red envelopes?

There are four attractions on this sign: Wofo
Temple, Cherry Valley, Lilac Garden, and
Peony Garden.

龙凤呈祥琴瑟和鸣
鸳鸯比翼白首齐眉

Which attraction is closest to me?

The closest attraction to you is Lilac Garden.

(Single-turn recognition)

√:150m

(b) Performance comparison with other VLMs.
How much further do I need to walk to get to
Cherry Valley?
You need to walk another 1150 meters to reach
Cherry Valley.

√: Cherry Valley (1150m)

(Multi-turn recognition and comprehension)

(c) Recognition and comprehension in real-world scenes.

Figure 1. We propose CalliReader, a versatile vision-language model (VLM) for Chinese Calligraphy Contextualization (CC2 ). It excels
in full-page/region-wise recognition, multilingual interpretation, and intent identification of calligraphy artworks (a), outperforming finetuned state-of-the-art VLMs (b), while also demonstrating applicability in general scene-text recognition and comprehension (c).

Abstract
Chinese calligraphy, a UNESCO Heritage, remains computationally challenging due to visual ambiguity and cultural
complexity. Existing AI systems fail to contextualize their
intricate scripts, because of limited annotated data and
poor visual-semantic alignment. We propose CalliReader, a
vision-language model (VLM) that solves the Chinese Calligraphy Contextualization (CC2 ) problem through three
innovations: (1) character-wise slicing for precise character extraction and sorting, (2) CalliAlign for visual-text
token compression and alignment, (3) embedding instruction tuning (e-IT) for improving alignment and addressing
data scarcity. We also build CalliBench, the first benchmark for full-page calligraphic contextualization, addressing three critical issues in previous OCR and VQA approaches: fragmented context, shallow reasoning, and hallucination. Extensive experiments including user studies
have been conducted to verify our CalliReader’s superiority to other state-of-the-art methods and even human pro-

fessionals in page-level calligraphy recognition and interpretation, achieving higher accuracy while reducing hallucination. Comparisons with reasoning models highlight
the importance of accurate recognition as a prerequisite
for reliable comprehension. Quantitative analyses validate
CalliReader’s efficiency; evaluations on document and realworld benchmarks confirm its robust generalization ability.

1. Introduction

1 *: Equal contribution.

Chinese calligraphy is recognized by UNESCO as an Intangible Cultural Heritage. It possesses intricate scripts, arbitrary layouts, and historical glyph variations, making it
hard to read and understand, even for native Chinese speakers. Yet, calligraphy encapsulates immense cultural and
historical significance. Therefore, unlocking its rich context through effective Chinese Calligraphy Contextualization (CC²) methods is paramount. Current systems struggle to achieve this, requiring precise recognition, in-depth
comprehension, and multilingual interpretation.
Existing optical character recognition (OCR) tools [22,
58] falter when faced with calligraphy’s stylistic nuances.
Vision-language models (VLMs) offer a promising alternative, demonstrating proficiency in image understanding
and interpretation [81, 85, 86]. However, VLMs often lack
training on datasets tailored to calligraphy. Additionally,

2 †: Corresponding author: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn
3 This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of

China (Grant No.: 62372015), Center For Chinese Font Design and Research, and Leading Projects in Key Research Fields of Language Funded
by the National Language Commission.

23030

