This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deterministic Object Pose Confidence Region Estimation
Zhang Li1,2 Zi Wang1,2 * Banglei Guan1,2 Yang Shang1,2 Qifeng Yu1,2
1
National University of Defense Technology
2
Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Image Measurement and Vision Navigation

Jinghao Wang1,2

Abstract
6D pose confidence region estimation has emerged as a critical direction, aiming to perform uncertainty quantification
for assessing the reliability of estimated poses. However,
current sampling-based approach suffers from critical limitations that severely impede their practical deployment: 1)
the sampling speed significantly decreases as the number
of samples increases. 2) the derived confidence regions
are often excessively large. To address these challenges,
we propose a deterministic and efficient method for estimating pose confidence regions. Our approach uses inductive conformal prediction to calibrate the deterministically regressed Gaussian keypoint distributions into 2D
keypoint confidence regions. We then leverage the implicit
function theorem to propagate these keypoint confidence regions directly into 6D pose confidence regions. This method
avoids the inefficiency and inflated region sizes associated
with sampling and ensembling. It provides compact confidence regions that cover the ground-truth poses with a
user-defined confidence level. Experimental results on the
LineMOD Occlusion and SPEED datasets show that our
method achieves higher pose estimation accuracy with reduced computational time. For the same coverage rate,
our method yields significantly smaller confidence region
volumes, reducing them by up to 99.9% for rotations and
99.8% for translations. The code will be available soon.

(a) Sampling method [9]

(b) Deterministic method

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Narrower confidence regions of our deterministic approach compared to the sampling method [9]. (a) A heatmapguided keypoints are established for 2D confidence regions Kh via
ICP, with 6D pose confidence regions Ths and Rsh inferred through
sampling. (b) We directly regress keypoint Gaussian distributions
and generated Kr by ICP. To avoid inefficiency and broadened regions due to sampling, we apply a Jacobian matrix from the IFT
to propagate Kr into the 6D pose.

Determining the 6D pose of an object from an RGB image is
a fundamental task in computer vision, with extensive applications in autonomous driving [1], robotic manipulation [2],
augmented reality [3], and space robotics [4]. The majority
of pose estimation research [5–11] primarily focuses on delivering a single optimal pose. It is often for applications
that tolerate occasional inaccuracies. However, it underperforms where high reliability and precise uncertainty quantification (UQ) are essential. Because visual ambiguities
* Corresponding author. wangzi16@nudt.edu.cn

undermine the accuracy of even the best algorithms, leading to disasters in safety-critical scenarios.
Driven by the need for safety and reliability in realworld applications, UQ has been a critical research focus
in robotics for decades. UQ is vital for ensuring successful
object grasping and prevents collisions, and it can be categorized as either a probabilistic distribution of outcomes or
a scalar confidence [12]. However, both distribution estimation [13–16] and confidence estimation [17, 18] are not
always reliable and often fail to provide statistically guaran-

14866

