This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-aided Dense and Continuous Point Tracking: Everywhere and Anytime
Zhexiong Wan1,2 Jianqin Luo1 Yuchao Dai1 Gim Hee Lee2
1
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University &
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information Acquisition and Processing
2
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{wanzhexiong, luojianqin}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn, gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

estimate pointwise long-term motions also draws attention.
Despite significant progress, the sparse and independent
representation of pointwise trajectories remains inherently
incompatible with the spatially dense representation of input video. Thus, recently there are methods [4, 35, 46] that
continue to use dense optical flow to represent long-term
motion. However, the temporal frame rate of the input video
is constrained by traditional shutter cameras, which makes
accurately modeling complex motion trajectories difficult
for video-only methods from the data acquisition perspective. Consequently, accurate estimation of fine-grained spatially dense and temporally continuous motion remains a
challenging and worthwhile research problem.
Unlike traditional shutter cameras that expose the entire
image at fixed frame rates, the new bio-inspired event cameras [9] can independently and asynchronously detect perpixel brightness changes with microsecond precision. This
unique design makes it inherently sensitive to visual motion
changes, leading to impressive motion-related applications
such as optical flow estimation [17, 62], motion segmentation [20, 61], feature tracking [33], object tracking [63], and
frame interpolation [45]. However, events are typically triggered only with motion contours or rich textures, making
it challenging to comprehensively perceive spatially dense
motion. Recently, integrating the advantages of event camera and traditional shutter camera has become a new direction [38, 57]. Leveraging on these successes, we propose
for the first time taking event data as an auxiliary input for
the point tracking task, where we comprehensively model
fine-grained spatially dense and temporally continuous motion from the input image and event modalities.
The introduction of event cameras offers the potential to
model continuous motion from the data perspective. However, to effectively model continuous long-term motion, we
need a new representation that replaces optical flow and
parametrically associates the dense temporal properties of
event data. BFlow [14] proposes to learn trajectories with
Bézier curves from events, but is limited to input fixed
frames and cannot adapt to longer sequences. CPFlow [31]

Recent point tracking methods have made great strides
in recovering the trajectories of any point (especially key
points) in long video sequences associated with large motions. However, the spatial and temporal granularities of
point trajectories remain constrained by limited motion estimation accuracy and video frame rate. Leveraging the
high temporal resolution and motion sensitivity of event
cameras, we introduce event data for the first time to recover spatially dense and temporally continuous trajectories of every point at any time. Specifically, we define the
dense and continuous point trajectory representation as estimating multiple control points of curves for each pixel and
model the movement of sparse events triggered along continuous point trajectories. Building on this, we propose a
novel multi-frame iterative streaming framework that first
estimates local inter-frame motion representations from two
consecutive frames with inter-frame events, then aggregates
them into a global long-term motion representation to utilize input full video and event data with an arbitrary number of frames. Extensive experiments on simulated and real
data demonstrate the significant improvement of our framework over state-of-the-art methods and the crucial role of
introducing events to model continuous point trajectories.

1. Introduction
Estimating fine-grained motion from input videos is a crucial task in computer vision with widespread applications
such as video compression [1], frame interpolation [23, 55],
motion segmentation [2, 34], and dynamic scene reconstruction [16]. Early studies [21, 44] based on two-frame
optical flow can model the spatially dense motion, but they
suffer from the challenge of modeling long-term motion
from more frames. With the proposal of tracking any point
(TAP) task [5, 19], using sparse points as query indexes to
Project page: https://npucvr.github.io/EDCPT

7936

