This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not Only Vision: Evolve Visual Speech Recognition via Peripheral Information
Zhaoxin Yuan1,2 , Shuang Yang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 and Xilin Chen1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
yuanzhaoxin20@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {shuang.yang, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

collectively complicate accurate interpretation. Variations
in speaking styles and individual differences in lip movements further exacerbate the difficulty of the task.
To address these challenges, studies have made significant efforts on optimizing the processing and learning of
visual information. Some approaches attempt to expand the
visual input region from lip to face to capture richer visual
cues [1, 19]. More recent works leverage audio-visual data
and self-supervised learning method to extract more discriminative visual features [14, 15, 39, 49, 52]. These efforts have led to more robust and general representations of
visual signals, resulting in substantial gains in VSR. With
these advances, VSR systems have become more capable
than ever. However, in real-world scenarios, visual information is often compromised due to occlusions, low-resolution
inputs, or the visual ambiguity of homophenous phonemes,
which makes recognition challenging. A natural question
arises: could there be other complementary information that
further enhance VSR, or, is optimizing visual information
processing the only path toward robust VSR?
The human lip-reading process offers a potential alternative perspective. When humans perform lip-reading, they
do not rely solely on visual signals but instead subconsciously integrate information beyond visual as assistance.
For example, background information about the speech,
such as the setting or topic of discussion and some knowledge of the speaker, or familiarity with common linguistic patterns, constrains the space of possible interpretations. Furthermore, humans leverage their accumulated experience with lip-reading itself, recognizing that certain lip
movements can correspond to multiple words with distinct
meanings. These human abilities are well acknowledged
yet remains unexplored in automatic VSR systems.
In this work, we present the first attempt to integrate information beyond visual dynamics into the automatic VSR
process. While prior studies in Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) have successfully leveraged additional context
to enhance recognition accuracy [4, 6, 17, 18, 20, 29, 36,
41], the role of such information in VSR has been largely

Is visual information alone sufficient for visual speech
recognition (VSR) in challenging real-world scenarios?
Humans do not rely solely on visual information for lipreading but also incorporate additional cues, such as
speech-related context and prior knowledge about the task.
However, existing methods have largely overlooked such external information in automatic VSR systems. To systematically explore the role of such information for VSR, we
introduce the concept of Peripheral Information. We categorize it into three types based on the relevance to the
spoken content: (1) Contextual Guidance (e.g., topic or description of speech), (2) Task Expertise (e.g., human prior
experience in lip-reading), and (3) Linguistic Perturbation
(irrelevant signals processed alongside meaningful information). Considering the disparity that peripheral information provides additional clues with varying significance
while visual input serves as the most direct source for VSR,
we propose a framework that introduces a hierarchical processing strategy to handle different modalities. With visualspecific adaptation and a dynamic routing mechanism for
multi-modal information, our approach reduces the impact
of modality conflicts effectively and enables selective utilization of peripheral information with varying relevance.
Leveraging readily available peripheral information, our
model achieves a WER of 22.03% on LRS3. Further experiments on AVSpeech demonstrate its generalization in realworld scenarios.

1. Introduction
Visual Speech Recognition (VSR) has gained wide attention due to its important applications, including assisting
speech interpretation in noisy environments[42], and offering a communication method for patients with speech disabilities [28]. However, it remains challenging in real-world
scenarios. Issues such as low image resolution, poor lighting conditions, and dynamic head poses [12] introduce substantial noise and ambiguity into the visual signal, which

3091

