This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Occupancy Learning with Spatiotemporal Memory
Ziyang Leng1 Jiawei Yang2 Wenlong Yi1 Bolei Zhou1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 University of Southern California

Abstract
3D occupancy becomes a promising perception representation for autonomous driving to model the surrounding
environment at a fine-grained scale. However, it remains
challenging to efficiently aggregate 3D occupancy over time
across multiple input frames due to the high processing cost
and the uncertainty and dynamics of voxels. To address
this issue, we propose ST-Occ, a scene-level occupancy representation learning framework that effectively learns the
spatiotemporal feature with temporal consistency. ST-Occ
consists of two core designs: a spatiotemporal memory that
captures comprehensive historical information and stores it
efficiently through a scene-level representation and a memory attention that conditions the current occupancy representation on the spatiotemporal memory with a model of uncertainty and dynamic awareness. Our method significantly
enhances the spatiotemporal representation learned for 3D
occupancy prediction tasks by exploiting the temporal dependency between multi-frame inputs. Experiments show
that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by a margin of 3 mIoU and reduces the temporal inconsistency by 29%. The code and model are available at
https://github.com/matthew-leng/ST-Occ.

the temporal fusion process become a critical issue [20].
Moreover, occupancy prediction tasks require voxel-level
detail, which demands higher granularity than the BEV representations for 3D detection tasks. Consequently, existing
temporal fusion paradigms are often inefficient and insufficient in exploiting spatiotemporal information for 3D occupancy learning.
Much less has been explored on utilizing spatiotemporal
information for occupancy representation learning. While
high granularity in occupancy representation aids the prediction task [28], the performance gains from temporal information integration remain limited [16]. We attribute this
to three main challenges: 1) Efficiency. The voxel-wise detail in occupancy representation makes it large and dense,
so storing and processing multiple frames of historical features is resource-intensive, limiting the number of frames
that can be used in temporal fusion. 2) Uncertainty. Due to
factors like occlusion and varying lighting conditions [11],
voxel-level uncertainties arise across frames, potentially accumulating noise and error during temporal fusion and negatively impacting prediction robustness and accuracy [5]. 3)
Dynamics. Dynamic instances in the scene introduce voxel
shifts, resulting in misaligned historical features if not accurately modeled, which can hinder performance on dynamic
instances.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose constructing a spatiotemporal memory under scenecentered coordinates instead of ego vehicle-centered coordinates, demonstrated in Fig. 1. In this way, we can not
only store and process the historical feature efficiently in a
recurrent way but also incorporate temporal clues that mitigate the uncertainty and compensate for the dynamics in
occupancy representation. Therefore, we introduce a new
paradigm: unified temporal modeling, along with ST-Occ,
a scene-level Spatiotemporal (ST) Occupancy representation learning framework designed to efficiently exploit the
spatiotemporal information for the 3D occupancy prediction task. ST-Occ can perform 3D occupancy prediction
in a streaming video approach [24] with a variable number
of frames for temporal modeling, which makes it effective
for constructing a complete and holistic representation of a
large-scale scene with strong temporal consistency and ro-

1. Introduction
In recent years, vision-centric 3D occupancy representation has gained significant interest in autonomous driving [5, 14, 16, 20, 27, 28, 33]. Closely related to Bird’s
Eye View (BEV) representations, many prior efforts have
sought to extend common BEV perception pipelines and
techniques [20]—such as view transformation, decoder designs, and temporal fusion—to obtain high-quality 3D occupancy representations.
Recent works leverage temporal information to improve
the robustness of occupancy prediction [16, 21, 27, 28, 32,
33]. To achieve this, historical features are typically stored
on a frame-wise basis, aligned with the current frame, and
processed in a recurrent [15] or stacked manner [8]. However, with the extended height dimension in 3D occupancy
representation, the memory and computation overheads of

26569

