This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReasonVQA: A Multi-hop Reasoning Benchmark with Structural Knowledge for
Visual Question Answering
Duong T. Tran1,2

Trung-Kien Tran1

Manfred Hauswirth2,3

Duong.Tran@de.bosch.com

TrungKien.Tran@de.bosch.com

manfred.hauswirth@tu-berlin.de

Danh Le Phuoc2,3
danh.lephuoc@tu-berlin.de
1

Bosch Center for AI, Germany

2

Technical University of Berlin

3

Fraunhofer FOKUS

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new dataset, ReasonVQA, for
the Visual Question Answering (VQA) task. Our dataset
is automatically integrated with structured encyclopedic
knowledge and constructed using a low-cost framework,
which is capable of generating complex, multi-hop questions. We evaluated state-of-the-art VQA models on ReasonVQA, and the empirical results demonstrate that ReasonVQA poses significant challenges to these models, highlighting its potential for benchmarking and advancing the
field of VQA. Additionally, our dataset can be easily scaled
with respect to input images; the current version surpasses
the largest existing datasets requiring external knowledge
by more than an order of magnitude. 1

1. Introduction
In recent years, significant advancements have been made
in the field of Visual Question Answering (VQA) on standard VQA datasets [1, 5, 11, 39]. Initially, these datasets
focused mainly on simple questions related to object identification and attributes, such as name, shape, color, and position. Towards the goal of general-purpose artificial intelligence, VQA models are expected to answer questions that
require a deeper understanding of the world, fine-grained
visual recognition, and multi-step reasoning. Recently, several additional VQA datasets [8, 12, 15, 23, 30, 34] have
been introduced to challenge VQA systems to handle more
complex questions. However, there are limitations associated with these datasets. Some datasets are entirely synthetic, while others rely heavily on manual human effort.

Figure 1. Sample image and questions from ReasonVQA. Using
an existing image, a question is formulated by reasoning through
one or multiple hops over the knowledge graph. The generated
questions span diverse domains.

1 ReasonVQA homepage: https://duong-tr.github.io/ReasonVQA

In this paper, we propose a new dataset called ReasonVQA,
which was developed from our low-cost and scalable framework. ReasonVQA focuses on integrating external (world)
knowledge associated with objects in the images and multihop reasoning. For example, in Figure 1, the question “How
tall is this church?” requires not only the identification of

18793

