This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3 QE: Learning Discrete Distribution Discrepancy-aware Quantization Error
for Autoregressive-Generated Image Detection
Yanran Zhang1, * Bingyao Yu1,∗,†

Yu Zheng1 Wenzhao Zheng1 Yueqi Duan2
Jie Zhou1 Jiwen Lu1,†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China

Lei Chen1

{zhangyr21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {wenzhao.zheng}@outlook.com;
{yuby, yu-zheng, duanyueqi, leichenthu, jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The emergence of visual autoregressive (AR) models has
revolutionized image generation while presenting new
challenges for synthetic image detection. Unlike previous GAN or diffusion-based methods, AR models generate images through discrete token prediction, exhibiting both marked improvements in image synthesis quality and unique characteristics in their vector-quantized
representations. In this paper, we propose to leverage Discrete Distribution Discrepancy-aware Quantization
Error (D3 QE) for autoregressive-generated image detection that exploits the distinctive patterns and the frequency
distribution bias of the codebook existing in real and fake
images. We introduce a discrete distribution discrepancyaware transformer that integrates dynamic codebook frequency statistics into its attention mechanism, fusing semantic features and quantization error latent. To evaluate
our method, we construct a comprehensive dataset termed
ARForensics covering 7 mainstream visual AR models.
Experiments demonstrate superior detection accuracy and
strong generalization of D3 QE across different AR models,
with robustness to real-world perturbations. Code is available at https://github.com/Zhangyr2022/D3QE.

(a) Full Distribution Overview

(b) Top-500 Token Distribution

Figure 1. Visualization of Discrete Distribution Discrepancy.
To elucidate the mechanism of D3 QE, we analyze token probability distributions from LlamaGen’s tokenizer using autoregressive
sampling. (a) shows the full codebook vector probability distribution, while (b) displays the top-500 activation probabilities. The
real data exhibits pronounced long-tail characteristics, whereas
generated samples demonstrate concentrated probability mass in
the peak regions, which D3 QE leverages for detection.

1. Introduction

days, Autoregressive Models [13, 45, 48] are capable of
not only accurately capturing the structural features of images but also efficiently producing high-quality visual content. On one hand, visual generative models have the potential to drastically reduce the time expenditure associated
with manual creation, thereby empowering industries such
as art, film production, and education. On the other hand,
while these models facilitate the easy acquisition of images
that can be indistinguishable from reality to the human eye,
they also usher in a host of potential social risks and ethical
dilemmas.
In recent times, considerable efforts have been dedicated
to the detection of generated images, with the goal of mitigating the trust crisis and addressing privacy risks that arise
from the use of generative models. Existing detection meth-

With the advent of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [12] and Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) [20],
significant advancements have been made in the realm of
generative AI technology within computer vision. Following this, the emergence of innovative technologies such as
Flow Models and Diffusion Models [41, 42] has further enhanced the fidelity and quality of image generation. Nowa* Equal contributions. † Corresponding authors.

16292

