This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SL2 A-INR: Single-Layer Learnable Activation for Implicit Neural
Representation
Reza Rezaeian*
University of Tehran

Moein Heidari*
University of British Columbia

Reza Azad
RWTH Aachen University

Dorit Merhof
University of Regensburg

Hamid Soltanian-Zadeh†
University of Tehran

Ilker Hacihaliloglu‡
University of British Columbia

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representation (INR), leveraging a neural
network to transform coordinate input into corresponding
attributes, has recently driven significant advances in several vision-related domains. However, the performance of
INR is heavily influenced by the choice of the nonlinear activation function used in its multilayer perceptron (MLP)
architecture. To date, multiple nonlinearities have been investigated, but current INRs still face limitations in capturing high-frequency components and diverse signal types.
We show that these challenges can be alleviated by introducing a novel approach in INR architecture. Specifically,
we propose SL2 A-INR, a hybrid network that combines a
single-layer learnable activation function with an MLP that
uses traditional ReLU activations. Our method performs
superior across diverse tasks, including image representation, 3D shape reconstruction, and novel view synthesis.
Through comprehensive experiments, SL2 A-INR sets new
benchmarks in accuracy, quality, and robustness for INR.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations (INRs), which model continuous functions over discrete data points, have recently
garnered significant attention for their ability to effectively
represent 2D images, 3D shapes, neural radiance fields, and
other complex structures [20, 23, 28, 29]. Unlike traditional
discrete grid-based methods, INRs focus on training neural
networks, particularly Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs), that
utilize continuous element-wise nonlinear activation functions to map continuous input coordinates to their respective output values, thereby delivering a continuous signal
representation [29]. Due to their flexible, compact, and effi-

Figure 1. An implicit neural representation method that enables
flexible tuning of spectral bias through SL2 A-INR. The top diagram illustrates the network architecture, which begins with
a Learnable Activation Block (Ψ) parameterized by Chebyshev
polynomials of degree K, followed by a feature fusion block. This
fusion block is implemented as a vanilla feed-forward network,
where the input to each layer is modulated by the output of the
first block (Ψ). The bottom panel provides a qualitative comparison of reconstruction quality. As the polynomial degree K increases from 4 to 64, the results show a significant enhancement
in detail and expressive power, highlighting the improved capacity for finer representations with larger K values. Image adapted
from [7].

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. Email: hszadeh@ut.ac.ir.
‡ Corresponding author. Email: ilker.hacihaliloglu@ubc.ca.

26065

