This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperEdit: Rectifying and Facilitating Supervision for Instruction-Based Image Editing
! Website
1

! Code

Data

Ming Li1,2,‡, Xin Gu1, Fan Chen1, Xiaoying Xing1, Longyin Wen1, Chen Chen2, Sijie Zhu1,→
ByteDance Intelligent Creation 2Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
Comparison with Existing Methods
ü 30× Less Training Data
ü 13× Less Model Size
ü 9.19% Improvements

Background: Change the background to a snowy mountain landscape

Add: Add a pink tie for the boy

Real-Edit Benchmark Overall Score

SuperEdit
1.1B

SmartEdit
14.1B

MagicBrush
1.1B

HIVE

InstructPix2Pix
InstructDiffusion

1.1B

1.1B

1.1B

HQ-Edit
1.1B

Training Editing Data Size (K)

(b) Comparison with GPT-4o Evaluation
Global: Transform the scene into a snowy winter scene

Replace: Replace the bow tie with a butterfly.
SuperEdit vs. SmartEdit

SuperEdit vs. InstructPix2Pix

Style: Convert the image to a watercolor style

Remove: Remove some clouds in the sky

(a) Examples of Our Method on Real & High-resolution Image

Human Evaluation Win Rate For Overall Score

(c) Comparison with Human Evaluation

Figure 1. (a) Our editing method works well with real and high-resolution images, handling various free-form edits (left) and local edits (right); (b)
Compared to the current state-of-the-art SmartEdit, our method achieves a 9.19% performance improvement with 30→ less training data and 13→
fewer model parameters; (c) Our method achieves better overall scores on the human evaluation results, indicating more precise editing capabilities.

Abstract
Due to the challenges of manually collecting accurate editing
data, existing datasets are typically constructed using various
automated methods, leading to noisy supervision signals caused
by the mismatch between editing instructions and original-edited
image pairs. Recent efforts attempt to improve editing models
through generating higher-quality edited images, pre-training
on recognition tasks, or introducing vision-language models
(VLMs) but fail to resolve this fundamental issue. In this paper,
we offer a novel solution by constructing more effective editing
instructions for given image pairs. This includes rectifying the
editing instructions to better align with the original-edited image pairs and using contrastive editing instructions to further
enhance their effectiveness. Specifically, we find that editing
models exhibit specific generation attributes at different inference steps, independent of the text. Based on these prior attributes, we define a unified guide for VLMs to rectify editing
instructions. However, there are some challenging editing scenarios that cannot be resolved solely with rectified instructions.

To this end, we further construct contrastive supervision signals
with positive and negative instructions and introduce them into
the model training using triplet loss, thereby further facilitating
supervision effectiveness. Our method does not require the VLM
modules or pre-training tasks used in previous work, offering
a more direct and efficient way to provide better supervision
signals, and providing a novel, simple, and effective solution
for instruction-based image editing. Results on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms
existing approaches. Compared with previous SOTA SmartEdit,
we achieve 9.19% improvements on the Real-Edit benchmark
with 30→ less training data and 13→ smaller model size. All
data and models are open-sourced on Github for future research.

1. Introduction

→ Corresponding author, sijiezhu@bytedance.com
‡ This work was done during the first author’s internship at ByteDance USA

19206

In recent years, significant progress has been made in
text-to-image (T2I) generation [10, 37, 40–42] due to the
development of diffusion models [9, 21, 48, 49]. These T2I
diffusion models can generate images that align with natural
language descriptions while satisfying human perception
and preferences. Consequently, numerous image editing

