This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M INERVA: Evaluating Complex Video Reasoning
Arsha Nagrani1 , Sachit Menon2 ,* Ahmet Iscen1 , Shyamal Buch1 , Ramin Mehran1 , Nilpa Jha1 ,
Anja Hauth1 , Yukun Zhu1 , Carl Vondrick2 , Mikhail Sirotenko1 , Cordelia Schmid1 , Tobias Weyand1
1

Google DeepMind, 2 Columbia University

Abstract

on these recent benchmarks [15, 34].

Multimodal LLMs are turning their focus to video benchmarks, however most video benchmarks only provide outcome supervision, with no intermediate or interpretable reasoning steps. This makes it challenging to assess if models are truly able to combine perceptual and temporal information to reason about videos, or simply get the correct answer by chance or by exploiting linguistic biases.
To remedy this, we provide a new video reasoning dataset
called M INERVA for modern multimodal models. Each question in the dataset comes with 5 answer choices, as well
as detailed, hand-crafted reasoning traces. Our dataset is
multimodal, diverse in terms of video domain and length,
and consists of complex multi-step questions. Extensive
benchmarking shows that our dataset provides a challenge
for frontier open-source and proprietary models. We perform fine-grained error analysis to identify common failure
modes across various models, and create a taxonomy of
reasoning errors. We use this to explore both human and
LLM-as-a-judge methods for scoring video reasoning traces,
and find that failure modes are primarily related to temporal localization, followed by visual perception errors, as
opposed to logical or completeness errors. The dataset,
along with questions, answer candidates and reasoning
traces is publicly available under https://github.com/googledeepmind/neptune?tab=readme-ov-file#minerva.

While these datasets aim to measure complex video understanding capabilities, they do not provide further insight into
how or why models succeed or fail beyond the correctness
of their final answers. One way to inspect model failures
is by exposure to step-by-step rationales generated by the
model. Attempts to improve these rationales have led to a
paradigm shift towards models (particularly in the text domain), that spend more time “thinking" [3] i.e. producing
intermediate thoughts towards a final answer, often via additional compute at inference time [24, 42]. ‘Thinking’ or
reasoning in the video domain, however, looks very different
to reasoning in the text or coding domain. In the text domain,
models can directly quote sections or edited versions of the
input as thoughts – these intermediates are easier to assess
by humans, or by another language model. This is not the
case for the video domain. The high dimensionality and
multi-modality of video means that solving a video task often requires temporal localization, perceptually recognizing
key objects, events and actions (from multiple modalities
such as speech or frames) and applying logical reasoning
to tie these intermediates all together. Complex queries in
video question answering (videoQA) hence naturally require
multi-step processes to solve, where each step may require a
different skill and/or access to a different modality input. We
henceforth refer to this multi-step process as a ‘reasoning
trace’ for videoQA. This includes the set of the steps required
to solve the question, including perception and localization.

1. Introduction
Video understanding has long been a holy grail for computer
vision. Video benchmarks have evolved from testing action
recognition on short clips [17, 26, 50] to more recent benchmarks testing advanced capabilities over longer time horizons (LVBench [45], VideoMME [15], Neptune [34], and
others). The development of the latter has been supercharged
by the rise of multimodal large language models [1, 6, 39],
which perform complex video tasks on videos up to an hour
long [45]), and are steadily approaching human performance

Yet, despite the fundamentally multi-step nature of this
capability, existing video benchmarks only evaluate final
answers: they only check the outcome and not the reasoning.
It is not clear, however, if a model arrives at a correct answer
due to a successful execution of key steps, pure chance, linguistic bias, or the process of elimination of answer choices.
Conversely, if it fails to produce the correct answer, was it
completely unable to solve the problem, or did it get close
but ultimately make a mistake that changed the final answer?
Using final answers alone makes it difficult to design datasets
that will remain challenging but still provide signal; all the
more pertinent as new models improve at breakneck speed.

* Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind

23968

