This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniSAM: Omnidirectional Segment Anything Model for UDA in Panoramic
Semantic Segmentation
Xu Zheng1,4, * Chenfei Liao1 Yuanhuiyi Lyu1 Jialei Chen5 Shengyang Wu3
Linfeng Zhang6 Xuming Hu1,2, †
1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 CSE, HKUST 3 UMich
4
INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski” 5 Nagoya University 6 SJTU

Ding Zhong1,3,∗

Abstract
Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM2) has emerged as a
strong base model in various pinhole imaging segmentation
tasks. However, when applying it to 360◦ domain, the significant field-of-view (FoV) gap between pinhole (70◦ ×70◦ )
and panoramic images (180◦ × 360◦ ) poses unique challenges. Two major concerns for this application includes 1)
inevitable distortion and object deformation brought by the
large FoV disparity between domains; 2) the lack of pixellevel semantic understanding that the original SAM2 cannot
provide. To address these issues, we propose a novel OmniSAM framework, which makes the first attempt to apply
SAM2 for panoramic semantic segmentation. Specifically,
to bridge the first gap, OmniSAM first divides the panorama
into sequences of patches. These patches are then treated
as image sequences in similar manners as in video segmentation tasks. We then leverage the SAM2’s memory mechanism to extract cross-patch correspondences that embeds
the cross-FoV dependencies, improving feature continuity
and the prediction consistency along mask boundaries. For
the second gap, OmniSAM fine-tunes the pretrained image
encoder and reutilize the mask decoder for semantic prediction. An FoV-based prototypical adaptation module with dynamic pseudo label update mechanism is also introduced to
facilitate the alignment of memory and backbone features,
thereby improving model generalization ability across different sizes of source models. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods by large margins, e.g., 79.06% (10.22%↑)
on SPin8-to-SPan8, 62.46% (6.58%↑) on CS13-to-DP13.

1. Introduction
The expansive field of view (FoV) of 360◦ × 180◦ brought
by the panoramic cameras has led to their growing popular* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author

ity in diverse applications, such as autonomous driving and
virtual reality [1, 7, 9, 41]. Unlike pinhole cameras, which
are limited by a confined FoV, panoramic imaging enables a
more holistic perception of the environment. Consequently,
recent research efforts focus on leveraging this advantage to
enhance scene understanding for intelligent systems. Generally, panoramic cameras capture 360◦ visual data in a
spherical format, which is projected onto a 2D planar representation to facilitate compatibility with conventional imaging pipelines. Unlike pinhole images, this projection process introduces inevitable distortions and object deformations due to the non-uniform distribution of pixels. Moreover, developing effective panoramic segmentation models
is challenging due to the scarcity of large-scale, precisely
annotated datasets, as panoramic image annotation remains
a labor-intensive task. For these reasons, unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) for panoramic semantic segmentation [14, 38, 42–45] has been proposed to bridge the domain
gap between pinhole and the panoramic image domain.
Recently, the Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM2)
achieves a breakthrough in both image and video instance
segmentation, exhibiting remarkable zero-shot segmentation capabilities. This has generated significant interest
in its potential applications across domains such as autonomous driving [16, 28], remote sensing [19, 20, 34], and
medical imaging [8, 22, 25, 31]. In particular, recent methods have shown the effectiveness of SAM2 in semantic segmentation tasks, such as the Classwise-SAM-Adapter [24]
for SAR image semantic segmentation and MLESAM [46]
for multi-modal semantic segmentation, further emphasizing its strong adaptability. Intuitively, these successes raise
the compelling question: “Can SAM2 be effectively utilized
in 360◦ image semantic segmentation?”
However, it is non-trivial to directly adapting SAM2 to
the UDA for panoramic semantic segmentation, two significant problems persists, namely: 1) the significant FoV gap,
typically 70◦ × 70◦ versus 180◦ × 360◦ , between pinhole
and panoramic domains, which complicates feature alignment across these distinct imaging modalities; 2) the in-

23892

