This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MolParser: End-to-end Visual Recognition of Molecule Structures in the Wild
Xi Fang Jiankun Wang Xiaochen Cai Shangqian Che Shuwen Yang
Haoyi Tao Nan Wang Lin Yao Linfeng Zhang Guolin Ke
DP Technology
{fangxi, wangjiankun, caixiaochen, chenshangqian ,yangsw,
taohaoyi, wangnan, yaol, zhanglf, kegl}@dp.tech

Abstract
In recent decades, chemistry publications and patents have
increased rapidly. A significant portion of key information is embedded in molecular structure figures, complicating large-scale literature searches and limiting the application of large language models in fields such as biology, chemistry, and pharmaceuticals. The automatic extraction of precise chemical structures is of critical importance. However, the presence of numerous Markush
structures in real-world documents, along with variations
in molecular image quality, drawing styles, and noise, significantly limits the performance of existing optical chemical structure recognition (OCSR) methods. We present MolParser, a novel end-to-end OCSR method that efficiently and
accurately recognizes chemical structures from real-world
documents, including difficult Markush structure. We use
an extended SMILES encoding rule to annotate our training dataset. Under this rule, we build MolParser-7M, a
large-scale OCSR dataset based on our E-SMILES representation. While utilizing a large amount of synthetic data,
we employed active learning methods to incorporate substantial in-the-wild data, specifically samples cropped from
real patents and scientific literature, into the training process. We trained an end-to-end molecular image captioning
model, MolParser, using a curriculum learning approach.
MolParser significantly outperforms classical and learningbased methods across most scenarios, with potential for
broader downstream applications. The dataset is publicly
available in huggingface.

Figure 1. MolParser uses an end-to-end transformer to extract
the chemical structures to string expression from the real patent or
literature. We extend the SMILES format to enable the representation of more complex molecular structures including Markush.

ysis, and chemical information retrieval. However, extracting them into machine-readable text remains a significant challenge. The automated interpretation of molecular
structures from document images, a task known as Optical Chemical Structure Recognition (OCSR), is therefore
of growing importance. With the rise of large language
models (LLMs), increasing efforts are being directed toward applying them to the understanding of scientific literature. Converting molecular structure images into structured, interpretable text not only advances OCSR but also
enables LLMs to more effectively process patents and scientific documents in chemistry-related domains.

1. Introduction

OCSR aims to automatically convert chemical structure diagrams from scientific literature, patents, and other
scanned documents into machine-readable string such as
SMILES [57] representation. SMILES, though widely used
for molecular representation, has notable limitations in handling complex chemical entities. It struggles with representing Markush structures, which are used in patents to
describe a broad class of molecules by allowing variability at certain positions, enabling the protection of entire

A significant portion of chemical information remains
locked in unstructured formats within printed or digital documents, such as patents and scientific papers. In many
of these documents, particularly in the field of chemistry,
molecular structures are presented as images. These graphical depictions are essential for drug discovery, patent anal-

24528

