This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Group Detection using VLM-augmented Temporal Groupness Graph
Kaname Yokoyama Chihiro Nakatani Norimichi Ukita
Toyota Technological Institute
{sd25444,sd23501,ukita}@toyota-ti.ac.jp

Ours

Abstract

1. Introduction
To understand human social activities, the structure of human groups is a good cue because in-group members share
a common purpose and/or behavior. For example, the group
structure is used for group activity recognition [13, 27, 36],
trajectory prediction [4, 6, 39, 46], and anomaly detection [9]. For group detection (e.g., Fig. 1), interactions
among in-group members should be recognized. While the
dominant cue for recognizing such human interactions is
the spatial relationship of people, various human attributes,
such as face directions and postures, are also useful.
While the human attributes mentioned above can be
recognized from the local appearance of each person, the
spatial context observed in the image also provides helpful cues for group detection. The usefulness of the spatial context is validated in various tasks, such as object
detection [2, 24, 49, 55] and individual action recognition [12, 41, 42]. However, compared with these tasks that
employ a relationship between each person and the scene,
group detection is more difficult because it requires a com-

Previous

This paper proposes dynamic human group detection in
videos. For detecting complex groups, not only the local appearance features of in-group members but also the
global context of the scene are important. Such local and
global appearance features in each frame are extracted using a Vision-Language Model (VLM) augmented for group
detection in our method. For further improvement, the
group structure should be consistent over time. While
previous methods are stabilized on the assumption that
groups are not changed in a video, our method detects dynamically changing groups by global optimization using a
graph with all frames’ groupness probabilities estimated
by our groupness-augmented CLIP features. Our experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art group detection methods on public datasets.
Code: https : / / github . com / irajisamurai /
VLM-GroupDetection.git

t1

(a)

t2

Time

(b)

Figure 1. Effects of our method. People enclosed with the same
color are detected as in-group members. (a) Our method using the
spatial scene context can detect two in-group members because
they are not facing each other but browsing the same background
object. (b) Our method can detect dynamic group structures so
that a group of three members in t1 splits into two groups in t2 .

plex relationship between multiple people and the scene
(e.g., Fig. 1 (a)), which is called spatial scene context.
In addition to the spatial scene context, the temporal
scene context is useful. For example, in the previous group
detection methods [5, 16, 22, 26, 31, 43, 50], group detection is stabilized under an assumption that the set of all
groups is fixed (i.e., not changed) throughout a video. We
call this group detection, in which only a single representative set of groups through a video is detected, static group
detection. However, people often go back and forth between
different groups. Static group detection can detect dynamically changing groups by dividing a video into short clips in
each of which the group structure is not changed. However,
since we do not know the frames in which the group structure changes, it is impossible to divide a video into appropriate short clips by pre-processes; it is a chicken-and-egg
problem. Therefore, this paper aims at jointly achieving stabilization of group detection and detection of dynamically
changing groups by employing the temporal scene context
in a video. We call this group detection, in which a set of
temporal structures of dynamically changing groups is detected, dynamic group detection (e.g., Fig. 1 (b)).

10475

