This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Balanced Image Stylization with Style Matching Score
Yuxin Jiang1,2

Liming Jiang3

Shuai Yang4

Jia-Wei Liu1

Ivor W. Tsang2,3

Mike Zheng Shou1†

1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore
CFAR & IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2

Figure 1. Examples of SMS applied to various artistic styles. Stylized outputs (left to right, top to bottom) include watercolor, oil
painting, kids’ illustration, sketch, chinese ink painting, and pixel art style.

Abstract
We present Style Matching Score (SMS), a novel optimization method for image stylization with diffusion models.
Balancing effective style transfer with content preservation
is a long-standing challenge. Unlike existing efforts, our
method reframes image stylization as a style distribution
matching problem. The target style distribution is estimated
from off-the-shelf style-dependent LoRAs via carefully designed score functions. To preserve content information
adaptively, we propose Progressive Spectrum Regularization, which operates in the frequency domain to guide stylization progressively from low-frequency layouts to highfrequency details. In addition, we devise a Semantic-Aware

Gradient Refinement technique that leverages relevance
maps derived from diffusion semantic priors to selectively
stylize semantically important regions. The proposed optimization formulation extends stylization from pixel space
to parameter space, readily applicable to lightweight feedforward generators for efficient one-step stylization. SMS
effectively balances style alignment and content preservation, outperforming state-of-the-art approaches, verified by
extensive experiments. Code: https://github.com/
showlab/SMS.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

Image stylization transforms a content image to adopt a
specific visual style, with applications in art design [5],
virtual reality [9], and content creation [4, 23, 24, 27].
Early exemplar-based methods like Neural Style Transfer

17346

