This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniVG: A Generalist Diffusion Model for Unified Image Generation and Editing
Tsu-Jui Fu1 , Yusu Qian2 , Chen Chen2 , Wenze Hu2 , Zhe Gan2 , Yinfei Yang2
1
Meta 2 Apple

Figure 1. We introduce UniVG, a single generalist model that can support diverse image generation tasks, including text-to-image, inpainting, identity-preserving generation, layout-guided generation, instruction-based editing, depth estimation, and referring segmentation.

Abstract
Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models have shown impressive results in generating visually compelling images following user prompts. Building on this, various methods further fine-tune the pre-trained T2I model for specific tasks.
However, this requires separate model architectures, training designs, and multiple parameter sets to handle different tasks. In this paper, we introduce UniVG, a generalist diffusion model capable of supporting a diverse range
of image generation tasks with a single set of weights.
UniVG treats multi-modal inputs as unified conditions to
enable various downstream applications, ranging from T2I
generation, inpainting, instruction-based editing, identitypreserving generation, and layout-guided generation, to

depth estimation and referring segmentation. Through comprehensive empirical studies on data mixing and multi-task
training, we provide detailed insights into the training processes and decisions that inform our final designs. For example, we show that T2I generation and other tasks, such as
instruction-based editing, can coexist without performance
trade-offs, while auxiliary tasks like depth estimation and
referring segmentation enhance image editing. Notably, our
model can even outperform some task-specific models on
their respective benchmarks, marking a significant step towards a unified image generation model.

17160

Work done while Tsu-Jui Fu was at Apple.

