This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can3Tok: Canonical 3D Tokenization and Latent Modeling of
Scene-Level 3D Gaussians
Quankai Gao1

Iliyan Georgiev2 Tuanfeng Y. Wang2 Krishna Kumar Singh2
Ulrich Neumann1,† Jae Shin Yoon2,†
1
2
University of Southern California
Adobe Research
Abstract

3D generation has made significant progress, however, it
still largely remains at the object-level. Feedforward 3D
scene-level generation has been rarely explored due to the
lack of models capable of scaling-up latent representation
learning on 3D scene-level data. Unlike object-level generative models, which are trained on well-labeled 3D data
in a bounded canonical space, scene-level generations with
3D scenes represented by 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
are unbounded and exhibit scale inconsistency across different scenes, making unified latent representation learning
for generative purposes extremely challenging. In this paper, we introduce Can3Tok, the first 3D scene-level variational autoencoder (VAE) capable of encoding a large number of Gaussian primitives into a low-dimensional latent
embedding, which effectively captures both semantic and
spatial information of the inputs. Beyond model design,
we propose a general pipeline for 3D scene data processing to address scale inconsistency issue. We validate our
method on the recent scene-level 3D dataset DL3DV-10K,
where we found that only Can3Tok successfully generalizes to novel 3D scenes, while compared methods fail to
converge on even a few hundred scene inputs during training and exhibit zero generalization ability during inference.
Finally, we demonstrate image-to-3DGS and text-to-3DGS
generation as our applications to demonstrate it’s ability
to faciliate downstream generation tasks. Project page:
https://github.com/Zerg-Overmind/Can3Tok

Input 3DGS

Can3Tok (ours)

PointNet

L3DG (3DCNN)

Figure 1. Reconstruction results from the latent space of 3D Gaussian splats (3DGS) of a general scene using our Can3Tok and other
3D-based VAE models [50, 53]. Can3Tok effectively preserves the
global shape and local details while existing methods often fail to
model the structured latent space from unstructured 3DGS.

and LucidDreamer [9] generate 3D scene content without
training on 3D scene-level data. However, their per-scene
optimization is time-consuming, prone to to texture saturation, and lacks 3D consistency due to the using of 2D diffusion models. Our approach explores realistic feedforward
3D scene-level generation by directly training on real 3D
data. Conceptually, it aligns with the idea of Stable Diffusion [55], which enables conditional generation by aligning
different modalities (e.g., text and 2D images) within the
same latent space for controllable generation. Since the diffusion process and architectures such as UNet or DiT [47]
are well-known to be grounded, the key bottleneck we identified in feedforward 3D generation is the development of
a 3D VAE for learning scene-level latent representations.
However, we find this to be non-trivial, as scene-level content is not merely a combination of multiple object-level elements but also includes the background, scene layout, and
the relative position, scale, and orientation of objects.
In this paper, we explore to learn a new VAE that can
project 3D data into a structured latent space. 3D Gaussian Splatting [25] (3DGS) is an emerging 3D representation that describes a scene as a set of Gaussians with a
few parameters such as position, scaling values, and etc.
One might wonder, is it still possible to build a latent space
for many input 3DGS scene representations that are decodable with existing 3D-based VAE models, such as PointNet

1. Introduction
Realistic 3D Scene-level generation enables immersive
AR/VR applications. While tremendous progress has been
made in 3D object-level generation using various 3D representations [16, 19, 45, 48, 65], with significant improvements ranging from per-scene optimization to feedforward
approaches, less research has focused on 3D scene-level
generation. Pioneering works such as WonderJourney [78]
† Equal advising.

9320

