This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure Matters: Revisiting Boundary Refinement in Video Object Segmentation
Guanyi Qin1, *, Ziyue Wang1, *, Daiyun Shen1 , Haofeng Liu1 , Hantao Zhou2
Junde Wu3 , Runze Hu4 , Yueming Jin1,†
1
National University of Singapore; 2 Tsinghua University
3
University of Oxford; 4 Beijing Institute of Technology
{guanyi.qin, e1374378, e1374467, haofeng.liu}@u.nus.edu, hrz@bit.edu.cn, ymjin@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
·

Given an object mask, Semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation (SVOS) technique aims to track and segment the
object across video frames, serving as a fundamental task
in computer vision. Although recent memory-based methods demonstrate potential, they often struggle with scenes
involving occlusion, particularly in handling object interactions and high feature similarity. To address these issues and
meet the real-time processing requirements of downstream
applications, in this paper, we propose a novel bOundary
Amendment video object Segmentation method with Inherent
Structure refinement, hereby named OASIS. Specifically, a
lightweight structure refinement module is proposed to enhance segmentation accuracy. With the fusion of rough edge
priors captured by the Canny filter and stored object features,
the module can generate an object-level structure map and
refine the representations by highlighting boundary features.
Evidential learning for uncertainty estimation is introduced
to further address challenges in occluded regions. The proposed method, OASIS, maintains an efficient design, yet extensive experiments on challenging benchmarks demonstrate
its superior performance and competitive inference speed
compared to other state-of-the-art methods, i.e., achieving
the F values of 91.6 (vs. 89.7 on DAVIS-17 validation set)
and G values of 86.6 (vs. 86.2 on YouTubeVOS 2019 validation set) while maintaining a competitive speed of 48 FPS on
DAVIS. Checkpoints, logs, and code will be available here.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Input frame. (b) Object mask generated by the SOTA
method Cutie. (c) Output structure map. (d) Object mask generated
by our model. In this case, the fish corresponding to the red mask
closely resembles the background and is concealed behind the other
two fish, causing previous methods to fail. Guided by our structure
map, the model successfully segments the fish accurately.

1. Introduction

objects in videos, VOS plays a crucial role in various applications including autonomous driving, robotics, video editing, medical intervention, etc. Albeit performance demands,
real-time processing is also essential for these applications,
necessitating algorithms that accurately perceive and segment objects while delivering sufficient inference speed.
Recent advancements [3–6] in SVOS emphasize the value
of memory-based mechanisms. Representations of certain
past frames are generated and stored in a memory bank. The
current frame is then used as the query to match these stored
representations and derive segmentation masks. Cutie [7],
further proposes object queries as a high-level summary of
the target object and interacts with the pixel-level features
of the query frame for accurate segmentation, achieving the
state-of-the-art performance. However, these approaches
still struggle when similar objects are close to each other or
are occluded, as shown in Figure 1 (a) and (b). On one hand,
the mask prediction depends predominantly on maintaining
consistency across frames for both pixel- and object-level
features, while the inherent geometric characteristics of the
objects are often overlooked. This limitation poses challenges in accurately discerning object structures, particularly

Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is an important task in
computer vision [1, 2] that aims to separate moving objects
from the background. In the general semi-supervised VOS
(SVOS) setting, the task involves propagating the object
masks specified in the first frame throughout the entire video.
By enabling effective identification and understanding of
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

14431

