This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Parallel Gradients for Fast ODE Solvers of Diffusion Models
Beier Zhu1 *

Ruoyu Wang2 *
Tong Zhao2
Hanwang Zhang1
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Westlake University

Chi Zhang2†

{beier.zhu, hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg, {wangruoyu71, zhaotong68, chizhang}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have achieved state-of-the-art generative performance but suffer from high sampling latency due
to their sequential denoising nature. Existing solver-based
acceleration methods often face image quality degradation
under a low-latency budget. In this paper, we propose the Ensemble Parallel Direction solver (dubbed as EPD-Solver),
a novel ODE solver that mitigates truncation errors by incorporating multiple parallel gradient evaluations in each
ODE step. Importantly, since the additional gradient computations are independent, they can be fully parallelized,
preserving low-latency sampling. Our method optimizes a
small set of learnable parameters in a distillation fashion, ensuring minimal training overhead. In addition, our method
can serve as a plugin to improve existing ODE samplers.
Extensive experiments on various image synthesis benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our EPD-Solver in
achieving high-quality and low-latency sampling. For example, at the same latency level of 5 NFE, EPD achieves an
FID of 4.47 on CIFAR-10, 7.97 on FFHQ, 8.17 on ImageNet,
and 8.26 on LSUN Bedroom, surpassing existing learningbased solvers by a significant margin. Codes are available
in https://github.com/BeierZhu/EPD.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) [7, 32, 39] have become a leading
paradigm in generative modeling, achieving state-of-the-art
performance across a diverse range of applications, including image synthesis [16, 32, 35], video generation [2, 8],
speech synthesis [14], and 3D shape modeling [26]. These
models operate by gradually refining a noisy input through
a denoising process, producing high-fidelity outputs with
impressive diversity and realism. However, the multi-step
sequential denoising process introduces substantial latency,
making sampling inefficient.
In response to the challenge, recent efforts have focused
on accelerating the sampling process of DMs. Notably,
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was partially
done during Beier Zhu’s visit at WestLake University.

Figure 1. Comparison of various solvers on diffusion models. We
compare the FID versus latency (ms) across different NFE settings
on a NVIDIA 4090. Our proposed EPD-Solver shows superior
image quality without increasing latency.

these methods typically fall into three categories: solverbased methods, distillation-based methods, and parallelismbased methods, each with distinct advantages and limitations.
Solver-based methods develop fast numerical solvers to reduce sampling steps [10, 12, 21, 23, 24, 40, 46, 50–52].
However, inherent truncation errors lead to significant quality degradation when the number of function evaluations
(NFE) is low (e.g., < 5). Distillation-based methods train
a student DM to establish a bijective mapping between the
data distribution and a predefined tractable noise distribution [1, 11, 22, 25, 27, 29, 36, 42, 53]. This process allows
the distilled model to generate high-quality samples within
a minimal number of NFEs, often as low as one. However,
achieving this level of efficiency requires extensive training
with carefully designed objectives, making the distillation
process computationally expensive. Additionally, such methods struggle to leverage multi-NFE settings effectively, limiting their flexibility when a trade-off between speed and quality is desired. Parallelism-based methods accelerate diffusion models by trading computation for speed [4, 17, 19, 38].
While promising, this direction remains underexplored.
To combine the advantages of these approaches, we investigate solver-based methods under low-latency constraints

19557

