This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot Inexact CAD Model Alignment from a Single Image
Pattaramanee Arsomngern1 Sasikarn Khwanmuang1 Matthias Nießner2 Supasorn Suwajanakorn1
1
VISTEC, Thailand 2 Technical University of Munich, Germany
https://zerocad9d.github.io/
Input / GT

NOC Map

Alignment Results

Standard Categories in ScanNet25k

Unseen Categories in Our New SUN2CAD Dataset

Figure 1. We estimate the 9-DoF pose of an inexact CAD model to align it with a target object’s pose in a 2D image without training on
scene-level pose annotations. Our approach can generalize to unseen classes in real images even though it was trained on just 9 classes.

Abstract

also because large portions of objects are occluded, making
full object reconstruction difficult. One way to address this
is by aligning existing 3D models to objects in the input image [16, 18, 23, 24]. This approach leverages artist-crafted
3D models, which offer detailed and complete geometry,
even for occluded regions, and is particularly well-suited
for applications like VR and gaming, where visual realism
takes priority over exact geometric fidelity.
Unlike 6-DoF CAD alignment tasks [25, 37, 49], where
the 3D model exactly matches the object, this task involves
aligning an inexact 3D model, retrieved from a database,
that may differ in shape or texture or lack texture entirely,
to its object’s pose in an image. In this paper, we propose
an approach that eliminates the need for pose annotations to
solve this task, enabling generalization to novel objects in
unseen categories in a zero-shot manner.
Existing methods [18, 24, 26] tackle this problem by relying on extensive 3D supervision from annotated tuples of
RGB images, depth maps, CAD models, and 9-DoF poses.
However, by training on annotated poses from a limited set
of categories, they struggle to generalize to unseen categories that differ significantly from the training set [2, 11].
To address annotation scarcity, several studies utilize
synthetic data for training [16, 49]. DiffCAD [16] relies on
the dataset 3D-FRONT [15], which provides 9-DoF pose
annotations for CAD models in synthetic indoor scenes.
However, its pose estimator is category-specific and still requires CAD models from that category to synthesize training data, making it difficult to scale and infeasible for unseen categories. FoundationPose [49] constructs its own

One practical approach to infer 3D scene structure from a
single image is to retrieve a closely matching 3D model from
a database and align it with the object in the image. Existing methods rely on supervised training with images and
pose annotations, which limits them to a narrow set of object categories. To address this, we propose a weakly supervised 9-DoF alignment method for inexact 3D models that
requires no scene-level pose annotations and generalizes to
unseen categories. Our approach derives a novel feature
space based on foundation features that ensure multi-view
consistency and overcome symmetry ambiguities inherent in
foundation features using a self-supervised triplet loss. Additionally, we introduce a texture-invariant pose refinement
technique that performs dense alignment in normalized object coordinates, estimated through the enhanced feature
space. We conduct extensive evaluations on the real-world
ScanNet25k dataset, where our method outperforms SOTA
weakly supervised baselines by +4.3% mean alignment accuracy and is the only weakly supervised approach to surpass the supervised ROCA by +2.7%. To assess generalization, we introduce SUN2CAD, a real-world test set with 20
novel object categories, where our method achieves SOTA
results without prior training on them.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D scene structure from a single image is highly
ill-posed, not only due to depth prediction ambiguities but

6231

