This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanSAM: Classifying Human-centric Forgery Videos
in Human Spatial, Appearance, and Motion Anomaly
Chang Liu1 * Yunfan Ye2 * Fan Zhang1 Qingyang Zhou1 Yuchuan Luo1 Zhiping Cai1†
1
National University of Defense Technology 2 Hunan University
https://dejian-lc.github.io/humansam/

Abstract

Spatial Anomaly

Numerous synthesized videos from generative models, especially human-centric ones that simulate realistic human
actions, pose significant threats to human information security and authenticity. While progress has been made in
binary forgery video detection, the lack of fine-grained understanding of forgery types raises concerns regarding both
reliability and interpretability, which are critical for realworld applications. To address this limitation, we propose
HumanSAM, a new framework that builds upon the fundamental challenges of video generation models. Specifically,
HumanSAM aims to classify human-centric forgeries into
three distinct types of artifacts commonly observed in generated content: spatial, appearance, and motion anomaly.
To better capture the features of geometry, semantics and
spatiotemporal consistency, we propose to generate the human forgery representation by fusing two branches of video
understanding and spatial depth. We also adopt a rankbased confidence enhancement strategy during the training process to learn more robust representation by introducing three prior scores. For training and evaluation, we
construct the first public benchmark, the Human-centric
Forgery Video (HFV) dataset, with all types of forgeries
carefully annotated semi-automatically. In our experiments,
HumanSAM yields promising results in comparison with
state-of-the-art methods, both in binary and multi-class
forgery classification.

Appearance Anomaly

Real

Motion Anomaly

Video 

classifier

Vanilla

Fine-grained

Figure 1. Vanilla video classifier distinguishes only fake or real
videos, while fine-grained forgery classification further extends
the fake videos into spatial, appearance and motion anomalies.

ative impacts (e.g., violation of personal privacy, spread
of misinformation). The generated highly realistic videos
that simulate complex human actions make the need more
pressing than ever to distinguish between generated and real
videos effectively. Recently, efforts have been made either
in face forgery detection [11, 32, 40, 45] or binary classification [2, 35, 39, 47], but both with limited reliability and
interoperability.
To address this issue, one possible solution is expanding
the binary forgery video classification into multiple finegrained classes [6, 49, 59]. This solution, however, relies strongly on the definition of fine-grained forgery types,
which itself is a highly difficult problem to ensure the
classes are exhaustive and mutually exclusive, compounded
by the lack of corresponding datasets that reflect such welldefined categories. This explains why there is rarely a work
on fine-grained forgery video classification even in such a
video generation era.
Recent studies identify three persistent challenges: (1)
Unnatural interactions, including flawed material responses
and causal inconsistencies [5, 26]; (2) Object appearance
inconsistency, affecting identity preservation, object per-

1. Introduction
Video generation models, particularly diffusion-based ones,
are advancing rapidly, producing video content increasingly
indistinguishable from reality [5, 10, 18, 19, 26, 27, 43, 53].
However, such technological progress also poses unprecedented societal risks, particularly when generating humancentric forgery videos, potentially causing significant neg* Equal contribution

Fake

† Corresponding author

14028

