This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPADE: Spatial-Aware Denoising Network for Open-vocabulary Panoptic Scene
Graph Generation with Long- and Local-range Context Reasoning
Xin Hu1 , Ke Qin1,2 , Guiduo Duan1,2 , Ming Li4 , Yuan-Fang Li3 , Tao He1 *
1
The Laboratory of Intelligent Collaborative Computing of UESTC
2
Ubiquitous Intelligence and Trusted Services Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province
3
Monash University, 4 Guangdong Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
{xh1m22,qinke,guiduo.duan}@uestc.edu.cn
ming.li@u.nus.edu, yuanfang.li@monash.edu, tao.he01@hotmail.com

Abstract

3*6*

1. Introduction
Panoptic Scene Graph Generation (PSG) represents a signiﬁcant advancement in scene graph generation (SGG) by
* Corresponding author.

2SHQ36*

2XUV



瀀濥濓濈濃澳澻澼



瀀濥濓濈濃澳澻澼

Panoptic Scene Graph Generation (PSG) integrates instance segmentation with relation understanding to capture pixel-level structural relationships in complex scenes.
Although recent approaches leveraging pre-trained visionlanguage models (VLMs) have signiﬁcantly improved performance in the open-vocabulary setting, they commonly
ignore the inherent limitations of VLMs in spatial relation
reasoning, such as difﬁculty in distinguishing object relative positions, which results in suboptimal relation prediction. Motivated by the denoising diffusion model’s inversion
process in preserving the spatial structure of input images,
we propose SPADE (SPatial-Aware Denoising-nEtwork)
framework—a novel approach for open-vocabulary PSG.
SPADE consists of two key steps: (1) inversion-guided calibration for the UNet adaptation, and (2) spatial-aware context reasoning. In the ﬁrst step, we calibrate a general pretrained teacher diffusion model into a PSG-speciﬁc denoising network with cross-attention maps derived during inversion through a lightweight LoRA-based ﬁne-tuning strategy. In the second step, we develop a spatial-aware relation graph transformer that captures both local and longrange contextual information, facilitating the generation
of high-quality relation queries. Extensive experiments on
benchmark PSG and Visual Genome datasets demonstrate
that SPADE outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both
closed- and open-set scenarios, particularly for spatial relationship prediction. The project page is at here.

2Y6*75











1RQ'LVWDQW5HODWLRQ

'LVWDQW5HODWLRQ

Figure 1. Mean Recall@50 of our proposed method and other
VLM-based models [4, 31, 69] on the spatial predicate classiﬁcation task on the PSG dataset [57]. Notably, we present the result
in the two scenarios: distant and non-distant relation pairs.

integrating pixel-level structural analysis with relation reasoning to achieve comprehensive scene understanding. By
unifying instance segmentation [34, 38] and visual relationship detection [2, 11] within a single framework, PSG
attempts to simultaneously segment all entities in an image and classify their relational interdependencies into subject–predicate–object triples.
In prior research, the majority of SGG [8, 13, 14, 16,
30] and PSG methods [51, 57, 68] have been developed
from a closed-set perspective. Recent advancements, however, have introduced an open-vocabulary setting for SGG
[17, 62], shifting research focus toward a more practical yet
challenging problem. Within this paradigm, various methods [4, 31, 59, 65, 69] have been proposed to endow their
models with open-world recognition capabilities. A key
technique in these works is to leverage the powerful pretrained Vision Language Models (VLMs) [26, 29, 37], enabling the recognition of unseen objects and relationships.
However, a suite of recent studies [3, 5, 25, 43, 56] have
revealed that most state-of-the-art VLMs, such as CLIP

15562

