This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Concertormer for Image Deblurring and Beyond
Pin-Hung Kuo1
1

Jinshan Pan2

National Taiwan University
3

Shao-Yi Chien1
2

Ming-Hsuan Yang3

Nanjing University of Science and Technology

University of California, Merced

Abstract
The Transformer architecture has excelled in NLP and vision tasks, but its self-attention complexity grows quadratically with image size, making high-resolution tasks computationally expensive. We introduce Concertormer, featuring
Concerto Self-Attention (CSA) for image deblurring. CSA
splits self-attention into global and local components while
retaining partial information in additional dimensions,
achieving linear complexity. A Cross-Dimensional Communication module enhances expressiveness by linearly combining attention maps. Additionally, our gated-dconv MLP
merges the two-staged Transformer design into a single
stage. Extensive evaluations show our method performs
favorably against state-of-the-art works in deblurring, deraining, and JPEG artifact removal. Code and models are
available at https://github.com/setsunil/Concertormer.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. PSNR vs FLOPs on the HIDE [48] dataset. Our models
are marked in blue and magenta text. The area of each circle is
proportional to the number of parameters.

In recent years, deep learning has driven significant advances in image restoration, with deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) becoming widely used for image deblurring. The core operation in CNNs, i.e., convolution, is effective for extracting local features but limited in capturing
non-local features, which are essential for deblurring.
The self-attention (SA) mechanism, on the other hand,
excels at capturing non-local information and has shown
promising results in image deblurring [5]. However, the
high computational costs make it challenging to apply, particularly to high-resolution images.
Window-based multi-head self-attention (W-MSA) [30,
58] mitigates computational costs by limiting the calculation area. However, this approach suffers from limited receptive fields, making it less effective for capturing global
relationships. As illustrated in Fig. 2(c), W-MSA processes
each block in the input feature map independently. Although the shifted window technique communicates attention between neighboring blocks, it requires a sufficient
number of blocks to model global relationships effectively.
Transposed SA is an alternative approach, as used in

14665

Restormer [68], which calculates self-attention along the
channel dimension instead of the spatial dimension. However, this approach underestimates the importance of local connectivity. As shown in Fig. 2(d), transposed selfattention loses spatial connectivity during matrix multiplication: random column permutations in Q and K do not
affect the result, meaning that transposed SA scarcely retains spatial connectivity information.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose an
efficient Transformer of Concerto Self-Attention, i.e., Concertormer, specifically for image deblurring. This model
simultaneously captures both local and global connectivity
with a lower computational cost. By dividing feature maps
into grids and a specific number of heads, Concerto SelfAttention introduces an additional dimension compared to
the typical multi-head self-attention mechanism. To utilize
this additional dimension along with the attention heads, we
introduce a learnable linear projection mechanism, termed
Cross-Dimensional Communication, which enables aggregation across independent attention maps.
The CSA is an efficient framework for self-attention calculation, which is adaptable to existing methods, such as

