This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hi-Gaussian: Hierarchical Gaussians under Normalized Spherical Projection for
Single-View 3D Reconstruction
Binjian Xie1,2 , Pengju Zhang1,† , Hao Wei1 , Yihong Wu1,2,†
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
1

{xiebinjian2022, pengju.zhang, weihao2019}@ia.ac.cn, yhwu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Single View as Input

Single-view 3D reconstruction is a fundamental problem
in computer vision, having a significant impact on downstream tasks such as autonomous driving, virtual reality
and augmented reality. However, existing single-view reconstruction methods are unable to reconstruct the regions
outside the input field-of-view or the areas occluded by visible parts. In this paper, we propose Hi-Gaussian, which employs feed-forward 3D Gaussians for efficient and generalizable single-view 3D reconstruction. A Normalized Spherical Projection module is introduced following an EncoderDecoder network in our model, assigning a larger range to
the transformed spherical coordinates, which can enlarge
the field of view during scene reconstruction. Besides, to
reconstruct occluded regions behind the visible part, we introduce a novel Hierarchical Gaussian Sampling strategy,
utilizing two layers of Gaussians to hierarchically represent 3D scenes. We first use a pre-trained monocular depth
estimation model to provide depth initialization for leader
Gaussians, and then leverage the leader Gaussians to estimate the distribution followed by follower Gaussians, which
can flexibly move into occluded areas. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms other methods for
scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis, on both outdoor and indoor datasets.

HiGaussian
Full 3D Reconstruction
as Output

Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. This is the pipeline of Hi-Gaussian, which requires only
one single-view image as input, and reconstructs a 3D scene in
a feed-forward manner. It can also render realistic images from
novel views.

1. Introduction

in autonomous driving scenarios. Moreover, in virtual reality and augmented reality tasks, there is an expectation to
reconstruct a scene from one single image captured by devices such as smartphones, which also makes single-view
3D reconstruction critically crucial. Unfortunately, reconstructing the 3D structure from a 2D image is ill-posed due
to the lack of explicit geometric cues such as epipolar geometry, which are only available with two or more views.
Therefore, single-view 3D reconstruction is an important
but challenging issue in computer vision.
Single-view 3D reconstruction attracts more attention recently, with the development of differentiable rendering or
neural rendering. PixelNeRF [44] introduces Neural Radiance Field into single-view reconstruction. It encodes a
2D image to obtain a feature volume, and finally decodes
the feature volume into a radiance field using an MLP decoder. MINE [17] uses multi-plane images to represent
scenes, composed of RGB-α images at continuous depths,
which enhances the scene representation capabilities. VisionNeRF [18] incorporates Transformer blocks into its en-

Living in a complex 3D environment, humans need to comprehend their surroundings to make even the slightest movements. Physiological studies show that humans can perceive depth even with monocular vision [16]. Although
binocular vision is more mature currently, it tends to degrade into monocular vision when sensing distant objects
†: Co-corresponding authors.

28664

