This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rep-MTL: Unleashing the Power of Representation-level Task Saliency
for Multi-Task Learning
Zedong Wang1
1

Siyuan Li2

Dan Xu1,

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Zhejiang University

zedong.wang@connect.ust.hk, lisiyuan@westlake.edu.cn, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

involved may not necessarily exhibit significant correlation,
which induces conflicts in joint training [9, 66], i.e., competing updates to the same architecture could impede the effective training of individual tasks, thus resulting in inferior
convergence and worse generalization [22, 67]. This hence
makes optimization an integral part of MTL, with its crux
believed to be alleviating the negative transfer among tasks
while exploiting their positive complementarity [57, 60, 64].

Despite the promise of Multi-Task Learning (MTL) in
leveraging complementary knowledge across tasks, existing
multi-task optimization (MTO) techniques remain fixated
on resolving conflicts through optimizer-centric loss scaling and gradient manipulation, yet fail to deliver consistent
gains. In this paper, we argue that the shared representation space, where task interactions naturally occur, offers
rich information and potential for operations complementary to existing optimizer designs, especially for facilitating
the inter-task complementarity, which is rarely explored in
MTO. This intuition leads to Rep-MTL, which exploits the
representation-level task saliency to quantify interactions
between task-specific optimization and shared representation learning. By steering these saliencies through entropybased penalization and sample-wise cross-task alignment,
Rep-MTL aims to mitigate negative transfer by maintaining the effective training of individual tasks instead pure
conflict-solving, while explicitly promoting complementary
information sharing. Experiments are conducted on four
challenging MTL benchmarks covering both task-shift and
domain-shift scenarios. The results show that Rep-MTL,
even paired with the basic equal weighting (EW) policy,
achieves competitive performance gains with favorable efficiency. Beyond standard performance metrics, Power Law
(PL) exponent analysis demonstrates Rep-MTL’s efficacy in
balancing task-specific learning and cross-task sharing.

As such, various studies have focused on addressing negative transfer through optimizer-centric loss scaling [33, 35]
and gradient manipulation [2, 49]. Although more precise
multi-task optimization (MTO) strategies have been introduced, their inconsistent efficacy has been increasingly recognized, especially in demanding scenarios [24, 27, 48, 64].
In parallel, the probe of task relationships has been extended
into shared representation space [1, 21, 43], in which task
saliencies are quantified by gradients w.r.t. shared representation [53], opening new avenues for MTO. In this paper, we
argue that the representation space, where task interactions
naturally occur, offers rich information and potential for operations beyond (and complementary to) optimizer designs,
especially for facilitating task complementarity explicitly.
To this end, we introduce Rep-MTL, a representationcentric approach that modulates multi-task training via task
saliency (Sec. 3.1). As shown in Figure 1, it comprises two
associative modules: (i) Task-specific Saliency Regulation
(TSR) that penalizes the task saliency distributions through
an entropy-based regularization, ensuring that task-specific
patterns can be reserved and remain distinctive during training, thereby mitigating negative transfer in MTO. (ii) Crosstask Saliency Alignment (CSA). Since prior methods rarely
touched on this, we start with an intuitive question: What
additional message does representation space provide us
during training? – the rich sample-wise feature dimensions
first come to our mind and inspire our design of CSA, which
explicitly promotes inter-task complementarity by aligning
sample-wise saliencies in a contrastive learning paradigm.
Together, Rep-MTL as a regularization requires no further
modifications to either optimizers or network architectures.

1. Introduction
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [4] has garnered increasing attention in recent years, with notable success in computer vision [14, 23], natural language processing [3, 50], and other
modalities [37, 38]. By leveraging multiple supervision signals at once, MTL models are expected to learn robust representation with reduced cost but better generalization compared to their single-task learning (STL) counterparts [20].
However, performance deterioration occurs as the tasks

3413

