This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JointDiT: Enhancing RGB-Depth Joint Modeling with Diffusion Transformers
Kwon Byung-Ki1,2†
1

Qi Dai2

POSTECH

2

Lee Hyoseok1

Chong Luo2

Microsoft Research Asia

3

Tae-Hyun Oh3

KAIST

Figure 1. We present JointDiT, a diffusion transformer modeling the RGB-Depth joint distribution. By leveraging the image prior of a
state-of-the-art diffusion transformer [6], JointDiT generates high-fidelity images and geometrically plausible and accurate depth maps.

Abstract
We present JointDiT, a diffusion transformer that models the
joint distribution of RGB and depth. By leveraging the architectural benefit and outstanding image prior of the stateof-the-art diffusion transformer, JointDiT not only generates high-fidelity images but also produces geometrically
plausible and accurate depth maps. This solid joint distribution modeling is achieved through two simple yet effective
techniques that we propose, namely, adaptive scheduling
weights, which depend on the noise levels of each modality,
and the unbalanced timestep sampling strategy. With these
techniques, we train our model across all noise levels for
each modality, enabling JointDiT to naturally handle various combinatorial generation tasks, including joint generation, depth estimation, and depth-conditioned image gener-

ation by simply controlling the timesteps of each branch.
JointDiT demonstrates outstanding joint generation performance. Furthermore, it achieves comparable results in
depth estimation and depth-conditioned image generation,
suggesting that joint distribution modeling can serve as a
viable alternative to conditional generation.

1. Introduction

† Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

In the era of generative AI, diffusion models have made
remarkable advancements in synthesizing images [25, 49].
The outstanding capability of text-to-image diffusion models has been found to be useful not only for image generation but also for solving important inverse problems [11–
13, 27], image inpainting [14, 41], image editing [15, 29],
and even further cross-modal conditional generation, such
as depth-conditioned image generation [5, 42, 69], and

25261

