This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stochastic Interpolants for Revealing Stylistic Flows across the History of Art
Pingchuan Ma*
Ming Gui*
Xiaopei Yang
Olga Grebenkova
CompVis @ LMU Munich

Johannes Schusterbauer
Vincent Tao Hu
Björn Ommer

Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

Abstract

lution of artistic movements and styles over time.
In this paper, we ask: How would a piece of art evolve?
What might it look like if created centuries earlier or
later? Naturally, no ground-truth pairs exist for such a task,
and the artistic style of a creator is inherently dynamic and
historically constrained. To address this challenge, we aim
to analyze the flow of artistic styles over time. Given a
single artwork, we try to determine its closest “projection”
onto the manifold of artistic expressions corresponding to a
given historical period. While optimal transport provides a
natural formulation for such a task, considering only a single
isolated artwork is insufficient. Instead, we reformulate the
problem as a distribution matching task, where we study the
evolution of the underlying distribution of art over time.
Recent advances in diffusion bridges such as DDIB [83],
DSB [13, 85], and DDBMs [100] have shown that domain
translation can be performed implicitly, without the need for
paired supervision. We build on this idea in the context of art
history by incorporating stochastic interpolants [1], enabling
us to model the temporal evolution of artistic styles without
requiring explicitly aligned training data. Unlike traditional
style transfer methods that transform images based on predefined and discrete styles, our approach projects styles onto
their corresponding distributions across time. Operating in a
compact latent space allows us to abstract away pixel-level
distraction and focus on meaningful stylistic shifts.
To support this temporal modeling, we require a dataset
that spans centuries and reflects a wide variety of artistic
styles. While datasets like WikiArt [71] offer breadth in
genre and metadata, they lack the scale and historical depth
needed to model long-term stylistic progression. Others,
such as BAM [93] and BAM-FG [70], are either restricted
in access or skewed toward modern art. To address this,
we curate a new unified dataset of over 650,000 artworks
annotated with creation year, location, artist, medium, and
other metadata (Fig. 1). This dataset enables the study of
artistic evolution at scale and over time. In summary, our
key contributions are as follows:

Generative models have made rapid progress in content
creation, particularly in synthesizing artworks and capturing stylistic variation. However, most methods operate at
the level of individual images, limiting their ability to reveal broader stylistic trends and temporal transitions. We
address this by introducing a framework that models stylistic evolution as an optimal transport problem in a learned
style space, using stochastic interpolants and dual diffusion
implicit bridges to align artistic distributions across time
without requiring paired data. A central contribution is a diverse dataset of over 650,000 artworks spanning 500 years,
curated with metadata across multiple genres. Together, our
method and dataset enable tracing long-range stylistic transitions and plausible futures of individual artworks, supporting fine-grained temporal analysis. This offers a new tool
for modeling historical patterns in visual culture and opens
up promising directions in visual understanding. Code and
dataset: https://github.com/CompVis/Art-fm.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer vision have sparked growing
interest in applications in interdisciplinary research domains.
Such applications not only try to offer novel perspectives,
but also address challenges that were impossible before, such
as those seen in medical imaging [18, 53], novel detection
in material science [50], and simulation of climate [56]. Despite these successes, there remains a noticeable gap in their
use for cultural studies [4], particularly in art history.
With the rise of generative models such as Stable Diffusion [66], DALL-E [64], and others [51, 58, 69], there
has been increasing use of these tools for artwork synthesis
and content creation. However, their primary focus remains
on image generation and editing, rather than analyzing the
broader narrative of art history [10, 19, 99]. As a result,
current models are not designed to capture the complex evo-

• We propose the first generative framework that explicitly
models the temporal progression of artistic styles across

* Equal Contribution

5867

