This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HoliTracer: Holistic Vectorization of Geographic Objects from Large-Size
Remote Sensing Imagery
Yu Wang, Bo Dang, Wanchun Li, Wei Chen, Yansheng Li*
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University
{wangfaye,bodang,wanchun.li,weichenrs,yansheng.li}@whu.edu.cn

Patch-based results
51

2p

ls
ixe

Patch-based
training
512 pixels

HoliTracer results
Tracer

HoliTracer
training

(a) Patch-based training v.s. HoliTracer training

(b) Patch-based results v.s. HoliTracer results

Figure 1. Existing Patch-based method [33] v.s. our HoliTracer.. Existing methods adopt a patch-based approach during training and
inference, leading to context loss and fragmented vector results. In contrast, our HoliTracer perceives context while directly tracing entire
objects, yielding superior vector results.

Abstract

and roads, demonstrate that HoliTracer outperforms stateof-the-art methods. Our code and data are available in
github.com/vvangfaye/HoliTracer

With the increasing resolution of remote sensing imagery
(RSI), large-size RSI has emerged as a vital data source for
high-precision vector mapping of geographic objects. Existing methods are typically constrained to processing small
image patches, which often leads to the loss of contextual
information and produces fragmented vector outputs. To
address these, this paper introduces HoliTracer, the first
framework designed to holistically extract vectorized geographic objects from large-size RSI. In HoliTracer, we enhance segmentation of large-size RSI using the Context Attention Net (CAN), which employs a local-to-global attention mechanism to capture contextual dependencies. Furthermore, we achieve holistic vectorization through a robust pipeline that leverages the Mask Contour Reformer
(MCR) to reconstruct polygons and the Polygon Sequence
Tracer (PST) to trace vertices. Extensive experiments on
large-size RSI datasets, including buildings, water bodies,

1. Introduction
Vector maps provide precise representations of the Earth’s
surface and are essential for various downstream tasks, such
as navigation and urban planning [5, 41]. Automatic extraction of accurate vector maps from remote sensing imagery
(RSI) has emerged as a cost-effective approach, achieving
significant progress in recent years [6, 14].
With advancements in remote sensing technology, the
resolution of RSI continues to improve, resulting in increasingly large images that require interpretation [1, 19, 26].
However, existing vector mapping methods [9, 29, 33, 37]
are typically designed for small image patches and struggle
to process such large-size imagery, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Specifically, due to computational constraints, most vectorization algorithms are limited to processing image inputs of
512×512 pixels [9, 37]. When applied to large-size imagery

* Corresponding author.

8482

