This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STAR: Spatial-Temporal Augmentation with Text-to-Video Models
for Real-World Video Super-Resolution
Rui Xie1∗ , Yinhong Liu1∗ , Penghao Zhou2 , Chen Zhao1 , Jun Zhou3
Kai Zhang1 , Zhenyu Zhang1 , Jian Yang1 , Zhenheng Yang2 , Ying Tai1†
1
Nanjing University, 2 ByteDance, 3 Southwest University
https://nju-pcalab.github.io/projects/STAR

Ours

Ours

Real-world Input (from VideoLQ)
Upscale-A-Video

RealViformer

Ours

Real-world Input (from VideoLQ)
Upscale-A-Video

RealViformer

Ours

Figure 1. Visualization comparisons on real-world low-resolution videos. Compared to the state-of-the-art VSR models [78, 80], our
results demonstrate more natural facial details and better structure of the text. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract
Image diffusion models have been adapted for real-world
video super-resolution to tackle over-smoothing issues in
GAN-based methods. However, as they are trained on
static images, they struggle to maintain temporal consistency, limiting their ability to capture temporal dynamics effectively. Introducing text-to-video (T2V) models into
video super-resolution for improved temporal modeling is
straightforward. However, two key challenges remain: artifacts caused by complex degradations in real-world scenarios and compromised fidelity due to the strong generative capacity of powerful T2V models (e.g., CogVideoX-5B).
To enhance the spatio-temporal quality of restored videos,
we introduce STAR (Spatial-Temporal Augmentation with

T2V models for Real-world video super-resolution), a novel
approach that leverages T2V models for real-world video
super-resolution, achieving realistic spatial details and robust temporal consistency. Specifically, we enhance vanilla
T2V models by incorporating Local Information Enhancement to enrich local details and mitigate degradation artifacts. Moreover, we propose a Dynamic Frequency (DF)
Loss to reinforce fidelity, guiding the model to focus on different frequency components across diffusion steps. Extensive experiments demonstrate STAR outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction

∗ Equal contributions. Work done during Rui Xie’s ByteDance internship. † indicates corresponding author.

Real-world video super-resolution (VSR) aims to generate
high-resolution (HR) videos with clear details and strong
temporal consistency from low-resolution (LR) inputs with
unknown degradations. Most VSR methods [8, 19, 53, 64]

17108

