This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CULTURE3D: A Large-Scale and Diverse Dataset of Cultural Landmarks and
Terrains for Gaussian-Based Scene Rendering
Xinyi Zheng1∗ , Steve Zhang2∗ , Weizhe Lin2† , Aaron Zhang1 ,
Walterio W. Mayol-Cuevas1 , Yunze Liu2† , Junxiao Shen1,2†
{wf24018, fan.zhang, walterio.mayol-cuevas, junxiao.shen}@bristol.ac.uk,
{steve.zhang, weizhe.lin, yunze.liu}@memories.ai,
1

University of Bristol 2 Memories.ai Research
∗
Equal contribution.
†
Corresponding Author

(a) The Old Schools

(d) Reconstruction Result and 3D Model (Left), Detail Rendered Structures (Right)

3D Reconstruction
(c) Outside Pavement

(b) Graduation square

Figure 1. Overview of the 3D reconstruction pipeline and resulting model. (a) Original images of The Old Schools building. (b) Original
images of Graduation Square. (c) Original images of the outside pavement area. (d) Reconstructed 3D model integrating multiple spatial
views, highlighting key locations within the reconstructed environment.

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction models face limitations in building extra-large scale outdoor scenes, primarily due to the lack of sufficiently large-scale and detailed datasets. In this paper, we present a extra-large finegrained dataset with 10 billion points composed of 41,006
drone-captured high-resolution aerial images, covering 20
diverse and culturally significant scenes from worldwide locations such as Cambridge Uni main buildings, the Pyramids, and the Forbidden City Palace. Compared to ex-

isting datasets, ours offers significantly larger scale and
higher detail, uniquely suited for fine-grained 3D applications. Each scene contains an accurate spatial layout and
comprehensive structural information, supporting detailed
3D reconstruction tasks. By reconstructing environments
using these detailed images, our dataset supports multiple applications, including outputs in the widely adopted
COLMAP format, establishing a novel benchmark for evaluating state-of-the-art large-scale Gaussian Splatting methods. The dataset’s flexibility encourages innovations and
supports model plug-ins, paving the way for future 3D

29064

