This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cycle Consistency as Reward: Learning Image-Text Alignment
without Human Preferences
Hyojin Bahng*

Caroline Chan*
Frédo Durand
MIT CSAIL

Phillip Isola

{bahng, cmchan, fredo, phillipi}@mit.edu

Abstract
Learning alignment between language and vision is a fundamental challenge, especially as multimodal data becomes
increasingly detailed and complex. Existing methods often
rely on collecting human or AI preferences, which can be
costly and time-intensive. We propose an alternative approach that leverages cycle consistency as a supervisory
signal. Given an image and generated text, we map the
text back to image space using a text-to-image model and
compute the similarity between the original image and its
reconstruction. Analogously, for text-to-image generation,
we measure the textual similarity between an input caption
and its reconstruction through the cycle. We use the cycle consistency score to rank candidates and construct a
preference dataset of 866K comparison pairs. The reward
model trained on our dataset, CycleReward, outperforms
state-of-the-art alignment metrics on detailed captioning,
with superior inference-time scalability when used as a verifier for Best-of-N sampling, while maintaining speed and
differentiability. Furthermore, performing DPO and Diffusion DPO using our dataset enhances performance across a
wide range of vision-language tasks and text-to-image generation. Our dataset, model, and code are publicly released
at https://cyclereward.github.io/.

proving alignment include reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [65] or direct preference optimization (DPO) [70], which requires collecting high-quality human preferences [40, 89, 90, 92] or AI feedback [48] from
proprietary models (e.g., GPT-4V [62]). However, obtaining such data is prohibitively expensive.
Comparing images and text is inherently challenging, especially with longer, detailed text. However, the comparison becomes much easier when we map text back into image space. As shown in Figure 1, more descriptive and
accurate texts lead to reconstructed images that better resemble the original images. This idea of cycle consistency [39, 82, 107] has been used as a metric to evaluate image-to-text generation [23, 32] and optimize diffusion
models [4]. However, these approaches compute cycle consistency on-the-fly using large pre-trained models, which is
prohibitively slow and often not differentiable.
We introduce CycleReward, a reward model trained
on preferences derived from cycle consistency. Given an
image-to-text mapping F : X → Y and a backward textto-image mapping G : Y → X, we define cycle consistency score as the similarity between the original input x
and its reconstruction G(F (x)). In the opposite direction,
we can compare reconstructed text F (G(y)) with input text
y. We use the cycle consistency score as a proxy for preferences, where a higher score indicates a preferred output.
This provides a more scalable and cheaper signal for learning alignment compared to human supervision. We create
a large-scale preference dataset, CyclePrefDB, comprising
866K comparison pairs from 11 image-to-text models and
4 text-to-image models. It contains significantly denser text
than typical text-to-image datasets (Table 1), while fitting
into the 77-token limit of text-to-image models. Trained on
this dataset, CycleReward is a fast, differentiable metric for
image-text alignment, particularly for longer text.
We evaluate CycleReward’s ability to evaluate and enhance image-text alignment across two tasks: detailed captioning and text-to-image generation. We find that it is effective both as an alignment metric and for Best-of-N optimization. It achieves state-of-the-art performance for de-

1. Introduction
As data becomes increasingly complex and detailed, aligning language and vision arises as a central challenge in
multimodal learning. Generative models may produce misaligned outputs, and vision-language models often hallucinate descriptions not grounded in the image [50], while
text-to-image models can generate images that misrepresent information in text prompts [33, 40]. Existing
alignment metrics primarily focus on short captions or
prompts [40, 90, 92], limiting their effectiveness in evaluating alignment for longer text. Existing strategies for im* Equal contribution.

22934

