This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blended Point Cloud Diffusion for Localized Text-guided Shape Editing
Etai Sella1∗
1

Noam Atia1∗

Tel Aviv University

Ron Mokady2
2

BRIA AI

3

Hadar Averbuch-Elor3

Cornell University

https://tau-vailab.github.io/BlendedPC/

Abstract
Natural language offers a highly intuitive interface for enabling localized fine-grained edits of 3D shapes. However,
prior works face challenges in preserving global coherence
while locally modifying the input 3D shape. In this work,
we introduce an inpainting-based framework for editing
shapes represented as point clouds. Our approach leverages foundation 3D diffusion models for achieving localized
shape edits, adding structural guidance in the form of a partial conditional shape, ensuring that other regions correctly
preserve the shape’s identity. Furthermore, to encourage
identity preservation also within the local edited region, we
propose an inference-time coordinate blending algorithm
which balances reconstruction of the full shape with inpainting at a progression of noise levels during the inference process. Our coordinate blending algorithm seamlessly blends the original shape with its edited version, enabling a fine-grained editing of 3D shapes, all while circumventing the need for computationally expensive and often
inaccurate inversion. Extensive experiments show that our
method outperforms alternative techniques across a wide
range of metrics that evaluate both fidelity to the original
shape and also adherence to the textual description.

Figure 1. Given an input point cloud and a target text prompt, our
localized editing technique produces an output point cloud that
accurately conveys the text while faithfully preserving the input’s
structural identity, particularly outside of the desired edit region.

1. Introduction

they often do not sufficiently preserve the shape’s structure,
creating additional unintended and undesirable changes.
Inspired by localized text-guided image editing techniques [3, 4, 44], we introduce a framework that reframes
the localized shape editing task as a semantic inpainting
problem. Our approach, coined Blended Point Clouds
(BlendedPC), leverages a foundation point cloud diffusion
model [37], which is tuned to enable text-guided semantic shape inpainting while preserving the model’s generative capabilities. In particular, we repurpose an existing
small-scale dataset linking 3D shape pairs with textual descriptions of their pairwise geometrics differences [2]. By
leveraging off-the-shelf language and point cloud segmentation models, we identify textual descriptions describing
part-specific differences (i.e. “the target has shorter legs”)
and construct a set of {partial shape, complete shape, textual description} triplets associated with these localized differences. These triplets serve as training data for our in-

We are witnessing tremendous success in text-guided 3D
generation—a task that seemed nearly impossible until recently, and nowadays enables the creation of high-fidelity
3D assets through the use of text [27, 41]. This generative power has also fueled increasing interests in text-guided
editing of existing 3D shapes [7, 45, 46]. However, most existing text-guided editing techniques [1, 46] manipulate input shapes globally, without explicit guidance over which
regions should be edited and, conversely, which regions
should be preserved. While these methods can perform semantic fine-grained edits conveying the target text prompt,
* Denotes equal contribution

19119

