This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TrackAny3D: Transferring Pretrained 3D Models for Category-unified
3D Point Cloud Tracking
Mengmeng Wang1,3 Haonan Wang1 Yulong Li1 Xiangjie Kong1,3
Jiaxin Du1,3 Guojiang Shen1,3 * Feng Xia2
1
Zhejiang University of Technology 2 RMIT University
3
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing

Abstract
3D LiDAR-based single object tracking (SOT) relies on
sparse and irregular point clouds, posing challenges
from geometric variations in scale, motion patterns, and
structural complexity across object categories. Current
category-specific approaches achieve good accuracy but
are impractical for real-world use, requiring separate models for each category and showing limited generalization.
To tackle these issues, we propose TrackAny3D, the first
framework to transfer large-scale pretrained 3D models for
category-agnostic 3D SOT. We first integrate parameterefficient adapters to bridge the gap between pretraining and
tracking tasks while preserving geometric priors. Then,
we introduce a Mixture-of-Geometry-Experts (MoGE) architecture that adaptively activates specialized subnetworks
based on distinct geometric characteristics. Additionally,
we design a temporal context optimization strategy that incorporates learnable temporal tokens and a dynamic mask
weighting module to propagate historical information and
mitigate temporal drift. Experiments on three commonlyused benchmarks show that TrackAny3D establishes new
state-of-the-art performance on category-agnostic 3D SOT,
demonstrating strong generalization and competitiveness.
We hope this work will enlighten the community on the importance of unified models and further expand the use of
large-scale pretrained models in this field.

1. Introduction
3D SOT on point clouds [10, 15, 36] is a task of persistently
localizing a target in a dynamic 3D scene. This task holds
substantial potential for a wide range of applications, such
as autonomous driving and mobile robotics. Unlike RGBbased tracking [3, 19, 53], which benefits from rich texture
and color cues, 3D LiDAR-based SOT relies exclusively on
sparse, irregular point clouds to infer a target’s 3D spatial
* Corresponding author: Guojiang Shen

Figure 1. Comparison between Different Tracking Paradigms.
The previous category-specific, fully trained paradigm (a) employs
multiple models, each learned for a specific category. We observed
that they face significant performance drops when using crosscategory training (on KITTI) (b). In contrast, our category-unified,
pretraining transfer paradigm (c) uses a single shared model for
all categories, which is efficiently transferred from pretrained 3D
models.

pose. This geometric dependency introduces unique challenges: objects from different categories (e.g., cars, pedestrians) exhibit drastic variations in scale, motion patterns,
and structural complexity.
To mitigate these challenges, existing methods [25, 27,
31, 43, 51] adopt a category-specific learning paradigm as
shown in Fig. 1(a), where plenty of dedicated models are independently trained and tested for each object type. While
attaining leading accuracy, this paradigm is impractical for
real-world deployment, as it demands prohibitive computational resources to train and store dozens of categoryspecific networks, and fails to generalize to novel categories, a critical limitation for open-world applications. To
validate the inter-class geometric variation challenge, we
empirically observe that directly applying existing meth-

28249

