This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Acknowledging Focus Ambiguity in Visual Questions
Chongyan Chen1† , Yu-Yun Tseng2† , Zhuoheng Li2 , Anush Venkatesh2 , Danna Gurari1,2
1

University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Colorado Boulder
†

denotes equal contribution (and so shared first authorship)

Abstract
No published work on visual question answering (VQA) accounts for ambiguity regarding where the content described
in the question is located in the image. To fill this gap, we
introduce VQ-FocusAmbiguity, the first VQA dataset that
visually grounds each plausible image region a question
could refer to when arriving at valid answers. We next analyze and compare our dataset to existing datasets to reveal its unique properties. Finally, we benchmark modern
models for two novel tasks related to acknowledging focus
ambiguity: recognizing whether a visual question has focus
ambiguity and locating all plausible focus regions within
the image. Results show that the dataset is challenging for
modern models. To facilitate future progress on these tasks,
we publicly share the dataset with an evaluation server at
https://vizwiz.org/tasks- and- datasets/
focus-ambiguity-in-visual-questions/.

Figure 1. Visual questions with focus ambiguity, meaning language in the questions (underlined words/phrases) refer to multiple plausible image regions (aka, segmentations). ‘Q’ denotes
the question, ‘F’ denotes the focus specified in the question, and
‘A’ denotes the answer. We created a new dataset that originates from four sources to represent ambiguous and unambiguous
questions, with two of the sources originating from existing VQA
datasets [15, 22] and exemplified in this figure. As shown, the location of the question grounding and answer grounding can match
(in which case, matching colors are used for all segmentations and
their associated text) and can differ (bottom right example, where
an additional answer segmentation is shown with a dashed line).

1. Introduction
Ambiguous language is a common part of communication.
It entails using vague words or phrases that can be interpreted in multiple plausible ways, ideally alongside context clarifying the intended meaning. For example, when a
three-year-old asks “What is this?”, we can understand the
meaning if the child simultaneously points to an item (e.g., a
red pomegranate). However, context is not always provided
to clarify the intended meaning of a question, as exemplified in Figure 1. In such cases, the language in the question
could refer to multiple plausible visual regions. We call this
focus ambiguity in visual questions, or more concisely “ambiguous questions” and “question ambiguity”.
Our paper is motivated by the belief that a VQA system should notify users when there is question ambiguity
and then facilitate them to arrive at the desired interpretation. The possible repercussions from VQA services not
providing such information can be grave, potentially inflicting adverse social, professional, legal, financial, and personal consequences. For instance, imagine if the answer to
the question in Figure 1 about “What is the cleaning prod-

uct?” leads a blind person to use window cleaner to wash
their dishes they will use for eating instead of the dish soap.
Alternatively, imagine replacing the question in Figure 1
with “What is the medicine?” when instead three pill bottles
are visible. The current obstacle for developing ambiguityaware VQA solutions is that no benchmark dataset exists for
establishing to what extent VQA models are aware of question ambiguity and so where further improvement is needed.
To fill this gap, we introduce the first dataset goaloriented towards focus ambiguity in visual questions.
Called VQ-FocusAmbiguity, it consists of 5,500 examples and segments (aka, grounds) all plausible image regions to which the language in each question could refer.
The dataset has a nearly even distribution between ambiguous and unambiguous examples. We also characterize this

1228

