This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RayletDF: Raylet Distance Fields for Generalizable 3D Surface Reconstruction
from Point Clouds or Gaussians
Shenxing Wei † Jinxi Li † Yafei Yang Siyuan Zhou Bo Yang *
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{shenxing.wei, jinxi.li, ya-fei.yang, siyuan.zhou}@connect.polyu.hk, bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

PFGS
RayletDF (Ours)
Input Point Cloud / Gaussians
RayDF
Ground Truth
Figure 1. We train all methods on the large-scale ARKitScene dataset and then directly test them on the unseen ScanNet++ dataset. Our
RayletDF shows superior generalizability compared to baselines, achieving significantly more accurate 3D scene surface reconstructions.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a generalizable method for 3D surface reconstruction from raw point clouds or pre-estimated
3D Gaussians by 3DGS from RGB images. Unlike existing coordinate-based methods which are often computationally intensive when rendering explicit surfaces, our proposed method, named RayletDF, introduces a new technique called raylet distance field, which aims to directly
predict surface points from query rays. Our pipeline consists of three key modules: a raylet feature extractor, a
raylet distance field predictor, and a multi-raylet blender.
These components work together to extract fine-grained local geometric features, predict raylet distances, and aggregate multiple predictions to reconstruct precise surface
points. We extensively evaluate our method on multiple
public real-world datasets, demonstrating superior performance in surface reconstruction from point clouds or 3D
Gaussians. Most notably, our method achieves exceptional
generalization ability, successfully recovering 3D surfaces
in a single-forward pass across unseen datasets in testing.
Our code and datasets are available at https://github.
com/vLAR-group/RayletDF .

been developed to recover 3D geometry, including occupancy fields (OF) [38], un/signed distance fields (U/SDF)
[13, 44], radiance fields (NeRF) [39], and vector fields (VF)
[70]. While achieving excellent results in 3D reconstruction, these coordinate-based methods and their variants typically demand dense network evaluations to obtain explicit
surfaces, thus being computationally heavy.
Recently, the point-based method 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [30] has emerged as an appealing alternative
to those coordinate-based methods, thanks to its impressive
real-time performance in synthesizing high-fidelity RGB
images at high resolutions. However, it still falls short in
rendering high-quality depth views, due to its failure in capturing fine-grained surface geometry, though various constraints such as depth priors [33, 62], local smoothness or
planarity regularization [24, 63] can be added to enhance
the quality of surfaces recovered.
On the other hand, a line of recent ray-based methods
such as DRDF [32], PRIF [20], DDFs [1], Pointersect [8],
and RayDF [36] have demonstrated excellent performance
in representing intricate surfaces based on light rays. Nevertheless, due to the limitation of existing ray parametrizations such as Plucker and spherical coordinates, they are
often limited to recovering object-level surfaces and require
per-scene training, lacking the desired generalizability to infer diverse 3D scene structures in a single forward pass.
In this paper, we present a generalizable 3D surface representation pipeline to accurately recover 3D geometry. The
core module of our pipeline is a new technique called raylet
distance field, with inspiration from ray-based methods.
The term raylet is defined as a unit segment of a light ray

1. Introduction
Learning efficient, accurate, and generalizable 3D surface
representations is crucial for many applications in mixed
reality, embodied AI, and graphics. Given RGB/D images and/or point clouds, a series of 3D representations has
†

Equal contribution

*

Corresponding author

25616

