This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How Do Optical Flow and Textual Prompts Collaborate to Assist in Audio-Visual
Semantic Segmentation?
Yujian Lee1,2,† ,
Peng Gao1,2,† ,
Yongqi Xu3 ,
Wentao Fan1,2,∗
1
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
2
Guangdong Provincial/Zhuhai Key Laboratory IRADS
and Department of Computer Science, Beijing Normal-Hong Kong Baptist University, Zhuhai, China
3
Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
{yujianlee1119, gaopeng1225}@gmail.com, xuyongqi@stu.pku.edu.cn, wentaofan@uic.edu.cn *

Abstract
Audio-visual semantic segmentation (AVSS) represents an
extension of the audio-visual segmentation (AVS) task, necessitating a semantic understanding of audio-visual scenes
beyond merely identifying sound-emitting objects at the visual pixel level. Contrary to a previous methodology, by decomposing the AVSS task into two discrete subtasks by initially providing a prompted segmentation mask to facilitate
subsequent semantic analysis, our approach innovates on
this foundational strategy. We introduce a novel collaborative framework, Stepping Stone Plus (SSP), which integrates
optical ﬂow and textual prompts to assist the segmentation
process. In scenarios where sound sources frequently coexist with moving objects, our pre-mask technique leverages
optical ﬂow to capture motion dynamics, providing essential temporal context for precise segmentation. To address
the challenge posed by stationary sound-emitting objects,
such as alarm clocks, SSP incorporates two speciﬁc textual
prompts: one identiﬁes the category of the sound-emitting
object, and the other provides a broader description of the
scene. Additionally, we implement a visual-textual alignment module (VTA) to facilitate cross-modal integration,
delivering more coherent and contextually relevant semantic interpretations. Our training regimen involves a postmask technique aimed at compelling the model to learn the
diagram of the optical ﬂow. Experimental results demonstrate that SSP outperforms existing AVS methods, delivering efﬁcient and precise segmentation results.

* † Equal Contribution,∗ Corresponding author. The completion of
this work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (62276106), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2024A1515011767), the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory
IRADS (2022B1212010006), and the Guangdong Higher Education Upgrading Plan (2021-2025) with No. of (2024GXJK695, 2024KTSCX222).

1. Introduction
The nature of the audio-visual segmentation (AVS) task is to
pinpoint sound-emitting objects in the visual domain using
auditory cues [2]. Prior to the emergence of AVS, audiovisual localization (AVL) provides general sound source locations [40, 46]. However, AVL lacks the precision needed
to identify speciﬁc sound-producing objects. AVS addresses this limitation by offering pixel-level labels for such
acoustic entity [54]. Nevertheless, identifying these objects
from the visual scene without prior knowledge of their nature proves impractical in daily life. Therefore, audio-visual
semantic segmentation (AVSS) enhances this process by
predicting semantic labels for the objects [55]. By integrating semantic understanding, AVSS improves machine
perception of the auditory environment.
The design of the existing AVS approaches can be
broadly categorized into fusion-based methods [7, 12, 20,
21, 24, 34, 35, 54] and prompt-based methods [8, 28, 30,
42–44, 47, 48]. (1). Fusion-based methods in Fig. 1(a)
combine auditory and visual modal information into a uniﬁed representation to accomplish the AVS task. These
methods typically utilize network architectures such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and transformers to facilitate effective modality fusion. A prominent example
is AVSBench [54], where visual information is ﬁrst encoded by an encoder to generate multi-scale visual representations. Subsequently, audio features are mapped to
these multi-scale representations, enabling the effective fusion of cross-modal information [36]. (2). Prompt-based
methods in Fig. 1(b) can be further subdivided into three
categories (Fig. 1(b.1), Fig. 1(b.2), and Fig. 1(b.3)):
(2.1). One category involves object queries feature embeddings generated from auditory features [8, 42–44, 48]
or (2.2). Masks created from visual features [28, 30], both
derived from the original data. (2.3). The other category
encompasses additional prior contextual knowledge, textual

23342

