This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Prompt to Progression: Taming Video Diffusion Models for Seamless
Attribute Transition
Ling Lo
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Kelvin C.K. Chan
Google DeepMind

linglo.ee08@nycu.edu.tw

kelvinckchan@google.com

Wen-Huang Cheng
National Taiwan University

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Existing models often struggle with complex temporal
changes, particularly when generating videos with gradual attribute transitions. The most common prompt interpolation approach for motion transitions often fails to
handle gradual attribute transitions, where inconsistencies
tend to become more pronounced. In this work, we propose a simple yet effective method to extend existing models for smooth and consistent attribute transitions, through
introducing frame-wise guidance during the denoising process. Our approach constructs a data-specific transitional
direction for each noisy latent, guiding the gradual shift
from initial to final attributes frame by frame while preserving the motion dynamics of the video. Moreover,
we present the Controlled-Attribute-Transition Benchmark
(CAT-Bench), which integrates both attribute and motion
dynamics, to comprehensively evaluate the performance of
different models. We further propose two metrics to assess the accuracy and smoothness of attribute transitions.
Experimental results demonstrate that our approach performs favorably against existing baselines, achieving visual
fidelity, maintaining alignment with text prompts, and delivering seamless attribute transitions.

Figure 1. Example of Video Generation with Attribute Transitions
Using the Same Base Model. The base model generates static appearances throughout the video. Prompt interpolation leads to inconsistencies, such as abrupt changes in the buildings, while our
method ensures smoother and more consistent attribute transitions.

1. Introduction

time dimension, such as varying motions and attribute transitions. Real-world videos, on the other hand, are composed
of sequences featuring different motions, color changes,
varying light conditions, and evolving backgrounds over
time. The limitation inevitably restricts the potential of
video generation in practical applications, where the ability to handle dynamic changes is essential.
As shown in Figure 1, when attempting to generate a
transition from“A bustling cityscape at midday, bathed in
bright sunlight.” to “A nighttime cityscape under heavy
rain.” in a video, the base T2V model fails to produce
meaningful attribute changes, resulting in a static appearance throughout the sequence. To address temporal variations, recent studies propose additional networks to facilitate multi-prompt video generation [8, 23], utilizing multiple descriptions that capture the desired transitions over

Diffusion models have made remarkable advancements in
text-to-video generation [5, 9, 10, 13, 15, 17, 25, 26]. Compared to image generation, the additional time dimension
in videos provides an opportunity to create more dynamic
and engaging content. Recent developments in large-scale
datasets and architecture designs have led to high-quality,
powerful text-to-video (T2V) models that generate videos
with remarkable coherence and realism. Despite their success in producing temporally consistent video sequences,
these models often struggle with complex variation over the

18651

