This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CuRe: Cultural Gaps in the Long Tail of Text-to-Image Systems
Aniket Rege1 * Zinnia Nie1 Mahesh Ramesh1 Unmesh Raskar1 Zhuoran Yu1
Aditya Kusupati2† Yong Jae Lee1† Ramya Korlakai Vinayak1†
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of Washington

Abstract
Popular text-to-image (T2I) systems are trained on webscraped data, which is heavily Amero and Euro-centric, underrepresenting the cultures of the Global South. To analyze these biases, we introduce CuRe, a novel and scalable
benchmarking and scoring suite for cultural representativeness that leverages the marginal utility of attribute specification to T2I systems as a proxy for human judgments.
Our CuRe benchmark dataset has a novel categorical hierarchy built from the crowdsourced Wikimedia knowledge
graph, with 300 cultural artifacts across 32 cultural subcategories grouped into six broad cultural axes (food, art, fashion, architecture, celebrations, and people). Our dataset’s
categorical hierarchy enables CuRe scorers to evaluate T2I
systems by analyzing their response to increasing the informativeness of text conditioning, enabling fine-grained cultural comparisons. We empirically observe much stronger
correlations of our class of scorers to human judgments of
perceptual similarity, image-text alignment, and cultural diversity across image encoders (SigLIP 2, AIMV2 and DINOv2), multimodal language models (OpenCLIP, SigLIP
2, Gemini 2.0 Flash) and state-of-the-art text-to-image systems, including three variants of Stable Diffusion (1.5, XL,
3.5 Large), FLUX.1 [dev], Ideogram 2.0, and DALL-E 3.
The code and dataset is open-sourced and available at
https://aniketrege.github.io/cure/.

Figure 1. Three images of types of pottery generated by a stateof-the-art T2I system, DALL-E 3, with varying amounts of information in the prompt. The T2I system is consistently accurate at
generating “ceramic diyas” (a), but hallucinates incorrect details
for “jebena, from Ethiopia” (b) and “amphora of Hermonax, a
type of pottery from Greece” (c). Specifying more information in
the prompt can help (i.e. in c but not in b), but is an unreliable
method to make the T2I system more culturally representative.

1. Introduction

enough examples during training. This training paradigm
has been shown to amplify societal biases and stereotypes
encoded in the training data [5, 12], including harmful and
offensive content [7, 8]. We show a simple example of T2I
system bias using a state-of-the-art T2I system [4] to generate images of culturally specific pottery in Fig. 1. Generating images with the text prompt “ceramic diyas” (a) gives
diverse, consistent and factual outputs, while prompting
with “jebena, from Ethiopia” (b) and “amphora of Hermonax, a type of pottery from Greece” (c) generate diverse
but low quality and inaccurate images that do not resemble pottery (b), or miss culture-specific details of the artifact (c). Building generative models that faithfully represent the diversity of human preferences, values, and experiences across global cultures in this long tail requires a
culturally-aware benchmarking and reliable bias measure-

Cultural diversity brings a collective strength that can
benefit all of humanity.
Robert Alan Arthur

Text-to-Image (T2I) systems [45, 48, 50, 53] are trained
on web-scale data [11, 22, 55, 56], which is long-tail in nature [44]. This translates to hallucinations when generating images of data in the tail, as the model has not seen
* Corresponding author: aniketr@cs.wisc.edu
† Equal Advising

15680

