This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamDance: Animating Human Images
by Enriching 3D Geometry Cues from 2D Poses
Yatian Pang1,3 , Bin Zhu1 , Bin Lin1 , Mingzhe Zheng4 ,
Francis E. H. Tay3 , Ser-Nam Lim5,6 , Harry Yang4,6 , Li Yuan1,2,†
1

PKU Shenzhen Graduate School 2 PengCheng Laboratory 3 NUS 4 HKUST 5 UCF 6 Everlyn

Abstract
In this work, we present DreamDance, a novel method
for animating human images using only skeleton pose sequences as conditional inputs. Existing approaches struggle with generating coherent, high-quality content in an efficient and user-friendly manner. Concretely, baseline methods relying on only 2D pose guidance lack the cues of 3D
information like depth and normal maps, leading to suboptimal results. Other works introduce extra representations to provide additional 3D information but inevitably
involve a cumbersome and time-intensive process. To address these limitations, DreamDance enriches 3D geometry cues from 2D poses by introducing an efficient diffusion
model, enabling high-quality human image animation with
various guidance. Our key insight is that human images
naturally exhibit multiple levels of correlation, progressing
from coarse skeleton poses to fine-grained geometry cues,
and further from these geometry cues to explicit appearance
details. Capturing such correlations could enrich the guidance signals, facilitating intra-frame coherency and interframe consistency. Specifically, we construct the TikTokDance5K dataset, comprising 5K high-quality dance videos
with detailed frame annotations, including human pose,
depth, and normal maps. Next, we introduce a Mutually
Aligned Geometry Diffusion Model to generate fine-grained
depth and normal maps for enriched guidance. Finally, a
Cross-domain Controller incorporates multi-level guidance
to animate human images effectively with a video diffusion
model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance in animating human
images compared to baseline methods.

Figure 1. A summarized comparison between DreamDance and
the baseline methods.

1. Introduction

significant academic interest due to its diverse applications
across industries, including film production, social media,
and online retail. Despite the rapid development of generative artificial intelligence, human image animation remains challenging because it requires a comprehensive understanding of both intra-frame coherency and inter-frame
consistency.
Recently, diffusion models [24, 58] have demonstrated
remarkable potential in image [6, 45, 50, 51] and video [4,
5, 79, 84, 90] generation, unlocking new possibilities for
human image animation tasks. Pioneer works such as
Disco [64] and Dreampose [33] leverage input images
and pose conditions to generate target frames sequentially.
However, due to the lack of temporal learning capabilities,
these methods often suffer from flickering artifacts and temporal inconsistency across frames. To address these limitations, more recent methods such as MagicAnimate [75] and

Human image animation refers to generating dynamic and
realistic videos from static human images following a sequence of motion control signals. This field has attracted

14039

