This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unknown Text Learning for CLIP-based Few-shot Open-Set Recognition
Rui Ma, Qilong Wang*, Bing Cao, Qinghua Hu, Yahong Han
Tianjin University, China
{miracle0205, qlwang, caobing, huqinghua, yahong}@tju.edu.cn

CLIP

Abstract

Unknown

Known
16

CoOp

CoOp

Recently, vision-language models (e.g., CLIP) with prompt
learning have shown great potential in few-shot learning.
However, an open issue remains for the effective extension of CLIP-based models to few-shot open-set recognition
(FSOR), which requires classifying known classes and detecting unknown samples using a few known samples. The
core challenge is that unknown samples and their textual
descriptions are unavailable. To address this, we propose
an Unknown Text Learning (UTL) method for CLIP-based
FSOR tasks with only known samples. Speciﬁcally, UTL involves two key components, i.e., universal unknown words
optimization (U2 WO) and unknown label smoothing (ULS).
Speciﬁcally, U2 WO constructs the universal space of unknown words with basis vectors and characterizes unknown
text based on a linear combination of those basis vectors.
To efﬁciently learn unknown text without unknown samples,
ULS is presented to perform contrast learning between unknown text and known samples by regulating the label of unknown classes to a small constant, which ﬂexibly empowers
unknown text to be non-matching and confused with known
visual samples. In addition, our UTL incorporates an additional context for known classes to mitigate conﬂicts of
context optimization between known and unknown classes.
UTL effectively regularizes the predicted probability by integrating learnable unknown text. Experimental results on
various benchmarks show that our UTL is superior to its
counterparts while achieving state-of-the-art performance.

8

M-Tuning
Density

or
UTL

Contexts

Learnable
Class Name

Open words

Unknown Text

(a)

UTL

2

or
Frozen

0
4

0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Confidence Score

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of our UTL with its counterparts in
terms of prompt. Speciﬁcally, CoOp [54] and M-Tuning [19] learn
only context prompt. In contrast, our UTL learns context prompts
and unknown text more ﬂexibly under various open-set scenarios. (b) Density distribution of conﬁdence score (maximum predicted probability) with the proposed UTL and CoOp. The gap
between the mean scores of known and unknown samples indicates the method’s ability to distinguish open-set instances.

samples under data-limited conditions. This problem has
gained signiﬁcant attention, inspiring research efforts to extend few-shot learning methods to open-set settings [11, 12,
20, 42]. Recently, vision-language models (e.g., CLIP [32])
with prompt learning [13, 45, 46, 50, 54, 55] have demonstrated remarkable performance in few-shot classiﬁcation
by learning textual prompts from training samples. That
inspires us to explore the potential of prompt learning for
FSOR. As shown in Fig. 1(a), CLIP constructs prompts
with context and class names. However, in FSOR, the class
names of unknown samples are unavailable. The absence
of unknown class names imposes a closed-set assumption, making CLIP vulnerable to open-set conditions [25].
Prompt learning methods like CoOp [54] attempt to learn
contextual prompts directly from image features, but they
still rely on a closed-set assumption and cannot be extended
to unknown text due to the absence of unknown samples.
As a result, the effectiveness of prompt learning in FSOR
remains fundamentally limited, as the core challenge lies in
the absence of unknown samples and their corresponding
textual descriptions.

1. Introduction
Test samples in real-world scenarios often belong to classes
not encountered during training, posing a critical challenge
for recognition systems. Additionally, the high cost of data
annotation and privacy concerns limit access to large-scale,
high-quality datasets, further exacerbating the problem. To
address this, Few-Shot Open-Set Recognition (FSOR) [20]
has been proposed to enable recognition systems to classify predeﬁned known classes while identifying unknown
* Corresponding author

657

