This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anomaly Detection of Integrated Circuits Package Substrates Using the Large
Vision Model SAIC: Dataset Construction, Methodology, and Application
Ruiyun Yu1 , Bingyang Guo1,*, Haoyuan Li1
1
Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
yury@mail.neu.edu.cn, {2110500, 2310540}@stu.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Anomaly detection plays a crucial role in the industrial
sector, especially in ensuring the quality of integrated circuits (IC), which are critical for product reliability and
performance. With increasing demands for higher quality standards, anomaly detection during the IC manufacturing process has become a significant research focus.
However, the progress of IC anomaly detection is hampered by the scarcity of defective samples and the shortage of well-defined annotations. To address this challenge,
this paper focuses on the research in the field of IC, especially on ceramic package substrates (CPS). We construct
a systematic automated optical inspection (AOI) equipment, and based on this, collected large-scale CPS 2D images to build a novel anomaly detection dataset (CPS2DAD), which offers copious samples with precise annotations, including category, mask, and bounding box. To the
best of our knowledge, CPS2D-AD is the largest dataset
in the field of IC. Meanwhile, we conduct an extensive
benchmark of CPS2D-AD, intending to supplement existing research by providing a baseline for the detection and
localization of anomalies in high-resolution data of ceramic package substrates. In addition, we have developed a novel large vision model, Segment Any Integrated
Circuits (SAIC), by embedding-based distillation mechanism based on CPS2D-AD datasets. Our CPS2D-AD is the
first open-source anomaly detection dataset about ceramic
package substrates, which can be accessed at: https:
//github.com/Bingyang0410/CPS2D-AD

Figure 1. Ceramic package substrates play a vital role in systemin-package and have spawned products for multiple industries.

1. Introduction

strates in the integrated circuits industry [2] is emphasized
by their distinct advantages in thermal conductivity, heat
resistance, and insulation, particularly in radio frequency
and digital system-in-package (SiP), as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The ceramic substrate is critical for bridging the upper and
lower components, establishing interconnects between both
internal and external heat dissipation pathways, and offering electrical interfaces along with mechanical support.
Nonetheless, manufacturing process imperfections can
lead to a myriad of surface defects on ceramic package substrates, such as open circuit, leakage, mouse bites, overflow,
and others. These defects pose a threat to product quality in subsequent stages. While several studies have made
initial endeavors in this field [12, 28, 30], their experimental datasets remain unavailable to the public. Meanwhile,
despite numerous 2D anomaly detection datasets designed
[38], only several datasets [6, 15, 17, 18, 22, 25, 29, 40,
48, 56, 62, 74] are suitable for industrial scenarios and only
one [53] is related to integrated circuits production. Thus,
there is a pressing need to create a comprehensive dataset
for anomaly detection in ceramic package substrates. Such
a resource would be incredibly valuable in the integrated
circuits industry. At the same time, it can bring new chal-

In recent years, with the rapid advancement of 5G/6G communication [33], GPU [23], aerospace [21], and other industries [45, 49, 52], integrated circuits are progressively
evolving towards high-power, high-frequency, and integrated trends. The significance of ceramic package sub* Corresponding author: Bingyang Guo.

22563

