This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Schrödinger Bridge Meets Real-World Image Dehazing with Unpaired
Training
Yunwei Lan1, 2 , Zhigao Cui1* , Xin Luo2 , Chang Liu2 , Nian Wang1 ,
Menglin Zhang2 , Yanzhao Su1 , Dong Liu2*
1
Rocket Force University of Engineering, Xi’an 710025, China
2
MOE Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230093, China

Abstract
Recent advancements in unpaired dehazing, particularly
those using GANs, show promising performance in processing real-world hazy images. However, these methods
tend to face limitations due to the generator’s limited transport mapping capability, which hinders the full exploitation
of their effectiveness in unpaired training paradigms. To
address these challenges, we propose DehazeSB, a novel
unpaired dehazing framework based on the Schrödinger
Bridge. By leveraging optimal transport (OT) theory, DehazeSB directly bridges the distributions between hazy and
clear images. This enables optimal transport mappings
from hazy to clear images in fewer steps, thereby generating
high-quality results. To ensure the consistency of structural
information and details in the restored images, we introduce detail-preserving regularization, which enforces pixellevel alignment between hazy inputs and dehazed outputs.
Furthermore, we propose a novel prompt learning to leverage pre-trained CLIP models in distinguishing hazy images
and clear ones, by learning a haze-aware vision-language
alignment. Extensive experiments on multiple real-world
datasets demonstrate our method’s superiority. 1

Figure 1. Existing GAN-based unpaired dehazing methods
struggle to handle images with complex structures due to the limited mapping capability of the generator. While diffusion modelbased methods can achieve more intricate transport mappings,
they necessitate transforming images into Gaussian noise and then
regenerating them through a large number of sampling steps. Our
Schrödinger Bridge enables the direct learning of optimal transport mapping from hazy to clear image distributions in fewer time
steps, achieving high efficiency and high-quality dehazing.

decade. The degradation process of hazy images typically
adheres to the Atmospheric Scattering Model (ASM) [31].

1. Introduction

I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),

Images captured under hazy conditions usually display reduced brightness and diminished contrast, significantly degrading visual quality and hindering further applications in
visual tasks such as object detection [11]. Consequently,
image dehazing, which aims to restore clear images from
hazy ones, has received considerable attention over the past

(1)

where I(x) represents the hazy image, and J(x) is the corresponding clear one. A and t(x) are the atmospheric light
and transmission map.
Early studies [3, 16, 51] primarily rely on physical priors to estimate the parameters necessary for the ASM, subsequently obtaining clear images. Although these methods can effectively dehaze images, they are susceptible to
over-dehazing since hand-crafted priors are often scenariospecific. Recently, the advent of deep learning has spurred

1 We acknowledge the support of GPU cluster built by MCC
Lab of Information Science and Technology Institution, USTC. Corresponding authors: Zhigao Cui and Dong Liu. (ywlan, xinluo,
lc980413, zhangmenglin)@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cuizg10@126.com, nianwang04@outlook.com, syzlhh@163.com, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn

8756

