This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

egoPPG: Heart Rate Estimation from Eye-Tracking Cameras in
Egocentric Systems to Benefit Downstream Vision Tasks
Björn Braun, Rayan Armani, Manuel Meier, Max Moebus, and Christian Holz
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
https://siplab.org/projects/egoPPG
egoPPG-DB dataset of everyday activities

egoPPG method

eye tracking videos + ground-truth PPG and ECG

eye tracking video

prediction model

walking and stairs

computer work

kitchen tasks

excercise bike

estimated blood volume pulse and heart rate
72 bpm
egoPPG heart
rate estimate
estimated blood volume pulse from gaze video
ground-truth (contact-based) blood volume pulse

Figure 1. We propose egoPPG as a novel computer vision task: tracking a person’s heart rate (HR) on unmodified egocentric vision
headsets. Taking eye tracking videos as input, our method PulseFormer estimates the photoplethysmogram (PPG) from areas around
the eyes to derive HR values. For training and validation, we introduce egoPPG-DB, a dataset of eye tracking videos while participants
performed everyday activities with synchronized ground-truth PPG (via nose-based contact sensor) and HR values (via ECG chest strap).

Abstract

collected a dataset of 13+ hours of eye tracking videos from
Project Aria and contact-based PPG signals as well as an
electrocardiogram (ECG) for ground-truth HR values. Similar to EgoExo4D, 25 participants performed diverse everyday activities such as office work, cooking, dancing, and exercising, which induced significant natural motion and HR
variation (44–164 bpm). Our model robustly estimates HR
(MAE=7.67 bpm) and captures patterns (r=0.85). Our results show how egocentric systems may unify environmental
and physiological tracking to better understand users and
that egoPPG as a complementary task provides meaningful
augmentations for existing datasets and tasks. We release
our code, dataset, and HR augmentations for EgoExo4D to
inspire research on physiology-aware egocentric tasks.

Egocentric vision systems aim to understand the spatial
surroundings and the wearer’s behavior inside it, including motions, activities, and interactions. We argue that
egocentric systems must additionally detect physiological
states to capture a person’s attention and situational responses, which are critical for context-aware behavior modeling. In this paper, we propose egoPPG, a novel vision
task for egocentric systems to recover a person’s cardiac
activity to aid downstream vision tasks. We introduce PulseFormer, a method to extract heart rate as a key indicator of
physiological state from the eye tracking cameras on unmodified egocentric vision systems. PulseFormer continuously estimates the photoplethysmogram (PPG) from areas around the eyes and fuses motion cues from the headset’s inertial measurement unit to track HR values. We
demonstrate egoPPG’s downstream benefit for a key task
on EgoExo4D, an existing egocentric dataset for which we
find PulseFormer’s estimates of HR to improve proficiency
estimation by 14%. To train and validate PulseFormer, we

1. Introduction
Egocentric vision systems, such as Mixed Reality (MR)
glasses by Meta [56], Magic Leap [43], and others have
emerged as powerful devices for capturing and analyzing a
person’s behavior and their environment from a first-person

5579

