This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MUSE-VL: Modeling Unified VLM through Semantic Discrete Encoding
Rongchang Xie

Chang Liu †

Chen Du Ping Song
ByteDance

{xierongchang, duchen.ai, songping.ldw}@bytedance.com, wen8.zhou@gmail.com

MMBench

Abstract

81.8
72.1

MMStar

We introduce MUSE-VL, a Unified Vision-Language Model
through Semantic discrete Encoding for multimodal understanding and generation. Recently, the research community has begun exploring unified models for visual generation and understanding. However, existing vision tokenizers
(e.g., VQGAN) only consider low-level information, which
makes it difficult to align with language tokens. This results
in high training complexity and necessitates a large amount
of training data to achieve optimal performance. Additionally, their performance is still far from dedicated understanding models. This paper proposes Semantic Discrete
Encoding (SDE), which effectively aligns the information
of visual tokens and language tokens by adding semantic
constraints to the visual tokenizer. This greatly reduces the
amount of training data and improves the performance of
the unified model. With the same LLM size, our method improved the understanding performance by 4.8% compared
to the previous SOTA Emu3 and surpassed the dedicated
understanding model LLaVA-NeXT 34B by 3.7%. For visual generation, our model achieves a FID score of 7.73 on
MJHQ-30k, surpassing the existing unified models.

56.7

SEED

69.4
69.1
49.6

63.7

46.6

55.9

Math-Vist

a 51.3

47.6

71.0

68.2

58.5

33.5

39.7
38.8

50.1

MMMU
75.1
69.8
70.0

89.2
93.5

79.9

AI2D

95.0

ScienceQA-IMG

Janus
Emu2-Chat
Chameleon-30B
Emu3
MUSE-VL-7B
MUSE-VL-32B

Figure 1. The evaluation of multimodal understanding and generation. (Top) Multimodal understanding results on various benchmarks. MUSE-VL surpasses the leading unified multimodal LLM,
Emu3 [68]. (Bottom) Images generated with MUSE-VL.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing interest in the domain
of unified Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs).
Researchers are dedicated to developing unified MLLMs
by integrating visual understanding and generation tasks
within autoregressive next-token prediction models. To realize a unified MLLM capable of next-token prediction for
both visual and text tokens, one of the most critical challenges is how to convert visual input into discrete tokens,
like text tokenizers do for text.
Some well done image discretization works have been
processed in the past few years, such as VQ-VAE [65], VQGAN [19], and MAGVIT [78]. This enables the large language models (LLMs) to jointly learn visual code embed† Corresponding author

dings along with text tokens. However, previous unified
works [60, 71] frequently demonstrate poor performance
in multimodal understanding tasks, failing to match the
performance of state-of-the-art multimodal understanding
models [40]. This is mainly because these image quantization methods are trained solely with image reconstruction tasks and lack alignment with textual or semantic features. The discretization process is ineffective in capturing
the high-dimensional semantic representation of images and
inevitably leads to loss of semantic information. As a result,
the visual tokens obtained by these methods are not suitable

24135

