This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VIPerson: Flexibly Generating Virtual Identity for Person Re-Identification
Yi-Xing Peng1,3
Delong Zhang1,3 *
Xiao-Wen Zhang1,3 *
Zhi Ouyang1,3
Jingke Meng1,3†
Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China;
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China;
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China.
{zhangxw75,zhangdlong5,pengyx23,}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

wszheng@ieee.org

Engine-based

Virtual Style

Person re-identification (ReID) is to match the person images under different camera views. Training ReID models necessitates a substantial amount of labeled real-world
data, leading to high labeling costs and privacy issues. Although several ReID data synthetic methods are proposed
to address these issues, they fail to generate images with
new identities or real-world camera styles. In this paper, we propose a novel pedestrian generation pipeline,
VIPerson, to generate camera-realistic pedestrian images
with flexible Virtual Identities for the Person ReID task.
VIPerson focuses on three key factors in data synthesis:
(I) Virtual identity diversity: Enhancing the latent diffusion model with our proposed dropout text embedding, we
flexibly generate random and hard identities. (II) Scalable cross-camera variations: VIPerson introduces scalable variations of scenes and poses within each identity.
(III) Camera-realistic style: Adopting an identity-agnostic
approach to transfer realistic styles, we avoid privacy exposure of real identities. Extensive experimental results
across a broad range of downstream ReID tasks demonstrate the superiority of our generated dataset over existing
methods. In addition, VIPerson can be adapted to the identity expansion scenario, which widens the application of our
pipeline. The dataset and code of VIPerson are available at
https://isee-laboratory.github.io/VIPerson/ .

Learning-based

Real Data

Camera-realistic Style

VIPerson

Privacy Leakage

Generated Data

Virtual Identity

Figure 1. Comparison of synthetic data. Left: Images of enginebased methods have a style gap compared with real images. Right:
Learning-based methods expose privacy by generating images that
match real identities in real-world datasets.

1. Introduction

diversity, primarily due to the high cost of data collection
and manual annotation. Moreover, pedestrian images containing sensitive information often expose real identities,
raising serious privacy concerns. Strict data privacy regulations [2, 4, 17, 35], such as EU’s General Data Protection
Regulation, restrict the ability to gather and share sensitive
visual data. This further impedes the collection of public ReID datasets, with some, like DukeMTMC [61], even
taken down. The lack of high-quality annotated data without privacy concerns significantly limits the performance
and generalization ability of ReID models.
To address these challenges, recent studies propose to
synthesize pedestrian images to improve ReID models.
These methods can be divided into two research streams.
Engine-based methods [1, 41, 42, 57] are developed to
leverage simulation engines to synthesize virtual pedestrian
images. However, these synthetic images exhibit distinct
virtual characteristics (see ‘Left’ in Figure 1), resulting in
a style gap compared to real-world images that showcase
camera-realistic styles (e.g. illumination, motion blur, camera bias, and environmental conditions). These synthetic

The person re-identification (ReID) task aims to match
pedestrians from different camera views. With the rise
of deep learning[52], ReID methods have been developed
based on real annotated pedestrian data [44, 59]. These
real-world ReID datasets are often limited in both scale and
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

23374

