This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Customizing Domain Adapters for Domain Generalization
Yuyang Ji2ω ,
Zeyi Huang1ω ,
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Haohan Wang2† ,
Yong Jae Lee1†
2
University of Illinois Urbaba-Champaign

Abstract
In this paper, we study domain generalization, where the
goal is to develop models that can effectively generalize from
multiple source domains to unseen target domains. Different from traditional approaches that aim to create a single,
style-invariant model, we propose a new “Customized Domain Adapters” method, named CDA. This method leverages parameter-efficient adapters to construct a model with
domain-specific components, each component focusing on
learning from its respective domain. We focus on integrating
the unique strengths of different adapter architectures, such
as ViT and CNN, to create a model adept at handling the
distinct statistical properties of each domain. Our experimental results on standard domain generalization datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our method over traditional
approaches, showcasing its enhanced adaptability and robustness in domain generalization tasks. Code is released at
https://github.com/code456-star/CDA.

Training Data
with Multiple Domains

(a)

Training Data
with Multiple Domains

(b)

Training Data
with Multiple Domains

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods share the same avenue where their
goal is to learn one model that is invariant to the “style” information
from different domains. (b) The alternative way is to learn multiple
models, and each model is only specialized in its own domain. (c)
We create a Domain Adapter Customization with different components, and each of these components is specially designed to
learn the knowledge of one domain, and then merge the learned
information together for prediction.

domains [1, 5, 9, 12, 16, 26, 30, 31, 36, 37, 41, 44, 47, 56,
57, 60, 62, 65, 68, 70]; another branch is to perform data
augmentation that can introduce more diverse data to enrich
the data of certain “semantic” information with the “style”
from other domains [13, 20, 49, 58, 64, 69], and also aims
to train a model that is invariant to these “styles”. More
recently, there has been a line of approaches that aims to
leverage the rich knowledge from large pre-trained vision
language models to improve generalization performance
[7, 8, 23, 32, 66]. For example, [8] synthesizes diverse styles
via learnable text representations of CLIP to simulate distribution shifts. [23] distills the knowledge from the CLIP
model into small models while pushing the models to ignore the “style” information in each domain through text
representations.

1. Introduction
Domain generalization is one of the most challenging
settings in studying machine learning robustness [38]. This
concept studies the ability of algorithms to generalize from
multiple source domains to unseen target domains. A core
hypothesis behind the setting of domain generalization is
that: if the model can perform well on the collection of
training domains, it is expected to learn the “semantic” information (i.e., the information that can be generalized across
domains) but to ignore the “style” information (i.e., the information that is specific to a particular training domain) from
the training data, and thus the model will generalize well to
the testing domain.
Given this interesting setting and the promises of domain
generalization in studying machine learning robustness, the
community has developed a torrent of methods. As summarized in previous works [34]: one branch of the methods
builds explicit regularization that pushes a model to learn
representations that are invariant to the “style” across these

However, we notice that most of the existing methods
take a shared avenue in which the aim is to learn one model
that is invariant to the “style” information from each domain.
In this paper, we take another avenue that values the specification of each domain: whether we can create a model with
different components, and each of these components is specially designed to learn the information of one domain, and
then merge the learned information together for prediction.
We believe our approach is intuitively advantageous because
it recognizes the differences between domains, building upon
an assumption that distinct domains exhibit unique statistical
properties that might not be fully captured by a single model.

ω ,† equal contribution and advising.

934

