This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Exploitation of Data Diversity Improves Visual Localization
Sihang Li*

Siqi Tan*

Bowen Chang

Chen Fengu

Jing Zhang

Yiming Liu

New York University
{sihangli, tan.k, cfeng, yimingli}@nyu.edu
https://ai4ce.github.io/RAP

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual localization, the task of calculating a 6-DoF camera
pose—its translation and rotation—based on a query image
within a given environment, is essential for various applications, including robotics [1], autonomous vehicles [18], and
virtual reality [11]. Besides traditional geometry-based approaches, recent learning-based visual localization methods
adopt absolute pose regression (APR) [5, 8, 24, 53], scene
coordinate regression (SCR) [3, 4, 43, 61], or post pose reﬁnement (PPR) [9, 19, 33, 43, 59, 64, 66]. SCR methods focus on learning-based 2D-3D correspondences followed by
subsequent Perspective-n-Point (PnP) for pose estimation.
u Corresponding author.

Diverse Appearances

RAP漦

Adversarial
Training

演
3DGS

7.0

Rotation Error (瀞)

Visual localization, which estimates a camera’s pose within
a known scene, is a fundamental capability for autonomous
systems. While absolute pose regression (APR) methods
have shown promise for efﬁcient inference, they often struggle with generalization. Recent approaches attempt to address this through data augmentation with varied viewpoints, yet they overlook a critical factor: appearance diversity. In this work, we identify appearance variation as
the key to robust localization. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst lift real
2D images into 3D Gaussian Splats with varying appearance and deblurring ability, enabling the synthesis of diverse training data that varies not just in poses but also
in environmental conditions such as lighting and weather.
To fully unleash the potential of the appearance-diverse
data, we build a two-branch joint training pipeline with
an adversarial discriminator to bridge the syn-to-real gap.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods, reducing
translation and rotation errors by 50% and 33% on indoor
datasets, and 38% and 44% on outdoor datasets. Most notably, our method shows remarkable robustness in dynamic
driving scenarios under varying weather conditions and in
day-to-night scenarios, where previous APR methods fail.

* Equal contribution.

Reducing
Syn-to-Real Gap

Improving Generalization

0.8

0.27

DFNetGS

PoseNet

PMNet

3.0

1.2

APR

*PPR: Post Pose Refinement
*APR: Absolute Pose Regression

DFNet MapNet

RAP (Ours)

PPR

CoordiNet
DFNet + NeFeS30
+ LENS
DFNet + NeFeS50
MCLoc

RAPref (Ours)
12 20

30

40

50

90

120

180

210

Translation Error (cm)

Figure 1. We propose RAP, a novel pipeline to train robust
APR models. We lift real-world 2D images into 3D Gaussian
Splats [25] to synthesize images with diverse appearances and
poses, improving model generalizability. We also introduce an adversarial discriminator, mitigating the syn-to-real gap to learn robust features. Together, we achieve state-of-the-art performance.

PPR methods heavily rely on a pose prior, usually obtained
from image retrieval, followed by iterative reﬁnement. In
contrast, APR methods employ a supervised framework to
train a regression neural network on image-pose pairs, enabling direct pose estimation during inference. APR offers
faster runtime and lower error in challenging scenes with
sparse views, signiﬁcant lighting variations, or numerous
dynamic objects, making it a promising method for ensuring robustness in real-world applications.
Despite promises, there is a performance gap in localization accuracy between APR and other methods. A wellknown pivotal work [49] attributes this to APR performing
image-based memorization, i.e., retrieving poses seen during training. Driven by this crucial ﬁnding, to improve such
memorization while avoiding the need for denser real-world
training samples, recent methods leverage Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [40] to synthesize additional posed images
for APR training [8, 30, 42]. LENS [42] tried to employ
appearance perturbation using NeRF-W [39], but found the

26848

