This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not all Views are Created Equal:
Analyzing Viewpoint Instabilities in Vision Foundation Models
Mateusz Michalkiewicz
Rice University

Sheena Bai
Rice University

Varun Jampani
Stability AI

Mahsa Baktashmotlagh
The University of Queensland
Guha Balakrishnan
Rice University

Abstract

3D Scene

In this paper, we analyze the viewpoint stability of foundational models - specifically, their sensitivity to changes
in viewpoint- and define instability as significant feature variations resulting from minor changes in viewing
angle, leading to generalization gaps in 3D reasoning
tasks. We investigate nine foundational models, focusing on their responses to viewpoint changes, including the
often-overlooked accidental viewpoints where specific camera orientations obscure an object’s true 3D structure. Our
methodology enables recognizing and classifying accidental, stable and other viewpoints using feature representations alone, without accessing the actual images at inference time. Our findings indicate that while foundation models consistently encode accidental viewpoints, they vary in
their interpretation of other viewpoints due to inherent biases, at times leading to object misclassifications based on
geometric resemblance. Through quantitative and qualitative evaluations on three downstream tasks - classification,
VQA, and 3D reconstruction - we illustrate the impact of
viewpoint instability and underscore the importance of feature robustness across diverse viewing conditions.

Feature Space
Stable

Featurizer
Unstable

Figure 1. Viewpoint stability of a featurizer. The blue cameras
represent small perturbations in camera space that result in correspondingly small changes in a feature space of a featurization
function, indicating a stable viewpoint. In contrast, the red camera
represents small perturbations in camera space that lead to large
changes in feature space, signifying an unstable viewpoint.

space amenable to semantic interpretation. Although effective, this approach can introduce generalization gaps, particularly related to 3D reasoning [15, 45] and spatial context [51], resulting in poor performance when faced with
unusual viewpoints or atypical test cases. Hence, while
the success of foundation models are impressive, they lack
certain fundamental reasoning capabilities, such as contentviewpoint disentanglement.
In light of the above discussion, we take a deeper look
in this study on how popular vision foundation models are
affected by changes to viewpoint. In particular, we propose
studying their viewpoint stability, or their rate of change of
their output features with respect to changes in viewpoint.
We define a model’s feature output from a certain viewpoint
of a scene as unstable if minor changes in the viewing angle lead to significant change in the returned features (see
Fig. 1). A robust representation should ideally exhibit minimal changes in high-level scene content with varying viewpoints. Viewpoint stability may be caused by several fac-

1. Introduction
A common assumption in visual reasoning is that scene
content in the 3D world is independent of camera viewpoint. While implicitly assumed in classical reconstruction
and rendering algorithms [30], this assumption is not explicitly enforced in feature representation models now used
in a range of computer vision applications. Popular foundation representation models, e.g., DINO [5] and CLIP [36],
simply leverage large datasets and self-supervised training
objectives to transform image pixels into a different feature

9113

