This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Penalizing Boundary Activation for Object Completeness in
Diffusion Models
Haoyang Xu1

Tianhao Zhao1

Sibei Yang2

Yutian Lin1 *

1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{haoyxu, happytianhao, yutian.lin}@whu.edu.cn
yangsb3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

A bed

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful technique for
text-to-image (T2I) generation, creating high-quality, diverse images across various domains. However, a common limitation in these models is the incomplete display
of objects, where fragments or missing parts undermine
the model’s performance in downstream applications. In
this study, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the incompleteness issue and reveal that the primary factor behind
incomplete object generation is the usage of RandomCrop
during model training. This widely used data augmentation method, though enhances model generalization ability, disrupts object continuity during training. To address
this, we propose a training-free solution that penalizes activation values at image boundaries during the early denoising steps. Our method is easily applicable to pretrained Stable Diffusion models with minimal modifications
and negligible computational overhead. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, showing substantial improvements in object integrity and image
quality. Code is available at https://github.com/
HaoyXu7/Object_Completeness.

A red car

A complete
bathtub

A cap
in the middle

SDv2.1

SDv1.5

Figure 1. Incomplete objects generated by different Stable Diffusion models with varying prompts, even with modifiers indicating
completeness (e.g. “complete”, “in the middle”).

1. Introduction

formance of downstream tasks dependent on the generated
data.
However, this issue has largely been overlooked in existing studies [23, 27, 36, 45]. Some studies [14, 35, 48] dismiss these minor imperfections as inherent randomness in
the generation process, while others [6, 21, 25, 57] categorize them as generation failures without delving into the underlying causes. The layout generation methods [6, 21, 64]
benefit from planning the placement of objects to address
the object incompleteness issue. These methods either produce objects that overflow the layout due to insufficient constraints or apply overly strict constraints, causing distortion.
SDXL [31] recognizes this issue and attempts to mitigate it
by incorporating the coordinates of the cropped operation
during training. While the method does not eliminate the
issue and carries the risk of introducing errors, such as the
unnatural clustering of multiple objects at the center of the
image. Despite these efforts, there has been little in-depth
exploration of the underlying causes of the incompleteness
problem or further advances in solutions.
To better understand the issue, we conducted an in-depth
investigation into the phenomenon of generative incom-

Diffusion models excel in text-to-image (T2I) generation by
producing high-quality, diverse outputs [15, 33, 37, 41, 47,
52], with broad applications in areas like dataset synthesis
and video generation [9, 18, 24, 26, 40, 53]. However, the
generated images often contain incomplete targets – fragmented or missing object parts as shown in Fig. 1. Such
object incompleteness issues not only undermine the reliability of diffusion models but also adversely affect the per* Corresponding author.

14962

