This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Translation of Text Embedding via Delta Vector
to Suppress Strongly Entangled Content in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Eunseo Koh∗

Seunghoo Hong∗ Tae-Young Kim∗ Simon S. Woo†
Sungkyunkwan University

Jae-Pil Heo†

{colorrain, hoo0681, jackdawson, swoo, jaepilheo}@g.skku.edu

Prompt 𝑃 : “A photo of Charlie Chaplin”

Abstract

Charlie Chaplin, mustache embedding :
Text embedding from 𝑃 :

Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models have made significant
progress in generating diverse high-quality images from
textual prompts. However, these models still face challenges in suppressing content that is strongly entangled with
specific words. For example, when generating an image
of “Charlie Chaplin”, a “mustache” consistently appears
even if explicitly instructed not to include it, as the concept
of “mustache” is strongly entangled with “Charlie Chaplin”. To address this issue, we propose a novel approach
to directly suppress such entangled content within the text
embedding space of diffusion models. Our method introduces a delta vector that modifies the text embedding to
weaken the influence of undesired content in the generated
image, and we further demonstrate that this delta vector
can be easily obtained through a zero-shot approach. Furthermore, we propose a Selective Suppression with Delta
Vector (SSDV) method to adapt delta vector into the crossattention mechanism, enabling more effective suppression
of unwanted content in regions where it would otherwise be
generated. Additionally, we enabled more precise suppression in personalized T2I models by optimizing delta vector,
which previous baselines were unable to achieve. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our approach
significantly outperforms existing methods, both in terms
of quantitative and qualitative metrics. Codes are available
at https:/github.com/eunso999/SSDV

: Suppressing information
: Cross-attention layer
: Stable diffusion

(a) Stable diffusion

Entangled content

Generated Image

(b) Previous methods

Activation still remained

(c) Our method

Activation suppressed

Generated Image

Generated Image

Figure 1. (a) When generating “A photo of Charlie Chaplin” with
Stable diffusion, the cross-attention map for the word “Charlie
Chaplin” (green border) shows strong activation in the mustache
region entangled with Charlie Chaplin. (b) Previous methods [1, 6,
15] do not directly suppress the mustache from the embedding of
“Charlie Chaplin”, which is strongly entangled with the mustache
and leads to the mustache still being present. (c) Our method
successfully suppresses the mustache by directly modifying the
embedding of “Charlie Chaplin”.

1. Introduction

particular attributes [16] as described in the prompt. These
limitations highlight the limited expressiveness of diffusion
models, which become especially apparent when trying to
remove elements. For example, when given a prompt such
as “a night sky without stars”, the model frequently focuses
on the word “stars”, failing to exclude them from the generated image. We refer to these undesired elements (e.g.
“star”) as negative content. Due to this inherent characteristic of diffusion models, effectively suppressing negative
content remains a challenging task, making it difficult to
exclude undesirable content such as copyright-infringing or
malicious outputs.
To address the aforementioned problems, several works

Recent advancements in diffusion models [9] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various generative
tasks, such as Text-to-Image (T2I) synthesis [24, 25, 28].
However, diffusion models still face limitations in handling
complex prompts. For instance, they struggle with generating a specified number of objects [10, 21] or objects with
∗ Co-authors with equal contributions; listed alphabetically
† Co-corresponding authors

15365

