This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feed-Forward SceneDINO for Unsupervised Semantic Scene Completion
Aleksandar Jevtić* 1
Christoph Reich* 1,2,4,5
Felix Wimbauer 1,4
Oliver Hahn 2
Christian Rupprecht 3
Stefan Roth 2,5,6
Daniel Cremers 1,4,5
1

TU Munich

2

TU Darmstadt

3

4
5
University of Oxford
MCML
ELIZA
https://visinf.github.io/scenedino

SceneDINO

Single Input Image

6

hessian.AI

*

equal contribution

Distill & Cluster

3D Feature Field

SSC Prediction

Figure 1. SceneDINO overview. Given a single input image (left), SceneDINO predicts both 3D scene geometry and 3D features in the
form of a feature field (middle) in a feed-forward manner, capturing the structure and semantics of the scene. Unsupervised distillation and
clustering of SceneDINO’s feature space leads to unsupervised semantic scene completion predictions (right).

Abstract

task unifies 3D geometry and semantic prediction from limited image observations [64, 89, 96]. Recent progress in
SSC has been primarily driven by utilizing supervised learning [38, 88, 96]. However, acquiring large-scale 3D annotations is highly labor-intensive [66]. While significant resources have been invested in collecting human annotations
for 2D tasks [53, 85], annotating similar amounts of data
in 3D remains unapproached. This motivates approaching
SSC without the need for manually annotated data.
Existing SSC approaches rely on ground-truth semantic annotations and frequently utilize additional supervision
from LiDAR scans [38, 46, 74, 96]. In contrast, we are the
first to approach SSC in a fully unsupervised setting, i.e.
without task supervision or other supervised components.
In particular, we aim to approach SSC from a single image
without relying on any human annotations, only learning
from unlabeled multi-view images using self-supervision.
This setting is extremely challenging for two reasons: first,
the human-defined nature of semantic taxonomies is ambiguous, and second, a single image only provides a partial observation of the scene with many invisible areas.
We take inspiration from recent advances in self-supervised
learning (SSL) of 2D representations and 3D reconstruction. 2D SSL representations, such as from DINO [11],
have been shown effective for 2D unsupervised scene understanding [32, 33, 104]. 3D reconstruction approaches
successfully leveraged SSL from multi-view data to infer
dense 3D geometry from a single image [34, 108].
In this paper, we present SceneDINO, to the best of
our knowledge, the first approach for unsupervised semantic scene completion. Trained using 2D SSL features

Semantic scene completion (SSC) aims to infer both the 3D
geometry and semantics of a scene from single images. In
contrast to prior work on SSC that heavily relies on expensive ground-truth annotations, we approach SSC in an unsupervised setting. Our novel method, SceneDINO, adapts
techniques from self-supervised representation learning and
2D unsupervised scene understanding to SSC. Our training
exclusively utilizes multi-view consistency self-supervision
without any form of semantic or geometric ground truth.
Given a single input image, SceneDINO infers the 3D geometry and expressive 3D DINO features in a feed-forward
manner. Through a novel 3D feature distillation approach,
we obtain unsupervised 3D semantics. In both 3D and
2D unsupervised scene understanding, SceneDINO reaches
state-of-the-art segmentation accuracy. Linear probing our
3D features matches the segmentation accuracy of a current supervised SSC approach. Additionally, we showcase
the domain generalization and multi-view consistency of
SceneDINO, taking the first steps towards a strong foundation for single image 3D scene understanding.

1. Introduction
Understanding the geometry and semantics of 3D scenes
from image observations is a fundamental computer vision
task with broad applications in robotics [26], autonomous
driving [47, 66], medical image analysis [18, 113], and civil
engineering [70]. The Semantic Scene Completion (SSC)

6784

