This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multispectral Demosaicing via Dual Cameras
SaiKiran Tedla*1,2

Junyong Lee*1 Beixuan Yang2 Mahmoud Afifi1 Michael S. Brown1,2
1
AI Center-Toronto, Samsung Electronics 2 York University

{s.tedla,j.lee8,m.afifi1,michael.b1}@samsung.com

{tedlasai,byang,mbrown}@yorku.ca

(a) RGB-MS dual-camera scenario

Abstract

image sensor
with 2x2 Bayer CFA

Multispectral (MS) images capture detailed scene information across a wide range of spectral bands, making them
invaluable for applications requiring rich spectral data. Integrating MS imaging into multi-camera devices, such as
smartphones, has the potential to enhance both spectral applications and RGB image quality. A critical step in processing MS data is demosaicing, which reconstructs color
information from the mosaic MS images captured by the
camera. This paper proposes a method for MS image demosaicing specifically designed for dual-camera setups where
both RGB and MS cameras capture the same scene. Our
approach leverages co-captured RGB images, which typically have higher spatial fidelity, to guide the demosaicing
of lower-fidelity MS images. We introduce the Dual-camera
RGB-MS Dataset – a large collection of paired RGB and
MS mosaiced images with ground-truth demosaiced outputs – that enables training and evaluation of our method.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art accuracy compared to existing techniques.

(b) Traditional method

image sensor
with 4x4 MSFA

Learnable
model
Demosaiced
MS image

MS mosaic
image
RGB
camera

Multispectral (MS)
camera

(c) Our method

MS mosaic
image

RGB mosaic
image

Learnable
model
Demosaiced
MS image

Figure 1. We propose a learning-based multispectral (MS) demosaicing method for a practical scenario (a), assuming a mobile device with a dual-camera setup, equipped with both RGB and MS
cameras. Unlike traditional MS demosaicing approaches (b), our
method (c) leverages the higher spatial resolution of the RGB mosaic from the RGB camera to guide and enhance the quality of the
demosaiced MS image, achieving state-of-the-art results.

for mobile devices, as HS imaging typically requires expensive and time-consuming capture systems [4, 16, 42].
In turn, there has been growing research focused on incorporating MS sensors into mobile devices, demonstrating
their ability to enhance performance in mobile RGB imaging tasks such as illuminant spectral estimation [18], image
restoration [43], low-light enhancement [37], and tone adjustment [58]. However, most methods leverage MS imaging as a complementary prior to improving RGB-targeted
tasks rather than focusing on enhancing MS image quality
directly. This is primarily due to the lower fidelity typically
associated with the MS imaging pipeline.
A standard RGB imaging pipeline adopts color filter arrays (CFAs) over the image sensor to capture red, green,
and blue spectral bands. Each pixel records a single band,
resulting in a single-channel mosaic raw image. A commonly used CFA is the Bayer array [5], which arranges the
bands in a 2×2 mosaic pattern. Demosaicing algorithms
then reconstruct the 3-channel RGB image by estimating
the missing color values using the partial mosaic data [30].
In contrast, an MS imaging pipeline employ more complex multispectral filter arrays (MSFAs), often arranged in
4×4 mosaic patterns, to capture multiple spectral bands
[3, 19, 26, 36]. While MSFA provides richer spectral in-

1. Introduction
Multispectral (MS) imaging extends beyond standard RGB
imaging by capturing spectral information across multiple
wavelengths, often including visible and near-infrared spectra. This enables precise analysis for applications such as
agriculture, medical imaging, and environmental monitoring [2, 12, 29, 50]. MS data has also shown great potential
for image enhancement [37, 43, 57, 58], making it a valuable addition to imaging pipelines.
As multi-camera systems become more common in modern smartphones, interest in integrating MS and RGB imaging has increased to leverage additional spectral data that
can complement RGB images. While hyperspectral (HS)
images provide denser and more contiguous spectral information than MS images, MS sensors are more practical
Code and data are available at https://ms-demosaic.github.io/
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

5405

