This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Completing 3D Partial Assemblies with View-Consistent 2D-3D Correspondence
Weihao Wang1 Yu Lan1 Mingyu You1,2 * Bin He1,2
1
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems, Shanghai, China
myyou@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
…

3D assembly completion represents a fundamental task in
3D computer vision and robotics. This task aims to retrieve
the missing parts from a set of candidates and predict their 6DoF poses to make the partial assembly complete. However,
due to the inherent uncertainty in completion and the similarity among candidates, even humans struggle to achieve
precise completion without external guidance. To address
this challenge, we introduce an auxiliary image depicting
the complete assembly from a specific view. The primary
challenge lies in the lack of correspondence or grounding
between the partial assembly and the image, leading to ambiguities in identifying missing parts and ineffective guidance
for completion. Moreover, this correspondence heavily depends on the view of image, which, unfortunately, is often
unknown in real-world scenarios. To this end, we propose
a novel cross-modal 3D assembly completion framework.
At its core is missing-oriented feature fusion augmented by
self-supervised view alignment to establish view-consistent
2D-3D correspondence between the image and the partial assembly, which effectively captures clues of missing parts from
the image and provides targeted guidance for completion.
Extensive experiments demonstrate our state-of-the-art performance on the PartNet dataset and show its generalization
capabilities in two downstream applications: component
suggestion and furniture restoration.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Challenges of 3D assembly completion. (a) Uncertainty
of completion. (b) Resemblance of candidates.

remaining candidate parts are exactly the missing ones, 3D
assembly completion requires more elaborate understanding
of the structural completeness of partial assembly to infer
the true missing parts. Even for humans, to achieve precise
completion without any external guidance is no easy task.
The challenges are summarized as follows.
First, the uncertainty of completion. The completion result
of a partial assembly is not unique and usually encompasses
a large solution space. Consider, for example, the chair with
an absent back depicted in Fig. 1(a). There can be multiple
completion plans with different combinations of parts to
construct the back. Existing methods [19, 24, 25] employ sophisticated designs to memorize the fixed mappings between
partial assemblies and their missing parts, and lack the ability
to infer the desirable completion plan from external guidance,
e.g., target images. Such rigid memorization significantly
hampers the ability to generalize to novel assemblies. When
confronted with an unseen partial assembly, these methods
struggle to accurately predict the optimal completion, hindered by their reliance on constrained experiences derived
from memorizing a limited number of training cases.

1. Introduction
3D assembly completion is a highly sought-after functionality in various downstream tasks, such as suggesting suitable
components for half-designed furniture in computer-aided
assembly design, and making virtual repair plans for broken
furniture that is missing several parts. Given the point cloud
of a partial assembly, the goal of this task is to identify and
retrieve its missing parts from a set of candidates, then predict their 6-DoF poses to make the partial assembly complete.
Distinct from the final steps in general assembly, where the

Second, the resemblance of candidates. Some candidate
parts, such as the legs illustrated in Fig. 1(b), demonstrate
a high degree of geometric similarity. Previous works in
assembly alleviate this issue by assuming the availability
of part-level instance segmentation for partial assemblies,
which greatly assists in discriminating similar parts. With
part instance segmentation, it becomes straightforward to
identify the missing leg in Fig. 1(b) by comparing the candidate parts with the other three legs of the partial assembly,
which share the same geometry. Unfortunately, partial as-

* Corresponding author.

7741

