This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Speciﬁc Zero-shot Quantization-Aware Training for Object Detection
Changhao Li1 *
Atlanta, USA

Xinrui Chen2 *
Shenzhen, China

Ji Wang3 *
Beijing, China

cli911@gatech.edu

cxr22@tsinghua.org.cn

wangji20@tsinghua.org.cn

Kang Zhao4
Beijing, China

Jianfei Chen4†
Beijing, China

zhaok14@tsinghua.org.cn

jianfeic@tsinghua.edu.cn

1

School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
School of Software, Tsinghua University
4
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
1. Introduction

Abstract
Quantization is a key technique to reduce network size
and computational complexity by representing the network
parameters with a lower precision. Traditional quantization methods rely on access to original training data, which
is often restricted due to privacy concerns or security challenges. Zero-shot Quantization (ZSQ) addresses this by using synthetic data generated from pre-trained models, eliminating the need for real training data. Recently, ZSQ has
been extended to object detection. However, existing methods use unlabeled task-agnostic synthetic images that lack
the speciﬁc information required for object detection, leading to suboptimal performance. In this paper, we propose a
novel task-speciﬁc ZSQ framework for object detection networks, which consists of two main stages. First, we introduce a bounding box and category sampling strategy to synthesize a task-speciﬁc calibration set from the pre-trained
network, reconstructing object locations, sizes, and category distributions without any prior knowledge. Second,
we integrate task-speciﬁc training into the knowledge distillation process to restore the performance of quantized detection networks. Extensive experiments conducted on the
MS-COCO and Pascal VOC datasets demonstrate the efﬁciency and state-of-the-art performance of our method. Our
project is publicly accessible1 .

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author
1 https://dfq-dojo.github.io/dfq-toolkit-webpage

Object detection neural networks are integral to a wide
array of computer vision applications, ranging from autonomous driving to surveillance systems [1, 38, 39, 45].
As the demand for deploying deep neural networks on
resource-constrained devices continues to grow, quantization has emerged as a critical technique to reduce network
size and computational complexity while maintaining performance [7, 11, 20, 52]. However, traditional quantizationaware training methods often require access to the entire original training data, which may become inaccessible
if the data are very huge or subjected to privacy protection. [26, 43]. In these scenarios, Zero-shot Quantization
(ZSQ) [3, 34, 40, 54, 57] presents a promising solution,
enabling the quantization of neural networks without relying on original training data. These methods primarily train
their model on synthetic data generated by inverting the network with randomly sampled labels.
Most prior work in this area has focused on classiﬁcation networks. Speciﬁcally, they use model inversion
to synthesize data by optimizing the gauss noise image
through gradient descent. Their loss functions are often
designated to classiﬁcation tasks, which generate classiﬁcation task-speciﬁc images. For example, GDFQ [50]
introduced a knowledge-matching generator to synthesize
label-oriented data using cross-entropy loss and batch normalization statistics (BNS) alignment. TexQ [6] emphasized the detailed texture feature distribution in real samples
and devised texture calibration for labeled image generation. PSAQ-ViT [31] introduced a patch similarity aware

22868

