This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffDoctor: Diagnosing Image Diffusion Models Before Treating
Yiyang Wang1 Xi Chen1 Xiaogang Xu4,† Sihui Ji1
Yu Liu2 Yujun Shen3 Hengshuang Zhao1,†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Tongyi Lab 3 Ant Group 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract

Artifacts in Synthesized Images

In spite of recent progress, image diffusion models still
produce artifacts. A common solution is to leverage the
feedback provided by quality assessment systems or human annotators to optimize the model, where images are
generally rated in their entirety. In this work, we believe
problem solving starts with identification, yielding the request that the model should be aware of not only the presence of defects in an image, but also their specific locations. Motivated by this, we propose DiffDoctor, a twostage pipeline to assist image diffusion models in generating
fewer artifacts. Concretely, the first stage targets developing a robust artifact detector, for which we collect a dataset
of over 1M flawed synthesized images and set up an efficient human-in-the-loop annotation process, incorporating
a carefully designed class-balance strategy. The learned
artifact detector is then involved in the second stage to optimize the diffusion model by providing pixel-level feedback.
Extensive experiments on text-to-image diffusion models
demonstrate the effectiveness of our artifact detector as well
as the soundness of our diagnose-then-treat design.

Distorted

Unreasonable

Watermarks

DiffDoctor

Diagnosing Artifacts

Treating Diffusion Model

Figure 1. Illustrations of DiffDoctor. We train a robust detector to localize the artifacts (diagnosing) and provide pixel-level
feedback to optimize the diffusion model (treating). After tuning on limited samples, the diffusion model generates significantly
fewer artifacts on unseen prompts while maintaining the quality.

way to refine the pre-trained diffusion model toward more
stable desired outputs is by using feedback, which can be
a score describing the quality of the image, and current
methods attempt to maximize such a score. However, feedback of these methods is generally an image-level score [4–
6, 8, 11, 18, 27, 29, 38] to each image, or pairwise comparisons [25], overlooking fine-grained pixel-level information — artifacts are sparse within the image. This analysis
shapes the motivation for our paper: Problem-solving starts
with identification. We should know where artifacts are before tuning the diffusion model.
Therefore, we present DiffDoctor, which tunes diffusion models in a diagnose-then-treat diagram. Diagnosing
means identifying the artifact locations in synthesized images, which requires an artifact detector to predict artifact
confidence. Treating means supervising the diffusion model
with the artifact detector, where we minimize the per-pixel
artifact confidence of synthesized images, aiming to reduce

1. Introduction
The advancement of image diffusion models [9, 12, 15, 20]
has made it possible to synthesize various images based on
different conditions. However, these models may still synthesize distorted, unreasonable, and unwanted content in the
images, known as artifacts [5, 13, 37], as shown in Fig. 1.
Unwanted artifacts make the outputs of the image diffusion
models unstable, posing a significant challenge to the wider
use of generative models in real-world applications.
Image diffusion models have the capacity to generate
correct images but lack the stability to generate reliably
with each synthesis. For example, given the same prompt,
a model may produce a plausible result with one random
seed but introduce visual artifacts with another. Therefore,
studies have been done to make the model more stable. One
† Corresponding author.

18917

