This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TeRA: Rethinking Text-guided Realistic 3D Avatar Generation
Yanwen Wang1∗ , Yiyu Zhuang1∗ , Jiawei Zhang1 , Li Wang1 , Yifei Zeng1 ,
Xun Cao1 , Xinxin Zuo2 , Hao Zhu1B
1
Nanjing University 2 Concordia University
Inference

“A woman with an oval face,

dark brown skin, and black
hair in a high bun wears a
white sleeveless cropped tank
top, blue jeans with rolled
cuffs, and white sneakers.”

TeRA

Directly

10s

Animate

Fast & Diverse Generation

Text-guided Structure-aware Editing

“Wearing blue jacket.”

“A Caucasian man with short
brown hair, and light skin wears
a gray sweatshirt, blue jeans,
and white sneakers.”

“Wearing dark short pants.”

Figure 1. We propose TeRA, the first latent diffusion model specifically designed for text-guided 3D avatar generation. TeRA achieves
superior inference speed,
text-to-3D
alignment,
and visual quality, while naturally supporting text-guided structure-aware editing.
FINAL
VERSION
– 2023/3/6

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the explosive growth of the metaverse, film/game production, and the AR/VR industry in recent years, the creation of rapid, convenient, and efficient 3D human avatars
has emerged as a critical bottleneck. Conventional approaches to 3D human avatar reconstruction often involve
intricate and time-consuming modeling techniques using a
single camera [64, 77, 92, 93], camera arrays [3, 20, 24], or
range sensors [80, 81]. On another line of research, large 3D
generative models [75, 76, 87] have recently emerged as an
efficient method for producing 3D models from image or
text descriptions. Nevertheless, experimental results indicate that all existing 3D generative large models fail to produce plausible results for photorealistic 3D human avatars.
Such defect is attributed to a profound style bias in the training samples, where there is an overabundance of designed
cartoon-like character models and a dearth of high-precision
realistic human models.
For the creation of photorealistic 3D human avatars,
the state-of-the-art approach leverages the score distillation
sampling (SDS) strategy [57]. The core idea of SDS lies in
its utilization of pre-trained 2D diffusion models to steer the

Efficient 3D avatar creation is a significant demand in the
metaverse, film/game, AR/VR, etc. In this paper, we rethink text-to-avatar generative models by proposing TeRA,
a more efficient and effective framework than the previous
SDS-based models and general large 3D generative models. Our approach employs a two-stage training strategy
for learning a native 3D avatar generative model. Initially, we distill a decoder to derive a structured latent space
from a large human reconstruction model. Subsequently,
a text-controlled latent diffusion model is trained to generate photorealistic 3D human avatars within this latent
space. TeRA enhances the model performance by eliminating slow iterative optimization and enables text-based partial customization through a structured 3D human representation. Experiments have proven our approach’s superiority
over previous text-to-avatar generative models in subjective
and objective evaluation. The project page is available at
https://yanwen-w.github.io/TeRA-Page/.

* These authors contribute equally to this work.

10686

