This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Counterfactual Learning for Audio-Visual Segmentation
Mingfeng Zha1 , Tianyu Li1 ,* Guoqing Wang1 , Peng Wang1 , Yangyang Wu2 , Yang Yang1 , Heng Tao Shen3
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Tongji University

Abstract
Audio-visual segmentation (AVS) aims to segment objects in
videos based on audio cues. Existing AVS methods are primarily designed to enhance interaction efficiency but pay
limited attention to modality representation discrepancies
and imbalances. To overcome this, we propose the implicit
counterfactual framework (ICF) to achieve unbiased crossmodal understanding. Due to the lack of semantics, heterogeneous representations may lead to erroneous matches,
especially in complex scenes with ambiguous visual content or interference from multiple audio sources. We introduce the multi-granularity implicit text (MIT) involving
video-, segment- and frame-level as the bridge to establish
the modality-shared space, reducing modality gaps and providing prior guidance. Visual content carries more information and typically dominates, thereby marginalizing audio features in the decision-making. To mitigate knowledge
preference, we propose the semantic counterfactual (SC) to
learn orthogonal representations in the latent space, generating diverse counterfactual samples, thus avoiding biases introduced by complex functional designs and explicit
modifications of text structures or attributes. We further
formulate the collaborative distribution-aware contrastive
learning (CDCL), incorporating factual-counterfactual and
inter-modality contrasts to align representations, promoting
cohesion and decoupling. Extensive experiments on three
public datasets validate that the proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

left to right, the sounding targets transition from static to
highly dynamic scenarios, ranging from cases where visual
segmentation models alone suffice to those requiring robust temporal and cross-modal joint representations. From
bottom to top, as the audio sources evolve from singlesource to multi-source and multi-class, the need for decoupling modality representations and achieving accurate
alignment becomes increasingly critical. These challenges
can be summarized as: a) Multi-source audio and complex
dynamics, where the simultaneous presence of multiple audio sources and temporal variations complicates effective
association, resulting in mismatches, particularly in complex scenes within frames and rapid changes across frames,
causing low intra-modal cohesion; b) Learning preference,
where models favor high information-dense visual features
and underutilize sparse audio, leading to weak inter-modal
coupling. Current works [5, 13, 16, 36] primarily design problem-specific functional components and combining them. Although effective, learning optimal parameters
in a fixed data space risks capturing spurious correlations.
For instance, since guitars are typically played by humans
to produce sound, models might incorrectly associate humans as sound producers based on statistical regularities.
Inspired by the human brain’s ability to self-project and
simulate unreal scenarios [1, 4, 11], we formulate the ICF,
which leverages text to bridge visual and audio modalities,
constructs counterfactual text samples, and establishes the
contrastive strategy based on representation distributions.
This raises three key questions: 1) Why use language as
a bridge instead of direct interaction? 2) Why construct implicit counterfactual samples? 3) Why construct contrast
learning based on representation distribution?

1. Introduction
Referring video segmentation [19, 75, 78, 85] which utilizes
text or audio prompts to identify matching targets in visual
content, has been applied to diverse tasks such as embodied intelligence [15] and autonomous driving [69]. Unlike
highly structured text, the low density and fuzziness of audio align more closely with natural attributes, posing significant challenges for audio-visual segmentation (AVS).
In Figure 1, we categorize the AVS issues into four parts
based on the complexity of audio and visual inputs. From
* Corresponding author.

We answer the first question. In complex scenes, multiple visual objects may emit sounds synchronously or asynchronously (many-to-many), or a single sound may correspond to multiple visual objects (one-to-many), making direct matching prone to ambiguities. Furthermore, temporal
delays between visual content and audio can exacerbate the
issue. We aim to leverage the semantic information of text
to capture the objects, actions, and their relationships within
the scene, facilitating cross-modal alignment and modeling
contextual continuity across frames (challenge a). Differ-

22349

