This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DASH: Detection and Assessment of Systematic Hallucinations of VLMs
Maximilian Augustin*

Yannic Neuhaus*
Tübingen AI Center – University of Tübingen

Matthias Hein

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) are prone to object hallucinations, where they erroneously indicate the presence
of certain objects in an image. Existing benchmarks quantify hallucinations using relatively small, labeled datasets.
However, this approach is i) insufficient to assess hallucinations that arise in open-world settings, where VLMs are
widely used, and ii) inadequate for detecting systematic errors in VLMs. We propose DASH (Detection and Assessment of Systematic Hallucinations), an automatic, largescale pipeline designed to identify systematic hallucinations
of VLMs on real-world images in an open-world setting.
A key component is DASH-OPT for image-based retrieval,
where we optimize over the “natural image manifold” to
generate images that mislead the VLM. The output of DASH
consists of clusters of real and semantically similar images
for which the VLM hallucinates an object. We apply DASH
to PaliGemma and two LLaVA-NeXT models across 380 object classes and, in total, find more than 19k clusters with
950k images. We study the transfer of the identified systematic hallucinations to other VLMs and show that fine-tuning
PaliGemma with the model-specific images obtained with
DASH mitigates object hallucinations. Code and data are
available at https://YanN eu.github.io/DASH.

Figure 1. DASH: Systematic Hallucinations of PaliGemma-3B.

1. Introduction

1. There is no systematic assessment of the types of images
for which VLMs hallucinate, making it difficult to determine whether these errors are random or indicative of a
systematic issue.
2. The reliance on small, curated datasets like MSCOCO
with a small number of object classes fails to accurately reflect the open-world application of VLMs in
real-world scenarios. This could potentially lead to overlooking significant problems due to the limited and biased nature of these datasets.
In this paper, we focus on object hallucinations of VLMs
where the models respond “yes” to the question “Can you
see an object in this image?”1 although the object is not
actually present. For brevity, we refer to this type of
object hallucination as false-positive-hallucination (FPhallucination) throughout the rest of the paper. The opposite case, where the VLM incorrectly answers “no” despite the object’s presence, is also of interest but can be
checked with existing detection benchmarks. As we demonstrate in this paper, object hallucinations may occur in entirely unexpected contexts (see Fig. 1). Thus, addressing
them requires an open-world approach not limited to small
benchmark datasets. Instead we argue that assessing and
fixing object hallucinations of a VLM requires (i) exploring

While vision-language models (VLMs) demonstrate remarkable comprehension of multimodal text and image
data, they suffer from object hallucination errors such as incorrectly identifying objects that are not present or describing incorrect relationships or positions of objects within image descriptions [29].
Benchmarks like POPE [24] and AMBER [51] assess the
erroneous indication of the presence or absence of an object
by a VLM, but are limited by the curated datasets they use,
such as MSCOCO [25]. While these benchmarks provide a
first assessment of these errors, they have two main issues:

1 We apply the suffix “Please answer only with yes or no.” to ensure
valid VLM responses.

* Equal contribution.

22748

