This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Probabilistic Modeling Beyond Domain Generalization for Semantic
Segmentation
I-Hsiang Chen1,2*,†
1

Hua-En Chang1*

National Taiwan University

DeepLabV3Plus

University of Washington

PDAF

Jenq-Neng Hwang2
3

Microsoft

4

Chang Gung University

Source (s)

Ground Truth

Sy-Yen Kuo1,4

Target (t)

Image

Input

2

Wei-Ting Chen3

Input

Mask2Former

PDAF

Latent Domain

Encoder

Ground Truth

𝑧

𝑥!

LDP Modeling
𝑝! (𝑧|𝑥" )
DomainCompensation

𝑥"

Segmentation

Decoder

(a) Qualitative comparison between PDAF and its backbones

(b) Overview of PDAF framework.

Figure 1. The proposed PDAF enhances existing segmentation backbones (DeepLabV3Plus [7] and Mask2Former [10]) by leveraging latent
domain prior modeling as a compensation mechanism, yielding consistent improvements on unseen target domains such as BDD100K [67].

(LDP) to capture domain shifts and uses this prior as a conditioning factor to align both source and unseen target domains. To achieve this, PDAF integrates into a pre-trained
segmentation model and utilizes paired source and pseudotarget images to simulate latent domain shifts, enabling
LDP modeling. The framework comprises three modules:
the Latent Prior Extractor (LPE) predicts the LDP by supervising domain shifts; the Domain Compensation Module
(DCM) adjusts feature representations to mitigate domain
shifts; and the Diffusion Prior Estimator (DPE) leverages
a diffusion process to estimate the LDP without requiring
paired samples. This design enables PDAF to iteratively
model domain shifts, progressively refining feature representations to enhance generalization under complex target
conditions. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness
of PDAF across diverse and challenging urban scenes.

Abstract
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS) is
a critical yet challenging task, as domain shifts in unseen
environments can severely compromise model performance.
While recent studies enhance feature alignment by projecting features into the source domain, they often neglect intrinsic latent domain priors, leading to suboptimal results.
In this paper, we introduce PDAF, a Probabilistic Diffusion
Alignment Framework that enhances the generalization of
existing segmentation networks through probabilistic diffusion modeling. PDAF introduces a Latent Domain Prior
Project page: https://pdaf-iccv.github.io
* Indicates equal contribution.
† This work was conducted while I-Hsiang Chen was an intern at University of Washington.

21755

