This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent-Reframe: Enabling Camera Control for
Video Diffusion Models without Training
Zhenghong Zhou* , Jie An* , Jiebo Luo
University of Rochester
zzhou72@ur.rochester.edu, {jan6,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu
Frame 3

LatentReframe

Frame 6

Frame 9

Frame 12

Frame 15

Text prompt: natural hot spring the steam floats up

+

Diffusion

=
Training-free
camera control

Text prompt: the sunflower swaying in the wind

Text prompt: night, b&w photo of old house, post apocalypse, forest, storm weather, wind, rocks

Figure 1. We propose Latent-Reframe, which enables a text-to-video diffusion model to generate high-quality videos that accurately follow
both the text prompt and a specified camera trajectory, without requiring additional training. In the left trajectory diagram, the red arrow
represents camera translation, and the base of the four-sided frustum indicates camera orientation.

Abstract
Precise camera pose control is crucial for video generation
with diffusion models. Existing methods require fine-tuning
with additional datasets containing paired videos and camera pose annotations, which are both data-intensive and
computationally costly, and may disrupt the model’s distribution learned from the training data. We introduce
Latent-Reframe, which enables camera control in a pretrained video diffusion model without fine-tuning. Unlike
existing methods, Latent-Reframe operates during the sampling stage, maintaining efficiency while preserving the distribution learned during pretraining. Our approach reframes the latent code of video frames to align with the
input camera trajectory through time-aware point clouds.
Latent code inpainting and harmonization then refine the
model’s latent space, ensuring high-quality video generation. Latent-Reframe can be applied to both DiT- and
UNet-based video diffusion models. Experimental results

demonstrate that Latent-Reframe can achieve comparable
or superior camera control precision and video quality to
training-based methods, without the need for fine-tuning on
additional datasets.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution

Generating a video that follows a given camera trajectory
is a key task for controllable video generation. Existing
methods, such as CameraCtrl [14] and MotionCtrl [46],
GEN3C [33], inject camera control into a pre-trained video
diffusion model by fine-tuning it with an additional dataset
containing paired videos and camera trajectories.
While these methods demonstrate good performance,
they face two key challenges: 1) Fine-tuning requires an
extra dataset annotated with camera trajectories, which is
labor-intensive to collect and computationally expensive in
training, even with techniques like Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) [20]; and 2) Fine-tuning can disrupt the learned
distribution of the pre-trained video diffusion model, potentially degrading the quality of the generated videos if the
fine-tuning dataset is of lower quality. This raises an im-

12779

