This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoFRR: Mixture of Diffusion Models for Face Retouching Restoration
Jiaxin Liu1 , Qichao Ying1 , Zhenxing Qian1 , Sheng Li1† , Runqi Zhang1 , Jian Liu2 , Xinpeng Zhang1
1 Fudan University 2 Ant Group

Abstract

Face Retouching Detection

Retouched image generation

Non-retouched

The widespread use of face retouching on social media platforms raises concerns about the authenticity of face images.
While existing methods focus on detecting face retouching,
how to accurately recover the original faces from the retouched ones has yet to be answered. This paper introduces Face Retouching Restoration (FRR), a novel computer vision task aimed at restoring original faces from their
retouched counterparts. FRR differs from traditional image restoration tasks by addressing the complex retouching operations with various types and degrees, which focuses more on the restoration of the low-frequency information of the faces. To tackle this challenge, we propose
MoFRR, Mixture of Diffusion Models for FRR. Inspired
by DeepSeek’s expert isolation strategy, the MoFRR uses
sparse activation of specialized experts handling distinct
retouching types and the engagement of a shared expert
dealing with universal retouching traces. Each specialized expert follows a dual-branch structure with a DDIMbased low-frequency branch guided by an Iterative Distortion Evaluation Module (IDEM) and a Cross-Attentionbased High-Frequency branch (HFCAM) for detail refinement. Extensive experiments on a newly constructed face
retouching dataset, RetouchingFFHQ++, demonstrate the
effectiveness of MoFRR for FRR.

Eye Enlarging 2

Images
Retouched
Original

Retouched

(a)

Risks of abusing retouching

Advertising / Cyber love

Fraud

Beauty craze

Mental illness

Smoothing

0

Face Lifting

3

Whitening

1

(c)

Face Retouching Restoration
(FRR)

(b)

Retouched
images

Restoration
Network

Restored
images

(d)

Figure 1. Application scenario of the proposed scheme (MoFRR).
(a) People use face retouching in various applications, (b) face retouching poses risks such as fraud, societal security, and cultural
psychological issues, (c) existing work for face retouching detection, (d) our proposed MoFRR method recovers the original image
from the retouched version, thereby offering an additional layer of
protection against face retouching fraud.

1. Introduction

edited promotional content. US and Israel also have labeling requirements for retouched faces [9, 30]. Researchers
have developed dedicated datasets and neural networks to
auto-detect the presence of retouching within a digital image [7, 11, 42]. In application, once exaggerated retouching
is detected, the corresponding images can be automatically
removed, or the livestreams closed.
In the literature, researchers have focused mainly on the
accurate detection of face retouching [20, 31, 42]. It has yet
to be answered regarding how we could near-faithfully recover the original face image from the retouched one, which
is important to trace back to the real identity of the severely
retouched faces.
In this paper, we consider a new computer vision task,
Face Retouching Restoration (FRR), to restore the original
faces from the retouched ones, which serves as a further
step for fighting against the misuse of face retouching. In
literature, researchers have dedicated their efforts to dealing with similar tasks, including makeup removal [37] and
image restoration (IR) [23, 27, 41]. The former transfers the
style of a reference face to a makeup face for face restora-

Retouched face images, produced through various techniques such as face lifting, eye enlargement, whitening, and
smoothing, are pervasive on social platforms. Most users
acquire these images through straightforward and convenient methods to improve their appearance. Despite amusement and fun, the abuse of face retouching causes a lot of
serious problems, including aesthetic degradation, commercial deception [2] and identity fraud [3]. To address these
problems, many retouching detection schemes and regulatory countermeasures have been proposed. For instance,
Norway [14] has enacted strict disclosure requirements for
†Corresponding author: Sheng Li (lisheng@fudan.edu.cn)

12842

