This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TCFG: Truncated Classiﬁer-Free Guidance for Efﬁcient and Scalable
Text-to-Image Acceleration
Xiaomeng Fu12∗ , Jia Li3† *
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The University of Hong Kong
fuxiaomeng@iie.ac.cn lijia@eee.hku.hk
Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in image and video generation due to their powerful generative capabilities. However, they suffer from slow inference
speed and high computational costs. Existing acceleration
methods for diffusion models may compromise model performance and struggle to generalize across diverse diffusion model architectures and downstream tasks. To address
these issues, we propose a model-agnostic and highly scalable acceleration strategy for text-controlled image generation. Speciﬁcally, we dynamically modulate the text
guidance coefﬁcience and truncate redundant text-related
computations during the denoising process. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves signiﬁcant model acceleration while preserving precise textimage alignment, showcasing the potential for a wide range
of diffusion models and downstream applications. We will
release the code upon acceptance.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, Diffusion Models (DMs) [17, 48, 49] have
gained signiﬁcant popularity in both academia and industry, and have dominated diverse applications [2, 3, 13, 18,
28, 37, 39, 44, 58] due to their superior capabilities to generate high-quality images. Especially, text-to-image generation emerges as a particularly prominent application, significantly advancing the development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Generated Content (AIGC). By leveraging billions of parameters and extensive training datasets, these large-scale
pretrained text-to-image diffusion models demonstrate robust generative priors, thereby facilitating numerous downstream vision tasks [10, 11, 36, 42, 53, 56].
Despite the remarkable capabilities of text-to-image diffusion models, their relatively slow inference speed remains
* Equal contribution, †Corresponding author

a signiﬁcant obstacle to widespread implementation. Two
primary factors hinder the inference speed of these models.
Firstly, in contrast to other one-step generative models such
as Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [24] and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12], diffusion models necessitate a series of iterative steps to reconstruct initial noise
into a coherent image. Secondly, to achieve enhanced generative capabilities, existing diffusion models are increasing
in size, resulting in slower speed for each denoising step.
To address these speed and efﬁciency challenges, various
optimization strategies have been proposed, which can be
broadly classiﬁed into two categories: inference sampling
optimization and model structural optimization.
The former [20, 32, 33, 45, 46, 50, 57] seek to develop
more efﬁcient samplers to minimize the number of denoising steps, based on advanced stochastic differential equation (SDE) solvers or various knowledge distillation methods. However, these techniques encounter performance limitations when attempting to compress the process into very
few steps, as the sharp reduction in sampling steps can alter
the convergence dynamics of the denoising process.
The latter methods [5, 6, 9, 23, 34, 54, 55] focus on
more efﬁcient denoising networks, with techniques including quantization, pruning, feature caching, etc. However,
these methods usually modify the internal structure and
computation ﬂow of a given model, making its speciﬁc
strategy not directly applicable across various diffusion architectures and limiting the adaptability for downstream
tasks that rely on certain features or layers.
Given the limitations of existing acceleration methods
and the widespread adoption of Classiﬁer Free Guidance
(CFG) in modern diffusion models, we focus on exploring
the potential optimization within CFG to develop a universal acceleration strategy for diffusion models.
Our method begins with a comprehensive analysis of the
role of text input within CFG. We demonstrate that the inﬂuence of text input diminishes once image semantics are

18552

