This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixA-Q: Revisiting Activation Sparsity for Vision Transformers from a
Mixed-Precision Quantization Perspective

1

Weitian Wang1,2 , Rai Shubham1 , Cecilia De La Parra1 , Akash Kumar2 *
Robert Bosch GmbH, Renningen, Germany, 2 Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany

{weitian.wang, shubham.rai, cecilia.delaparra}@bosch.com, akash.kumar@ruhr-uni-bochum.de

Abstract
In this paper, we propose MixA-Q, a mixed-precision activation quantization framework that leverages intra-layer
activation sparsity (a concept widely explored in activation pruning methods) for efficient inference of quantized
window-based vision transformers. For a given uniform-bit
quantization configuration, MixA-Q separates the batched
window computations within Swin blocks and assigns a
lower bit width to the activations of less important windows, improving the trade-off between model performance
and efficiency. We introduce a Two-Branch Swin Block that
processes activations separately in high- and low-bit precision, enabling seamless integration of our method with most
quantization-aware training (QAT) and post-training quantization (PTQ) methods, or with simple modifications. Our
experimental evaluations over the COCO dataset demonstrate that MixA-Q achieves a training-free 1.35× computational speedup without accuracy loss in PTQ configuration.
With QAT, MixA-Q achieves a lossless 1.25× speedup and
a 1.53× speedup with only a 1% mAP drop by incorporating activation pruning. Notably, by reducing the quantization error in important regions, our sparsity-aware quantization adaptation improves the mAP of the quantized W4A4
model (with both weights and activations in 4-bit precision)
by 0.7%, reducing quantization degradation by 24%.

models process richer visual information, improving performance on dense tasks. However, this comes with increased
computational overhead that results in latency bottlenecks
for real-time applications like autonomous driving. Thus,
reducing the computational cost associated with activations
has become increasingly important. To tackle these computational challenges that arise from vision transformers and
high-resolution inputs, activation pruning and quantization
are two effective methods that improve efficiency with acceptable performance degradation.
Real-world images exhibit natural sparsity because not
all pixels within an image are important. Activation pruning
is a group of methods that exploits this activation sparsity
to improve latency performance by selecting less important
tokens [21] or windows of transformers at runtime and skipping the computations associated with them. SparseViT [2]
is a representative work for window-based ViTs like Swin
Transformer and has achieved good latency improvement
with negligible loss of accuracy. However, activation pruning methods have several limitations:
• Require retraining to adapt the model for the pruned activations.
• Significant accuracy degradation at high pruning ratios.
• Performance is largely dependent on accurate window selections, which can’t be guaranteed for Out-OfDistribution (OOD) inputs. This could limit their deployment on safety-critical applications.
On the other hand, quantization is an effective and prevalent compression approach that reduces a model’s computational cost by decreasing the representation precision of
weights and activations. While most quantization methods
use uniform-bit precision across the whole network, modern hardware increasingly supports the multi-bit precision,
giving rise to mixed-precision quantization (MPQ) methods. The key insight in most prior MPQ methods is that different layers within the machine learning model don’t have
the same contribution to the final output and don’t have the
same robustness to quantization noise. However, they often
overlook the intra-layer activation sparsity and focus on the
inter-layer bit-width allocation. This offers another dimen-

1. Introduction
Swin Transformer [22] is a representative vision transformer that generalizes well across different visual perception tasks, particularly dense prediction tasks such as object detection and segmentation [3]. While it improves upon
the quadratic complexity of conventional ViT [8] by introducing a hierarchical structure and shifting window mechanisms, the self-attention operation remains computationally
intensive.
With recent advancements in high-resolution imaging,
* Corresponding author

22143

