This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EEdit

: Rethinking the Spatial and Temporal Redundancy for
Efficient Image Editing

Zexuan Yan1,* Yue Ma2,* Chang Zou1 Wenteng Chen1 Qifeng Chen2 Linfeng Zhang1,†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Project: https://eff-edit.github.io/
Prompt-guided image editing

Reference-guided image editing

Drag-guided image editing

… with drawing of lion …

… silvery cat…

Ours

10.96X

4.6

Ours

2.46X

4.6

2.99X

DI + PnP

13.8

DDIM + P2P

FORA
18.8

Direct Inversion (DI)

DuCa
23.6

ToCa

TF-ICON

50.4

5.1

6.8
7.3
11.3

Editing latency with different editing methods (s)

Original
Editing latency with different acceleration methods (s)

Figure 1. Gallery of various editing tasks and efficiency comparisons. We propose the EEdit, a novel inversion-based framework for
efficient image editing. Compare with previous methods, we achieve the faster and more efficient image editing.

Abstract

three techniques to solve them one by one. For spatial
redundancy, spatial locality caching is introduced to
compute the edited region and its neighboring regions
while skipping the unedited regions, and token indexing
preprocessing is designed to further accelerate the caching.
For temporal redundancy, inversion step skipping is
proposed to reuse the latent for efficient editing. Our
experiments demonstrate an average of 2.46× acceleration
without performance drop in a wide range of editing
tasks including prompt-guided image editing, dragging
and image composition. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/yuriYanZeXuan/EEdit.

Inversion-based image editing is rapidly gaining momentum while suffering from significant computation overhead,
hindering its application in real-time interactive scenarios. In this paper, we rethink that the redundancy
in inversion-based image editing exists in both the spatial and temporal dimensions, such as the unnecessary
computation in unedited regions and the redundancy in
the inversion progress. To tackle these challenges, we
propose an Efficient Editing framework, named EEdit, to
achieve efficient image editing. Specifically, we introduce
* Contributed equally
† Corresponding author

17474

