This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SReﬁner: Soft-Braid Attention for Multi-Agent Trajectory Reﬁnement
Liwen Xiao1 Zhiyu Pan1 Zhicheng Wang1 Zhiguo Cao1 Wei Li2 *
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{liwenxiao}@hust.edu.cn

velocity
low

Abstract
Accurate prediction of multi-agent future trajectories is crucial for autonomous driving systems to make safe and efﬁcient decisions. Trajectory reﬁnement has emerged as a key
strategy to enhance prediction accuracy. However, existing
reﬁnement methods often overlook the topological relationships between trajectories, which are vital for improving
prediction precision. Inspired by braid theory, we propose
a novel trajectory reﬁnement approach, Soft-Braid Reﬁner
(SReﬁner), guided by the soft-braid topological structure
of trajectories using Soft-Braid Attention. Soft-Braid Attention captures spatio-temporal topological relationships
between trajectories by considering both spatial proximity
and vehicle motion states at “soft intersection points”. Additionally, we extend this approach to model interactions
between trajectories and lanes, further improving the prediction accuracy. SReﬁner is a multi-iteration, multi-agent
framework that iteratively reﬁnes trajectories, incorporating topological information to enhance interactions within
trafﬁc scenarios. SReﬁner achieves signiﬁcant performance improvements over four baseline methods across two
datasets, establishing a new state-of-the-art in trajectory reﬁnement. Codes are available at https://github.com/LiwenXiao/SReﬁner.

‫ݐ‬

‫ݔ‬

‫ݔ‬

‫ݕ‬

‫ݕ‬

high

(a) Traffic scene as topology

(b) Braid topology

(c) Soft-braid topology

Figure 1. (a) Trafﬁc scene with multi-agent future interaction. (b)
Braid topology [1] detects crossing situations, but fails to account
for non-crossing interactions (e.g., red car decelerating for blue
car in (a)). (c) We design soft-braid topology that establishes logical connections among all future trajectories, explicitly modeling
spatio-temporal dynamics to guide reﬁnement.

To further improve prediction accuracy, trajectory reﬁnement strategies have been widely adopted. These methods
typically take an initially predicted future trajectory as input and produce a more accurate and reasonable output. For
instance, QCNet [40] encodes coarse predicted trajectories
as anchor queries and combines them with scene context
to predict trajectory offsets. R-Pred [7] utilizes local attention mechanisms to reﬁne trajectories based on contextual
information from neighboring vehicles. SmartReﬁne [38]
introduces a scene-adaptive reﬁnement strategy that adjusts
the number of reﬁnement iterations and the range of local
attention based on the scene’s characteristics. MTR++ [21]
leverages initial intent points to guide information exchange
between trafﬁc participants, enabling them to understand

1. Introduction
Predicting the future trajectories of surrounding trafﬁc participants is essential for autonomous driving systems to
make safe and efﬁcient decisions in dynamic trafﬁc environments [10, 12, 41]. Consequently, accurate multi-agent
trajectory prediction is crucial for enhancing the safety of
autonomous vehicles. Recent studies have focused on improving the accuracy and rationality of multi-agent trajectory prediction from various perspectives, including scene
representation [2, 16, 37] and multi-agent behavior modeling [13, 35, 39].
* Corresponding author.

960

