This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PROL : Rehearsal Free Continual Learning in Streaming Data via Prompt
Online Learning
M. Anwar Ma’sum1,∗ , Mahardhika Pratama1 , Savitha Ramasamy2 , Lin Liu1 ,
Habibullah Habibullah1 , and Ryszard Kowalczyk1,3
1

STEM University of South Australia, 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR & IPAL, CNRS@CREATE
3

Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

Abstract

The limitation of seeing data only once in OCL leads to insufficient learning of a deep learning model that results in
difficulty in gaining knowledge of a new task while maintaining knowledge of previously learned tasks. In other
words, it complicates how to resolve the catastrophic forgetting problem. To handle such a limitation, most of the
state-of-the-art OCL methods (SOTAs) save previous task
exemplars for a rehearsal process to maintain the knowledge from previously learned tasks [30, 39, 49]. Practically,
this approach is not reliable since, due to privacy constraints
or data openness policy, previously learned data can be unavailable anymore. In addition, the rehearsal process increases memory consumption and computational costs.
Leveraging the recent advancement of the foundation
model, recent SOTAs utilized a pre-trained model (PTM)
that carries a generalization attribute as initial weight [22,
25, 48]. However, the SOTAs still store and replay previously learned exemplars or features in their memory. The
insight tells us that rehearsal-free online continual learning remains an open problem. On the other hand, the
prompt-based approach has been proven to be effective in
rehearsal-free continual learning. Specifically, the growing prompt components methods [17, 28, 33] outperform
the prompt-pool method [44] and task-wise prompt methods [7, 37, 42, 43] both in terms of accuracy and forgetting measure. However, from the perspective of OCL, the
growing components prompt methods violate the throughput aspects, as the model parameters grow with the increasing number of classes. This growth incurs more operations
and longer training time, leading to more skipped (unprocessed) data streams. Thus, the approach is not favorable
for dealing with catastrophic forgetting in streaming data.
These intriguing insights motivate us to develop a novel
rehearsal-free method that can effectively address the OCL
problem. We develop our proposed method based on two
fundamental goals in OCL, i.e., (1) achieving stabilityplasticity and (2) being efficient both in the training and
inference phases. To achieve these goals, we design
our method with the following components: (1) a single

The data privacy constraint in online continual learning
(OCL), where the data can be seen only once, complicates
the catastrophic forgetting problem in streaming data. A
common approach applied by the current SOTAs in OCL is
the use of memory-saving exemplars or features from previous classes to be replayed in the current task. On the other
hand, the prompt-based approach performs excellently in
continual learning, but at the cost of a growing number of
trainable parameters. The first approach may not be applicable in practice due to the data openness policy, while
the second approach has the issue of throughput associated with the streaming data. In this study, we propose a
novel prompt-based method for online continual learning
that includes 4 main components: (1) single light-weight
prompt generator as a general knowledge, (2) trainable
scaler-and-shifter as specific knowledge, (3) pre-trained
model (PTM) generalization preserving, and (4) hard-soft
updates mechanism. Our proposed method achieves significantly higher performance than the current SOTAs in CIFAR100, ImageNet-R, ImageNet-A, and CUB dataset. Our
complexity analysis shows that our method requires a relatively smaller number of parameters and achieves moderate training time, inference time, and throughput. For further study, the source code of our method is available at
https://github.com/anwarmaxsum/PROL.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) has becomes a spotlight in the
world of artificial intelligence (AI) involving dynamic environments, as it tackles catastrophic forgetting for a continually evolving sequence of tasks [5, 38]. CL methods
are proven to be promising in various domains, e.g., computer vision, automation, NLP and graph analysis [1, 21, 31,
35]. Online continual learning (OCL) is an advanced subproblem of CL where CL is conducted in streaming data.
*Corresponding: masmy039@mymail.unisa.edu.au

2471

