This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DSRBench: A Comprehensive 3D Spatial Reasoning Benchmark
Wufei Ma Haoyu Chen† Guofeng Zhang Yu-Cheng Chou
Jieneng Chen Celso de Melo→ Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University

†

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

→

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

for various high-level reasoning and interaction in downstream tasks. Studying the spatial reasoning ability of current LMMs will help us identify specific types of factual
errors, uncover their fundamental limitations, and inform
targeted improvements to further advance current LMMs.

3D spatial reasoning is the ability to analyze and interpret the positions, orientations, and spatial relationships
of objects within the 3D space. This allows models to develop a comprehensive understanding of the 3D scene, enabling their applicability to a broader range of areas, such
as autonomous navigation, robotics, and AR/VR. While
large multi-modal models (LMMs) have achieved remarkable progress in a wide range of image and video understanding tasks, their capabilities to perform 3D spatial reasoning on diverse natural images are less studied. In this
work we present the first comprehensive 3D spatial reasoning benchmark, 3DSRBench, with 2,772 manually annotated visual question-answer pairs across 12 question
types. We conduct robust and thorough evaluation of 3D
spatial reasoning abilities by balancing data distribution
and adopting a novel FlipEval strategy. To further study
the robustness of 3D spatial reasoning w.r.t. camera 3D
viewpoints, our 3DSRBench includes two subsets with 3D
spatial reasoning questions on paired images with common
and uncommon viewpoints. We benchmark a wide range of
open-sourced and proprietary LMMs, uncovering their limitations in various aspects of 3D awareness, such as height,
orientation, location, and multi-object reasoning, as well as
their degraded performance on images from uncommon 6D
viewpoints. Our 3DSRBench provide valuable findings and
insights about future development of LMMs with strong spatial reasoning abilities. Our project page is available here.

Prior datasets [27, 29, 30, 35] studying spatial relationships often focused on relationships w.r.t. the viewer, e.g.,
object A is to the left of object B from the viewer’s perspective. We regard these as 2D spatial relationships as they
can be captured merely from 2D bounding boxes of the objects (see Fig. 2b). They neglect 3D spatial relationships
in the 3D world space or those from an object’s perspective. Capturing 3D spatial relationships between objects in
the images would help LMMs understand and predict the
interactions between objects, and enable a broader range of
applications in 3D, e.g., robotics and embodied AI.

1. Introduction

To study how LMMs can capture 3D spatial relationships, previous works often exploited synthetic environments and generated images with 3D ground-truths [57, 58].
Visual question-answer pairs were automatically synthesized by applying pre-defined rules to the known 3D scene
graphs and object attributes. The synthetic images exhibit a significant domain gap with natural images and
lacked the diversity and richness in real-world. More recent
works [16] explored real datasets with 3D annotations, e.g.,
Omni3D [9]. However, images in these datasets are limited
to specific domains, such as indoor rooms and self-driving
scenes. In general, visual question-answer pairs generated
with rule-based methods from 3D annotations (i) limit the
scope of theirs datasets to a small set of rigid object categories, and (ii) cannot enable a fine-grained and robust evaluation of 3D spatial relationships that can only be achieved
with human annotated datasets (see Sec. 3.1).

Recent large multi-modal models (LMMs) [1, 4, 50] have
achieved significant improvements in a wide range of image and video understanding tasks, such as image captioning [2, 34], visual question answering [23, 27, 38, 54], visual grounding [60], decision making [10, 32, 41], and action recognition [42, 59]. Notably, the spatial reasoning
ability [16, 27, 29, 56], i.e., parsing 2D and 3D spatial relationships between objects, serves as a crucial foundation

In this work we present the first comprehensive 3D spatial reasoning benchmark, 3DSRBench, that features 2,772
3D spatial reasoning questions from 12 question types on
diverse and open-vocabulary entities, including rigid objects, humans, animals, and implicit concepts, such as logo
on a car or arrow on a billboard. We manually annotate
2,100 visual question-answer pairs on natural images from
the MS-COCO dataset [36], covering 12 subtypes of ques-

6924

