This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Generative Adversarial Transferability with Self-supervised
Vision Transformer Features
Shangbo Wu1 Yu-an Tan1 Ruinan Ma1 Wencong Ma2 Dehua Zhu1 Yuanzhang Li2 *
1
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{shangbo.wu, tan2008, ruinan, wencong.ma, zhudehua, popular}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
The ability of deep neural networks (DNNs) come from extracting and interpreting features from the data provided. By
exploiting intermediate features in DNNs instead of relying
on hard labels, we craft adversarial perturbation that generalize more effectively, boosting black-box transferability.
These features ubiquitously come from supervised learning in
previous work. Inspired by the exceptional synergy between
self-supervised learning and the Transformer architecture,
this paper explores whether exploiting self-supervised Vision
Transformer (ViT) representations can improve adversarial transferability. We present dSVA—a generative dual
self-supervised ViT features attack, that exploits both global
structural features from contrastive learning (CL) and local
textural features from masked image modeling (MIM), the
self-supervised learning paradigm duo for ViTs. We design
a novel generative training framework that incorporates a
generator to create black-box adversarial examples, and
strategies to train the generator by exploiting joint features
and the attention mechanism of self-supervised ViTs. Our
findings show that CL and MIM enable ViTs to attend to
distinct feature tendencies, which, when exploited in tandem,
boast great adversarial generalizability. By disrupting dual
deep features distilled by self-supervised ViTs, we are rewarded with remarkable black-box transferability to models
of various architectures that outperform state-of-the-arts.
Code available at https://github.com/spencerwooo/dSVA.

Figure 1. Demonstration of dSVA. By jointly exploiting deep
features of both self-supervised ViTs, i.e., DINO (CL) and MAE
(MIM), dSVA crafts perturbation that disrupts both structural and
textural representations of the image (as visualized in the attention
saliency maps), fooling ConvNets, ViTs, and MLPs alike.

learn sample-label correlations over their training process,
by identifying the structure and semantic characteristics of
the data for classification. These learnt deep features are generalizable enough to essentially serve as the basis that drive
downstream tasks such as object detection [5, 47], similarity measurement [18, 72], image super-resolution [35], and
style transfer [19]. Prior research has shown that improving
transferability is possible by targeting intermediate features
of the surrogate model instead of directly attacking hard
labels or output gradients [28, 60, 73]. Since deep features
of well-trained DNNs are generalizable [69], perturbation
designed to disrupt these features are more transferable [29].
The habitual inclusion of label-wise loss in existing work
for conducting adversarial attacks acts as a common practice that pushes the surrogate model to be setup with supervised learning. This makes sense for ConvNets where
self-supervised learning lags behind supervised. However,

1. Introduction
The transferability of adversarial examples enable real-world
black-box attacks on DNNs without the adversary’s access
to their internals. Such attacks require the construction of
a local white-box surrogate model. Consequently, their effectiveness relies on the ability to disrupt the shared latent
representations, i.e., features, learnt by both models. DNNs
* corresponding author

530

