This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AD-GS: Object-Aware B-Spline Gaussian Splatting for Self-Supervised
Autonomous Driving
1

Jiawei Xu1 Kai Deng1 Zexin Fan1 Shenlong Wang2 Jin Xie3 * Jian Yang1 *
College of Computer Science, Nankai University 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University

{jiaweixu, dengkai, zexin fan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn

LiDAR Points

…

Images

Input

csjyang@nankai.edu.cn

csjxie@nju.edu.cn

Manual 3D Annotations

Motion Modeling (Sec3.2)

EmerNeRF

time
Scene Modeling (Sec3.3)

AD-GS(Ours)

Ground Truth

High Quality Arbitrary Space-Time Rendering

Figure 1. AD-GS. We achieve high-quality rendering by self-supervised manners for autonomous driving scenes without relying on the
expensive manual 3D annotations.

Abstract
Modeling and rendering dynamic urban driving scenes is
crucial for self-driving simulation. Current high-quality
methods typically rely on costly manual object tracklet annotations, while self-supervised approaches fail to capture
dynamic object motions accurately and decompose scenes
properly, resulting in rendering artifacts. We introduce ADGS, a novel self-supervised framework for high-quality freeviewpoint rendering of driving scenes from a single log. At
its core is a novel learnable motion model that integrates
locality-aware B-spline curves with global-aware trigonometric functions, enabling flexible yet precise dynamic object modeling. Rather than requiring comprehensive semantic labeling, AD-GS automatically segments scenes into
objects and background with the simplified pseudo 2D
segmentation, representing objects using dynamic Gaussians and bidirectional temporal visibility masks. Further,
our model incorporates visibility reasoning and physically
rigid regularization to enhance robustness. Extensive eval-

uations demonstrate that our annotation-free model significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art annotationfree methods and is competitive with annotation-dependent
approaches. Project Page: https://jiaweixu8.
github.io/AD-GS-web/

1. Introduction

* Corresponding authors.

Autonomous driving (auto-driving) scene rendering models reconstruct dynamic driving environments using LiDAR
points and images captured from multiple camera poses and
timestamps. These models enable rendering from novel
viewpoints and moments. Most existing approaches rely on
manually annotated object bounding boxes and poses within
the scenes to facilitate reconstruction [3, 5, 6, 15, 23, 31, 33,
35, 38, 43]. Such 3D annotations simplify the process by
eliminating the need for models to estimate object positions
and motions, thereby making the reconstruction of largescale auto-driving scenes much more easier. While models
based on manual 3D annotations have achieved significant
progress in recent years, the high cost of annotation poses a

24770

