This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Integrating Task-Specific and Universal Adapters for
Pre-Trained Model-based Class-Incremental Learning
Yan Wang, Da-Wei Zhou(B) , Han-Jia Ye
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{wangy,zhoudw,yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

nomenon known as catastrophic forgetting of established
features [13]. Correspondingly, recent breakthroughs in
pre-training [17] have prompted the research community to
leverage pre-trained models (PTMs) as a means to mitigate
the issue of forgetting [45, 49, 50]. Leveraging vast datasets
and considerable computing resources, PTMs naturally produce features with strong generalization capabilities. As a
result, the development of a robust CIL methodology that
harnesses the power of PTMs while mitigating catastrophic
forgetting has attracted considerable attention from the research community [48, 64–66].
Owing to the remarkable generalization properties of
PTMs, existing approaches frequently involve freezing
the pre-trained weights and adapting to incremental tasks
through the integration of lightweight modules [7, 25, 33].
Many of these methods rely on visual prompt tuning [43,
49]. During training, they learn task-specific prompt parameters and a set of keys. These keys are later used for task selection through query-key matching during inference. However, these methods suffer from two drawbacks. First, continual learning requires models to dynamically adapt to a
sequence of tasks while maintaining stability on previous
ones. Current prompt-based methods rely on accurate retrieval of task-specific prompts during inference. However, incorrect key matching, especially in scenarios with
task ambiguity or distribution shifts, can lead to the selection of irrelevant prompts, degrading performance. Second,
these methods predominantly concentrate on the acquisition
of task-specific knowledge and ignore the general knowledge shared between different tasks. Thus, they tend to
make mistakes when distinguishing between highly similar
classes across different tasks.
To overcome the challenges outlined above, we introduce integrating Task-Specific and Universal Adapters
(TUNA) in this paper, which explicitly disentangles continual learning into two complementary components: (1)
specialized adapters that extract task-discriminative features, and (2) a universal adapter that consolidates crosstask shared knowledge through fusion. This decomposition

Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) requires a learning system to continually learn new classes without forgetting. Existing pre-trained model-based CIL methods often freeze the
pre-trained network and adapt to incremental tasks using
additional lightweight modules such as adapters. However, incorrect module selection during inference hurts performance, and task-specific modules often overlook shared
general knowledge, leading to errors on distinguishing between similar classes across tasks. To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose integrating Task-Specific
and Universal Adapters (TUNA) in this paper. Specifically,
we train task-specific adapters to capture the most crucial
features relevant to their respective tasks and introduce an
entropy-based selection mechanism to choose the most suitable adapter. Furthermore, we leverage an adapter fusion
strategy to construct a universal adapter, which encodes the
most discriminative features shared across tasks. We combine task-specific and universal adapter predictions to harness both specialized and general knowledge during inference. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our approach. Code is available at https://github.com/
LAMDA-CL/ICCV2025-TUNA .

1. Introduction
The advent of deep learning leads to the remarkable performance of deep neural networks in practical applications [8, 9, 14, 55]. However, in real-world scenarios, data
often arrive in a continuous stream, necessitating a learning system capable of progressively assimilating knowledge
of emerging classes, a process known as class-incremental
learning (CIL) [40]. CIL faces a formidable challenge: the
process of acquiring new classes often results in the erosion of previously learned knowledge, precipitating a phe† Correspondence to: Da-Wei Zhou (zhoudw@lamda.nju.edu.cn)

806

