This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoM2P: Egocentric Multimodal Multitask Pretraining
Gen Li1

Yutong Chen⇤1

Yiqian Wu⇤1,2
1

Kaifeng Zhao⇤1

Marc Pollefeys1,3

Siyu Tang1

ETH Zürich 2 Zhejiang University 3 Microsoft
https://egom2p.github.io/

Abstract
Understanding multimodal signals in egocentric vision,
such as RGB video, depth, camera poses, and gaze, is essential for applications in augmented reality, robotics, and
human-computer interaction, enabling systems to better interpret the camera wearer’s actions, intentions, and surrounding environment. However, building large-scale egocentric multimodal and multitask models presents unique
challenges. Egocentric data are inherently heterogeneous,
with large variations in modality coverage across devices
and settings. Generating pseudo-labels for missing modalities, such as gaze or head-mounted camera trajectories, is
often infeasible, making standard supervised learning approaches difficult to scale. Furthermore, dynamic camera
motion and the complex temporal and spatial structure of
first-person video pose additional challenges for the direct
application of existing multimodal foundation models.
To address these challenges, we introduce a set of efficient temporal tokenizers and propose EgoM2P, a masked
modeling framework that learns from temporally-aware
multimodal tokens to train a large, general-purpose model
for egocentric 4D understanding. This unified design supports multitasking across diverse egocentric perception and
synthesis tasks, including gaze prediction, egocentric camera tracking, and monocular depth estimation from egocentric video, and also serves as a generative model for
conditional egocentric video synthesis. Across these tasks,
EgoM2P matches or outperforms specialist models while
being an order of magnitude faster. We will fully opensource EgoM2P to support the community and advance
egocentric vision research.

Depth Frames

RGB Frames

EgoM2P

Camera Trajectories

Gaze Dynamics

Figure 1. EgoM2P: A large-scale egocentric multimodal and multitask model, pretrained on eight extensive egocentric datasets.
It incorporates four modalities—RGB and depth video, gaze dynamics, and camera trajectories—to handle challenging tasks like
monocular egocentric depth estimation, camera tracking, gaze estimation, and conditional egocentric video synthesis. For simplicity, we only visualize four frames here.

1. Introduction

tric datasets [5, 10, 20, 23, 26, 29, 30, 49, 60, 61, 69, 70,
77, 87, 106, 122, 125], such as EgoExo4D, HoloAssist,
and HOT3D, provide rich, diverse, and semantically meaningful data. Additionally, large-scale synthetic datasets
generated by simulators like EgoGen [52] provide precise
ground truth annotations, which are often expensive and
time-consuming to obtain in the real world. By combining these complementary data sources, it is increasingly feasible to train large-scale multimodal and multitask models
for egocentric vision. These models have the potential to
further enhance our understanding of human behavior and
real-world interactions, opening new possibilities for applications in augmented reality, virtual reality, and robotics.
Current large-scale video models predominantly focus on understanding and generating videos from thirdperson perspectives: Video understanding tasks span video
captioning, question answering, retrieval, and segmentation [39, 51, 59, 71, 112, 116, 121, 123, 127]; Video generation models primarily generate third-person view videos
from text inputs [11, 12, 17, 22, 31, 35, 37, 45, 67, 68, 78,
85, 88, 100, 107, 111, 117]. Recent works [48, 81] have expanded modalities to include audio, yet these models still
operate with a limited range of modalities. While thirdperson video models have seen significant progress, ego-

Egocentric video capture has evolved significantly with the
integration of multimodal data, including RGB, depth, gaze,
and camera trajectories. These modalities interact dynamically, offering the most crucial information for understanding human head motion, intention, and scene geometry.
The growing availability of real-world multimodal egocen* Equal contribution. Alphabetical order.

10830

