This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identity-aware Language Gaussian Splatting for Open-vocabulary 3D Semantic
Segmentation
SungMin Jang Wonjun Kim∗
Konkuk University
{jsmbank, wonjkim}@konkuk.ac.kr

Abstract

view1
Text query : Sheep

Open-vocabulary 3D semantic segmentation has been
actively studied by incorporating language features into
3D scene representations. Even though many methods
have shown the notable improvement in this task, they still
have difficulties to make language embeddings be consistent
across different views. This inconsistency highly results in
mis-labeling where different language embeddings are assigned to the same part of an object. To address this issue, we propose a simple yet powerful method that aligns
language embeddings via the identity information. The key
idea is to locate language embeddings for the same identity closely in the latent space while putting them apart
otherwise. This approach allows the same object to have
identical language embeddings in novel views with accurate semantic masks, which are well aligned with the input text. Furthermore, we propose a progressive mask expanding scheme that enables more accurate extraction of
semantic mask boundaries. This scheme is very effective in
preserving the boundary shape of the target region by allowing the model to consider the local relationship between
segments. Experimental results on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our method delivers state-of-the-art performance in open-vocabulary 3D semantic segmentation.
https://github.com/DCVL-3D/ILGS release

view2
Cosine similarity
Others

Sheep

view2

view1

Gaussian field

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) RGB images. (b)(c) Results of the cosine similarity between the text embedding of the input query and language
features by the previous method [20] and the proposed method,
respectively.

1. Introduction

recent years. To do this, most previous methods have utilized high-quality 3D point clouds [19, 25], however, it is
quite difficult to acquire data, which reflects various realworld environments, with language annotations. This limitation still makes the practical use of open-vocabulary 3D
semantic segmentation challenging.

Open-vocabulary 3D semantic segmentation has begun to
attract considerable attentions due to recent advances in 3D
scene representations and vision-language models. This
technique is able to handle open-ended language queries
and segment corresponding regions in the 3D space, thus
provides natural and flexible interactions for editing of 3D
scenes. As demands from various applications, e.g., autonomous navigation [6], robotic manipulation [7], and
VR/AR, increase, there has been the significant research
progress in open-vocabulary 3D semantic segmentation in
∗ Corresponding author

To alleviate this issue, recent studies [10, 14, 20, 21, 24,
31, 34, 35] have adopted techniques of 3D scene representations such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) [16] and 3D
Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [9]. Based on this, they have
attempted to incorporate language features extracted from
vision-language models, e.g., CLIP [22], LSeg [13], etc.,
into the result of 3D scene representations. Even though
such language-aligned scene representations have brought
the notable improvement in open-vocabulary 3D semantic segmentation, existing methods often fail to maintain

20467

