This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Domain Generalization with Domain-speciﬁc Soft Prompts
Generation
Jianhan Wu ‗ Xiaoyang Qu ‗ Zhangcheng Huang Jianzong Wang †
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
wujianhan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, quxiaoy@gmail.com
william.huang@connect.polyu.hk, jzwang@188.com

Abstract

adapt to downstream tasks. By introducing learnable
prompts [1, 9, 37] into the text or vision encoders of
CLIP, this approach allows the model to dynamically
adjust its representations with minimal ﬁne-tuning.
Unlike traditional ﬁne-tuning methods [35] that require extensive parameter updates, prompt learning
optimizes only a small fraction of parameters, significantly reducing computational costs while maintaining high performance. This approach has been extensively adopted in federated learning (FL) [19, 21]
paradigms, particularly in scenarios characterized by
substantial computational and communication overheads between server and client devices. While federated learning based on prompt learning demonstrates
substantial privacy and computational beneﬁts, a key
challenge persists: data on each node is often collected
in a non-IID manner in real-world scenarios, leading to
domain shift [16, 30] between nodes. For example, one
device may take photos mostly indoors, while another
mostly outdoors [24]. The presence of the domain shift
issue renders the direct application of learning with
hand-crafted prompts (such as "a photo of a [class]") in
federated learning incapable of achieving satisfactory
outcomes [33].
To address the domain shift problem in FL, federated domain generalization (FDG) [6, 16, 17, 29] further
considers that the test data (target domain) is unavailable during decentralized training from distributed
source domains. Some methods have optimized soft
prompts [14, 25] across diﬀerent clients by treating
them as learnable vectors and reﬁning them via backpropagation. For example, Promptﬂ [9] shares prompt
vectors instead of model parameters to enhance communication eﬃciency and privacy in FL. pFedPG [34]
introduced a domain bank mechanism to embed textual domain information into soft prompts. Recently,
ADAPT [33] and FedTPG [26] used lightweight neural
networks (e.g., adapter [11]) to optimize soft prompts
conditioned on images through residual or concatena-

Prompt learning has become an eﬃcient paradigm for adapting CLIP to downstream tasks. Compared with traditional
ﬁne-tuning, prompt learning optimizes a few parameters
yet yields highly competitive results, especially appealing
in federated learning for computational eﬃciency. engendering domain shift among clients and posing a formidable
challenge for downstream-task adaptation. Existing federated domain generalization (FDG) methods based on prompt
learning typically learn soft prompts from training samples,
replacing manually designed prompts to enhance the generalization ability of federated models. However, these learned
prompts exhibit limited diversity and tend to ignore information from unknown domains. We propose a novel and eﬀective method from a generative perspective for handling FDG
tasks, namely federated domain generalization with domainspeciﬁc soft prompts generation (FedDSPG). Speciﬁcally,
during training, we introduce domain-speciﬁc soft prompts
(DSPs) for each domain and integrate content and domain
knowledge into the generative model among clients. In the
inference phase, the generator is utilized to obtain DSPs for
unseen target domains, thus guiding downstream tasks in
unknown domains. Comprehensive evaluations across several public datasets conﬁrm that our method outperforms
existing strong baselines in FDG, achieving state-of-the-art
results.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) [13], such
as Contrastive Language Image Pretraining (CLIP)
[12, 18, 27], have emerged as a powerful technique to
‗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author is Jianzong Wang.

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of
China (Youth Scientist Project) under Grant No. 2024YFB4504300
and the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Joint Funding Project (Category A)
under Grant No. SGDX20240115103359001.

2366

