This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMAIF: Multi-task and Multi-degradation All-in-One for Image Fusion with
Language Guidance
Zihan Cao1 Yu Zhong1 Ziqi Wang1 Liang-Jian Deng1, 2, ⋆
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC)
2
Multi-Hazard Early Warning Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, UESTC
1

iamzihan666@gmail.com yuuzhong1011@gmail.com
ziqiwang327@foxmail.com liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn
⋆

Corresponding author

Abstract
Image fusion, a fundamental low-level vision task, aims
to integrate multiple image sequences into a single output
while preserving as much information as possible from the
input. However, existing methods face several significant
limitations: 1) requiring task- or dataset-specific models;
2) neglecting real-world image degradations (e.g., noise),
which causes failure when processing degraded inputs; 3)
operating in pixel space, where attention mechanisms are
computationally expensive; and 4) lacking user interaction
capabilities. To address these challenges, we propose a
unified framework for multi-task, multi-degradation, and
language-guided image fusion. Our framework includes
two key components: 1) a practical degradation pipeline
that simulates real-world image degradations and generates interactive prompts to guide the model; 2) an all-inone Diffusion Transformer (DiT) operating in latent space,
which fuses a clean image conditioned on both the degraded
inputs and the generated prompts. Furthermore, we introduce principled modifications to the original DiT architecture to better suit the fusion task. Based on this framework,
we develop two versions of the model: Regression-based
and Flow Matching-based variants. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that our approach effectively addresses the aforementioned limitations
and outperforms previous restoration+fusion and all-in-one
pipelines. Codes are available at https://github.
com/294coder/MMAIF.

Fusion Tasks
Visible infrared,
Multi-exposure,
Multi-focus image
fusion ...

Restoration Tasks
De-rain, De-snow, Haze
removal, De-blur, Denoise,
Low-light enhance, Superresolution ...

Figure 1. Main conception of the proposed MMAIF.

1. Introduction

For example, in multi-modal image fusion, such as nearinfrared and visible image fusion (VIF) [30], the goal is
to highlight human or animal targets from the near-infrared
data while retaining the color and texture information from
the visible light image. In single-modal image fusion, such
as multi-exposure (MEF) [52] or multi-focus image fusion
(MFF) [27], the aim is to preserve information from different parameters (e.g., exposure, focus). With the development of convolutional neural networks [17, 46, 56], diffusion models [3, 60], Transformers [9, 18, 59], and linearRNN networks like Mamba [4], a large number of works
are pushing the limits of the image fusion task.
However, previous works [13, 36, 42, 53] often overlook the fact that real-world images may encounter various types of degradations, or even composite degradations, during the imaging process. In such cases, fusion
networks trained on clean images often fail. A common solution is to add one or more image restoration networks or
algorithms before the fusion network (termed as restoration+fusion pipeline) to restore the images and then fuse
the restored image sequences. This often introduces additional training or inference overhead and complicates the

Image fusion aims to integrate image sequences from multiple modalities or a single modality but with varying camera
parameters into a single image, while preserving the representative objects or information from the input sequences.

11744

