This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EquiCaps: Predictor-Free Pose-Aware Pre-Trained Capsule Networks
Athinoulla Konstantinou1
Georgios Leontidis1
1
University of Aberdeen, UK

Mamatha Thota2
Aiden Durrant1
2
University of Lincoln, UK

{a.konstantinou.24, georgios.leontidis, aiden.durrant}@abdn.ac.uk, mthota@lincoln.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning self-supervised representations that are invariant
and equivariant to transformations is crucial for advancing beyond traditional visual classification tasks. However,
many methods rely on predictor architectures to encode
equivariance, despite evidence that architectural choices,
such as capsule networks, inherently excel at learning interpretable pose-aware representations. To explore this,
we introduce EquiCaps (Equivariant Capsule Network),
a capsule-based approach to pose-aware self-supervision
that eliminates the need for a specialised predictor for
enforcing equivariance. Instead, we leverage the intrinsic pose-awareness capabilities of capsules to improve
performance in pose estimation tasks. To further challenge our assumptions, we increase task complexity via
multi-geometric transformations to enable a more thorough
evaluation of invariance and equivariance by introducing
3DIEBench-T, an extension of a 3D object-rendering benchmark dataset. Empirical results demonstrate that EquiCaps
outperforms prior state-of-the-art equivariant methods on
geometric tasks, including rotation and translation, achieving a supervised-level R2 of 0.78 on the 3DIEBench rotation prediction benchmark and improving upon SIE and
CapsIE by 0.05 and 0.04 R2 , respectively. Moreover,
in contrast to non-capsule-based equivariant approaches,
EquiCaps maintains robust equivariant performance under
combined geometric transformations, underscoring its generalisation capabilities and the promise of predictor-free
capsule architectures. Code, dataset, and weights are released at http://github.com/AberdeenML/EquiCaps.

Figure 1. Equivariant evaluation of EquiCaps (ours) and competing methods on 3DIEBench benchmark. We indicate which subset
(train or val) is used to generate embeddings, and, for PRE, which
dataset (train, val, or all) is used for retrieval.

such information is vital [28, 40, 58]. In response, there
has been increasing interest in developing more generalised
self-supervised approaches, most notably through the investigation of pose-aware learning [24, 54, 56]. Achieving
such generalisation, particularly to novel viewpoints, can
consequently address real-world settings that inherently exhibit large data variations, e.g. autonomous driving [54].
One promising strategy to preserve transformation information—and thus achieve pose-awareness—is to directly optimise for equivariant representations, enabling
the model to capture how transformations steer the latent space. However, such methods often face limitations [19, 23, 24, 46]. First, they rely on a dedicated
predictor network to encode equivariant properties, often
further increasing architectural complexity through conditional projectors, partitioned representations, or hypernet-

1. Introduction
The success of self-supervised learning (SSL) is largely attributed to the exploitation of invariant representations under data augmentations and transformations to learn rich semantic concepts [3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 12, 27, 31, 32, 62]. However, methods that strictly enforce invariance fail to preserve
useful augmentation and transformation information, which
could limit their applicability to downstream tasks where

7947

