This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Scalability of Simplicity:
Empirical Analysis of Vision-Language Learning with a Single Transformer
Weixian Lei* Jiacong Wang* Haochen Wang*
Xiangtai Li Jun Hao Liew Jiashi Feng Zilong Huang†
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

Bytedance Seed
Abstract

RWQA

This paper introduces S AIL, a single transformer unified
multimodal large language model (MLLM) that integrates
raw pixel encoding and language decoding within a singular architecture. Unlike existing modular MLLMs, which
rely on a pre-trained vision transformer (ViT), S AIL eliminates the need for a separate vision encoder, presenting
a more minimalist architecture design. Instead of introducing novel architectural components, S AIL adapts mixattention mechanisms and multimodal rotary position embedding to better align with the distinct characteristics of
visual and textual modalities. We systematically compare
S AIL’s properties—including scalability, cross-modal information flow patterns, and visual representation capabilities—with those of modular MLLMs. By scaling both training data and model size, S AIL achieves performance comparable to modular MLLMs. Notably, the removal of pretrained ViT components enhances S AIL’s scalability and results in significantly different cross-modal information flow
patterns. Moreover, S AIL demonstrates strong visual representation capabilities, achieving results on par with ViT22B in vision tasks such as semantic segmentation. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
bytedance/SAIL.

1. Introduction
The pursuit of multimodal intelligence has driven the
development of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [48, 58, 65], which typically adopt a modular design: a pre-trained vision encoder (e.g., CLIPViT [15, 59]) extracts image features, a Large Language
Model (LLM) [2, 16, 37, 55–57] processes text, and a
lightweight projector aligns the two modalities. This framework achieves strong performance through multi-stage pretraining, supervised fine-tuning (SFT), and post-training on
multimodal datasets [3, 18, 48, 70, 71, 84]. While effective,

SEEDB-IMG

AI2D

TextVQA

MMB

IMG CLS

OCR-B
IMG Seg

SAIL

(A)

SOLO

EVE

EVEv2

(B)

Figure 1. (A) Data scaling curve for Modular Multimodal Large
Language Model (MLLM) and S AIL, our Single Transformerbased MLLM. As pretraining data increases, the single transformer S AIL shows a sharper performance gain, demonstrating its
superior data scalability. Experiment settings are described in Section 4.3. (B) Comparison to existing Single Transformer-based
MLLMs: our S AIL pushes the performance boundaries on both
vision tasks and vision-language tasks.

this modular MLLM paradigm inherently fragments multimodal processing, reinforces reliance on pretrained visual
encoders, which may limit deployment flexibility and scalability [11, 21, 53].
A promising alternative is to eliminate the visual encoder entirely and process raw image patches and text tokens within a single Transformer. This unified architecture removes modality-specific modules, enabling parameter sharing and end-to-end learning of vision-language interactions. Previous works [11, 21, 53] have primarily explored the architecture design, training data, and methods of
Single Transformer-based MLLMs. However, little exploration has been given to their fundamental properties, such
as scalability, cross-modal information flow patterns, and
visual representation capabilities. A deeper understanding
of these properties is crucial for unlocking the full potential
of Single Transformer-based MLLMs.
In this work, we present an experimental analysis of
the fundamental properties of Single Transformer-based

20758

