This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MamV2XCalib: V2X-based Target-less Infrastructure Camera Calibration with
State Space Model
Yaoye Zhu Zhe Wang Yan Wang*
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
zhuyaoye22@gmail.com

wangzhe@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
As cooperative systems that leverage roadside cameras to
assist autonomous vehicle perception become increasingly
widespread, large-scale precise calibration of infrastructure cameras has become a critical issue. Traditional manual calibration methods are often time-consuming, laborintensive, and may require road closures. This paper proposes MamV2XCalib, the first V2X-based infrastructure
camera calibration method with the assistance of vehicleside LiDAR. MamV2XCalib only requires autonomous vehicles equipped with LiDAR to drive near the cameras to be
calibrated in the infrastructure, without the need for specific
reference objects or manual intervention. We also introduce
a new targetless LiDAR-camera calibration method, which
combines multi-scale features and a 4D correlation volume to estimate the correlation between vehicle-side point
clouds and roadside images. We model the temporal information and estimate the rotation angles with Mamba,
effectively addressing calibration failures in V2X scenarios caused by defects in the vehicle-side data (such as occlusions) and large differences in viewpoint. We evaluate
MamV2XCalib on the V2X-Seq and TUMTraf-V2X realworld datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness and robustness of our V2X-based automatic calibration approach.
Compared to previous LiDAR-camera methods designed
for calibration on one car, our approach achieves better and more stable calibration performance in V2X scenarios with fewer parameters. The code is available at
https://github.com/zhuyaoye/MamV2XCalib.

1. Introduction
In recent years, due to the inherent limitations of on-board
perception systems, many researchers have started focusing on utilizing external sensor information to assist autonomous vehicles [5, 10]. Among these external sources,
infrastructure cameras are widely used in V2X systems
* Corresponding author: wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

reference
images

(a) Calibration with targets includ- (b) Calibration with reference iming trajectory or vehicle itself
ages prepared before calibration

𝑡!"#
𝑡!"#

···

𝑡!

𝑡!

(c) Ours: V2X-based target-less camera calibration method

Figure 1. Comparison of roadside camera calibration methods.

for their wide deployment, broader field of view, and reduced occlusion [24]. However, outdoor deployment exposes roadside cameras to extreme weather and vibrations
from large vehicles, causing shifts from their initial positions. If not recalibrated, such shifts can significantly degrade the accuracy of data fusion between road and vehicle
sensors. In cases of large deviations, they may even result in
a complete loss of monitoring over the intended area [38].
Therefore, efficient, scalable calibration methods are essential for stable intelligent transportation systems in outdoor
environments.
Traditional calibration methods [32, 39] primarily rely
on manual targets, but unlike vehicle sensors that can be calibrated indoors, fixed roadside cameras cannot be relocated.
As the demand for camera calibration increases, these manual methods become time-consuming and labor-intensive
and may cause disruptions to regular traffic operations. Re-

26696

