This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Provable Importance of Gradients for
Autonomous Language-Assisted Image Clustering
Bo Peng, Jie Lu, Guangquan Zhang, Zhen Fang*
University of Technology Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Abstract
This paper investigates the recently emerged problem of
Language-assisted Image Clustering (LaIC), where textual
semantics are leveraged to improve the discriminability of
visual representations to facilitate image clustering. Due
to the unavailability of true class names, one of core challenges of LaIC lies in how to filter positive nouns, i.e., those
semantically close to the images of interest, from unlabeled
wild corpus data. Existing filtering strategies are predominantly based on the off-the-shelf feature space learned by
CLIP; however, despite being intuitive, these strategies lack
a rigorous theoretical foundation. To fill this gap, we propose a novel gradient-based framework, termed as GradNorm, which is theoretically guaranteed and shows strong
empirical performance. In particular, we measure the positiveness of each noun based on the magnitude of gradients
back-propagated from the cross-entropy between the predicted target distribution and the softmax output. Theoretically, we provide a rigorous error bound to quantify the
separability of positive nouns by GradNorm and prove that
GradNorm naturally subsumes existing filtering strategies
as extremely special cases of itself. Empirically, extensive
experiments show that GradNorm achieves the state-of-theart clustering performance on various benchmarks.

tering reply on purely visual supervision signals and therefore inherit limitations especially when images of interest
are visually similar to but semantically different from each
other.
This paper delves into a new landscape for image clustering by departing from the classic single-model toward a
multi-modal regime. In the visual domain, (deep) clustering
methods usually learn discriminative representations from
distributional priors [22, 39, 49], pseudo-labels [2, 3, 17,
62], neighborhood consistency [10, 56, 70] and augmentation invariance [12, 29, 31], which, however, can not be
directly transferred into the vision-language regime due to
the heterogeneous relation between visual and textual data.
While the advanced vision-language pre-training schemes,
e.g., CLIP [50], have emerged as promising alternatives for
visual representation learning by mapping textual and visual inputs into a unified representation space, harnessing
the power of texts to facilitate image clustering is still nontrivial due to the unavailability of class name priors.
To address this challenge, the mainstream solutions [1,
32] are to select positive nouns, i.e., those who best describe
images of interest, from unlabeled lexical databases in the
wild1 (e.g., WordNet [38]) for the textual pseudo-labeling of
each image. Despite recent empirical successes, the separability of positive nouns remains theoretically underexplored, with no prior work providing a rigorous formalization or provable error bounds. Our work thus complements
existing works by filling in the critical blank. In this paper,
we design a simple yet effective framework that provides a
provable guarantee for Language-assisted Image Clustering
(LaIC) from a novel perspective of gradient.
Methodologically, our proposed method GradNorm begins by learning a single-layer self-supervised classifier using CLIP features extracted from pseudo-labeled images.
Leveraging the alignment between the CLIP image and text
feature spaces [7], we extend the learned classifier to handle text features as well. Subsequently, we employ CLIP
features of unlabeled wild texts as input to compute the gra-

1. Introduction
As a fundamental problem in pattern recognition and machine learning, image clustering [36] seeks to separate a set
of unlabeled images into multiple groups such that images
in the same group are semantically similar to each other.
Due to its ability to reveal the inherent semantic structure
underlying the data without requiring laborious and trivial data labeling work, clustering has been shown to benefit
downstream tasks [4, 5, 27, 43–46, 69, 72, 74, 75, 77–79] in
computer vision. Despite increasing attention, the vast majority of strategies [18, 26, 34, 39, 61, 64, 66] to image clus-

1 Generally, “in-the-wild” data are those that can be collected almost for
free upon deploying machine learning models in the open world.

* Correspondence Author

19805

