This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapting Vehicle Detectors for Aerial Imagery
to Unseen Domains with Weak Supervision
Xiao Fang1 ,

Minhyek Jeon1 ,

Shuowen Hu2 ,
1

Zheyang Qin1 ,

Stanislav Panev1 ,

Shayok Chakraborty1,3 ,

Celso de Melo2 ,

Fernando De la Torre1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, 3 Florida State University,
{xfang2, minhyekj, zheyangq, spanev}@andrew.cmu.edu,
{celso.m.demelo.civ, shuowen.hu.civ}@army.mil, shayok@cs.fsu.edu, ftorre@cs.cmu.edu
Target

Environment

Abstract

Source

Environment

Utah, USA

Fine-tuning

Images with

weak labels

Detecting vehicles in aerial imagery is a critical task
with applications in traffic monitoring, urban planning, and
defense intelligence. Deep learning methods have provided
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results for this application. However, a significant challenge arises when models trained on
data from one geographic region fail to generalize effectively to other areas. Variability in factors such as environmental conditions, urban layouts, road networks, vehicle types, and image acquisition parameters (e.g., resolution, lighting, and angle) leads to domain shifts that degrade model performance. This paper proposes a novel
method that uses generative AI to synthesize high-quality
aerial images and their labels, improving detector training
through data augmentation. Our key contribution is the development of a multi-stage, multi-modal knowledge transfer framework utilizing fine-tuned latent diffusion models
(LDMs) to mitigate the distribution gap between the source
and target environments. Extensive experiments across diverse aerial imagery domains show consistent performance
improvements in AP50 over supervised learning on source
domain data, weakly supervised adaptation methods, unsupervised domain adaptation methods, and open-set object
detectors by 4-23%, 6-10%, 7-40%, and more than 50%,
respectively. Furthermore, we introduce two newly annotated aerial datasets from New Zealand and Utah to support further research in this field. Project page is available at: https://humansensinglab.github.io/
AGenDA

Stable

Diffusion

Car
Car
empty

Synthetic images

Selwyn, NZ
Images with

fine-grain labels

Cross-attention maps

Automatic

Labels

Open-Set

Detector

Detector

Detector

AP
Freeze
Trainable

Figure 1. Overview. We propose a pipeline that generates highquality aerial images along with their labels. Our method outperforms baseline detectors trained on source images and open-set
detectors directly inferred on target images.

nearly indistinguishable from real-world data [11, 34, 50].
Additionally, integrating natural human language has become crucial to modern vision systems. This integration
can take the form of conditioning the generation process
(for example, in text-to-image generative models [39, 44]
utilizing cross-attention mechanism) or serving as an additional modality that shares a common latent space with

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Generative AI have led to the development of diffusion-based models [48] that can synthesize images with unprecedented realism, making them

8088

