This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boost 3D Reconstruction using Diffusion-based Monocular Camera Calibration
Junyuan Deng1,2 Wei Yin2
Xiaoyang Guo2* Qian Zhang2
†
Xiaotao Hu1,2
Weiqiang Ren2
Xiao-Xiao Long3
Ping Tan1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Horizon Robotics

3

Nanjing University

Code: https://github.com/JunyuanDeng/DM-Calib

Abstract

pose estimation [58], 3D reconstruction [62], and zero-shot
metric depth estimation [85]. Traditional methods primarily
focus on multi-view calibration, typically involving multiple images of fixed intrinsics [47] or multiple images of
checkerboard patterns [95].
However, these methods depend heavily on dense multiview images with sufficient overlap, making them cumbersome and often impractical for sparse-view or even monocular setups. Consequently, monocular camera calibration has
garnered significant research interest.
Monocular camera calibration is inherently an ill-posed
problem, requiring additional information to address it. Traditional approaches have attempted to incorporate handcrafted knowledge to solve the problem, such as the gravity
direction [71], Manhattan World constraints [39], and human
face priors [25]. However, these handcrafted insights often
fail to generalize effectively across large diverse real-world
scenarios. To overcome these limitations, recent studies [96]
have recast monocular camera calibration as a learning-based
regression problem, leveraging a single image to directly infer its intrinsic parameters.
While learning-based methods benefit from data-driven
knowledge, outperforming traditional approaches, they are
constrained by the limited availability of public datasets.
As a result, these methods tend to overfit on training data
and exhibit poor generalization to unseen scenarios. This
limitation raises a critical question: What kind of knowledge
is necessary to develop a robust camera calibration method
that exhibits strong generalization capabilities?
One promising solution lies in leveraging stable diffusion priors [53]. The intuition behind stems from a key
observation: stable diffusion models possess an implicit understanding of imaging across different focal lengths. As
is widely known, Cameras with long focal lengths tend to
compress spatial relationships, resulting in a more flattened
image perspective, while wide-angle cameras exaggerate
depth and distance, resulting in a more pronounced perspective effect. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we present two portrait

In this paper, we present DM-Calib, a diffusion-based approach for estimating pinhole camera intrinsic parameters
from a single input image. Monocular camera calibration
is essential for many 3D vision tasks. However, most existing methods depend on handcrafted assumptions or are
constrained by limited training data, resulting in poor generalization across diverse real-world images. Recent advancements in stable diffusion models, trained on massive
data, have shown the ability to generate high-quality images
with varied characteristics. Emerging evidence indicates
that these models implicitly capture the relationship between
camera focal length and image content. Building on this
insight, we explore how to leverage the powerful priors of
diffusion models for monocular pinhole camera calibration.
Specifically, we introduce a new image-based representation,
termed Camera Image, which losslessly encodes the numerical camera intrinsics and integrates seamlessly with the diffusion framework. Using this representation, we reformulate
the problem of estimating camera intrinsics as the generation of a dense Camera Image conditioned on an input image.
By fine-tuning a stable diffusion model to generate a Camera
Image from a single RGB input, we can extract camera intrinsics via a RANSAC operation. We further demonstrate that
our monocular calibration method enhances performance
across various 3D tasks, including zero-shot metric depth
estimation, 3D metrology, pose estimation and sparse-view
reconstruction. Extensive experiments on multiple public
datasets show that our approach significantly outperforms
baselines and provides broad benefits to 3D vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is a foundational task in 3D computer
vision, critical for numerous applications such as camera
* Project Leader.
† Corresponding author.

7110

