This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind the Gap: Preserving and Compensating for the Modality Gap in
CLIP-Based Continual Learning
Linlan Huang1 , Xusheng Cao1 , Haori Lu1 , Yifan Meng1 , Fei Yang2,1 , Xialei Liu2,1 *
1
2
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
{huanglinlan, caoxusheng, luhaori}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {feiyang, xialei}@nankai.edu.cn

Gap Restriction

Abstract
Continual learning aims to enable models to learn sequentially from continuously incoming data while retaining
performance on previously learned tasks. With the Contrastive Language-Image Pre-trained model (CLIP) exhibiting strong capabilities across various downstream tasks,
there has been growing interest in leveraging CLIP for continual learning in such scenarios. Most existing works
overlook the inherent modality gap in CLIP, a key factor in its generalization and adaptability. In this paper,
we analyze the variations in the modality gap during the
fine-tuning of vision-language pre-trained models. Our
observations reveal that the modality gap effectively reflects the extent to which pre-trained knowledge is preserved. Based on these insights, we propose a simple yet
effective method, MG-CLIP, that improves CLIP’s performance in class-incremental learning. Our approach leverages modality gap preservation to mitigate forgetting and
modality gap compensation to enhance the capacity for
new data, introducing a novel modality-gap-based perspective for continual learning. Extensive experiments on
multiple benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms existing approaches without requiring additional replay data. Our code is available at https://github.
com/linlany/MindtheGap.

Text
features

ty
ali
d
o p
M Ga

Image
features

Gap
Compensating

Figure 1. Left: In continual learning, we preserve the modality
gap to retain CLIP’s original knowledge and mitigate forgetting.
Right: Due to the modality gap, the text classifier’s performance is
restricted. We compensate for it through an intra-modal classifier
by enhancing its adaptability and refining decision boundaries.

and generalization capabilities for continual learning [15,
23, 36]. Among pre-trained models, visual language pretrained models such as CLIP demonstrate excellent generalization to downstream tasks, showcasing impressive
zero-shot capabilities [16, 17, 26]. Consequently, CLIPbased continual learning (CL) has emerged as a promising new direction, attracting increasing attention from researchers [11, 12, 30, 40].
Existing CLIP-based continual learning methods can be
broadly categorized into two approaches: one fine-tunes
the backbone to modify feature representations [21, 40],
while the other freezes the backbone and introduces learnable modules for continual learning [11, 12, 49]. They often
treat CLIP as a feature extractor, approximating it to a textenhanced visual model [21]. Based on this view, they focus
on better feature fusion for improved performance [12, 49]
or leveraging textual information to guide visual feature
adaptation [11]. However, these methods often overlook
CLIP’s unique cross-modal properties, the modality gap,
distinguishing it from unimodal systems. The modality gap
is observed in previous work [19]. As shown in Fig. 1 (left),
the modality gap is that the intra-modal feature distance is
small while the inter-modal distance is large. The feature

1. Introduction
The goal of continual learning is to enable models to continuously acquire new knowledge and adapt to the everchanging real world [22, 31]. Traditional approaches to
continual learning focus on training a model from scratch,
aiming to reduce catastrophic forgetting of old task knowledge while maintaining plasticity to adapt to new data [18].
This is often referred to as the stability-plasticity tradeoff. However, with the recent development of large-scale
pre-trained models, these models offer stronger stability
* Corresponding author.

3777

