This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Diffusion Models and 3D Representations:
A 3D Consistent Super-Resolution Framework
Yi-Ting Chen1
Ting-Hsuan Liao1
Pengsheng Guo2
3
Alexander Schwing
Jia-Bin Huang1
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
Carnegie Mellon University
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

(a) LR novel view

(b) 3DSR trained on LR images

(c) 3DSR trained with 3DSR (ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison on the LLFF dataset with a downsampling factor of ×8 and upsampling of ×4. We train 3DGS using
different super-resolved (SR) images and render novel views. The results demonstrate that our method yields fewer artifacts from 3D
inconsistencies and better preserves overall structural integrity compared to the baselines.

Abstract
We propose 3D Super Resolution (3DSR), a novel 3D
Gaussian-splatting-based super-resolution framework that
leverages off-the-shelf diffusion-based 2D super-resolution
models. 3DSR encourages 3D consistency across views via
the use of an explicit 3D Gaussian-splatting-based scene
representation. This makes the proposed 3DSR different
from prior work, such as image upsampling or the use
of video super-resolution, which either don’t consider 3D
consistency or aim to incorporate 3D consistency implicitly. Notably, our method enhances visual quality without
additional fine-tuning, ensuring spatial coherence within
the reconstructed scene. We evaluate 3DSR on MipNeRF360 and LLFF data, demonstrating that it produces

13481

high-resolution results that are visually compelling, while
maintaining structural consistency in 3D reconstructions.
Code will be released.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in 3D representation learning have significantly improved novel view synthesis (NVS), enabling
realistic rendering of scenes from sparse observations.
Concretely, techniques such as Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [24] and Gaussian Splatting (GS) [14] have
demonstrated remarkable success in reconstructing highfidelity 3D representations, benefiting applications in virtual reality, augmented reality, robotics, and content cre-

