This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth AnyEvent: A Cross-Modal Distillation Paradigm for Event-Based
Monocular Depth Estimation
Luca Bartolomei∗,†

Enrico Mannocci†
∗

Fabio Tosi†

Matteo Poggi∗,†

Stefano Mattoccia∗,†

Advanced Research Center on Electronic System (ARCES)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy

†

https://bartn8.github.io/depthanyevent
Frame (Only for Distillation)

E2Depth

DepthAnyEvent-R

DepthAnyEvent-R (Distillation)

Events

RMSE: 13.160 M

RMSE: 11.535 M

RMSE: 9.198 M

Figure 1. DepthAnyEvent-R in action. The first column shows the input frame (used only for distillation) and the corresponding event
visualization. The other three columns present depth estimation results from different approaches: E2Depth [15], our DepthAnyEvent-R,
and our DepthAnyEvent-R trained with our distillation approach. The top row shows the estimated depth maps while the bottom row
depicts their corresponding RMSE visualizations.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Depth perception from cameras is paramount for many application fields, such as those concerning the autonomous
navigation of agents in complex scenarios or robotic tasks.
In these fields, learning-based methods using conventional
cameras have obtained compelling results in the last decade.
Moreover, this paradigm enabled inferring depth from a single camera, which brings significant advantages compared
to multicamera setups in terms of cost, calibration complexity, and physical constraints. Nonetheless, conventional
camera systems struggle to provide a prompt and reliable
perception of the sensed environment when dealing with
highly dynamic scenes resulting from the fast movement
of vehicles, drones, robots or in the presence of challenging illumination conditions such as high contrast scenarios, low light, or rapid lighting changes. These limitations
are intrinsic to the conventional camera acquisition technology occurring at discrete periodic intervals and with a limited dynamic range, causing motion blur, over/under exposure, and potentially missing critical information between
frames. In contrast, the intrinsic ability to capture scene
changes as soon as they appear – with microsecond temporal resolution – and the much higher dynamic range made

Event cameras capture sparse, high-temporal-resolution
visual information, making them particularly suitable for
challenging environments with high-speed motion and
strongly varying lighting conditions. However, the lack of
large datasets with dense ground-truth depth annotations
hinders learning-based monocular depth estimation from
event data. To address this limitation, we propose a crossmodal distillation paradigm to generate dense proxy labels
leveraging a Vision Foundation Model (VFM). Our strategy
requires an event stream spatially aligned with RGB frames,
a simple setup even available off-the-shelf, and exploits the
robustness of large-scale VFMs. Additionally, we propose
to adapt VFMs, either a vanilla one like Depth Anything v2
(DAv2), or deriving from it a novel recurrent architecture to
infer depth from monocular event cameras. We evaluate our
approach with synthetic and real-world datasets, demonstrating that i) our cross-modal paradigm achieves competitive performance compared to fully supervised methods
without requiring expensive depth annotations, and ii) our
VFM-based models achieve state-of-the-art performance.

19669

