This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffPCI: Large Motion Point Cloud frame Interpolation with Diffusion Model
Tianyu Zhang1 Haobo Jiang2 Jian Yang1 Jin Xie3 *
1
College of Computer Science, Nankai University 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University
tianyu.zhang@mail.nankai.edu.cn

haobo.jiang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

csjyang@nankai.edu.cn

csjxie@nju.edu.cn

Point cloud interpolation aims to recover intermediate
frames for temporally smoothing a point cloud sequence.
However, real-world challenges, such as uneven or large
scene motions, cause existing methods to struggle with limited interpolation precision. To address this, we introduce
DiffPCI, a novel diffusion interpolation model that formulates the frame interpolation task as a progressive denoising
diffusion process. Training DiffPCI involves two key stages:
a forward interpolation diffusion process and a reverse interpolation denoising process. In the forward process, the
clean intermediate frame is progressively transformed into
a noisy one through continuous Gaussian noise injection.
The reverse process then focuses on training a denoiser to
gradually refine this noisy frame back to the ground-truth
frame. In particular, we derive a point cloud interpolationspecific variational lower bound as our optimization objective for denoiser training. Furthermore, to alleviate the interpolation error especially in highly dynamic scenes, we
develop a novel full-scale, dual-branch denoiser that enables more comprehensive front-back frame information fusion for robust bi-directional interpolation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiffPCI significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art frame interpolation methods
(e.g. 27% and 860% reduction in the Chamfer Distance and
Earth Mover’s Distance on Nuscenes).

ing richer environmental information and smoother target
representations, with a variety of downstream applications
such as autonomous driving and 3D reconstruction [5, 13–
15, 26, 42, 48, 52].
In earlier works, intermediate point clouds were constructed as Pseudo-LiDAR [19, 20] using known camera
intrinsics. Recent approaches [22, 45, 47, 54] focus on directly interpolating point clouds onto the LiDAR data by
approximating correspondences between points in consecutive frames. However, methods that estimate correspondences using implicit models [12, 45, 54] suffer from poor
interpretability and require complex model designs. By
contrast, methods such as PointINet [22] and FastPCI [47],
which explicitly estimate scene flow for frame interpolation, offer greater interpretability. Among these, PointINet
[22] employs bidirectional pre-trained optical flow to estimate point mappings between frames, addressing the imbalance issue in frame predictions caused by unidirectional
optical flow. However, in highly dynamic autonomous driving scenarios, significant and irregular object motion greatly
increases the uncertainty of frame interpolation, resulting
in limited performance and high-noise predictions, particularly in the cases involving substantial movement.

1. Introduction

The geometric distortion or motion trajectory hopping of
the interpolation point cloud is often generated by the above
methods due to the local feature correlation fracture. The
fundamental reason is that these methods treat interpolation as a deterministic optimization problem and try to predict the intermediate frame directly through a single feedforward network or iterative optimization while ignoring
the probability distribution characteristics and multi-modal
possibilities implied in the motion process. The diffusion
model can explicitly model the gradient path from noise
distribution to target data distribution by decomposing the
data generation process into a Markov chain with gradual
de-noising, which provides a new perspective for solving
large motion interpolation problems. Currently, the effectiveness of the diffusion model in 3D point cloud generation [21, 25, 44, 51, 55] and video interpolation [3, 11, 38]
has been studied and verified, but its potential in point cloud

Advancements in 3D sensor technology, particularly LiDAR, have facilitated the utilization of sequential point
clouds in applications such as autonomous driving, environmental monitoring, and 3D modeling. However, the
study of high-frequency sequential point clouds is still limited by the frequency constraint of existing LiDAR sensors. Point cloud frame interpolation (PCI) addresses
this challenge by generating intermediate frames, provid* Corresponding author.

27348

