This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaRender: Training-Free Occlusion Control in Image Generation via Latent
Rendering
Xiaohang Zhan
Tencent

Dingming Liu
Tencent

xiaohangzhan@outlook.com

dingmingliu3722@gmail.com

(1) Precise control of occlusion

cat

dog

branch

(2) Complex occlusion

cat

dog

branch

branch

dog

cat

(3) Unusual occlusion

(4) Surreal occlusion

giraffe

giraffe

house

lawn

piano

sofa

airplane
cat

moon

teddy

(5) Change opacity

store

glass door

Figure 1. This work enables precise control of occlusion relationships among objects, and performs well in situations including complex,
unusual and surreal occlusion. It also enables rich effects such as opacity control. All of these do not require training or fine-tuning. The
background is omitted from the graph for clarity.

Abstract
We propose a novel training-free image generation algorithm that precisely controls the occlusion relationships between objects in an image. Existing image generation methods typically rely on prompts to influence occlusion, which
often lack precision. While layout-to-image methods provide control over object locations, they fail to address occlusion relationships explicitly. Given a pre-trained image
diffusion model, our method leverages volume rendering
principles to “render” the scene in latent space, guided by
occlusion relationships and the estimated transmittance of

objects. This approach does not require retraining or finetuning the image diffusion model, yet it enables accurate
occlusion control due to its physics-grounded foundation.
In extensive experiments, our method significantly outperforms existing approaches in terms of occlusion accuracy.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that by adjusting the opacities of objects or concepts during rendering, our method
can achieve a variety of effects, such as altering the transparency of objects, the density of mass (e.g., forests), the
concentration of particles (e.g., rain, fog), the intensity of
light, and the strength of lens effects, etc.

19679

