This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AID: Adapting Image2Video Diffusion Models for
Instruction-guided Video Prediction
Zhen Xing1,2

Qi Dai 3

Zejia Weng1,2

Zuxuan Wu1,2†

Yu-Gang Jiang1,2

1

2

1

Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract

Text-guided video prediction (TVP) involves predicting the
motion of future frames from the initial frame according to
an instruction, which has wide applications in virtual reality, robotics, and content creation. Previous TVP methods
make significant breakthroughs by adapting Stable Diffusion for this task. However, they struggle with frame consistency and temporal stability primarily due to the limited
scale of video datasets. We observe that pretrained Image2Video diffusion models possess good video dynamics
priors but lack fine-grained textual control. Hence, transferring pretrained models to leverage their video dynamic
priors while injecting fine-grained control to generate controllable videos is both a meaningful and challenging task.
To achieve this, we introduce the Multi-Modal Large Language Model (MLLM) to predict future video states based
on initial frames and text instructions. More specifically, we
design a dual query transformer (DQFormer) architecture,
which integrates the instructions and frames into the conditional embeddings for future frame prediction. Additionally, we develop Temporal and Spatial Adapters that can
quickly transfer general video diffusion models to specific
scenarios with minimal training costs. Experimental results
show that our method significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art techniques on four datasets: Something Something
V2, Epic Kitchen-100, Bridge Data, and UCF-101. Notably, AID achieves 91.2% and 55.5% FVD improvements
on Bridge and SSv2 respectively, demonstrating its effectiveness in various domains.

licly available image-text datasets [49]. For video generation, Sora [44], Wan [62] and SVD [1] achieve remarkable
performance, attributable to their large-scale private videotext datasets and resource-intensive pretraining.
Compared to images, videos encompass dynamic temporal changes and convey richer semantic content [35, 53,
64, 68]. Controllable video generation has a broader range
of potential applications [34, 54–57, 69]. Text-guided video
prediction (TVP) task is a crucial downstream task in video
generation, involving predicting future video frames based
on a few initial frames and an instruction text. TVP is particularly helpful for generating long videos. Moreover, predicting future trajectories and states based on the current
initial state is highly valuable for robotic arm manipulation
and planning in robotic and first-person VR devices.
Despite many benefits of the TVP task, it also presents
several challenges. These include understanding the initial frames, aligning the initial frames with the instruction
text, and generating consistent future frames. Compared
to the creative demands of text-to-video models [2, 24, 25,
50, 70, 71], TVP focuses more on the accuracy of the generated video following instructions. Recently, most methods [19, 21, 40] address this problem by extending textto-image models [48] to TVP tasks. While these models
possess strong creative capabilities, they lack video prior
information. Training such models with a small amount of
domain-specific data often results in poor video consistency
and stability. For instance, tutorial videos [18], first-person
cooking videos [9], and robotic arm operation videos [10]
often struggle with generation quality due to the limited
scale of video data in these specific fields. However, we
observe that general video generation models, which have
been pretrained on extensive datasets, have learned robust
video dynamics priors. As a result, transferring these wellpretrained video generation models [1, 5, 44, 50] to specific
domain applications holds significant potential.
To adapt the pretrained video diffusion model to TVP
tasks, we face two main challenges: firstly, how to design
the fine-grained textual description and inject it into the

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion models have made significant advancements in image generation [47, 48, 76–80], rapidly
becoming one of the hottest topics in computer vision. The
tremendous success of image generation models is based on
the collection of billions of high-quality, large-scale, pub1 † Corresponding author.

21243

