This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Att-Adapter: A Robust and Precise Domain-Specific Multi-Attributes T2I
Diffusion Adapter via Conditional Variational Autoencoder
Wonwoong Cho1 *
Yan-Ying Chen2
Matthew Klenk2
David I. Inouye1
Yanxia Zhang2
1
2
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47906
Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos, CA, 94022
“A photo of a woman smiling”

Abstract

Realistic
Vision 4.0
+“the width of nose
is small”

Text-to-Image (T2I) Diffusion Models have achieved remarkable performance in generating high quality images.
However, enabling precise control of continuous attributes,
especially multiple attributes simultaneously, in a new domain (e.g., numeric values like eye openness or car width)
with text-only guidance remains a significant challenge.
To address this, we introduce the Attribute (Att) Adapter,
a novel plug-and-play module designed to enable finegrained, multi-attributes control in pretrained diffusion
models. Our approach learns a single control adapter
from a set of sample images that can be unpaired and
contain multiple visual attributes. The Att-Adapter leverages the decoupled cross attention module to naturally harmonize the multiple domain attributes with text conditioning. We further introduce Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE) to the Att-Adapter to mitigate overfitting,
matching the diverse nature of the visual world. Evaluations on two public datasets show that Att-Adapter outperforms all LoRA-based baselines in controlling continuous attributes. Additionally, our method enables a broader
control range and also improves disentanglement across
multiple attributes, surpassing StyleGAN-based techniques.
Notably, Att-Adapter is flexible, requiring no paired synthetic data for training, and is easily scalable to multiple attributes with a single model. The project page is
available at: https://tri-mac.github.io/attadapter/.

+“the width of nose
is big”

+“closing eyes”

+“opening eyes widely”

Realistic
Vision 4.0
+ Att-Adapter
+

+

0.3

width of nose

0.7

+

width of nose

+

0.2

eyes openness

0.8

eyes openness

Figure 1. Att-Adapter enables continuous control (e.g., 0 to 1)
over subtle visual details like nose width or eye openness, which
are difficult to capture with discrete text-based conditioning.

Large pretrained T2I diffusion models [25, 28, 29, 31] have
achieved remarkable success in generating high quality and
realistic images based solely on text prompts. However, allowing users precise control over the generated content or
tailoring it to a specific new domain remains challenging
[7, 10, 30, 40]. For example, with the prompt “A photo of

a woman smiling”, one might want to adjust specific facial
attributes such as “width of nose” and “openness of eyes”
by assigning specific numeric values to these attributes.
As Fig. 1 demonstrates, current models like Stable Diffusion [29] (Realistic Vision 4.01 ) fail to reliably control these
fine-grained attributes, often misinterpreting or neglecting
the specified modifications.
Early domain adaptation methods rely on text-based
conditioning, either by optimizing text tokens [7, 30, 42]
or fine-tuning T2I models using Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) [15]. However, text-only conditioning are inherently limited: texts often underspecifies visual details such
as object type, perspective and style [16, 42], and existing
methods typically handle only discrete attribute values.
Recent efforts attempt to address continuos attribute
[3, 8, 21, 26]. AttributeControl [3] modifies CLIP embeddings but struggles with indescribable visual attributes (e.g.,
nose width) that rarely appear in text. Other methods, such
as W+ Adapter[21] and PreciseControl [26], depend on pretrained StyleGAN latent spaces, making generation quality
highly dependent on separately trained GANs. ConceptSlider [8] proposes a LoRA-based controller for indescribable visual attributes but requires paired data and trains separate models per attribute (Fig. 2). This limits its use to the
case where only one attribute is paired while others remain
unchanged, which makes it infeasible in unpaired multiattribute data settings without generating synthetic pairs.

* A significant portion of this work was performed during internship at
Toyota Research Institute.

1 https : / / huggingface . co / stablediffusionapi /
realistic-vision-v40

1. Introduction

15626

