This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ObjectMate: A Recurrence Prior for Object Insertion
and Subject-Driven Generation
Daniel Winter1,2
Asaf Shul1,2
Matan Cohen1
1
1
Dana Berman
Yael Pritch
Alex Rav-Acha1
Yedid Hoshen1,2
1

Google

2

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

{daniel.winter, asaf.shul, yedid.hoshen}@mail.huji.ac.il

https://object-mate.com

Background

a * on the
surface of moon

Result

a * on a mirror
with the pyramids
in the background

a * in the
snow

References

References

Subject generation

Object insertion

Figure 1. ObjectMate. Our method composes objects into scenes with photorealistic pose and lighting, while preserving their identity.
The scene can be specified via an image or text. We do not use test-time tuning.

Abstract
This paper introduces a tuning-free method for both object insertion and subject-driven generation. The task involves composing an object, given multiple views, into a
scene specified by either an image or text. Existing methods
struggle to fully meet the task’s challenging objectives: (i)
seamlessly composing the object into the scene with photorealistic pose and lighting, and (ii) preserving the object’s
identity. We hypothesize that achieving these goals requires
large-scale supervision, but manually collecting sufficient
data is simply too expensive. The key observation in this
paper is that many mass-produced objects recur across multiple images of large unlabeled datasets, in different scenes,

16281

poses, and lighting conditions. We use this observation
to create massive supervision by retrieving sets of diverse
views of the same object. This powerful paired dataset enables us to train a straightforward text-to-image diffusion
architecture to map the object and scene descriptions to
the composite image. We compare our method, ObjectMate, with state-of-the-art methods for object insertion and
subject-driven generation, using a single or multiple references. Empirically, ObjectMate achieves superior identity
preservation and more photorealistic composition. Differently from many other multi-reference methods, ObjectMate
does not require slow test-time tuning.

