This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Interpretable Queries for Explainable Image Classification with
Information Pursuit
Stefan Kolek
LMU Munich

Aditya Chattopadhyay
AWS AI Labs*

Hector Andrade-Loarca†
Technical University of Munich

Kwan Ho Ryan Chan
University of Pennsylvania

Gitta Kutyniok
LMU Munich

Abstract

René Vidal
University of Pennsylvania

Query Dictionary

Parameter Space
Swims?

Information Pursuit (IP) is a recently introduced learning
framework to construct classifiers that are interpretableby-design. Given a set of task-relevant and interpretable
data queries, IP selects a small subset of the most informative queries and makes predictions based on the gathered query-answer pairs. However, a key limitation of IP
is its dependency on task-relevant interpretable queries,
which typically require considerable data annotation and
curation efforts. While previous approaches have explored
using general-purpose large language models to generate
these query sets, they rely on prompt engineering heuristics and often yield suboptimal query sets, resulting in a
performance gap between IP and non-interpretable blackbox predictors. In this work, we propose parameterizing IP
queries as a learnable dictionary defined in the latent space
of vision-language models such as CLIP. We formulate an
optimization objective to learn IP queries and propose an
alternating optimization algorithm that shares appealing
connections with classic sparse dictionary learning algorithms. Our learned dictionary outperforms baseline methods based on handcrafted or prompted dictionaries across
several image classification benchmarks.

Brown fur?

Prediction: Horse

Wings?
Animal?

Classifier

Vehicle?

IP Algorithm

4

1
Query-Answer History

Input Image
2

Wings? No.

3

1. Query: Animal? Yes.
2. Query: Swims? No.
3. Query: Pony Tail? Yes.

Figure 1. Illustration of image classification via the IP algorithm.
In step (1), the IP algorithm selects the next most informative
query from the query dictionary based on the current query-answer
history. The selected query (blue) asks if the input image contains
“wings”. In step (2), an answer mechanism determines the query
answer. In step (3), the resulting query-answer pair “Wings? No.”
is appended to the query-answer history. In step (4), the queryanswer pair history serves as input to the classifier: if the entropy
of the predicted label distribution is sufficiently small the classifier predicts the class label of the image; otherwise step (1-4) is
repeated. While prior work has relied on predefined query dictionaries, this work proposes to parameterize queries in a semantic
embedding space and learn the query dictionary for IP.

Once the posterior reaches a user-defined confidence level,
IP stops querying the data and makes a prediction. The explanation for the prediction is the sequence of interpretable
query-answer pairs selected by IP to make the prediction
(see Fig. 1 for an overview).
IP has four key ingredients: (1) a dictionary of interpretable and task-relevant queries, (2) a mechanism for selecting queries in order of information gain, (3) a mechanism for answering selected queries, and (4) a classifier that
makes a prediction based on the sequence of query-answer
pairs. In previous IP work [5, 6, 8], the query dictionary for
image classification was handcrafted in the form of manually annotated concepts, such as those found in the CUB200-2011 dataset [36], or concepts that were generated by a
large language model (LLM), following a human prompt.

1. Introduction
There is a significant interest in the development of machine learning models, which are highly accurate and interpretable by-design. Such models aim to provide transparent and explainable predictions. Information Pursuit (IP)
[5, 6, 8] is a recent promising framework for interpretable
by-design machine learning. Given a predefined finite dictionary of semantic queries relevant to the task, the IP algorithm sequentially selects interpretable queries over the input data in order of information gain, updating the posterior
at each step given the previously asked query-answer pairs.
* Work done prior to joining Amazon Web Services (AWS).
† Affiliated with the Munich Center of Machine Learning.

3947

