This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Extending Foundational Monocular Depth Estimators to Fisheye Cameras
with Calibration Tokens
Suchisrit Gangopadhyay1 *, Jung-Hee Kim2 *, Xien Chen1 *, Patrick Rim1 , Hyoungseob Park1 , Alex Wong1
Yale University1 , Michigan State University2
{rit.gangopadhyay,xien.chen,patrick.rim,hyoungseob.park,alex.wong}@yale.edu, kimjun84@msu.edu

Abstract
We propose a method to extend foundational monocular depth estimators (FMDEs), trained on perspective images, to fisheye images. Despite being trained on tens of
millions of images, FMDEs are susceptible to the covariate shift introduced by changes in camera calibration (intrinsic, distortion) parameters, leading to erroneous depth
estimates. Our method aligns the distribution of latent embeddings encoding fisheye images to those of perspective
images, enabling the reuse of FMDEs for fisheye cameras
without retraining or finetuning. To this end, we introduce a set of Calibration Tokens as a light-weight adaptation mechanism that modulates the latent embeddings
for alignment. By exploiting the already expressive latent
space of FMDEs, we posit that modulating their embeddings avoids the negative impact of artifacts and loss introduced in conventional recalibration or map projection
to a canonical reference frame in the image space. Our
method is self-supervised and does not require fisheye images but leverages publicly available large-scale perspective image datasets. This is done by recalibrating perspective images to fisheye images, and enforcing consistency between their estimates during training. We evaluate our approach with several FMDEs, on both indoors and outdoors,
where we consistently improve over state-of-the-art methods using a single set of tokens for both. Code available at:
github.com/JungHeeKim29/calibration-token.

Figure 1. Foundational monocular depth estimators fail on
fisheye images. Despite being trained on large-scale datasets,
foundational monocular depth estimators (FMDEs) models produces erroneous outputs. The inaccurate, blurry estimates are
caused by a covariate shift that stem from fisheye distortion.

eye or other wide-angle cameras, which allows for wider
coverage of the 3D environment. However, images captured by these cameras also come with substantial distortion, which arise from differences in projective geometry,
where straight lines within the 3D environment or the 3D
scene are preserved in perspective images but may appear
curved in fisheye images.
Foundational monocular depth estimators (FMDEs) [44,
48, 73] are trained on orders of tens of millions of images, enabling them to generalize across a wide range 3D
scenes. However, their training data is comprised of internet images, which are predominantly captured using perspective cameras. Hence, despite being trained on largescale datasets, FMDEs produce erroneous estimates when
transferred to fisheye images (see Fig. 1). These errors
stem from a covariate shift, which can be characterized by
changes in camera calibration (intrinsic, distortion) parameters – leading to differences in object appearance and their
perceived depth or distance from the camera.
To address fisheye distortion, one solution is to recalibrate and undistort images or perform a map projection to
some canonical reference frame. In principle, if one has
the correct calibration, it is possible to re-project a fisheye image into a perspective-like view (or vice versa). In
practice, however, there are several problems: (1) The calibration process itself can be error-prone and sensitive to
physical perturbations in the camera system. Minor bumps,
focus changes, or lens replacements can degrade or inval-

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction is a fundamental
component in many spatial applications, including autonomous vehicles, extended reality (XR), robotic manipulation. Each of these applications has unique demands
for the field of view (FOV), often wider than the standard
(perspective) camera. To meet this need, these applications tend to be deployed on systems equipped with fish* Equal contribution

5198

