This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDFace: Face Template Protection for Efficient and Secure Identification
Sunpill Kim1† Seunghun Paik1† Chanwoo Hwang1 Dongsoo Kim1 Junbum Shin2 Jae Hong Seo1 *
1
Department of Mathematics & Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang University
2
CryptoLab Inc.
{ksp0352, whitesoonguh, aa5568, frds37, jaehongseo}@hanyang.ac.kr, junbum.shin@cryptolab.co.kr

Abstract
As face recognition systems (FRS) become more widely
used, user privacy becomes more important. A key privacy issue in FRS is protecting the user’s face template, as
the characteristics of the user’s face image can be recovered from the template. Although recent advances in cryptographic tools such as homomorphic encryption (HE) have
provided opportunities for securing the FRS, HE cannot be
used directly with FRS in an efficient plug-and-play manner.
In particular, although HE is functionally complete for arbitrary programs, it is basically designed for algebraic operations on encrypted data of predetermined shape, such as
a polynomial ring. Thus, a non-tailored combination of HE
and the system can yield very inefficient performance, and
many previous HE-based face template protection methods
are hundreds of times slower than plain systems without
protection. In this study, we propose IDFace, a new HEbased secure and efficient face identification method with
template protection. IDFace is designed on the basis of two
novel techniques for efficient searching on a (homomorphically encrypted) biometric database with an angular metric. The first technique is a template representation transformation that sharply reduces the unit cost for the matching
test. The second is a space-efficient encoding that reduces
wasted space from the encryption algorithm, thus saving the
number of operations on encrypted templates. Through experiments, we show that IDFace can identify a face template from among a database of 1M encrypted templates in
126ms, showing only 2× overhead compared to the identification over plaintexts.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements of the metric learning on the hypersphere have greatly improved the performance of face
recognition systems (FRS) [8, 16, 30, 38, 39, 52, 67, 70],
enabling various real-world applications of them. However,
* Corresponding author
† These co-first authors contributed equally to this work

as the advanced FRS extracts more discriminative characteristics from a user’s face image to his/her face template,
privacy concerns regarding the secure storage of these templates become intensified. The advances on FRSs have focused on improving performance without protecting users’
face templates, and using them without appropriate template protection methods can cause severe privacy problems. For example, several studies [19, 35, 36, 41, 48, 60–
62] showed that face images can be reconstructed from corresponding unprotected face templates, even without seeing
the internal parameters of the target FRS. Even worse, the
reconstructed faces can be exploited for further malicious
purposes, e.g., impersonating the identity of the recovered
faces in other FRSs, including commercial ones [41, 68].
Hence, for real-world applications such as identification at
the airport or entrance of a building, as well-documented in
GDPR [65], secure storage of templates becomes one of the
most important security goals.
Faces are a form of biometrics, and biometric template
protection (BTP) has been researched for a long time in
various types of biometrics, including irises [23, 45, 69],
fingerprints [12, 32, 56, 64], and recently faces [7, 11, 20,
40, 44]. The security notions of BTP are well established
and have three standard requirements according to ISO/IEC
24745 [29]: irreversibility, revocability, and unlinkability.
For pursuing concrete and provable security, cryptographic
tools such as cryptographic hash functions and homomorphic encryptions (HE) [22] are widely employed on BTP
designs. Despite strong security guarantees from these cryptographic tools, simultaneously achieving an appropriate
level of security without sacrificing performance is still
challenging. One obstacle is that cryptographic tools are designed to deal with specific types of data, e.g., bit-strings
or polynomials. In particular, contrary to classical biometrics such as iris and fingerprint, whose templates are usually represented as bit-strings [15, 49], most FRSs deal with
real-valued templates. This makes designing BTPs for faces
more challenging than other classical biometrics. Moreover,
for applying BTPs in closed-set face recognition scenarios
where the user’s images can be utilized for training or fine-

13995

