This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SUB: Benchmarking CBM Generalization via Synthetic Attribute Substitutions
Jessica Bader1
1

Leander Girrbach1

Zeynep Akata1

Stephan Alaniz2 *

Technical University of Munich, Helmholtz Munich, Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
2

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
jessica.bader@tum.de

SUB: Dataset with Attribute Substitutions

Abstract

Class: Blue Jay; Substitution: Blue Crown → Yellow Crown

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) and other conceptbased interpretable models show great promise for making AI applications more transparent, which is essential
in fields like medicine. Despite their success, we demonstrate that CBMs struggle to reliably identify the correct
concepts under distribution shifts. To assess the robustness of CBMs to concept variations, we introduce SUB:
a fine-grained image and concept benchmark containing
38,400 synthetic images based on the CUB dataset. To create SUB, we select a CUB subset of 33 bird classes and
45 concepts to generate images which substitute a specific
concept, such as wing color or belly pattern. We introduce a novel Tied Diffusion Guidance (TDG) method to
precisely control generated images, where noise sharing
for two parallel denoising processes ensures that both the
correct bird class and the correct attribute are generated.
This novel benchmark enables rigorous evaluation of CBMs
and similar interpretable models, contributing to the development of more robust methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/ExplainableML/sub and the dataset at
http://huggingface.co/datasets/Jessica-bader/SUB.
.

Real

CBM

CLS

Blue Jay

Yellow crown

…
Blue wings
White wings

Concepts c

SUB

Blue crown

CBM

Predict y
CLS

Blue Jay

Yellow crown

…

* Work was done at TUM and Helmholtz Munich.

Benchmarking CBM Generalization
Predict y
Concepts c
Blue crown

Blue wings

correct

detected

White wings

incorrect

not detected

Figure 1. (Top) TGD modifies attributes where prompting fails.
(Bottom) The CBM generalizes poorly, memorizing the “Blue
Jay” concept vector and mis-classifying the modified concept.

1. Introduction
While deep learning models excel on complex tasks, they
are often criticized for lack of transparency in their reasoning, causing a severe bottleneck in the deployment of deep
models in real-world contexts. For example, in the medical field, the model’s reasoning must be present in order to
be used by physicians. Interpretable models are essential to
address these needs. One core method is the Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) [30], which generates intermediate,
interpretable concepts to inform the final prediction.
CBM evaluation exhibits a limitation, as demonstrated
in Fig. 1. We expect the CBM to assign the bottom bird
the label yellow crown, but it still identifies a blue crown.
In fact, the CBM predicts the exact concept vector associ-

Tied Guidance (Ours)

T2I Prompting
“Blue Jay with a yellow crown”

ated with the Blue Jay class (middle), despite clear differences. This observation suggests that the CBM may ground
predictions in extraneous factors, potentially entirely unrelated to the visible concepts, rather than those in the image.
Ergo, the CBM defaults to predicting the concept vector of
the most similar training class. Such behavior raises doubts
about the validity of the so-called concept predictions as reliable interpretability tools. As Koh et al. [30] evaluated
their CBM solely on training classes, we cannot distinguish
if the model genuinely learned to identify concepts or simply memorized the concept vectors of the target classes.
In this work, our objective is to evaluate the generalization of concept predictions in CBMs and Vision Lan-

23188

