This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise-Modeled Diffusion Models for Low-Light Spike Image Restoration
Ruonan Liu1 Lin Zhu1, * Xijie Xiang2 Lizhi Wang3 Hua Huang3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Peking University 3 Beijing Normal University
{liuruonan,linzhu}@bit.edu.cn

Motion blur

Window length

Abstract

Lower light

Low light

High light

Two main challenge
Low signal-to-noise ratio

Spike-based imaging, inspired by the human visual system,
offers several advantages, including high temporal resolution and low power consumption, but suffers from significant image degradation in low-light conditions due to noise
interference. Restoring spike images under such conditions
poses a significant challenge, as traditional frame-based or
spike-based techniques are ill-suited to handle such severe
noise and unique noise characteristics. This paper proposes a novel approach for restoring low-light spike images
using noise-modeled diffusion models. By establishing a
noise-embedded spike imaging model under low light, we
model the forward diffusion process as the degradation of
spike images with proportional and residual terms and incorporate deterministic and non-deterministic components
with reverse shifting, enabling the model to capture the distinctive spike noise structure. Additionally, we utilize region mask image, dark current map and spike density value
as conditions to further guide the restoration process by
providing prompts for degradation regions, deterministic
parameters and noise intensity, respectively. Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms existing spike-based reconstruction and diffusionbased image restoration methods in both quantitative performance and visual quality. The code and dataset are
available at https://github.com/BIT-Vision/
SpikeDiffusion.

512

Fragmented spike intervals
99.6%

100%

100%

Different adaptation range
Missing interval:
spike signal number = 0
Incomplete interval:
spike signal number = 1
Complete interval:
spike signal number ≥ 2

128
12%

75%

96%

100%

Window length (w):
length of the spike stream

41
67%

33%

0
SNR

40%

Data quantity

53%

Spike density (d):
average number of spike signals

98%

(a)

Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR):
signal density / noise density

Light intensity
Spk2ImgNet

17.87
Dark current
noise density
0.0053 0.01 0.1 Spike
(b)
density

Ours

0.89

0 0.0053

RSIR-low Hu et al.
0.01

(c)

0.1

RSIR-high
0.5

Spike
density

d = 0.008

RSIR (w=32×10)

Hu et al. (w=41×21)

RSIR-retrain (w=128) Spk2ImgNet-retrain (w=128)

Spk2ImgNet (w=41)

Spike (w=10)

Ours (w=128)

GT

(d)

Figure 1. Spike image restoration under low-light conditions.
(a) Severity of fragmented spike intervals across different light intensities and window lengths. We select the spike stream with a
density of about 0.008, corresponding to typical indoor light intensity, and a window length of 128 to balance information loss and
motion blur for image restoration. (b) Illustration of the impact
of dark current noise on the signal-to-noise ratio. (c) Comparison
of spike density distributions across datasets employed by different methods. (d) Performance comparison among different spikebased image reconstruction methods. Our method demonstrates
significant advancements in handling spike noise and restoring fine
textures.

1. Introduction
In recent years, bio-inspired neuromorphic vision sensors,
such as event cameras [1, 4] and spike cameras [9, 38],
have brought ground-breaking innovations to vision field
with their significant advantages of low power consumption, high speed, and high dynamic range. Mimicking the
foveal structure of the retina, spike cameras employ an
integrate-and-fire sampling mechanism, where each pixel
independently samples and generates asynchronous spike

signals, providing visual information with a temporal resolution of up to 40 kHz (or 20 kHz for portable versions)
along with rich texture details.
However, as illustrated in Fig. 1, due to the unique sampling properties of spike cameras, spike imaging faces two
main challenges under low-light conditions: (1) Low signal-

* Corresponding author.

4080

