This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-IRSTD: Leveraging Semantic Text to Promote Infrared Small Target
Detection in Complex Scenes
Feng Huang∗ , Shuyuan Zheng∗ , Zhaobing Qiu∗,† , Huanxian Liu, Huanxin Bai, Liqiong Chen†
Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
huangf@fzu.edu.cn, zhengshuyuan200147@gmail.com, qiuzhaobing@fzu.edu.cn,
liuhuanxian10@gmail.com, mw136296@gmail.com, liqiongchen@fzu.edu.cn.

Abstract
Infrared small target detection is currently a hot and challenging task in computer vision. Existing methods usually
focus on mining visual features of targets, which struggles to cope with complex and diverse detection scenarios. The main reason is that infrared small targets have
limited image information on their own, thus relying only
on visual features fails to discriminate targets and interferences, leading to lower detection performance. To address this issue, we introduce a novel approach leveraging semantic text to guide infrared small target detection, called Text-IRSTD. It innovatively expands classical
IRSTD to text-guided IRSTD, providing a new research
idea. On the one hand, we devise a novel fuzzy semantic
text prompt to accommodate ambiguous target categories.
On the other hand, we propose a progressive cross-modal
semantic interaction decoder (PCSID) to facilitate information fusion between texts and images. In addition, we
construct a new benchmark consisting of 2,755 infrared
images of different scenarios with fuzzy semantic textual
annotations, called FZDT. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that our method achieves better detection performance and target contour recovery than the state-of-theart methods. Moreover, proposed Text-IRSTD shows strong
generalization and wide application prospects in unseen detection scenarios. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/Zhengsy0407/Text-IRSTD.

ture details [20, 27, 32]. Therefore, how to accurately detect infrared (IR) small targets from complex backgrounds
remains an open issue.

Figure 1. Visual comparison between the SOTA model and proposed Text-IRSTD. (a) Detection results of the SOTA model [29],
which relies only on visual features. (b) Detection results of proposed Text-IRSTD, which uses both textual and visual features.

1. Introduction

In the early days, many traditional methods emerged
to improve detection accuracy. They mainly consist of
filter-based methods [11, 23], local saliency-based methods [1, 24, 34] and sparse representation-based methods
[8, 14, 25]. However, reliance on artificial feature representations prevents them from further mining the deep semantic information of real targets. In contrast, deep learning
(DL)-based methods autonomously learn multi-layered features in a data-driven manner and achieve significant performance improvements. For example, Dai et al. [2] propose
asymmetric contextual modulation (ACM) module to better interact with high-level semantics and low-level detail
features. For higher feature utilization, Zhang et al. [33]
propose attention-guided pyramid context network (AGPCNet), which mines the correlations between feature map

Infrared small target detection (IRSTD) has become an important and challenging issue in computer vision, which is
widely used in both civil and military applications [12, 13,
19]. However, due to the long range detection needs, imaged targets usually occupy only a few pixels and lack tex* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

10635

