This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Real Unsupervised Anomaly Detection Via Confident Meta-Learning
Shakiba Sharifi1
Marco Cristani1,2
Francesco Setti1,2
1
Dept. of Engineering for Innovation Medicine, University of Verona
Strada le Grazie 15, Verona, Italy
2
Qualyco S.r.l., Strada le Grazie 15, Verona, Italy

Muhammad Aqeel1

Contact author:

muhammad.aqeel@univr.it

Abstract
So-called unsupervised anomaly detection is better described as semi-supervised, as it assumes all training data
are nominal. This assumption simplifies training but requires manual data curation, introducing bias and limiting adaptability. We propose Confident Meta-learning
(CoMet), a novel training strategy that enables deep
anomaly detection models to learn from uncurated datasets
where nominal and anomalous samples coexist, eliminating the need for explicit filtering. Our approach integrates
Soft Confident Learning, which assigns lower weights to
low-confidence samples, and Meta-Learning, which stabilizes training by regularizing updates based on trainingvalidation loss covariance. This prevents overfitting and enhances robustness to noisy data. CoMet is model-agnostic
and can be applied to any anomaly detection method trainable via gradient descent. Experiments on MVTec-AD,
VIADUCT, and KSDD2 with two state-of-the-art models
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, consistently
improving over the baseline methods, remaining insensitive
to anomalies in the training set, and setting a new state-ofthe-art across all datasets.

Figure 1. Impact of anomalies and near boundary samples in
the training set. In Supervised Learning, positive and negative
samples contribute to determining the boundary between the two
data distributions. In Semi-Supervised Learning, often improperly called unsupervised, the lack of positive samples (i.e. anomalies) lead to overestimate the covariance of the nominal samples’
distribution, resulting in a higher number of misdetections at inference time (red points lying inside the blue circle). Our Confident Meta-learning approach allows models to be learned properly
in Unsupervised Learning by assigning low confidence weight to
samples close to and beyond the decision boundary. Note that
in Semi-Supervised Learning the positive samples (red dots) are
transparent because they are not available at training time. In Unsupervised Learning instead, dots’ transparency is proportional to
the assigned confidence weights.

tions are difficult to scale in high-throughput industrial settings. As a result, there is a strong demand for automated
defect detection systems that can operate with high accuracy, reliability, and efficiency.
Supervised learning approaches have shown strong performance in this task, but their effectiveness is highly dependent on the quantity and diversity of labeled defective
and nominal samples available during training. They require a substantial number of defective samples with pixellevel annotations. Since defects are inherently rare and often subtle, collecting and annotating such data is both costly
and time-consuming. Moreover, many defect types exhibit
high intra-class variability, requiring a sufficiently large and
diverse dataset to ensure robust generalization across different defect categories. To mitigate these challenges, recent

Keywords: Unsupervised Anomaly detection, Meta Learning, Soft Confident Learning

1. Introduction
In industrial manufacturing, real-time detection of defective
products is critical to ensuring safety and quality standards,
reducing waste, and optimizing production efficiency. The
ability to detect defective products at an early stage prevents
costly recalls and enhances customer satisfaction. Traditionally, quality control has relied on manual inspection by
human operators. However, this process is expensive, produces inconsistent outputs, and is prone to errors due to fatigue and subjective judgment. Moreover, manual inspec-

4858

