This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SD2 Actor: Continuous State Decomposition via Diffusion Embeddings
for Robotic Manipulation
Jiayi Li
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
jiayili@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

(c) Continuous
Spectrum

(a) LLMs Inference

Language-conditioned robot manipulation in the continuous spectrum presents a persistent challenge due to the difficult of mapping states to target actions. Previous methods face limitations in effectively modeling object states,
primarily due to their reliance on executing ambiguous
instructions devoid of explicit state information. In response, we present SD2 Actor, a zero-shot robotic manipulation framework that possesses the capability to generate precise actions in continuous states. Specifically,
given the novel instructions, we aim to generate instructionfollowing and accurate robot manipulation actions. Instead
of time-consuming optimization and finetuning, our zeroshot method generalizes to any object state with a wide
range of translations and versatile rotations. At its core,
we quantify multiple base states in the training set and
utilize their combination to refine the target action generated by the diffusion model. To obtain novel state representations, we initially employ LLMs to extract the novel
state from the instruction and decompose it into multiple
learned base states. We then employ the linear combination of base state embeddings to produce novel state features. Moreover, we introduce the orthogonalization loss
to constrain the state embedding space, which ensures the
validity of linear interpolation. Experiments demonstrate
that SD2 Actor outperforms state-of-the-art methods across
a diverse range of manipulation tasks in ARNOLD Benchmark. Moreover, SD2 Actor can effectively learn generalizable policies from a limited number of human demonstrations, achieving promising accuracy in a variety of realworld manipulation tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning generalizable robotics policies under the guidance
of instruction has attracted increasing attention in the field
of embodied AI and robotics. Recent language-conditioned

Empty thirty-five of the water in the cup.
Got it! Obtain the novel state 35%.
Searching State Set, the two closest
states are 20% and 40%. The
coefficients are 0.25 and 0.75.

(b) State Generalization
Base
State

Combination

Novel
State

20%

25%

40%
10cm

35%
12cm

20cm

17cm

condition

Diffusion Policy
x0

N (0, I )

Figure 1. Zero-shot generalization of SD2 Actor. SD2 Actor facilitates language-conditional robot manipulation driven by continuous goal states. (a) Our model employs LLMs to analyze and
decompose object states in instructions. (b) The model uses linear
combination to represent learned embeddings as novel state features and as conditions to guide diffusion to generate actions (c)
where reflects the continuous and previously unseen object state.

robot manipulation [7, 11, 15, 55] have showcased great potential for end-to-end imitation learning that directly maps
goal states to robot actions. However, these methods require
training with a large number of demonstrations and exhibit
poor state generalization.
Recently, previous robot manipulation approaches [11,
14, 18, 28, 46, 49, 55] mainly focus on tasks with discrete
object states, such as “open the cabinet”, where states are
binary (i.e., open and close ). But these approaches ignore
continuity of the states of target object (e.g., cabinet) which
ranges from 0% to 100%. Meanwhile, ARNOLD [12] di-

13751

