This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenRSD: Towards Open-prompts for Object Detection in
Remote Sensing Images

1

Ziyue Huang1 , Yongchao Feng1 , Ziqi Liu1 , Shuai Yang1 , Qingjie Liu1,2 *, Yunhong Wang1,2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{ziyuehuang, fengyongchao, liuzigi2002, buaa yangshuai, qingjie.liu, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Remote sensing object detection has made significant
progress, but most studies still focus on closed-set detection, limiting generalization across diverse datasets. Openvocabulary object detection (OVD) provides a solution by
leveraging multimodal associations between text prompts
and visual features. However, existing OVD methods for
remote sensing (RS) images are constrained by small-scale
datasets and fail to address the unique challenges of remote sensing interpretation, include oriented object detection and the need for both high precision and real-time
performance in diverse scenarios. To tackle these challenges, we propose OpenRSD, a universal open-prompt RS
object detection framework. OpenRSD supports multimodal
prompts and integrates multi-task detection heads to balance accuracy and real-time requirements. Additionally, we
design a multi-stage training pipeline to enhance the generalization of model. Evaluated on seven public datasets,
OpenRSD demonstrates superior performance in oriented
and horizontal bounding box detection, with real-time inference capabilities suitable for large-scale RS image analysis. Compared to YOLO-World, OpenRSD exhibits an
8.7% higher average precision and achieves an inference
speed of 20.8 FPS. Codes and models are available at:
https://github.com/floatingstarZ/OpenRSDt.

Figure 1. We compare the precision and inference speed of
OpenRSD against other methods, with inference speed tested on a
single 2080Ti GPU.

pabilities across diverse datasets and are limited to detecting objects belonging to predefined categories. Openvocabulary object detection (OVD) [7, 24] in natural scenes
present a viable solution to this limitation by establishing
multimodal associations between text prompts and visual
features, thereby relaxing the limitations of predefined categories. Furthermore, they leverage large-scale datasets such
as image-text pairs [30], high-quality detection datasets
[20], and grounding data [24] for training, enabling robust
generalization across various scences.
Recent studies have explored OVD models for RS images [22, 32, 41]; however, these efforts are constrained by
the use of small-scale datasets, which are inadequate to support robust generalization. Furthermore, they fail to address
the unique requirements of RS scenarios, such as detecting
small objects and precisely object orientations. This gap
motivate us to develop a universal RS object detector with
functional flexibility and strong cross-domain detection capabilities, serving as a foundational model for RS image in-

1. Introduction
As an important task of remote sensing (RS) image interpretation, remote sensing object detection has witnessed significant advancements in recent years [29, 43]. Nonetheless, the majority of existing studies have concentrated on
closed-set object detection, which aims to optimize performance on a fixed set of categories within specific datasets
by refining model architectures [43] or loss functions [45].
These models frequently exhibit poor generalization ca* indicates the corresponding author.

8384

