This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Intention Grounding for Egocentric Assistants
Pengzhan Sun1

Junbin Xiao1 * Tze Ho Elden Tse1 Yicong Li1
Arjun Akula2 Angela Yao1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Google DeepMind
{pengzhan, junbin, eldentse, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg,
liyicong@u.nus.edu, arjunakula@google.com

Conventional Visual Grounding

Query: white chair

Egocentric Visual Intention Grounding

Query: It would be helpful to have somewhere to
sit while I organize all these tools and supplies.

Query: I need a little boost to reach
the sink.

Figure 1. Traditional visual grounding (left) vs. egocentric visual intention understanding (center and right). Traditional grounding identifies
the “white chair” by detecting specific objects from third-person perspectives. Egocentric visual intention understanding must infer user
needs in complex, first-person scenarios, e.g., seating in a workshop (center) or using a chair to reach the sink (right).

Abstract

naive description grounding. This advancement enables unified visual grounding for egocentric and exocentric visual
inputs while handling explicit object queries and implicit
human intentions. Our code and model are available at
https://github.com/pengzhansun/EgoIntention.

Visual grounding associates textual descriptions with objects in an image. Conventional methods target third-person
image inputs and named object queries. In applications
such as AI assistants, the perspective shifts – inputs are egocentric, and objects may be referred to implicitly through
needs and intentions. To bridge this gap, we introduce
EgoIntention, the first dataset for egocentric visual intention
grounding. EgoIntention challenges multimodal LLMs to 1)
understand and ignore unintended contextual objects and
2) reason about uncommon object functionalities. Benchmark results show that current models misidentify context
objects and lack affordance understanding in egocentric
views. We also propose Reason-to-Ground (RoG) instruction tuning; it enables hybrid training with normal descriptions and egocentric intentions with a chained intention
reasoning and object grounding mechanism. RoG significantly outperforms naive finetuning and hybrid training
on EgoIntention, while maintaining or slightly improving

1. Introduction
Consider the following scenarios: a person is looking for
a place to sit down for organizing tools in a messy workshop, or a kid is trying to reach the sink in a kitchen (refer
to Figure 1). A wearable artificial intelligent (AI) assistant
could enhance these tasks by identifying contextually relevant objects (e.g., a chair) without explicit object references.
To achieve this, such an assistant must possess strong egocentric visual perception capabilities [11, 37, 43, 51]. This
would significantly improve task efficiency, reduce cognitive
load, and support hands-free, context-aware interaction in
dynamic environments.
Building on this vision, we introduce the egocentric visual intention grounding task. Given an egocentric visual

* Corresponding author

2512

