This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Safer and Understandable Driver Intention Prediction
Mukilan Karuppasamy1

Shankar Gangisetty1 Shyam Nandan Rai2 Carlo Masone2
IIIT Hyderabad, India 2Politecnico di Torino, Italy

C V Jawahar1

1

Maneuver: Left Turn
to
es
at ow
vi sl s
De oid cle es
av sta mov
ob d
an ay
aw

Abstract
Existing AD systems
Interpretable systems

The increasing reliance on deep neural networks in safety-critical
applications [26] raises significant concerns due to their blackbox nature, resulting in a lack of interpretability. In autonomous
driving [16, 38], this lack of transparency makes it difficult
for users to trust AI-driven decisions, leading to safety and accountability challenges, particularly in accidents. Ensuring safer
deployment requires models that predict driving actions and
provide human-understandable explanations for their decisions.
For instance, consider the scenario illustrated in Fig. 1. An

Parked
Vehicle

e
cl
hi e
ve th
o s
Eg llow c
fo affi d
tr ea
ah

1. Introduction

VCBM Interpretation
(Maneuver + Explanation + GradCAM)

Collision

Ex
p

la
n

at

io

n

Intention: Left Turn

rn
tu ng
ft mi
Le co d
is ea
ah

Autonomous driving (AD) systems are becoming increasingly
capable of handling complex tasks, mainly due to recent
advances in deep learning and AI. As interactions between
autonomous systems and humans increase, the interpretability
of decision-making processes in driving systems becomes
increasingly crucial for ensuring safe driving operations.
Successful human-machine interaction requires understanding
the underlying representations of the environment and the
driving task, which remains a significant challenge in deep
learning-based systems. To address this, we introduce the task
of interpretability in maneuver prediction before they occur for
driver safety, i.e., driver intent prediction (DIP), which plays
a critical role in AD systems. To foster research in interpretable
DIP, we curate the eXplainable Driving Action Anticipation
Dataset (DAAD-X), a new multimodal, ego-centric video
dataset to provide hierarchical, high-level textual explanations
as causal reasoning for the driver’s decisions. These explanations are derived from both the driver’s eye-gaze and the
ego-vehicle’s perspective. Next, we propose Video Concept
Bottleneck Model (VCBM), a framework that generates spatiotemporally coherent explanations inherently, without relying on
post-hoc techniques. Finally, through extensive evaluations of
the proposed VCBM on the DAAD-X dataset, we demonstrate
that transformer-based models exhibit greater interpretability
than conventional CNN-based models. Additionally, we
introduce a multilabel t-SNE visualization technique to illustrate
the disentanglement and causal correlation among multiple
explanations. Our data, code and models are available at:
https://mukil07.github.io/VCBM.github.io/

GradCAM

Figure 1. Illustration of an AD scenario for the DIP task. An AD
system may intend to take a left turn while encountering a parked or
slow-moving vehicle at the turn. Existing DIP models, lacking HCI understanding, might fail to anticipate the obstacle, leading to a potential
collision. The proposed interpretable model, VCBM, enhances safety
by enabling the ego-vehicle to explain its intended actions, anticipate
obstacles more effectively, and adjust maneuvers accordingly. This
results in safer and more transparent decision-making.

autonomous car is traveling at high speed and attempts to take
a left turn at a road intersection. While turning, a parked vehicle
is in the blind spot and left undetected by the autonomous car
sensors. In such situations, existing driver intention prediction
(DIP) methods [18, 37] may fail to recognize the parked vehicle,
increasing the risk of a near-miss or collision. Hence, interpretability in DIP models becomes crucial in the aforementioned
cases. Interpretable DIP models can reveal why the system
overlooked such situations, which can help diagnose failures and
improve model learning. An interpretable model can provide
high-level explanations that enhance decision-making, fostering
greater trust and confidence in autonomous driving technology.
Trust is not solely about performance but also the ability to
scrutinize, explain, and refine the model’s decisions over time,
ultimately ensuring safer and more reliable deployment.
Traditional DIP datasets such as Brain4Cars [10], Viena2 [2],
HDD [23], AIDE [39], and DAAD [37] primarily focus on
predicting maneuvers or agent trajectories without providing
contextual explanations. This limitation affects the ability to
train and evaluate DIP models on not just what happened, but
also why it happened. To address this gap, we introduce the

25378

