This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Prompt-Tuning with Heterogeneous and Incomplete
Multimodal Client Data
Thu Hang Phung 1

Duong M. Nguyen 1 Thanh Trung Huynh 2 Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen 3
Trong Nghia Hoang 4 * Phi Le Nguyen 1 *
1
Institute of AI Innovation and Societal Impact, Hanoi University of Science and Technology
2
EPFL 3 Griffith University 4 Washington State University
Abstract

are scattered across multiple private siloed systems.
To overcome this siloed data challenge, federated finetuning has recently been considered to aggregate the finetuned updates across private devices running their own (local) fine-tuning processes [9, 32, 47]. This approach can
be further combined with an existing parameter-efficient
tuning method called prompt tuning [25]. This method focuses on creating lightweight signals such as additional
tokens that are prepended to the input of the pre-trained
models [41, 44, 59, 60], providing them valuable contextual information to perform specific tasks more effectively. Local sets of prompts can then be aggregated using the conventional parameter aggregation procedure in
FL [16, 29, 47, 50, 58].
However, such federated prompt-tuning techniques are
restricted to learning with uni-modal data. In more practical scenarios, advances in sensor and device manufacturing increasingly enable the capture of multiple data modalities (e.g., text, images), leading to richer datasets for
fine-tuning [6]. Leveraging such diverse multi-modal information can significantly enhance model performance,
as demonstrated by the success of multi-modal foundation models like CLIP [39] and ViLT [21]. This has further motivated research on multi-modal federated learning [8, 33, 37, 52] and fine-tuning pre-trained multi-modal
LLMs, i.e., multi-modal federated fine-tuning [56].
Despite these advances, multi-modal federated learning
research often adopts specific local architectures which cannot be learned via fine-tuning existing pre-trained multimodal foundation models [8, 33, 37, 52]. Existing multimodal federated fine-tuning research on the other hand assumes that all local datasets have the same set of modalities [56]. As such, these approaches are not suitable for situations where different clients might collect data using different types of sensors. Furthermore, the multi-modal sensor data across clients might even have different missing
patterns of data entries. This leads to local datasets with
both intra- and inter-heterogeneities. Intra-heterogeneity
occurs when individual samples within a single dataset

This paper introduces a generalized federated prompttuning framework for practical scenarios where local
datasets are multi-modal and exhibit different distributional
patterns of missing features at the input level. The proposed framework bridges the gap between federated learning and multi-modal prompt-tuning which have traditionally focused on either uni-modal or centralized data. A key
challenge in this setting arises from the lack of semantic
alignment between prompt instructions that encode similar distributional patterns of missing data across different
clients. To address this, our framework introduces specialized client-tuning and server-aggregation designs that simultaneously optimize, align, and aggregate prompt-tuning
instructions across clients and data modalities. This allows
prompt instructions to complement one another and be combined effectively. Extensive evaluations on diverse multimodal benchmark datasets demonstrate that our work consistently outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines.

1. Introduction
The recent emergence of exceedingly large models [3] with
immense scale and versatility due to being pre-trained on
large swaths of generic data has resulted in a paradigm shift
in machine learning (ML). Most task-specific models are
now fine-tuned versions of those large models instead of being created from de novo learning processes. For example,
most state-of-the-art (SOTA) models solving specific NLP
tasks are fine-tuned versions of existing large pre-trained
or foundation models such as BERT [12], GPT [5], and
T5 [40]. Likewise, SOTA models for various computer vision tasks have also been derived from foundation models
such as the vision transformer [13] pre-trained on extensive
datasets like ImageNet [11]. The standard fine-tuning approach, however, assumes centralized data which is not always possible in practical scenarios where fine-tuning data
* Corresponding Authors

3936

