This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable 3D Outdoor Scene Generation via Scene Graphs
Yuheng Liu1,2
1

Xinke Li3† Yuning Zhang4
Chongshou Li4 Xueting Li5∗

Lu Qi2 Xin Li1 Wenping Wang1
Ming-Hsuan Yang2∗

Texas A&M University 2 UC Merced 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
Southwest Jiaotong University 5 NVIDIA
Intuitive and concise control

Scene Graph

Bird’s Eye View

3D Urban Scene

Vehicles

Vegetation

Sidewalk

Ground

Pedestrian

Road

Pole

Barrier

Building

Misc.

Figure 1. Scene Graph Guided 3D Outdoor Scene Generation. Scene graphs provide a user-friendly and intuitive way to control 3D
scene generation. We also develop an interactive system that enables users to generate 3D urban scenes through scene graph interaction.

1. Introduction

Abstract

3D scene generation has garnered wide attention due to
its potential for creating realistic, physically coherent 3D
scenes. These models offer a powerful approach to understanding and simulating the complexities of our 3D world.
Among the various methods for 3D scene generation, probabilistic generative models have shown great promise in recent advancements. However, the stochastic nature of these
models makes the generation process difficult to control
precisely, emphasizing the need for an editable and controllable generation process.

Three-dimensional scene generation is crucial in computer
vision, with applications spanning autonomous driving and
gaming. However, current methods offer limited or nonintuitive user control. In this work, we propose a method
that uses scene graph as a user-friendly control format to
generate outdoor 3D scenes. We develop an interactive system that transforms a sparse scene graph into a dense Bird’s
Eye View (BEV) Embedding Map, which guides a conditional diffusion model to generate 3D scenes that match the
scene graph description. Users can easily create or modify scene graphs to generate large-scale outdoor scenes.
We create a large-scale dataset with paired scene graphs
and 3D semantic scenes to train the BEV embedding and
diffusion models. Experimental results show that our approach consistently produces high-quality 3D urban scenes
closely aligned with the input scene graphs. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first approach to generate 3D outdoor scenes conditioned on scene graphs. Code is available
at https://github.com/yuhengliu02/control-3d-scene.

† Corresponding author.

To enable controllable scene generation, many methods leverage recent advances in 2D conditional generation,
such as DALL-E [3] and Stable Diffusion [41], where highquality images are generated based on natural language.
Inspired by these models, some approaches [29, 32, 33]
use 2D views to guide 3D content generation. However,
these methods are primarily object-centric and do not scale
to complex outdoor scenes due to their large scales and
interconnected structures. Other approaches apply textbased conditions to directly control 3D scene generation,
such as Text2LiDAR [50]. Yet, text-to-3D provides insufficient control over both physical constraints and spatial details: it cannot effectively enforce real-world physical rules

∗ Equal contribution.

28052

