This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoDa-4DGS: Dynamic Gaussian Splatting with Context and Deformation
Awareness for Autonomous Driving
Rui Song* 1,2 , Chenwei Liang* 1 , Yan Xia3 , Walter Zimmer2 , Hu Cao2
Holger Caesar4 , Andreas Festag1,5 , Alois Knoll2
1

Fraunhofer IVI

2

3

TU Munich

USTC

4

TU Delft

5

TH Ingolstadt

https://rruisong.github.io/publications/CoDa-4DGS
Scene Segmentation

Prompt: “Person”
IoU = 86.04 %

4D Reconstruction

Novel View Synthesis
-15 Deg

Prompt: “car”
IoU= 97.01%

Prompt: “Tree”
IoU = 92.55 %
+15 Deg

Instance Decomposition

Scene Synthesis

Synthetic
Objects

Synthetic
Objects

Original
Scene

Synthetic 4D
Objects

Novel Pose

Original
Scene

Synthetic 4D
Objects

Novel Pose

Figure 1. Our CoDa-4DGS incorporates both context awareness and deformation awareness to effectively compensate for deformable
Gaussians in 4D. This results in more accurate dynamic scene rendering and enables a range of downstream applications, such as scene
segmentation, instance segmentation, 4D reconstruction, novel view synthesis, and scene synthesis.

Abstract
Dynamic scene rendering opens new avenues in autonomous driving by enabling closed-loop simulations with
photorealistic data, which is crucial for validating endto-end algorithms. However, the complex and highly dynamic nature of traffic environments presents significant
challenges in accurately rendering these scenes. In this paper, we introduce a novel 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS)
approach, which incorporates context and temporal deformation awareness to improve dynamic scene rendering.
Specifically, we employ a 2D semantic segmentation foundation model to self-supervise the 4D semantic features of

Gaussians, ensuring meaningful contextual embedding. Simultaneously, we track the temporal deformation of each
Gaussian across adjacent frames. By aggregating and encoding both semantic and temporal deformation features,
each Gaussian is equipped with cues for potential deformation compensation within 3D space, facilitating a more
precise representation of dynamic scenes. Experimental results show that our method improves 4DGS’s ability to capture fine details in dynamic scene rendering for autonomous
driving and outperforms other self-supervised methods in
4D reconstruction and novel view synthesis. Furthermore,
CoDa-4DGS deforms semantic features with each Gaussian, enabling broader applications.

* Equal contribution
Corresponding author, email address: rui.song@ivi.fraunhofer.de

28031

