This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V2PE: Improving Multimodal Long-Context Capability of
Vision-Language Models with Variable Visual Position Encoding
Junqi Ge1,4∗ , Ziyi Chen1,4∗ , Jintao Lin3,4∗ , Jinguo Zhu4∗ ,
Xihui Liu3 , Jifeng Dai1,4 , Xizhou Zhu1,2,4†
1
Tsinghua University 2 SenseTime Research 3 University of Hong Kong
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have shown promising capabilities in handling various multimodal tasks, yet
they struggle in long-context scenarios, particularly tasks
involving videos, high-resolution images, or lengthy imagetext documents. In our work, we first conduct an empirical analysis of VLMs’ long-context capabilities using our
augmented long-context multimodal datasets. Our findings
reveal that directly applying the positional encoding mechanism used for textual tokens to visual tokens is suboptimal,
and VLM performance degrades sharply when the position
encoding exceeds the model’s context window. To address
this, we propose Variable Visual Position Encoding (V2PE),
a novel positional encoding approach that employs variable
and smaller increments for visual tokens, enabling more efficient management of long multimodal sequences. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of V2PE in enhancing VLMs’ ability to effectively understand and reason over
long multimodal contexts. We further integrate V2PE with
our augmented long-context multimodal datasets to finetune the open-source VLMs. The fine-tuned model achieves
strong performance on both standard and long-context multimodal tasks. Notably, when the sequence length of the
training dataset is increased to 256K tokens, the model is
capable of processing multimodal sequences up to 1M tokens, highlighting its potential for real-world long-context
applications. We shall release the code, model weights, and
datasets to facilitate further research.

Figure 1. Performance on the image retrieval task using a token
length of up to 1M on MM-NIAH [119] across different VLMs.
The GPT-4o [81] version is 2024-08-06, while InternVL2-2B [20]
models are both fine-tuned from the official release, using our augmented data, with token lengths reaching up to 256K per sample.

1. Introduction

reveals that VLMs struggle to generalize effectively when
confronted with multimodal long-sequence inputs (e.g.,
long videos [121, 126], high-resolution images [45, 122],
and lengthy image-text documents [3, 105, 151]). This limitation emerges even in relatively straightforward, such as
object counting and passkey duplication, significantly restricting VLMs’ potential applications and impeding the enhancement of user experience [22, 114, 119, 120].
Recent efforts have attempted to extend VLMs’ capabilities to process multiple images or handle long multimodal
sequences. However, these approaches either permit only
a small number of images (typically fewer than five) [52,
65, 149] or primarily target video data (e.g., LongVA [144],
LongVILA [132], LongLLAVA [120],VideoXL [93]).
These studies are only limited to specific application scenarios, highlighting the challenges VLMs face in handling
complex and long-sequence multimodal data, which makes
a key research question particularly urgent: Why do VLMs
perform poorly in long-context scenarios, and how can we
unlock their capacity for comprehensive multimodal understanding and reasoning over long sequences?
To investigate this, we first construct a large-scale pool
of long-context multimodal datasets to evaluate and analyze VLM capabilities systematically. By extending the se-

With the rapid advancement of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [14, 29, 83, 99, 108], Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) have made substantial strides [19, 82, 103, 115],
excelling at tasks like visual captioning [17], visual question answering [78], and complex visual reasoning [136].
Despite this progress, existing research [112, 119, 132, 144]

21070

