This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEAL: Semantic Aware Image Watermarking
Kasra Arabi, R. Teal Witter, Chinmay Hegde, Niv Cohen
New York University
Abstract
Generative models have rapidly evolved to generate realistic outputs. However, their synthetic outputs increasingly challenge the clear distinction between natural and
AI-generated content, necessitating robust watermarking
techniques to mark synthetic images. Watermarks are typically expected to preserve the integrity of the target image,
withstand removal attempts, and prevent unauthorized insertion of the watermark pattern onto unrelated images. To
address this need, recent methods embed persistent watermarks into images produced by diffusion models using the
initial noise of the diffusion process. Yet, to do so, they either distort the distribution of generated images or require
searching a large dictionary of candidate noise patterns for
detection.
In this paper, we propose a novel watermarking method
that embeds semantic information about the generated image into the noise pattern, enabling a distortion-free watermark that can be verified without requiring a database of
key patterns. Instead, the key pattern can be inferred from
the semantic embedding of the image using locality-sensitive
hashing. Furthermore, conditioning the watermark detection
on the original image content improves its robustness against
forgery attacks. To demonstrate that, we consider two largely
overlooked attack strategies: (i) an attacker extracting the
initial noise and generating a novel image with the same
pattern; (ii) an attacker inserting an unrelated (potentially
harmful) object into a watermarked image, while preserving the watermark. We empirically validate our method’s
increased robustness to these attacks. Taken together, our
results suggest that content-aware watermarks can mitigate
risks arising from image-generative models. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Kasraarabi/
SEAL.

Figure 1. Illustration of different watermarking frameworks using
the initial noise of diffusion models. No Watermark: A diffusion
model maps pure Gaussian noise to an image. Tree-Ring: A pattern
is added to the initial noise, modifying the distribution of generated
images in a detectable way. Key-Based Watermarking: A key is
sampled to generate distortion-free images linked to the key. Ours
(SEAL): The initial noise is conditioned on multiple keys derived
from the image’s semantic embedding, with each key influencing a
different patch.

1. Introduction

risks by allowing the detection of synthetically generated
content.
Yet, many conventional watermarking techniques lack
robustness against adversaries who attempt to remove them
using regeneration attacks powered by recent generative
models [2, 12, 36]. To address this, new watermarking techniques leveraging similar advances in generative models
offer an increased robustness against such attacks [4, 31, 34].
Namely, these methods embed a watermarking pattern in
the initial noise used by a diffusion model. These patterns
have been shown to be more robust against existing removal
attacks.
However, existing watermarks that utilize the diffusion
model initial noise tend to be vulnerable to other attacks aim-

The growing capabilities of generative models pose risks to
society, including misleading public opinion, violating privacy or intellectual property, and fabricating legal evidence
[5, 16, 28]. Watermarking methods aim to mitigate such

16196

