This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChartPoint: Guiding MLLMs with Grounding Reflection for Chart Reasoning
Zhengzhuo Xu1,2 * SiNan Du1⇤ Yiyan Qi2† SiwenLu3 Chengjin Xu2 Chun Yuan1† Jian Guo2,4
1
Tsinghua University 2 International Digital Economy Academy 3 Beihang University
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
Abstract

Question: According to this chart, for Japan, what is the Sales in thousands at Years 2021?
Chain of Thought
Let's break down the process step by step:
1. Identify the Line for Japan: In the chart, Japan is xxx..
2. Locate the Year 2021: Find the year 2021 on the xaxis of the chart.
3. Find the Intersection: Look for where the teal line xxx.
4. Read the Value: At the intersection point xxx.
So, the sales of electric vehicles in Japan for the year
2021 were approximately 500 thousand units.

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
emerged as powerful tools for chart comprehension. However, they heavily rely on extracted content via OCR, which
leads to numerical hallucinations when chart textual annotations are sparse. While existing methods focus on
scaling instructions, they fail to address the fundamental
challenge, i.e., reasoning with visual perception. In this
paper, we identify a critical observation: MLLMs exhibit
weak grounding in chart elements and proportional relationships, as evidenced by their inability to localize key positions to match their reasoning. To bridge this gap, we
propose PointCoT, which integrates reflective interaction
into chain-of-thought reasoning in charts. By prompting
MLLMs to generate bounding boxes and re-render charts
based on location annotations, we establish connections between textual reasoning steps and visual grounding regions.
We further introduce an automated pipeline to construct
ChartPoint-SFT-62k, a dataset featuring 19.2K highquality chart samples with step-by-step CoT, bounding box,
and re-rendered visualizations. Leveraging this data, we
develop two instruction-tuned models, ChartPointQ2 and
ChartPointQ2.5 , which outperform state-of-the-art across
several chart benchmarks, e.g., +5.04% on ChartBench.

Chain of Thought with BBox (Ours)

Step 1

Step 3
Step 4
Step 2

First, we look at the legend to identify the color
representing Japan
<bbox>(140,200),(350,370)</bbox>... Next, we find the
data point on the x axis corresponding to the year 2021
<bbox>(770,850),(870,960)</bbox>... Then, we follow
the vertical line above the year 2021 until it intersects
with the teal line representing Japan
<bbox>(760,790),(900,880)</bbox>. Finally, we look at
the y value (<bbox>(80,700),(260,850)</bbox>) at this
intersection point... The y value (sales in thousands) for
Japan in 2021 is approximately \box{250}.

Figure 1. Comparison between vanilla CoT and proposed CoT
with bounding box reflection on Qwen2-VL [59]. Vanilla CoT
fails to introduce visual-level reflections. We re-render the generated BBox on the query chart to verify area focus and successfully
improve the precision of the extracted numbers.

continues to be challenging tasks.
Existing methods attempt to address this issue through
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), including using more
instruction-tuning data [21, 35, 44], increasing the chart resolution [76], or adopting more meticulously crafted alignment training techniques [45, 67, 69]. However, MLLMs
still exhibit a limited perception of chart content. Recently,
the inference-time scaling law and the reasoning models
trained on it have exhibited impressive and in-depth reasoning capabilities [20, 83]. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) training
has notably enhanced LLMs’ proficiency in mathematics,
logic, and code [61, 80]. This motivates us to refine reasoning paradigms and inference formats of MLLMs on charts,
especially in scenarios with sparse text annotations.
Do current MLLMs truly grasp the correct logic for chart
interpretation? As depicted in Fig. 1, while the MLLMs
present reasonable steps for chart-reading, the numbers
they extract still contain significant errors. This situation
prompts a crucial question: do MLLMs rely excessively
on the extracted numbers when interpreting charts, thus
lacking the capacity to read from chart elements and proportional relationships? To explore this, we employ the
MLLMs [6, 59] with satisfying localization capabilities,
which can denote object positions using bounding boxes

1. Introduction
Recently, with Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrating strong understanding and generalization capabilities [4, 8, 51, 56], Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) have become the mainstream for processing multimedia data such as images and videos [5, 36, 41, 42, 50].
Charts, as an intuitive way to present complex data, are
widely adopted in documents and on the internet. However,
current MLLMs heavily rely on optical character recognition (OCR) results when processing charts. When the text
information extracted by OCR is limited, the MLLMs struggle to interpret the charts accurately, even leading to numerical hallucinations [35, 60, 66]. Thus, extracting chart content accurately and attaining profound chart comprehension
* ⇤: Equal contributions. †: Corresponding authors.

426

