This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MosaicDiff: Training-free Structural Pruning for Diffusion Model Acceleration
Reflecting Pretraining Dynamics
Bowei Guo Shengkun Tang Cong Zeng Zhiqiang Shen
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{Bowei.Guo, Shengkun.Tang, Cong.Zeng, Zhiqiang.Shen}@mbzuai.ac.ae
MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.30

MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.35

MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.40

MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.50

FID = 3.33

FID = 3.65

FID = 5.27

Deepcache-N=3

FID = 2.24
MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.15
(20 Steps)

MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.15

MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.20

MosaicDiff
Sparsity-0.30

FID = 24.67

FID = 24.19

FID = 23.73

FID = 23.79

FID = 28.37

Vanilla

Learning-to-Cache

FID = 2.26

FID = 2.27

Vanilla

FID = 24.90

DiT-XL/2
50 Steps

SDXL
50 Steps

Prompt: Bedroom scene with a bookcase, blue comforter and window.

Figure 1. MosaicDiff is a post-training / training-free structural pruning technique for both transformer-based and U-Net-based diffusion
models. It can achieve 0.5 pruning sparsity on linear scheduled 675M DiT-XL/2 and 0.3 pruning sparsity on scaled-linear scheduled 2.6B
SDXL-base-1.0 with minimal performance degradation.

Abstract

mising output quality, outperforming previous state-of-theart methods by large margins, also providing a new viewpoint for more efficient and robust training-free diffusion
acceleration. Our implementation is available at https:
//github.com/bwguo105/MosaicDiff.git.

Diffusion models are renowned for their generative capabilities, yet their pretraining processes exhibit distinct
phases of learning speed that have been entirely overlooked
in prior post-training acceleration efforts in the community. In this study, we introduce a novel framework called
MosaicDiff that aligns diffusion pretraining dynamics with
post-training sampling acceleration via trajectory-aware
structural pruning. Our approach leverages the observation
that the middle, fast-learning stage of diffusion pretraining requires more conservative pruning to preserve critical model features, while the early and later, slow-learning
stages benefit from a more aggressive pruning strategy. This
adaptive pruning mechanism is the first to explicitly mirror
the inherent learning speed variations of diffusion pretraining, thereby harmonizing the model’s inner training dynamics with its accelerated sampling process. Extensive experiments on DiT and SDXL demonstrate that our method
achieves significant speed-ups in sampling without compro-

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [10, 11, 29, 33] have emerged as a powerful framework for generative tasks in unconditional image
generation [11], text-guided image generation [33] and even
3D generation [31], yet their extensive computational demands, especially during pretraining, pose significant challenges for real-world applications. The high cost of diffusion pretraining has driven the community toward trainingfree acceleration methods, which aim to reduce sampling
times without incurring additional training overhead. However, these methods often overlook the nuanced learning dynamics inherent in the pretraining process.

1655

