This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TextSSR: Diffusion-based Data Synthesis for Scene Text Recognition
Xingsong Ye1 , Yongkun Du1 , Yunbo Tao1 , Zhineng Chen2 *
1
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, China
2
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University, China
{xsye20, zhinchen}@fudan.edu.cn, {ykdu23, ybtao24}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Pseudo Labeling
E2E STR Model

Scene text recognition (STR) suffers from challenges of
either less realistic synthetic training data or the difficulty of
collecting sufficient high-quality real-world data, limiting
the effectiveness of trained models. Meanwhile, despite producing holistically appealing text images, diffusion-based
visual text generation methods struggle to synthesize accurate and realistic instance-level text at scale. To tackle this,
we introduce TextSSR: a novel pipeline for Synthesizing
Scene Text Recognition training data. TextSSR targets
three key synthesizing characteristics: accuracy, realism,
and scalability. It achieves accuracy through a proposed
region-centric text generation with position-glyph enhancement, ensuring proper character placement. It maintains
realism by guiding style and appearance generation using contextual hints from surrounding text or background.
This character-aware diffusion architecture enjoys precise
character-level control and semantic coherence preservation, without relying on natural language prompts. Therefore, TextSSR supports large-scale generation through combinatorial text permutations. Based on these, we present
TextSSR-F, a dataset of 3.55 million quality-screened text
instances. Extensive experiments show that STR models
trained on TextSSR-F outperform those trained on existing synthetic datasets by clear margins on common benchmarks, and further improvements are observed when mixed
with real-world training data. Code is available at https:
//github.com/YesianRohn/TextSSR.

TextSSR Pipeline
Data Volume: 8 Instances
Anagram Expansion

…

Diffusion Model
Filtering Process

IC15

SVTP

74
.3
3
82
.0
3

IC13

92
.7
1

SVT

96
.8
7
97
.9
2

SeqAcc(%)

90
.3
9

IIIT5K

Trained on MAERec

89
.3
4
89
.9
5

97
.2
0
97
.2
0

Baseline
+ TextSSR-F

95
.5
2
96
.7
5

Baseline
(ST + TextOCR)

98
.1
0
98
.2
0

Data Volume: 127 Instances

CUTE80

Contextless

Figure 1. Top: Text instances detected by an end-to-end STR
model [23], and synthesized by our TextSSR based on the detected examples. Bottom: Accuracy of MAERec [20] across common benchmarks. Peach indicates training on ST [15] and TextOCR [39], while blue denotes that TextSSR-F is additionally included as training data.

1. Introduction

task for complex scene understanding, image search, etc.
Recent STR practices [9, 10, 20] have shown that besides advanced modeling techniques, high-quality training
data also plays a critical role. Training STR models also
follows the scaling law from the data perspective [31] and
current data size is far from saturated even for English. Enlarging the size of real-world datasets is a feasible way to
further enhance recognition performance. However, it is
challenging to collect real-world scene text images on an
even larger scale. On one hand, diversified data collection is
costly and time-consuming. On the other hand, real-world
scenes predominantly contain high-frequency, semantically
meaningful words, while low-frequency words are difficult
to collect. Synthesizing high-quality text images seems to
be an effective alternative. However, research on this direction is somewhat laggard. The two most popular synthetic datasets, MJ [18] and ST [15], are constructed based
on traditional rendering techniques nearly a decade ago. Although they can be easily scaled up in quantity, recent studies [9, 11] indicate that there are significant accuracy gaps
between models trained on MJ&SJ and Union14M-L [20],
mainly because MJ&SJ fail to comprehensively describing

Scene text images are a unique type of image captured in
the wild, they differ from general images in the presence
of text, which appears with diverse sizes, fonts, and often
with varying degrees of distortion and occlusion. However,
these texts usually contain high-level semantic information
closely related to the captured scene, making STR a crucial
* Corresponding author.

17464

