This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TrafficLoc: Localizing Traffic Surveillance Cameras in 3D Scenes
†

Yan Xia∗1,2 Yunxiang Lu∗2 Rui Song2,4 Oussema Dhaouadi2,5 João F. Henriques6 Daniel Cremers2,3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Technical University of Munich 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
4
Fraunhofer IVI 5 DeepScenario 6 Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
yan.xia@ustc.edu.cn, {yunxiang.lu, rui.song, oussema.dhaouadi, cremers}@tum.de, joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1. Localization accuracy on the proposed Carla Intersection and KITTI dataset. The point cloud is projected into a 2D view and
shown above the image, with point colors indicating distance. The proposed TrafficLoc achieves the best performance, with more correct
(green) and fewer incorrect (red) point-to-pixel pairs. The first column presents the input point cloud and input image.

Abstract
We tackle the problem of localizing traffic cameras within
a 3D reference map and propose a novel image-to-point
cloud registration (I2P) method, TrafficLoc, in a coarse-tofine matching fashion. To overcome the lack of large-scale
real-world intersection datasets, we first introduce Carla
Intersection, a new simulated dataset with 75 urban and
rural intersections in Carla. We find that current I2P methods struggle with cross-modal matching under large viewpoint differences, especially at traffic intersections. TrafficLoc thus employs a novel Geometry-guided Attention Loss
(GAL) to focus only on the corresponding geometric regions
under different viewpoints during 2D-3D feature fusion. To
address feature inconsistency in paired image patch-point
groups, we further propose Inter-intra Contrastive Learning (ICL) to enhance separating 2D patch / 3D group fea† Corresponding author, email address: yan.xia@ustc.edu.cn.

* Equal contribution.

tures within each intra-modality and introduce Dense Training Alignment (DTA) with soft-argmax for improving position regression. Extensive experiments show our TrafficLoc
greatly improves the performance over the SOTA I2P methods (up to 86%) on Carla Intersection and generalizes well
to real-world data. TrafficLoc also achieves new SOTA performance on KITTI and NuScenes datasets, demonstrating
the superiority across both in-vehicle and traffic cameras.
Our project page is publicly available at https://tumluk.github.io/projects/trafficloc/.

1. Introduction
Traffic surveillance cameras, as affordable and easy-toinstall roadside sensors in cooperative perception, offer a
broad, global perspective on traffic. Integrating this data
with onboard sensors enhances situational awareness, supporting applications like early obstacle detection [28, 34,
49] and vehicle localization [42, 54]. Localizing the 6-DoF

28685

