This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Puppet-Master: Scaling Interactive Video Generation as a Motion Prior for
Part-Level Dynamics
Ruining Li

Chuanxia Zheng Christian Rupprecht Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

{ruining, cxzheng, chrisr, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk
vgg-puppetmaster.github.io

Input

Final Frame

Input

Final Frame

Input Final Frame

Input

Final Frame

Input

Final Frame

Intermediate Frames

Figure 1. Puppet-Master generates videos depicting internal, part-level motion, prompted by one or more drags (arrows). Fine-tuned
solely on our curated synthetic Objaverse-Animation-HQ dataset, it generalizes well to real-world scenarios and diverse object categories.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce Puppet-Master, an interactive video generator that captures the internal, part-level motion of objects,
serving as a proxy for modeling object dynamics universally. Given an image of an object and a set of “drags”
specifying the trajectory of a few points on the object, the
model synthesizes a video where the object’s parts move accordingly. To build Puppet-Master, we extend a pre-trained
image-to-video generator to encode the input drags. We
also propose all-to-first attention, an alternative to conventional spatial attention that mitigates artifacts caused
by fine-tuning a video generator on out-of-domain data.
The model is fine-tuned on Objaverse-Animation-HQ, a new
dataset of curated part-level motion clips obtained by rendering synthetic 3D animations. Unlike real videos, these
synthetic clips avoid confounding part-level motion with
overall object and camera motion. We extensively filter
sub-optimal animations and augment the synthetic renderings with meaningful drags that emphasize the internal dynamics of objects. We demonstrate that Puppet-Master
learns to generate part-level motions, unlike other motionconditioned video generators that primarily move the object
as a whole. Moreover, Puppet-Master generalizes well to
out-of-domain real images, outperforming existing methods
on real-world benchmarks in a zero-shot manner.

In this paper, we introduce Puppet-Master, an interactive
video generator that predicts how objects move in response
to external stimuli. This generator takes as input a single
image of an object and a set of sparse drags, which specify
the motion of selected points on the object. It then outputs
a video of the part-level object motion consistent with the
drags and the object’s internal dynamics (Fig. 1).
We are motivated by the need for AI systems to understand how objects can move and deform in general. Researchers have developed countless models of dynamic objects, but most are specific to particular object types, such
as faces, hands, humans, or quadrupeds [3, 38, 52, 75]. The
few more general models [58] do not make strong assumptions about object types but are difficult to train due to the
lack of suitable data (e.g., aligned 3D meshes for [58]).
None of these are good candidates for learning a “foundation” model of part-level object dynamics. Such a model
should be able to express different types of natural object
dynamics (Fig. 1), such as part articulation, sliding of parts,
and soft deformations.
Recently, video generators trained on millions of videos
have been proposed as proxies for “world models” [1, 7,
45]. Any general world model should possess an understanding of object dynamics. However, these models,
trained on Internet-scale data, still struggle to capture the

13405

