This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboPearls: Editable Video Simulation for Robot Manipulation
Tang Tao1⇤‡ Likui Zhang2⇤ Youpeng Wen1 Kaidong Zhang2 Jia-Wang Bian3 Xia Zhou4
Tianyi Yan4 Kun Zhan4 Peng Jia4 Hefeng Wu2 Liang Lin2 † Xiaodan Liang1 †
1 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Sun Yat-sen University
3 Bytedance Seed 4 Li Auto Inc.

trent.tangtao@gmail.com, zhanglk9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Figure 1. RoboPearls, an editable video simulation framework for robotic manipulation. RoboPearls reconstructs photo-realistic
scenes with semantic features from demonstration videos. Then, with various simulation operators, RoboPearls leverages multiple LLM
agents to process user commands into specific editing functions. Furthermore, RoboPearls utilizes a VLM to analyze learning issues and
generate corresponding simulation demands to enhance robotic performance.

Abstract
The development of generalist robot manipulation policies has seen significant progress, driven by large-scale
demonstration data across diverse environments. However, the high cost and inefficiency of collecting real-world
demonstrations hinder the scalability of data acquisition.
While existing simulation platforms enable controlled environments for robotic learning, the challenge of bridging the sim-to-real gap remains. To address these challenges, we propose RoboPearls, an editable video simulation framework for robotic manipulation. Built on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), RoboPearls enables the construction
of photo-realistic, view-consistent simulations from demonstration videos, and supports a wide range of simulation operators, including various object manipulations, powered

by proposed modules like Incremental Semantic Distillation (ISD) and 3D regularized NNFM Loss (3D-NNFM).
Moreover, by incorporating large language models (LLMs),
RoboPearls automates the simulation production process in
a user-friendly manner through flexible command interpretation and execution. Furthermore, RoboPearls employs
a vision-language model (VLM) to analyze robotic learning issues to close the simulation loop for performance enhancement. To demonstrate the effectiveness of RoboPearls,
we conduct extensive experiments on multiple datasets and
scenes, including RLBench, COLOSSEUM, Ego4D, Open
X-Embodiment, and a real-world robot, which demonstrate
our satisfactory simulation performance. More information
can be found on our Project Page.

1. Introduction

⇤ Equal contribution

The field of robotics has witnessed rapid advancements
in the development of generalist robot manipulation poli-

‡ Work done during an internship at Li Auto Inc.
† Co-corresponding author

10118

