This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Debiased Cross-modal Attention Maps and Code-based Reasoning
for Zero-shot Referring Expression Comprehension
Juntao Chen

Wen Shen* Zhihua Wei* Lijun Sun* Hongyun Zhang
Tongji University, Shanghai, China

{2432047,wenshen,zhihua wei,sunlijun,zhanghongyun}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

Region-Text
Matching

Zero-shot Referring Expression Comprehension (REC)
aims at locating an object described by a natural language
query without training on task-specific datasets. Current
approaches often utilize Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
to perform region-text matching based on region proposals. However, this may downgrade their performance since
VLMs often fail in relation understanding and isolated proposals inevitably lack global image context. To tackle
these challenges, we first design a general formulation for
code-based relation reasoning. It instructs Large Language
Models (LLMs) to decompose complex relations and adaptively implement code for spatial and relation computation.
Moreover, we directly extract region-text relevance from
cross-modal attention maps in VLMs. Observing the inherent bias in VLMs, we further develop a simple yet effective
bias deduction method, which enhances attention maps’ capability to align text with the corresponding regions. Experimental results on four representative datasets demonstrate
the SOTA performance of our method. On the RefCOCO
dataset centered on spatial understanding, our method gets
an average improvement of 10% over the previous zero-shot
SOTA.

Image

Region
Proposals

white cow lefty
leaning down
Query

Fixed Rules for Relation

Parser

Words
left

Rules
…

…

…

Fail to
Match
"lefty"

biggest …

(a) Existing Zero-shot REC Method
Attention Map in VLM

Region
Proposals

Image

white cow lefty
leaning down
Query

LLM

Understand
"lefty"

Program to
Score Proposals

Code-based Adaptive Reasoning

(b) Our Method Utilizing Attention Maps and Code-based Relation Reasoning

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of existing zero-shot REC frameworks
and ours. (a) Existing method [56] performs region-text matching
and relies on hand-crafted rules and parsers to solve relations. It
is restricted by fixed rules and fails to adapt to varied natural language (“left” can be solved by rules while “lefty” fails to be recognized). This may lead to the wrong prediction. (b) Our method differs by leveraging attention maps to align the text with global image context. Another difference is code-based adaptive reasoning,
which utilizes the extensive knowledge of Large Language Models (LLMs). It understands text flexibly (knowing “lefty” means
“left” from the context and its knowledge) and customizes programs for different relations. Combining results from the attention
map and the program, our method identifies the correct proposal.

Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) requires pinpointing the location of a unique object within an image
specified by a language query. As a fundamental visionlanguage task, REC demonstrates great potential in building the bridge between language instructions and the physical world. And it often functions as a crucial component
in various tasks such as Visual Question Answering (VQA)
[3, 39] and Visual Language Navigation (VLN) [43, 45].
However, collecting high-quality object-labeled data necessitates labor-intensive annotation, and supervised training may also lead to over-fitting to certain datasets. There* Corresponding authors: Wen Shen, Zhihua Wei and Lijun Sun.

fore, zero-shot REC manners [18, 36, 49, 56] that rid the
dependence on task-specific data become promising.
Nevertheless, the zero-shot setting makes attribute understanding and relation reasoning more challenging. Recent studies [56, 67, 74] formulate REC as an optimal
matching problem between region proposals and texts.
They utilize Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [28, 46] to
perform matching, with hand-crafted language parsers and

20413

