This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Representation Shift: Unifying Token Compression with FlashAttention
Joonmyung Choi1 * Sanghyeok Lee1 * Byungoh Ko1
Eunseo Kim1 Jihyung Kil2 Hyunwoo J. Kim3†
1
Korea University 2 Adobe Research 3 KAIST
{pizard, cat0626, ko990128, pingdoll3110}@korea.ac.kr
jkil@adobe.com

hyunwoojkim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

UMT-L (FA)

Transformers have demonstrated remarkable success
across vision, language, and video. Yet, increasing task
complexity has led to larger models and more tokens, raising the quadratic cost of self-attention and the overhead
of GPU memory access. To reduce the computation cost
of self-attention, prior work has proposed token compression techniques that drop redundant or less informative tokens. Meanwhile, fused attention kernels such as FlashAttention have been developed to alleviate memory overhead by avoiding attention map construction and its associated I/O to HBM. This, however, makes it incompatible with most training-free token compression methods,
which rely on attention maps to determine token importance. Here, we propose Representation Shift, a trainingfree, model-agnostic metric that measures the degree of
change in each token’s representation. This seamlessly integrates token compression with FlashAttention, without attention maps or retraining. Our method further generalizes beyond Transformers to CNNs and state space models.
Extensive experiments show that Representation Shift enables effective token compression compatible with FlashAttention, yielding significant speedups of up to 5.5× and
4.4× in video-text retrieval and video QA, respectively.
Code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/
Representation-Shift.

UMT-B (FA)

UMT-L

UMT-B

Figure 1. Comparison of importance metrics for token pruning
(average over 7 video-text retrieval benchmarks in Table 2). Pruning with a conventional attention-based score (Attn) yields poor
speed-accuracy trade-offs on UMT-L and is incompatible with
FlashAttention (FA). In contrast, our proposed representation shift
accelerates both vanilla UMT-L and UMT-L with FlashAttention,
achieving superior trade-offs compared to downscaling to UMT-B
and attention-based scores.

1. Introduction

75, 78], segmentation [12, 49, 76], and video understanding [26–28, 32, 44, 51, 61, 62, 64]. While these works have
proven to be effective, the quadratic complexity of the selfattention mechanism remains a critical bottleneck, limiting
the scalability of Transformer based architectures.
To address this problem, a wide range of approaches have
been proposed to accelerate Transformers across various
domains, such as vision and natural language processing
(NLP). Early works tackled the computational burden by
proposing sparse attention mechanisms [3, 25, 57, 66] and
architectural modifications [15, 37, 48, 54, 59, 73] to approximate self-attention, such as low-rank approximations
and sparse attention patterns. However, these methods often introduce structural deviations from the original Transformer architecture, making them incompatible with widely
adopted pretrained models. As a result, vanilla Transformers [19] remain the dominant choice in practice, supported
by the widespread availability of pre-trained models across
a variety of domains. Here, one promising approach to
accelerate pre-trained vanilla Transformers is FlashAtten-

Transformers, initially proposed for natural language processing (NLP) [55], have become a prominent architecture in the vision domain. Following the pioneering work
ViTs [19], numerous subsequent studies have extended
Transformers to various vision tasks, e.g., image classification [15, 19, 37, 52, 53, 59], object detection [8, 23, 58, 63,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

20456

