This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DM-EFS: Dynamically Multiplexed Expanded Features Set
Form for Robust and Efficient Small Object Detection
Aashish Sharma
KLASS Engineering and Solutions, Singapore
sharma.aashish@klasses.com.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of small object detection (SOD) by introducing our novel approach - Dynamically Multiplexed Expanded Features Set (DM-EFS) form.
Detecting small objects is challenging as they usually suffer
from inadequate feature representation. Hence, to address
this, we propose the Expanded Features Set (EFS) form - a
simple yet effective idea to improve the feature representation of small objects by utilizing the untapped higher resolution features from the shallower layers of the backbone
module. We observe that the EFS form improves the SOD
performance. However, due to processing of additional features, it has a higher computational cost which reduces inference efficiency. Hence, to address this, we propose Dynamic Feature Multiplexing (DFM) - a novel design that
optimizes the usage of the EFS form during inference by dynamically multiplexing it to create our aforementioned DMEFS form. Since our DM-EFS form is a multiplexed (or subsampled) optimal version of the EFS form, it improves the
SOD performance like the EFS form but with a lower computational cost. Extensive experiments confirm the efficacy
of our DM-EFS approach. Integrated with YOLOv7 base
model, our DM-EFS achieves state-of-the art results on diverse SOD datasets outperforming the base model and SOD
baselines, with on-par or even better inference efficiency.

(a) CFINet [44]

(b) QueryDet [41]

(c) YOLOv7 (Base)

(d) DM-EFS (Ours)

Figure 1. For the example shown from the VisDrone [46] dataset,
compared to SOD baselines CFINet [44] and QueryDet [41], and
YOLOv7 [35] base model, our DM-EFS detects small objects
more robustly and accurately. Green and red boxes are groundtruths and predictions respectively, shown without class labels on
original resolution image. Please zoom-in for better visualization.

1. Introduction

can be observed from the results shown in Figs. 1a and 1b,
where for a 640×640 image from the VisDrone [46] dataset,
recent SOD methods, CFINet [44] and QueryDet [41], have
inaccuracies in detecting small objects robustly.
Detecting small objects is challenging given their inadequate feature representation in limited resolution images [6]. To address this, existing SOD methods have proposed various techniques such as feature imitation [39, 44]
which aims to enrich features of small objects by learning to
mimic the features of large objects, feature up-sampling [9,
26] or GAN-based super-resolution [1, 2, 25] to generate
high-resolution features for small objects. While GANbased methods are known to create spurious artefacts that
can adversely impact detection [6, 29, 30], feature imitation
methods, including the recent CFINet [44], work on handcrafted feature imitation designs which can be susceptible
to errors or training instabilities. Also, while using high

Object detection is an imperative vision task and there are
numerous methods [21, 22, 28, 35, 38] that have achieved
significant performance. Despite this, when used for small
object detection (SOD), e.g., for objects of size ≤ 20px,
these methods do not work well. While there are several
methods [13, 23, 40, 41, 44] specifically designed to address the SOD problem, it remains far from solved especially when working with limited resolution images1 . This
1 In this paper, we assume we only have limited resolution images which
we define as images with ≤ 640×640 spatial resolution.

24569

