This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S3R-GS: Streamlining the Pipeline for Large-Scale Street Scene Reconstruction
Guangting Zheng1 ,* Jiajun Deng2 ,* Xiaomeng Chu1 , Yu Yuan1 , Houqiang Li1 , Yanyong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 The University of Adelaide
{zgt,cxmeng,yyhappier}@mail.ustc.edu.com,jiajun.deng@adelaide.edu.au,
{lihq,yanyongz}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has reshaped
the field of photorealistic 3D reconstruction, achieving impressive rendering quality and speed. However, when applied to large-scale street scenes, existing methods suffer
from rapidly escalating per-viewpoint reconstruction costs
as scene size increases, leading to significant computational
overhead. After revisiting the conventional pipeline, we
identify three key factors accounting for this issue: unnecessary local-to-global transformations, excessive 3D-to2D projections, and inefficient rendering of distant content. To address these challenges, we propose S3R-GS, a
3DGS framework that Streamlines the pipeline for largescale Street Scene Reconstruction, effectively mitigating
these limitations. Moreover, most existing street 3DGS
methods rely on ground-truth 3D bounding boxes to separate dynamic and static components, but 3D bounding
boxes are difficult to obtain, limiting real-world applicability. To address this, we propose an alternative solution with
2D boxes, which are easier to annotate or can be predicted
by off-the-shelf vision foundation models. Such designs together make S3R-GS readily adapt to large, in-the-wild scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate that S3R-GS enhances rendering quality and significantly accelerates reconstruction. Remarkably, when applied to videos from
the challenging Argoverse2 dataset, it achieves state-of-theart PSNR and SSIM, reducing reconstruction time to below 50%—and even 20%—of competing methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/Tom-zgt/S3RGS.

high-quality simulators [10, 24, 39, 51], and also shows
great potential in synthesizing driving corner cases [59].
However, unlike the reconstruction of a single object or an
indoor environment, it involves a vast number of Gaussian
primitives to accurately model the street scene, significantly
increasing computational overhead. As the range of driving scenes expands, this challenge becomes even more pronounced, making it a valid problem to be explored.
In the literature, one popular direction towards street
scene reconstruction is to develop the pipeline based on
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [32]. This kind of method
[7, 18, 20, 26, 27, 34, 47, 52, 57] utilizes neural networks
to represent the scene as a continuous 3D volume and performs volume rendering to generate novel views, remarkably improving the rendering quality of classical reconstruction approaches [8, 14, 15]. However, due to the constraints of neural network capacity, NeRF-based methods
need large computation overhead when applied to large outdoor scenarios and suffer from artifacts and blurriness in
modeling dynamic objects.

1. Introduction

Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [21] offers an
efficient alternative, utilizing explicit 3D Gaussian primitives to represent 3D scenes. This explicit representation facilitates the decomposition of static and dynamic elements,
which is a desirable property for scene reconstruction. Additionally, 3DGS accelerates rendering by replacing volume rendering with rasterization-based rendering. Such advantages have led to the trend of utilizing 3DGS in recent
works [11, 19, 53, 58, 59] for the reconstruction of street
scenes. However, when applied to large-scale street scenes,
these methods suffer from rapidly increasing per-viewpoint
reconstruction costs due to significant computational redundancy in their pipelines. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a),
the conventional pipeline generally comprises three steps:
transforming each object’s Gaussians from local to global
frame, projecting all of the Gaussian primitives to the image plane, and rasterizing visible projected Gaussians using
α-blending method. First, local-to-global transformation is
unnecessary for dynamic street scene reconstruction, yet it
introduces substantial computational redundancy, particu-

As an emerging topic, street scene reconstructing has attracted a surge of research interest recently due to its
significance in applications such as autonomous vehicles,
robotics, and VR/AR. It plays a vital role in developing
* Equal contribution to this work.

25594

