This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MinCD-PnP: Learning 2D-3D Correspondences with Approximate Blind PnP
Pei An1 ,* Jiaqi Yang2 ,* Muyao Peng1 , You Yang1†, Qiong Liu1 , Xiaolin Wu3 , Liangliang Nan4
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
3
Southwest Jiaotong University, China 4 Delft University of Technology, Netherlands

Abstract
Image-to-point-cloud (I2P) registration is a fundamental
problem in computer vision, focusing on establishing 2D3D correspondences between an image and a point cloud.
Recently, the differentiable perspective-n-point (PnP) has
been widely used to supervise I2P registration networks
by enforcing projective constraints on 2D-3D correspondences. However, differentiable PnP is highly sensitive to
noise and outliers in the predicted correspondences, which
hinders the effectiveness of correspondence learning. Inspired by the robustness of blind PnP to noise and outliers in correspondences, we propose an approximate blind
PnP-based correspondence learning approach. To mitigate
the high computational cost of blind PnP, we reformulate
it as a more tractable problem: minimizing the Chamfer
distance between learned 2D and 3D keypoints, referred to
as MinCD-PnP. To effectively solve MinCD-PnP, we introduce a lightweight multi-task learning module, MinCD-Net,
which can be easily integrated into the existing I2P registration architectures. Extensive experiments on 7-Scenes,
RGBD-V2, ScanNet, and self-collected datasets demonstrate that MinCD-Net outperforms state-of-the-art methods and achieves higher inlier ratio and registration recall
in both cross-scene and cross-dataset settings. The source
code: https://github.com/anpei96/mincdpnp-demo.

Figure 1. To overcome the limitation of feature-level matching,
differentiable PnP employs the projective constraints of 2D-3D
correspondences but is highly sensitive to correspondence quality.
In this paper, we incorporate blind PnP to enhance I2P registration
and achieve a salient improvement compared to other methods.

1. Introduction

widely used in visual localization, navigation, visual odometry, 3D reconstruction, and so on [1, 13, 21, 26, 34].
Learning-based approaches have gained significant attention in I2P registration [1, 35]. Deep neural networks
(DNNs) help bridge the modality gap between images and
point clouds [2, 25] by estimating 2D-3D correspondences
through pixel-to-point feature-level matching (i.e., comparing feature distances between each 2D pixel and 3D
point) [12]. However, feature-level matching struggles to
remove outliers, as it ignores the projective constraints inherent in 2D-3D correspondences, as shown in Fig. 1.
To utilize the constraints of projective geometry in learning 2D-3D correspondences, the mainstream technique
leverages differentiable perspective-n-point (PnP) [4, 6, 42].
The objective is to refine camera pose estimation via differentiable PnP, thereby improving the accuracy of global
projective correspondences. However, differentiable PnP is
highly sensitive to noise and outliers in the predicted correspondences [37]. This issue makes the estimated camera
pose unreliable, thus hindering the effectiveness of differentiable PnP on correspondence learning.

Image-to-point-cloud (I2P) registration [12] is a fundamental task in computer vision [2], aiming to establish 2D3D correspondences between images and point clouds [35].
These correspondences are used to estimate the six-degreeof-freedom (6 DoF) camera pose with the perspective-npoint (PnP) algorithm [23], enabling I2P registration by
aligning images with point clouds. Thus, I2P registration is
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: yangyou@hust.edu.cn

26519

