This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Passing the Driving Knowledge Test
Maolin Wei1 * Wanzhou Liu2 * Eshed Ohn-Bar1
1
Boston University 2 Washington University in St. Louis

Abstract

Q: Several cars arrive simultaneously at
an uncontrolled intersection: the red car
will go straight, the purple car will turn
left, and the blue car will turn left. In
which order should they proceed?

If a Large Language Model (LLM) were to take a driving
knowledge test today, would it pass? Beyond standard spatial and visual question-answering (QA) tasks on current
autonomous driving benchmarks, driving knowledge tests
require a complete understanding of all traffic rules, signage, and right-of-way principles. To pass this test, human
drivers must discern various edge cases that rarely appear
in real-world datasets. In this work, we present DriveQA,
an extensive open-source text and vision-based benchmark
that exhaustively covers traffic regulations and scenarios.
Through our experiments using DriveQA, we show that (1)
state-of-the-art LLMs and Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) perform well on basic traffic rules but exhibit significant weaknesses in numerical reasoning and complex right-of-way
scenarios, traffic sign variations, and spatial layouts, (2)
fine-tuning on DriveQA improves accuracy across multiple categories, particularly in regulatory sign recognition
and intersection decision-making, (3) controlled variations
in DriveQA-V provide insights into model sensitivity to environmental factors such as lighting, perspective, distance,
and weather conditions, and (4) pretraining on DriveQA
enhances downstream driving task performance, leading to
improved results on real-world datasets such as nuScenes
and BDD, while also demonstrating that models can internalize text and synthetic traffic knowledge to generalize effectively across downstream QA tasks.

A. Red car, purple car, blue car
B. Red car, blue car, purple car
C. Purple car, blue car, red car
D. Blue car, purple car, red car

Figure 1. Can LLMs Pass a Driving Knowledge Test? We introduce a comprehensive multimodal dataset to evaluate the traffic
rule-following capabilities of MLLMs. While most question answering (QA) benchmarks in autonomous driving focus on spatial
understanding and common planning tasks, our DriveQA dataset
assesses broad driving knowledge. The challenging benchmark
comprises text-based questions derived from various U.S. state
driving manuals, as well as visual tasks for traffic sign recognition
and right-of-way judgment. We evaluate both text-only and imagetext QA using synthetic images (varying perspectives, weather,
time of day, and sign types) while showing transferability and
generalization to downstream real-world driving tasks. Ths figure
shows one example for a right-of-way question, a category where
models frequently struggle. Incorrect responses are highlighted in
red and correct answers in green.

of traffic conditions. While primarily textual, these tests
may also include graphical illustrations to ground questions
in real-world scenarios. Recent advances in Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) [3, 26, 47, 75, 97] as
general-purpose reasoning models provide an opportunity
to explore a key question: how well do current vision-andlanguage models perform when faced with the same driving
knowledge assessments? Even without targeted fine-tuning,
MLLMs may inherit some traffic rule knowledge from their
pretraining data (however, our findings indicate that both
such knowledge and associated reasoning capabilities remain limited).
Researchers have been increasingly integrating MLLMs
into autonomous driving systems [11, 14, 28, 39, 42, 51, 53,
54, 70, 77, 84, 89, 95, 98]. However, while these models
are often tested on perception-focused benchmarks that em-

1. Introduction
Safe navigation in traffic requires not only recognizing and
interpreting visual information but also reasoning over traffic rules and making decisions that align with regulations.
To ensure drivers develop these critical skills, before receiving their license they must first pass a written knowledge
test—a structured (multiple choice questions) assessment
designed to evaluate precise understanding of traffic laws,
right-of-way rules, and complex driving scenarios [32, 56].
Driving tests are not merely procedural; they assess
a driver’s ability to apply reasoning across a wide range
* Equally contributed.

8395

