This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Talking to DINO: Bridging Self-Supervised Vision Backbones with Language
for Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Luca Barsellotti∗1 , Lorenzo Bianchi∗2,3 , Nicola Messina2 , Fabio Carrara2 , Marcella Cornia1 ,
Lorenzo Baraldi1 , Fabrizio Falchi2 , Rita Cucchiara1
1
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy 2 ISTI-CNR, Italy 3 University of Pisa, Italy
1

2

{name.surname}@unimore.it

{name.surname}@isti.cnr.it

Dense Feature Map

Abstract
DINOv2

Open-Vocabulary Segmentation (OVS) aims at segmenting
images from free-form textual concepts without predefined
training classes. While existing vision-language models
such as CLIP can generate segmentation masks by leveraging coarse spatial information from Vision Transformers, they face challenges in spatial localization due to
their global alignment of image and text features. Conversely, self-supervised visual models like DINO excel in
fine-grained visual encoding but lack integration with language. To bridge this gap, we present Talk2DINO, a novel
hybrid approach that combines the spatial accuracy of DINOv2 with the language understanding of CLIP. Our approach aligns the textual embeddings of CLIP to the patchlevel features of DINOv2 through a learned mapping function without the need to fine-tune the underlying backbones.
At training time, we exploit the attention maps of DINOv2
to selectively align local visual patches with textual embeddings. We show that the powerful semantic and localization abilities of Talk2DINO can enhance the segmentation
process, resulting in more natural and less noisy segmentations, and that our approach can also effectively distinguish
foreground objects from the background. Experimental results demonstrate that Talk2DINO achieves state-of-theart performance across several unsupervised OVS benchmarks. Source code and models are publicly available at:
https://lorebianchi98.github.io/Talk2DINO/.

Input Image

sim
(element-wise)

Input Categories

Learned
Mapping

dinosaur
person

reﬁnement
& threshold

⋯

⋯

CLIP Text
Encoder

Mapped
Category
Embeddings

vegetation

Figure 1. Overview. Our approach aligns the embedding spaces
of CLIP and DINOv2 through a learned mapping function. This
results in fine-grained visual encodings, which can be mapped to
language to provide natural and less noisy semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction

from working with a specific fixed set of classes provided at
training time. Solving this task requires a fine-grained understanding of the semantic interconnections between image pixels and the meaning conveyed by natural language.
While previous works employed pixel-level annotations
as a source of supervision [53, 58, 65], a recent trend in the
field is to tackle this problem in an unsupervised manner [3,
9, 54] leveraging the correlations learned by state-of-the-art
backbones. Contrastive embedding spaces like CLIP [38],
in particular, have demonstrated good performance on tasks
that demand a holistic understanding of vision and language
modalities [28, 33, 60, 64], and have therefore been employed for unsupervised OVS [26, 47, 63]. Although CLIPbased backbones exhibit strong cross-modal capabilities,
they are primarily trained to predict a global similarity score
between text and images, which limits their spatial understanding and consequently affects tasks based on dense predictions. Recent efforts have tackled this limitation by introducing architectural modifications [18, 47, 63]. However,
the spatial understanding constraints imposed by the training modality hinder the effectiveness of such backbones in
OVS and highlight the potential benefits of exploring alternative models with enhanced perceptual capabilities.

Open-Vocabulary Segmentation (OVS) [59] is a fundamental task in Computer Vision that aims to partition an input
image into a set of coherent regions based on concepts provided at inference time [6, 17, 27]. The set of concepts
used to partition the image is usually provided in freeform
natural language, which effectively unchains the methods
∗ Equal contribution.

22025

