This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Highlight What You Want: Weakly-Supervised Instance-Level Controllable
Infrared-Visible Image Fusion
Jizheng Zhang2 Haiyu Song1 * Mingyu Ge1 Jiayu Wang1 Haoran Duan3∗
College of Computer Science and Engineering, Dalian Minzu University
2
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
{wangzeyu, shy}@dlnu.edu.cn, haoranduan@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zeyu Wang1

1

Text A: The person
on the left of all
persons.
Text B: The person
on the right of all
persons.

Abstract
Infrared and visible image fusion (VIS-IR) aims to integrate complementary information from both source images
to produce a fused image with enriched details. However,
most existing fusion models lack controllability, making it
difficult to customize the fused output according to user
preferences. To address this challenge, we propose a novel
weakly-supervised, instance-level controllable fusion model
that adaptively highlights user-specified instances based on
input text. Our model consists of two stages: pseudolabel generation and fusion network training. In the first
stage, guided by observed multimodal manifold priors, we
leverage text and manifold similarity as joint supervisory
signals to train text-to-image response network (TIRN) in
a weakly-supervised manner, enabling it to identify referenced semantic-level objects from instance segmentation
outputs. To align text and image features in TIRN, we propose a multimodal feature alignment module (MFA), using
manifold similarity to guide attention weight assignment for
precise correspondence between image patches and text embeddings. Moreover, we employ spatial positional relationships to accurately select the referenced instances from multiple semantic-level objects. In the second stage, the fusion
network takes source images and text as input, using the
generated pseudo-labels for supervision to apply distinct
fusion strategies for target and non-target regions. Experimental results show that our model achieves state-of-the-art
fusion performance and accurately highlights user-defined
instances. Code: https://github.com/GMY628/RIS-Fuse.

Text

Dog on grass
eating pizza,
with a ball
nearby.

Ours (Text A)

Ours (Text B)
Image

Dog

Grass

0.11

Pizza
Ball

Text Manifold
Well
Trained Text
Encoder

Visible

{

Ours (No Text)
Text

Infrared

Manifold
Similarity

Image Manifold
Well
Trained Image
Encoder

Manifold Prior: In well-trained manifold space, image patches and text tokens
describing the same object exhibit high manifold similarity, while unrelated pairs do not.

Figure 1. Top: Our model highlights instance objects guided by
text. Bottom: Discovered manifold prior between text and image.

1. Introduction

images capture thermal radiation, enabling effective lowlight and night-time detection, but lack texture details, while
VIS images offer rich details but are limited by lighting
conditions. Fusing these modalities aims to preserve thermal information from IR while enhancing it with the detail from VIS [28, 58]. This is crucial for applications
like surveillance, target detection, and autonomous driving
[1, 26, 44, 52].
Existing fusion methods face major limitations in controllability and user adaptability. Users, real-world scenarios, or diverse downstream tasks, frequently require varying
levels of fusion and target emphasis. However, once trained,
these static methods produce fixed outputs, failing to adapt
to dynamic needs [4]. While recent works have attempted
to introduce controllability into fusion through text-driven

Infrared-visible image fusion (VIS-IR) combines complementary features from infrared (IR) and visible (VIS) images to create more informative results [39, 40, 53]. IR
* Corresponding author

12637

