This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynCity: Training-Free Generation of 3D Worlds
Paul Engstler∗

Aleksandar Shtedritski∗
Iro Laina
Christian Rupprecht
Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{paule,suny,iro,chrisr,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1. We introduce SynCity, a novel method for generating complex and freely navigable 3D worlds from a prompt. It is training-free
and leverages powerful language, 2D, and 3D generators through new prompt engineering strategies.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We propose SynCity, a method for generating explorable
3D worlds from textual descriptions. Our approach leverages pre-trained textual, image, and 3D generators without
requiring ﬁne-tuning or inference-time optimization. While
most 3D generators are object-centric and unable to create
large-scale worlds, we demonstrate how 2D and 3D generators can be combined to produce ever-expanding scenes.
The world is generated tile by tile, with each new tile created within its context and seamlessly integrated into the
scene. SynCity enables ﬁne-grained control over the appearance and layout of the generated worlds, which are
both detailed and diverse.
* Denotes equal contribution. Project page: https://research.
paulengstler.com/syncity/

27585

We consider the problem of generating 3D worlds from textual descriptions. Generating 3D content, for example, for
video games, virtual reality, and simulation, is highly laborious and time-consuming. This is particularly true for large
3D scenes, even though these are often in the background
and may have limited artistic signiﬁcance. Automating their
generation is thus particularly appealing.
The advent of modern generative AI has already impacted 3D generation, and in particular, the generation of
3D objects. DreamFusion [40] was among the ﬁrst to
adapt diffusion-based 2D image generators [44] to create
3D objects. Subsequent advancements ﬁne-tuned 2D image generators to produce multiple consistent views of an
object [14, 33, 48, 53] and learned few-view 3D reconstruc-

