This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond [cls]: Exploring the true potential
of Masked Image Modeling representations
Marcin Przewi˛eźlikowski1,2,∗ Randall Balestriero3 Wojciech Jasiński1,4
Marek Śmieja1 Bartosz Zieliński1
1
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian University
2
Doctoral School of Exact and Natural Sciences, Jagiellonian University
3
Brown University 4 AGH University of Krakow
∗

marcin.przewiezlikowski@doctoral.uj.edu.pl

Abstract
ImageNet-1k accuracy

90

Masked Image Modeling (MIM) has emerged as a promising approach for Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) of visual
representations. However, the out-of-the-box performance
of MIMs is typically inferior to competing approaches. Most
users cannot afford fine-tuning due to the need for large
amounts of data, high GPU consumption, and specialized
user knowledge. Therefore, the practical use of MIM representations is limited. In this paper we ask what is the reason
for the poor out-of-the-box performance of MIMs. Is it due
to weaker features produced by MIM models, or is it due
to suboptimal usage? Through detailed analysis, we show
that attention in MIMs is spread almost uniformly over many
patches, leading to ineffective aggregation by the [cls] token. Based on this insight, we propose Selective Aggregation
to better capture the rich semantic information retained in
patch tokens, which significantly improves the out-of-the-box
performance of MIM1 .

1. Introduction
Self-supervised Learning (SSL) [10] has emerged as a powerful paradigm for pre-training visual representations from
unlabelled data. These representations are of high quality and can be used out-of-the-box for various downstream
tasks [5, 16, 37, 45], which is crucial because the computational costs and data volumes required for fine-tuning are
prohibitive for most end users [45]. However, to take full
advantage of these representations, we need to understand
their distinct properties.
There are two dominant SSL paradigms: Joint Embedding Architectures (JEA), which optimize the goal of producing similar embeddings from multiple views of the same
1We release the codebase at github.com/gmum/beyond_cls.

Standard representation
Selective token aggregation

85
80
75
70
65

MAE [37]

I-JEPA [5]

BEiT-v2 [50]

CAPI [27]

Figure 1. The standard approaches used to obtain global representations in Masked Image Modeling (MIM) – [cls] token or naive
averaging over patch tokens – do not focus on the most relevant
image fragments, resulting in poor out-of-the-box performance. As
a remedy, we propose Selective Aggregation – a lightweight approach that dynamically selects relevant tokens, thereby improving
performance.

image [15, 16, 18–21, 34, 36, 45, 69, 72], and Masked Image
Modeling (MIM), which learns to reconstruct missing pixels
(or high-level representations) of images with occluded fragments [5, 6, 11, 37, 50, 64]. Although JEA representations
often offer superior quality, they are highly dependent on
the choice of data and pretraining augmentations, some of
which may be detrimental to the performance of downstream
tasks [4, 45, 51, 56, 63]. In contrast, the advantage of MIM
representations lies in a more generic pretext task that requires fewer assumptions about the pretraining data, thus
increasing their applicability to non-standard data domains
and downstream tasks [23, 46, 73]. However, MIM representations often underperform in high-level perceptual tasks
for reasons that are not fully understood [9, 47, 70].
In this paper, we systematically analyze how masked
models form their representations in order to understand the
reasons for their poor quality. We find that MIM represen-

23442

