This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProSAM: Enhancing the Robustness of SAM-based Visual Reference
Segmentation with Probabilistic Prompts

1

Xiaoqi Wang1,2 , Clint Sebastian2 , Wenbin He1,2 , Liu Ren1,2
Bosch Research North America, 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)

xiaoqi.wang@us.bosch.com clint.sebastian@de.bosch.com wenbin.he2@us.bosch.com liu.ren@us.bosch.com

Abstract
The recent advancements in large foundation models have
driven the success of open-set image segmentation, a task
focused on segmenting objects beyond predefined categories. Among various prompt types (such as points, boxes,
texts, and visual references), visual reference segmentation stands out for its unique flexibility and strong zeroshot capabilities. Recently, several SAM-based methods
have made notable progress in this task by automatically
generating prompts to guide SAM. However, these methods often generate prompts at boundaries of target regions
due to suboptimal prompt encoder, which results in instability and reduced robustness. In this work, we introduce
ProSAM, a simple but effective method to address the stability challenges we identified in existing SAM-based visual
reference segmentation approaches. By learning a variational prompt encoder to predict multivariate prompt distributions, ProSAM avoids generating prompts that lie in unstable regions, overcoming the instability caused by less robust prompts. Our approach consistently surpasses state-ofthe-art methods on the Pascal-5i and COCO-20i datasets,
providing a more robust solution for visual reference segmentation.

Figure 1. The same mask can be generated by SAM using various
prompts in a region.

1. Introduction

ing text prompts [8, 37, 39] offer a solution to this limitation but encounter two main challenges [10]: (i) aligning
vision and language representations for rare or long-tailed
objects is challenging due to their scarcity, leading to compromised segmentation performance for these objects; and
(ii) certain objects are difficult to describe accurately in natural language without specialized knowledge. For example,
someone without a background in chemistry may struggle
to accurately describe ”molecular orbitals”.
To tackle the challenges resulting from long-tailed data
shortage and descriptive limitation, image segmentation
with visual references (i.e., an annotated reference image
that indicates the objects of interest) has become increasingly important. Its ultimate goal is to segment similar objects as indicated in the annotated reference image, regardless of the semantic category of target objects. Recently,
various methods [20, 32, 45] have leveraged the exceptional segmentation capabilities of SAM, achieving significant breakthroughs in visual reference segmentation. The
main idea of these methods is to generate prompts that direct SAM to predict masks for the target objects. Among
these approaches, training-based methods [32] that learn
prompt embeddings to guide SAM mask generation have
achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance. However,
the existing training approaches often direct the prompts
toward the boundaries of target regions, resulting in instability and reduced robustness. This robustness challenge is
specifically caused by the inherent design of SAM — iden-

Open-set image segmentation methods have gained considerable attention for their ability to segment objects beyond a fixed set of categories. These methods incorporate diverse prompts, including points, boxes, texts, and
visual references, effectively addressing the limitations of
closed-set approaches. The introduction of the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) series [14, 28] has notably advanced open-set segmentation performance using point and
box prompts. However, when segmenting the same type of
object across multiple images, using SAM can be tedious
and time-consuming because it requires custom prompts for
each image individually. Image segmentation methods us-

20487

