This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relative Illumination Fields:
Learning Medium and Light Independent Underwater Scenes
Mengkun She1*
1

Felix Seegräber1*

Kiel University

Multi-view input images

2

David Nakath1

Patricia Schöntag1,2

Kevin Köser1

GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel

(a) Re-rendering

(b) Color restored

(c) Medium backscatter (d) Surface illumination

Figure 1. Our proposed approach reconstructs a neural radiance field of an underwater scene captured by a camera system with unknown,
co-moving light sources, enabling novel view synthesis (a). Additionally, it can recover the clean scene representation where neither
medium nor light cone effects are present (b) and is capable of disentangling the light cone in the scattering medium (c) and the surface
illumination (d).

1. Introduction
Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [4, 14], along with their
subsequent variants [7, 26], have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in generating high-fidelity, photorealistic renderings of scenes reconstructed from 2D images. Although
NeRF’s formulation is volumetric, it assumes the scene exists in a clear air environment with highly opaque objects.
Underwater environments, however, present unique challenges due to wavelength-dependent attenuation and scattering. The space between objects is no longer empty but
filled with water, which absorbs and scatters light, behaving
almost like an additional object. This interaction complicates the disentanglement of true objects from the medium,
making the current NeRF formulation less effective. Recent
advancements [9, 10, 27] in underwater scene representation have adapted NeRF-based methods for these situations.
Nevertheless, most approaches focus on homogeneous scattering medium illuminated by a distant global light source,
such as sunlight. These methods primarily rely on the revised underwater imaging formation model [1, 2], which is
largely based on the well-known fog model [18] for shallow
water scenarios, where sunlight produces nearly isotropic

We address the challenge of constructing a consistent and
photorealistic Neural Radiance Field in inhomogeneously
illuminated, scattering environments with unknown, comoving light sources. While most existing works on underwater scene representation focus on a static homogeneous
illumination, limited attention has been paid to scenarios
such as when a robot explores water deeper than a few tens
of meters, where sunlight becomes insufficient. To address
this, we propose a novel illumination field locally attached
to the camera, enabling the capture of uneven lighting effects within the viewing frustum. We combine this with
a volumetric medium representation to an overall method
that effectively handles interaction between dynamic illumination field and static scattering medium. Evaluation results demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of our approach.
*Authors contributed equally to this work.
This work has received funding from the German Research Foundation
(project number 396311425), through the Emmy Noether program.

29110

