This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StreamGS: Online Generalizable Gaussian Splatting Reconstruction
for Unposed Image Streams
Yang Li1,4,* Jinglu Wang1 Lei Chu1 Xiao Li1
Shiu-Hong Kao1,2,* Ying-Cong Chen2,3 Yan Lu1
1
Microsoft Research Asia 2 HKUST 3 HKUST(GZ) 4 Rutgers University
yangliaftermath@gmail.com

skao@cse.ust.hk

yingcongchen@ust.hk

{jinglu.wang, leichu, li.xiao, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Input Image q
Sequence

Abstract

…

The advent of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has advanced 3D scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis. With the growing interest of interactive applications
that need immediate feedback, online 3DGS reconstruction
in real-time is in high demand. However, none of existing methods yet meet the demand due to three main challenges: the absence of predetermined camera parameters,
the need for generalizable 3DGS optimization, and the necessity of reducing redundancy. We propose StreamGS, an
online generalizable 3DGS reconstruction method for unposed image streams, which progressively transform image
streams to 3D Gaussian streams by predicting and aggregating per-frame Gaussians. Our method overcomes the
limitation of the initial point reconstruction [27] in tackling
out-of-domain (OOD) issues by introducing a content adaptive reﬁnement. The reﬁnement enhances cross-frame consistency by establishing reliable pixel correspondences between adjacent frames. Such correspondences further aid in
merging redundant Gaussians through cross-frame feature
aggregation. The density of Gaussians is thereby reduced,
empowering online reconstruction by signiﬁcantly lowering
computational and memory costs. Extensive experiments on
diverse datasets have demonstrated that StreamGS achieves
quality on par with optimization-based approaches but does
so 150 times faster, and exhibits superior generalizability in
handling OOD scenes.

The ﬁeld of 3D Scene reconstruction [10, 30] for novel view
synthesis from image streams has gained increasing attention, due to its signiﬁcance in enabling interactive applications that offer users instant feedback. In this context, the
* Work done during the internship at MSRA.

…

1. Introduction

Input View
Novel View

Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. The proposed StreamGS efﬁciently transforms image
streams into Gaussian streams by progressively reconstructing and
aggregating per-frame 3D Gaussians. We show our reconstructed
3DGS (visualized as points) alongside estimated camera poses (in
blue), and synthesized novel views.

advent of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [12] marks a major advancement in high-quality, real-time rendering. This
progress highlights the urgency for efﬁcient, on-the-ﬂy generation of 3DGS from image streams.
Nonetheless, online 3DGS reconstruction faces unique
challenges. (1) Unknown camera. The conventional preprocessing using Structure from Motion (SfM) [21] for
camera estimation is impractical for real-time streaming.

25841

