This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniPortrait: A Unified Framework for Identity-Preserving Single- and
Multi-Human Image Personalization
Junjie He
Yifeng Geng
Liefeng Bo
Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
{hejunjie.hjj, cangyu.gyf, liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com
Text-to-Single-ID Personalization

Stylized Portrait Synthesis

Text-to-Multi-ID Personalization

“Blonde with hair beaten into loose waves. Tattoos on
both arms and multiple bracelets on each wrist. Green
lace blouse with high-waisted jeans. Yellow walls.”

“Three men in a coffee shop.”

“The man was sitting at a table with a laptop on it.
With one hand over his head, he looked at the screen
with a worried expression on his face.”

Identity-Preserving Style Transfer With ControlNet

“Two women, retro comic style artwork,
comic book cover, symmetrical, vibrant.”

“An old woman, white hair and a wrinkled face, a serious
expression. Wearing a black coat and a straw hat, she
stood in a snowy field with a white sky background.”

Figure 1. Example generations from UniPortrait. Our method customizes single- and multi-ID images in a unified manner, providing
high-fidelity identity preservation, extensive facial editability, free-form input description, and no requirement for a predetermined layout.

Abstract

erative control tools. Code is available at https://
github.com/junjiehe96/UniPortrait.

This paper presents UniPortrait, an innovative human
image personalization framework that unifies single- and
multi-ID customization with high face fidelity, extensive facial editability, free-form input description, and diverse layout generation. UniPortrait consists of only two plug-andplay modules: an ID embedding module and an ID routing
module. The ID embedding module extracts versatile editable facial features with a decoupling strategy for each ID
and embeds them into the context space of diffusion models.
The ID routing module then combines and distributes these
embeddings adaptively to their respective regions within the
synthesized image, achieving the customization of single
and multiple IDs. With a carefully designed two-stage training scheme, UniPortrait achieves superior performance in
both single- and multi-ID customization. Quantitative and
qualitative experiments demonstrate the advantages of our
method over existing approaches as well as its good scalability, e.g., the universal compatibility with existing gen-

1. Introduction

14399

Recent advances in diffusion models [7, 13] have revolutionized the field of text-to-image synthesis, paving the way
for a plethora of image customization tasks [21, 23, 33,
46, 47]. Among these, human image customization has
emerged as a key area of focus for its enormous potential
in applications such as AI portrait photos, image animation,
and virtual try-ons. The objective of this task is to generate images that maintain a consistent face identity (ID) with
reference face images while adhering to additional prompts.
Early human image customization methods [8, 14, 38]
rely on test-time fine-tuning, with each new identity roughly
taking dozens of minutes or even hours to achieve satisfactory results. Recent works [27, 45, 49, 51] resort to
tuning-free setups. They employ a separate trained encoder

