This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaTe: Images Are All You Need for Material Transfer via Diffusion Transformer
Nisha Huang1,2 , Henglin Liu1 , Yizhou Lin1 , Kaer Huang3 , Chubin Chen1 ,
Jie Guo2,† , Tong-yee Lee4 , Xiu Li1,†
1
2
Tsinghua University, PengCheng Laboratory, 3 Lenovo Research, 4 National Cheng-Kung University
{hns24, liu-hl24, yz-lin24, chencb24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
{huangnsh, guoj01}@pcl.ac.cn 3 huangke1@lenovo.com 4 tonylee@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Input

2

Input

1

Materials

Materials

Figure 1. MaTe is a material transfer method that enables the transformation of textures from a single real-world image without any prior
knowledge. This approach is not only capable of successfully extracting texture information from antiques with thousands of years of
history but also handles popular computer graphics images, jewelry, and fur materials, providing strong support for design work.

Abstract

plifying inference prerequisites.

Recent diffusion-based methods for material transfer rely
on image fine-tuning or complex architectures with assistive
networks, but face challenges including text dependency,
extra computational costs, and feature misalignment. To
address these limitations, we propose MaTe, a streamlined
diffusion framework that eliminates textual guidance and
reference networks. MaTe integrates input images at the
token level, enabling unified processing via multi-modal attention in a shared latent space. This design removes the
need for additional adapters, ControlNet, inversion sampling, or model fine-tuning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MaTe achieves high-quality material generation
under a zero-shot, training-free paradigm. It outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in both visual quality and efficiency
while preserving precise detail alignment, significantly sim-

1. Introduction

15117

Material transfer is a technique that precisely maps the
properties of a specific material sample onto the surface of
a target object, as shown in Fig. 1. Due to its broad application prospects in digital content creation and industrial design, this technology has garnered attention in recent years.
Traditional material transfer frameworks primarily rely on
parametric modeling paradigms, such as optical reflection
models based on bidirectional scattering distribution function (BRDF) [5, 10, 14] or procedural texture generation algorithms [13, 44]. These frameworks limit the diversity of
the generated results due to the limited size of the basic material library, failing to meet the customization needed for
non-uniform composite materials in digital artistic creation.

