This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AstroLoc: Robust Space to Ground Image Localizer
∗

Alex Stoken Carlo Masone1
Gabriele Berton1,2
1
Politecnico di Torino 2 Amazon
https://astro-loc.github.io/

Abstract
Thousands of photos of Earth are taken every day by
astronauts from the International Space Station. Localizing these photos, which has been performed manually for
decades, has recently been approached through image retrieval solutions: given an astronaut photo, the goal is to
find its most similar match among a large database of geotagged satellite images, in a task called Astronaut Photography Localization (APL). Yet, existing APL approaches are
trained only using satellite images, without taking advantage of the millions of open-source astronaut photos. In this
work we present the first APL pipeline capable of leveraging
astronaut photos for training. We first produce full localization information for 300,000 manually weakly-labeled astronaut photos through an automated pipeline, and then use
these images to train a model, called AstroLoc. AstroLoc
learns a robust representation of Earth’s surface features
through two objective functions: pairing astronaut photos
with their matching satellite counterparts in a pairwise loss,
and a second loss on clusters of satellite imagery weighted
by their relevance to astronaut photography through unsupervised mining. AstroLoc achieves a staggering 35% average improvement in recall@1 over previous SOTA, reaching
a recall@100 consistently over 99% for existing datasets.
Moreover, without fine-tuning, AstroLoc provides excellent
results for related tasks like the lost-in-space satellite problem and historical space imagery localization.

Figure 1. One model, many space to ground applications. We
train a single model, AstroLoc, that succeeds in multiple spacebased image retrieval settings: astronaut photography localization,
“lost in space” orbit determination, and historical (Space Shuttle)
photography localization. In this figure, each group of 3 images
represent a query and its top-2 predictions from searching over a
worldwide database of millions of satellite images. Correct predictions in green, wrong predictions in red.

tential for oblique perspectives to observe topography and
height (e.g., measure the height of a volcanic eruption to
divert flights), (3) various illumination conditions (whereas
satellite imagery is typically sun-synchronous, always capturing the same area at the same time of day), and (4) offers
the highest resolution open source Earth observations data.
Furthermore, due to the ISS’s 90 minute repeating orbit, astronauts can be tasked with imaging for near real time disaster response, and they can use human intuition to focus
on relevant areas and events, making the photographs very
information-dense, whereas satellites commonly collect images systematically, regardless of semantic value. All these
characteristics make this data source a perfect complement
to satellite data and a crucial component for climate science [25], atmospheric phenomena [18, 38], urban planning
[9, 14, 28, 30], and, most importantly, disaster management
and response [31]1 .

1. Introduction
Earth observation is the process of collecting information
about the Earth’s surface, which is vital for monitoring the
state of our planet. Among the multitude of systems used
to acquire Earth observations data, most of which rely on
automatic collection by nadir-facing (straight-down) satellites, manual acquisition of photos by astronauts aboard the
International Space Station (ISS) is a clear outlier. This imagery has distinctive properties including (1) a wide range
of spatial resolutions (up to 2 meters per pixel), (2) the po-

1 https : / / storymaps . arcgis . com / stories /
947eb734e811465cb0425947b16b62b3

*Work was done outside of Amazon

5811

