This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Know “No” Better:
A Data-Driven Approach for Enhancing Negation Awareness in CLIP
Junsung Park1 Jungbeom Lee2,3 Jongyoon Song4 Sangwon Yu1 Dahuin Jung5† Sungroh Yoon1,6†
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Amazon 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
4
Samsung Research 5 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Soongsil University
6
IPAI, AIIS, ASRI, INMC, and ISRC, Seoul National University
CLIP

NegationCLIP

CLIP

NegationCLIP

a bus WITHOUT destination
displayed in its electronic ticker

the chair with NO one in it

a park with NO benches

a woman NOT holding a purse

CLIP

NegationCLIP

a cappuccino with NO foam

CLIP

NegationCLIP

the man who is NOT looking away

(a) Image-Text Matching

a street WITHOUT any trees

a man NOT reading a book

(b) Text-to-Image Generation

the chair which is
NOT behind the laptop

the person that is NOT a woman

a black chair with NO one sitting in it

(c) Referring Image Segmentation

the brown and white chair with
NO pillow on it

Figure 1. Examples of the original CLIP and NegationCLIP (ours) on negation-inclusive data in multimodal tasks. Our NegationCLIP
demonstrates a better understanding of negation concepts across various tasks.

Abstract

generated from our pipelines, we develop NegationCLIP,
which enhances negation awareness while preserving the
generality. Moreover, to enable a comprehensive evaluation
of negation understanding, we propose NegRefCOCOg—a
benchmark tailored to test VLMs’ ability to interpret negation across diverse expressions and positions within a sentence. Experiments on various CLIP architectures validate
the effectiveness of our data generation pipelines in enhancing CLIP’s ability to perceive negation accurately. Additionally, NegationCLIP’s enhanced negation awareness
has practical applications across various multimodal tasks,
demonstrated by performance gains in text-to-image generation and referring image segmentation.

While CLIP has significantly advanced multimodal understanding by bridging vision and language, the inability to
grasp negation—such as failing to differentiate concepts
like “parking” from “no parking”—poses substantial challenges. By analyzing the data used in the public CLIP
model’s pre-training, we posit this limitation stems from a
lack of negation-inclusive data. To address this, we introduce data generation pipelines that employ a large language model (LLM) and a multimodal LLM to produce
negation-inclusive captions. Fine-tuning CLIP with data
† Corresponding Authors

2825

