This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Generic Event Boundary Detection
Hyungrok Jung1∗

Daneul Kim2∗§‡ Seunggyun Lim1 Jeany Son3†§ Jonghyun Choi2†‡
1
2
3
GIST
Seoul National University
POSTECH

jhrock2001@gm.gist.ac.kr
carpedkm@snu.ac.kr
sk000514@gm.gist.ac.kr
jeany@postech.ac.kr
jonghyunchoi@snu.ac.kr

(a) Comparison between offline-GEBD and human perception

Abstract

Event 1

GEBD

Generic Event Boundary Detection (GEBD) aims to interpret long-form videos through the lens of human perception. However, current GEBD methods require processing
complete video frames to make predictions, unlike humans
processing data online and in real-time. To bridge this
gap, we introduce a new task, Online Generic Event Boundary Detection (On-GEBD), aiming to detect boundaries of
generic events immediately in streaming videos. This task
faces unique challenges of identifying subtle, taxonomyfree event changes in real-time, without the access to future frames. To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel
On-GEBD framework, ESTimator, inspired by Event Segmentation Theory (EST) [50] which explains how humans
segment ongoing activity into events by leveraging the discrepancies between predicted and actual information. Our
framework consists of two key components: the Consistent
Event Anticipator (CEA), and the Online Boundary Discriminator (OBD). Specifically, the CEA generates a prediction of the future frame reflecting current event dynamics based solely on prior frames. Then, the OBD measures
the prediction error and adaptively adjusts the threshold using statistical tests on past errors to capture diverse, subtle event transitions. Experimental results demonstrate that
ESTimator outperforms all baselines adapted from recent
online video understanding models and achieves performance comparable to prior offline-GEBD methods on the
Kinetics-GEBD and TAPOS datasets.

Seen

Event 2

Time
prediction

Human

Unseen

Event 1
Seen

(b) EST mechanism

GT

Time

Grooming

Action

Event 1

Event 2

Event 3

Real 
World

Expected

Visual
Boundary
: Small / Large difference

: Expected visual from past cognition

Figure 1. Comparison of offline-GEBD and human perception
with illustration of Event Segmentation Theory (EST). (a) In a
conventional GEBD task, all the event boundaries are determined
by utilizing all past and future frames. However, human segments
event sequentially relying only on visuals available at the current
moment. (b) The illustration of EST shows how humans perceive
events. When we perceive visuals, we naturally expect continuous
visuals to be recognized. When a significant difference from the
given visual input occurs, we perceive it as an event boundary.

actively investigated tasks such as action recognition and
action detection [4, 16, 18, 28, 36, 51, 54], these studies
typically focus on a limited set of pre-defined action classes
and short, trimmed video clips. Consequently, the field of
long-form video understanding, which involves analyzing
extended video content with complex narratives and diverse
actions, remains largely unexplored.
In this regard, Generic Event Boundary Detection
(GEBD) [34] introduces a new perspective to understand
long-form videos. Originating from cognitive science, the

1. Introduction
In the era of diverse video content from platforms such as
YouTube, TikTok and Netflix, the growing importance of
processing long-form videos has spurred a growth of interest in video understanding tasks. While recent research has
∗ Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Authors
§ Work done while at GIST.
‡ Daneul Kim is with CSE in SNU, and was previously with IPAI.
Jonghyun Choi is with ECE, ASRI, and IPAI in SNU.

13741

