This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Representation Angle Learning*
Liping Yi1 , Han Yu2 , Gang Wang1,∗ , Xiaoguang Liu1,∗ , Xiaoxiao Li3,4
1
College of Computer Science, TMCC, SysNet, DISSec, GTIISC, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
4
Vector Institute, Vancouver, Canada
{yiliping, wgzwp, liuxg}@nbjl.nankai.edu.cn, han.yu@ntu.edu.sg, xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca

1. Introduction

Abstract

Federated learning (FL) [13, 14, 24, 36, 45, 55, 56] is a
privacy-preserved distributed machine learning paradigm.
Typically, an FL server is often involved to broadcast a
global model to FL clients. The clients then further train
the global model on local data to obtain local models. The
server aggregates local model updates received from the
clients to produce a new global model. In this way, client
data are not exposed. Under this setting, the models trained
by the clients must follow the same structure.
In practice, clients participating in FL often have nonindependent and identically distributed (non-IID) data,
a.k.a., data heterogeneity [27, 42, 50, 58, 75, 78, 79], the
local models trained on such data are biased, so the global
model obtained by aggregating them may not perform well
on all client data. Besides, FL clients also have heterogeneous system configurations in terms of computing power
and communication bandwidth, a.k.a., system heterogeneity [39, 57, 59, 60, 67]. Thus, requesting all clients to train
the same model might not be viable for some weaker clients,
while leaving stronger clients under-utilized. More critically, some companies or institutions joining FL as clients
might face intellectual property issues regarding their proprietary local models. Thus, they might be reluctant to share
their private heterogeneous models, a.k.a., model heterogeneity. These challenges have inspired the field of modelheterogeneous federated learning (MHFL) with preserved
data and model privacy, which advocates avoiding directly
sharing private local heterogeneous models [61–65].
Existing MHFL approaches mainly include: a) Modeldecoupling: each client model is decoupled into heterogeneous and homogeneous parts, with only homogeneous
parts being shared with the server [11, 30]. b) Knowledge
distillation: the server aggregates local representation or
logits from different clients to generate global representation or logits, which is used to calculate distillation loss for
local training [28, 31]. c) Mutual training: each client is

Model-heterogeneous federated learning (MHFL) is a challenging FL paradigm designed to allow FL clients to train
structurally heterogeneous models under the coordination
of an FL server. Existing MHFL methods face significant limitations when it comes to transferring global knowledge to clients as a result of sharing only partial homogeneous model parameters or calculating distance loss, leading to inferior model generalization. To bridge this gap, we
propose a novel model-heterogeneous Federated learning
method with Representation Angle Learning (FedRAL). It
consists of three innovative designs: (1) We first introduce
representation angle learning into MHFL. Specifically, we
embed a homogeneous square matrix into the local heterogeneous model of each client, which learns the angle information of local representations. These homogeneous representation angle square matrices are aggregated on the
server to fuse representation angle knowledge shared by
clients for enhancing the generalization of local representations. (2) As different clients might have heterogeneous
system resources, we propose an adaptive diagonal sparsification strategy to reduce the numbers of the parameters of representation angle square matrices uploaded to
the server, to improve FL communication efficiency. (3)
To enable effective fusion of sparsified homogeneous local representation angle square matrices, we design an
element-wise weighted aggregation approach. Experiments
on 4 benchmark datasets under 2 types of non-IID divisions
over 6 state-of-the-art baselines demonstrate that FedRAL
achieves the best performance. It improves test accuracy,
communication efficiency and computational efficiency by
up to 5.03%, 12.43× and 6.49×, respectively.

* Corresponding author.

1314

