This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHIFT: Smoothing Hallucinations by Information Flow Tuning for Multimodal
Large Language Models
Sudong Wang1,2 , Yunjian Zhang3 *, Yao Zhu3 *, Enci Liu4
Jianing Li3 , Yanwei Liu1 , Xiangyang Ji3
1
Institute of Information Engeering, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
2
Nanyang Technological University; 3 Tsinghua University; 4 Columbia University
SWANG049@e.ntu.edu.sg, sdtczyj@gmail.com, ee zhuy@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

timodal information, MLLMs still struggle with the “hallucination” challenge [16, 22, 29, 33, 36, 43]. Specifically,
MLLMs may attach incorrect attributes (e.g. color, quantity) to objects in the input image, and might even fabricate non-existent objects, resulting in plausible-sounding
but ridiculous responses. This phenomenon has raised concerns about the safety and accuracy of MLLMs, limiting
their applications in commercial scenarios.
Existing mitigating MLLM hallucination methods
mainly fall into two categories: training-based and trainingfree.
The former attributes hallucinations to crossmodal misalignment, and thus finetunes the model using
hallucination-targeted datasets or Reinforcement Learning
with Human Feedback (RLHF) [3, 16, 23, 32, 41, 54].
While these approaches have shown effectiveness in reducing hallucinations, they rely heavily on manual data annotation and knowledge base integration, and the training process also incurs additional computational costs. By contrast, training-free methods address hallucinations during
the inference stage, without requiring additional training
costs. Currently, these methods operate at the token level,
either performing contrastive decoding on token probabilities [25, 46] or penalizing over-trust tokens [19].

Despite the remarkable progress of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) in recent years, the persistent challenge of “hallucination” has surfaced as a major barrier,
sharply constraining their practical applicability and reliability in real-world systems. In this paper, we provide a
novel perspective for the causes and mitigations for hallucinations by tracking the information flow within MLLMs. We
find that information in MLLMs does not flow in a strictly
continuous manner, instead, they may mutate abruptly in
deep layers. The mutated information does not originate
from shallow layers, on the contrary, it is directly injected
into the model, which may cause the model’s outputs to deviate from the input, leading to hallucinations. Inspired
by this observation, we propose a hallucination mitigation method that directly operates on the mutated information, named Smoothing Hallucinations by Information
Flow Tuning (SHIFT). In this method, the differences of
feature encodings between adjacent layers are monitored,
and once the mutated information is detected, the knowledge from shallow layers is used to tune it. This process
filters out hallucinated knowledge, aligning features more
faithfully with the input and effectively reducing hallucinations. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks have
demonstrated the superior performance in terms of accuracy and efficiency of SHIFT on mitigating hallucinations
compared with baselines.

1. Introduction
Recently, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
have advanced significantly in understanding and interpreting natural images, driving breakthroughs across various
vision-language tasks [2, 4, 5, 9, 12, 17, 26, 34, 35, 47, 50–
52, 55]. Despite the remarkable success in processing mul-

Figure 1. SHIFT is effective for mitigating hallucinations.

Current methods do not consider how hallucinated information appears during the model’s processing, which

1 Corresponding authors: Yao Zhu and Yunjian Zhang.

3639

