This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring View Consistency for Scene-Adaptive Low-Light
Light Field Image Enhancement
Shuo Zhang, Chen Gao, Youfang Lin*
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence,
School of Computer Science& Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China.
{zhangshuo, gaochen, yflin}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Light Field (LF) images captured under low illumination
conditions typically exhibit low quality. Recent learningbased methods for low-light LF images enhancement are
generally tailored to specific illumination inputs, limiting
their performance in real-world scenes. Moreover, how to
maintain the inherent view-consistency in the enhanced images also remains a difficult problem. In this paper, we
propose to explore the view consistency for scene-adaptive
low-light LF enhancement. We first analyze the view consistency for LF illumination maps and design a self-supervised
view-consistent loss to keep the consistency between the illumination maps of different views in LFs. To enhance the
model’s perception of illumination, we combine both global
and local information to estimate the illumination map,
which is easily plugged into other models. Subsequently,
we use the illumination maps to light up the low-light LF
images and restore the corruption to produce the final enhanced image. Experiments demonstrate that our ViewConsistent Network (VCNet) outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on real-world low-light LF datasets in both fixed
lighting conditions and dynamic lighting conditions. Our
proposed illumination adjustment is also demonstrated that
can comprehensively improve the performance of existing
methods in terms of both image quality and view consistency. Code is available at: https://github.com/
shuozh/VCNet

Figure 1. Performance comparison in dynamic illumination tasks.
The size of the points represents the run time to process one LF.
Our VCNet achieves the best results in terms of detail restoration
with higher PSNR and views consistency preservation with higher
AP. By adding our proposed illumination adjustment module, labeled as “+ E”, the performances of all methods are improved.

tion [25]. Nevertheless, the low-quality LF images severely
compromised the performance of these applications, especially for images captured in low-light environments.
In recent years, several methods are developed for enhancing low-light LF images. Some methods [15, 28, 37]
process stacked views of LF images to implicitly extract
disparity information between views to take redundant information for reconstructing LF. Other methods employ advanced spatial-angular separation convolution [35, 37, 38]
to extract redundant information between views for recovery. Although these methods are effective in handling LF
data, their performance is limited since they do not take the
view consistency into consideration, breaking the view consistency of the recovered image. Moreover, these methods
learn a low-light image to normal-light image mapping to
restore the low-light LF images. For different levels of illumination degradation, they require separate learning processes to train different models for recovery. Since the
degradation levels are usually unknown for real-world images, it is difficult for these models to select appropriate
parameters for restoration.
To deal with dynamically degraded inputs, a simple yet

1. Introduction
In contrast to conventional cameras, Light Field (LF) cameras have the capability to simultaneously capture both directional and intensity of all light rays in a single shot. Because of the structural information inherent in LF images,
they are well-suited for various applications, including digital refocus [2], depth estimation [8], and 3D reconstruc* Corresponding author: yflin@bjtu.edu.cn

7340

