This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stable-Sim2Real: Exploring Simulation of Real-Captured 3D Data with
Two-Stage Depth Diffusion
Mutian Xu1

Chongjie Ye2,3,1

Haolin Liu4

Yushuang Wu5

Jiahao Chang1

Xiaoguang Han1,2,3 *

1

3

2
SSE, CUHKSZ
FNii-Shenzhen
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence, CUHKSZ
4
5
Tencent Hunyuan3D
ByteDance Games

Our Stable-Sim2Real

3D Synthetic
Data

Abstract
3D data simulation aims to bridge the gap between simulated and real-captured 3D data, which is a fundamental
problem for real-world 3D visual tasks. Most 3D data simulation methods inject predefined physical priors but struggle to capture the full complexity of real data. An optimal
approach involves learning an implicit mapping from synthetic to realistic data in a data-driven manner, but progress
in this solution has met stagnation in recent studies. This
work explores a new solution path of data-driven 3D simulation, called Stable-Sim2Real, based on a novel two-stage
depth diffusion model. The initial stage finetunes StableDiffusion to generate the residual between the real and synthetic paired depth, producing a stable but coarse depth,
where some local regions may deviate from realistic patterns. To enhance this, both the synthetic and initial output
depth are fed into a second-stage diffusion, where diffusion
loss is adjusted to prioritize these distinct areas identified by
a 3D discriminator. We provide a new benchmark scheme
to evaluate 3D data simulation methods. Extensive experiments show that training the network with the 3D simulated data derived from our method significantly enhances
performance in real-world 3D visual tasks. Moreover, the
evaluation demonstrates the high similarity between our 3D
simulated data and real-captured patterns. Project page:
mutianxu.github.io/stable-sim2real.

Depth
Map

Stage-I

Stage-II

diffusion

diffusion

3D Simulated
Data

Point
Cloud

Figure 1. We delve back into a substantial yet stagnant problem
of simulating real-captured 3D data in a data-driven manner, introducing Stable-Sim2Real. Given the depth maps of the 3D synthetic data, our approach applies a two-stage depth diffusion model
based on Stable Diffusion [42] to generate realistic depth maps that
are fused to produce real 3D point clouds. The initial stage generates stable but coarse depth maps, followed by a second-stage
diffusion to enhance regional details.

data [8, 10, 12, 16, 68] emerges as an alternative data resource that is cost-effective, rapid, and scalable. Nevertheless, models trained using synthetic data may not perform
robustly against the real-world signal.
This problem has catalyzed the development of 3D data
simulation techniques, to minimize the gap between simulated and real-captured 3D data. While some studies
[2, 30, 33, 39, 75] have explored grounding physical priors
to simulate depth sensors, they struggle to capture the full
complexity of real-world patterns and are confined to simulation environments, due to the reliance on predefined and
explicit physical modeling. A better solution involves learning an implicit mapping from synthetic to realistic data in a
data-driven manner, offering greater flexibility and adaptability to real-world diversities. However, only a handful of
earlier works [4, 19, 47, 56] have ventured down this path.
Hindered by the lack of synthetic-real paired datasets and
the dependence on conventional networks like GANs [18],
which are prone to training instability and mode collapse
[29], these methods have yet to demonstrate the anticipated
performance levels. As a result, developing data-driven 3D

1. Introduction
In recent years, real-world 3D datasets have played a crucial
role in addressing a wide range of tasks in 3D vision and
robotics [1, 7, 11, 15, 23, 52, 69, 70]. However, collecting
real 3D data is often labor-intensive and time-consuming,
and is further complicated by the recent concerns regarding data privacy. In this scenario, synthetic (i.e., simulated)
* Corresponding author

2609

