This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free4D: Tuning-free 4D Scene Generation with Spatial-Temporal Consistency
∗

∗

Tianqi Liu1,2,
Zihao Huang1,2,
Zhaoxi Chen2 Guangcong Wang3
†
†
2
1,2
1,2
Shoukang Hu
Liao Shen
Huiqiang Sun
Zhiguo Cao1 Wei Li2,
Ziwei Liu2,
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 3 Great Bay University
https://free4d.github.io/
∆𝑡𝑡

Free4D

∆𝑡𝑡

or
“A rabbit playing
colorful balloon.”

Figure 1. Free4D can generate diverse 4D scenes from single-image or textual input. By enforcing spatial-temporal consistency in a
tuning-free way, Free4D enables high-quality scene generation with explicit 4D controls.

Abstract
We present Free4D, a novel tuning-free framework for 4D
scene generation from a single image. Existing methods either focus on object-level generation, making scene-level
generation infeasible, or rely on large-scale multi-view
video datasets for expensive training, with limited generalization ability due to the scarcity of 4D scene data. In
contrast, our key insight is to distill pre-trained foundation
models for consistent 4D scene representation, which offers
promising advantages such as efficiency and generalizability. 1) To achieve this, we first animate the input image using
image-to-video diffusion models followed by 4D geometric structure initialization. 2) To turn this coarse structure
into spatial-temporal consistent multi-view videos, we design an adaptive guidance mechanism with a point-guided
denoising strategy for spatial consistency and a novel latent replacement strategy for temporal coherence. 3) To lift
these generated observations into consistent 4D representation, we propose a modulation-based refinement to mitigate

inconsistencies while fully leveraging the generated information. The resulting 4D representation enables real-time,
controllable rendering, marking a significant advancement
in single-image-based 4D scene generation.

1. Introduction

∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

Creating a dynamic 3D environment that closely mirrors the
real world is crucial for achieving realistic and immersive
digital experiences, a key objective in fields such as film
production, video games, and augmented reality. However,
captured images provide only limited snapshots of a scene.
Generating dynamic 3D scenes from such limited observations, particularly from a single image, remains a significant
challenge and an open research problem.
Existing 4D generation methods [4, 46, 47, 75] primarily
focus on objects, often neglecting background generation
and its dynamics. Recently, several studies [54, 65, 69, 74]
have explored 4D scene generation for real-world applications. Compared to single-object generation, scene-level 4D
generation presents greater challenges, requiring handling
complex geometries, spatial relationships, and dynamic interactions. One line of research relies on fine-tuned video

25571

