This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FB-Diff: Fourier Basis-guided Diffusion for Temporal Interpolation of 4D
Medical Imaging
Xin You1,2,3

Runze Yang1

Chuyan Zhang1

Zhongliang Jiang2

Jie Yang1,∗

Nassir Navab2,∗

1 Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2 Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
3 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany

xin.you@tum.de, nassir.navab@tum.de

Abstract
The temporal interpolation task for 4D medical imaging,
plays a crucial role in clinical practice of respiratory motion
modeling. Following the simplified linear-motion hypothesis, existing approaches adopt optical flow-based models to
interpolate intermediate frames. However, realistic respiratory motions should be nonlinear and quasi-periodic with
specific frequencies. Intuited by this property, we resolve
the temporal interpolation task from the frequency perspective, and propose a Fourier Basis-guided Diffusion model,
termed FB-Diff. Specifically, due to the regular motion
discipline of respiration, physiological motion priors are
introduced to describe general characteristics of temporal
data distributions. Then a Fourier motion operator is elaborately devised to extract Fourier bases by incorporating
physiological motion priors and case-specific spectral information in the feature space of Variational Autoencoder.
Well-learned Fourier bases can better simulate respiratory
motions with motion patterns of specific frequencies. Conditioned on starting and ending frames, the diffusion model
further leverages well-learned Fourier bases via the basis interaction operator, which promotes the temporal interpolation task in a generative manner. Extensive results
demonstrate that FB-Diff achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA)
perceptual performance with better temporal consistency
while maintaining promising reconstruction metrics. Codes
are available here.

1. Introduction
4D medical images, which depict 3D volumes with temporal variations, are essential in clinical practice for capturing
dynamic changes and monitoring the progression of diseases over time [12, 25, 49, 52]. A significant application
is the temporal modeling for breathing-induced motions of

28010

cardiac or pulmonary anatomical structures. That task aims
to enrich motion visualizations by generating intermediate
frames under the condition of starting and ending frames,
which is consistent with the concept of Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) in natural scenarios.
VFI has been thoroughly investigated through systematic
studies in recent years [10, 24, 31, 37, 39, 41, 58, 61, 62].
However, due to unique properties and constraints of medical imaging, it remains a challenge to directly implement
these frameworks into 4D medical video interpolation with
maintaining equally promising performance. Specifically,
the quality of ground truth intermediate frames in medical
imaging is often compromised due to factors such as imaging noise, unstable breathing, causing unexpected artifacts
[17, 25, 43, 49]. Thus, the lower image quality compared to
videos in the natural domain, will degrade the interpolation
performance of VFI models. Besides, potential patients’
movement might induce an additional disturbance to the
temporal modeling [5, 38].
Furthermore, there exists a discrepancy on the type of
motions between natural and medical scenes. The former
focuses on the object movement and illumination intensity
change. While in the medical domain, motions can be depicted as subtle anatomical variance with quasi-periodic
motion discipline [51, 56]. Thus, a specific motion prior
of anatomies is effective to boost the temporal interpolation,
especially for the medical data with limited resources from
a small pool of individuals.
On account of these challenges, we present the following
question: “How can we devise a specialist VFI model tailored for 4D temporal medical volumes?” Existing methods
[2, 13, 29, 30, 51] on medical VFI face a major shortcoming: the linear motion hypothesis in a breathing period is
required for the regression of intermediate frames as revealed in Fig.1(a). However, respiratory motions should be
a nonlinear oscillatory process that cannot be simply mod-

