This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HAMSt3R: Human-Aware Multi-view Stereo 3D Reconstruction
Sara Rojas1,2* Matthieu Armando2 Bernard Ghanem1
Philippe Weinzaepfel2 Vincent Leroy2 Grégory Rogez2
1

KAUST

2

NAVER LABS Europe

Pointmaps

Human-aware reconstruction & SMPL fit

Ins. Segmentation

Densepose

Figure 1. Given a set of unposed images, HAMSt3R reconstructs the 3D scene as a dense point map with human semantics, attaching
instance segmentation and DensePose information directly to 3D points for human-aware modeling.

Abstract

aging the outputs of our different heads, HAMSt3R produces a dense point map enriched with human semantic
information in 3D. Unlike existing methods that rely on
complex optimization pipelines, our approach is fully feedforward and efficient, making it suitable for real-world applications. We evaluate our model on EgoHumans and
EgoExo4D, two challenging benchmarks containing diverse
human-centric scenarios. Additionally, we validate its generalization to traditional multi-view stereo and multi-view
pose regression tasks. Our results demonstrate that our
method can reconstruct humans effectively while preserving strong performance in general 3D reconstruction tasks,
bridging the gap between human and scene understanding
in 3D vision.

Recovering the 3D geometry of a scene from a sparse set
of uncalibrated images is a long-standing problem in computer vision. While recent learning-based approaches such
as DUSt3R and MASt3R have demonstrated impressive results by directly predicting dense scene geometry, they are
primarily trained on outdoor scenes with static environments and struggle to handle human-centric scenarios. In
this work, we introduce HAMSt3R, an extension of MASt3R
for joint human and scene 3D reconstruction from sparse,
uncalibrated multi-view images. First, we exploit DUNE,
a strong image encoder obtained by distilling, among others, the encoders from MASt3R and from a state-of-the-art
Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) model, multi-HMR, for a
better understanding of scene geometry and human bodies.
Our method then incorporates additional network heads to
segment people, estimate dense correspondences via DensePose, and predict depth in human-centric environments, enabling a more comprehensive 3D reconstruction. By lever-

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction from uncalibrated images is a fundamental problem in computer vision with a wide range
of applications in robotics, augmented reality, and humancomputer interaction. Traditionally, this task has long been
approached by solving a succession of problems [53, 54]

* Work done while interning at NAVER LABS Europe.

5027

