This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Homeostatic and Plastic Prompt Tuning for Audio-Visual Multi-Task
Incremental Learning
Liang Li2 †

Jiong Yin1,2 *
1

Jiehua Zhang3

Yuhan Gao1

Chenggang Yan1

Xichun Sheng4

2

Hangzhou Dianzi University Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3

Xi’an Jiaotong University 4 Macao Polytechnic University

{jiong.yin,yuhangao,cgyan}@hdu.edu.cn

liang.li@ict.ac.cn

jiehua.zhang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

𝒏 tasks
Massive
at one time

Task1

Audio-visual multi-task incremental learning aims to
continuously learn from multiple audio-visual tasks without
the need for joint training on all tasks. The challenge of the
problem is how to preserve the old task knowledge while
facilitating the learning of new task with previous experiences. To address these challenges, we introduce a threestage Progressive Homeostatic and Plastic audio-visual
prompt (PHP) method. In the shallow phase, we design the
task-shared modality aggregating adapter to foster crosstask and cross-modal audio-visual representation learning
to enhance shared understanding between tasks. In the middle phase, we propose the task-specific modality-shared dynamic generating adapter, which constructs prompts that
are tailored to individual tasks while remaining general
across modalities, which balances the model’s ability to
retain knowledge against forgetting with its potential for
versatile multi-task transferability. In the deep phase, we
introduce the task-specific modality-independent prompts
to further refine the understand ability by targeting individual information for each task and modality. By incorporating these three phases, PHP retains task-specific
prompts while adapting shared parameters for new tasks to
effectively balance knowledge sharing and specificity. Our
method achieves SOTA performance in different orders of
four tasks (AVE, AVVP, AVS and AVQA). Our code can be
available at https://github.com/ENJOY-Yin-jiong/PHP.

Joint
training

𝑻𝒂𝒔𝒌𝐢−𝟏

𝑇𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑛

…

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑2
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑛

When comes a new task

Retraining with

?

𝑇𝑎𝑠𝑘𝜎
other tasks
(a) Audio-visual multi-task learning

Data flows

past

Continuous
training

𝑇𝑎𝑠𝑘2

…

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑1

Shared
model

𝑇𝑎𝑠𝑘3
current
When comes a new task

𝑇𝑎𝑠𝑘𝜎

Shallow
Cross-task
Knowledge
Consolidation

𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐴𝑑𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐢

Middle

Task-specific Crossmodal Integration

Replace

𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝐴𝑑𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑒𝑟i−1

∞ tasks
𝑇𝑎𝑠𝑘1

𝑻𝒂𝒔𝒌𝐢
Increm ental f lows

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑1

Shared
model

…

𝑇𝑎𝑠𝑘2

p2314922@mpu.edu.mo

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑2

Task-modality
Specialization

Deep
Replace

𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑠 𝐴𝑑𝑎𝑝𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐢−𝟏

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑3

Only train
one task

…

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝜎

(b) Audio-visual multi-task incremental learning

"Is t he t rumpet i n the
vi deo alw ay s playi ng?”
“Yes. ”

𝑻𝒂𝒔𝒌𝐢−𝟏

𝑻𝒂𝒔𝒌𝐢

(c) The pipeline of our method

Figure 1. (a) Audio-visual multi-task learning allows simultaneous training on various audio and video tasks. But, the model
may require retraining when a new task emerges. (b) Audio-visual
multi-task incremental learning is able to address new tasks
more flexibly while maintaining the memory of previous tasks. (c)
The pipeline of our method.

trained uniformly is deployed, it often struggles to update
continuously to acquire new knowledge, while also fulfilling new task requirements as illustrated in Fig 1 (a).
Audio-visual multi-task incremental learning aims to
conduct continuous learning within audio-visual task
streams without the need for simultaneous training on all
tasks. An incremental learning strategy can greatly enhance the flexibility of multi-task models and enable them
to quickly adapt to new tasks based on shared knowledge, as
shown in Fig 1 (b). However, this approach faces the critical
challenge of catastrophic forgetting, where new knowledge
overwrites existing representations, causing significant performance decline on previously learned tasks.
Previous works in incremental learning have made
significant progress in mitigating catastrophic forgetting.
Some methods maintain memory of old tasks through parameter regularization [1, 24, 29, 78], while others rely on
data replay [3–6, 14, 43, 44, 64] to revisit past knowledge.

1. Introduction
Visual and auditory perception form the core of human understanding of the world. Audio-visual multi-task learning
attracts significant research interest for integrating audiovisual cues to address various tasks. However, due to the
dynamic nature of the real world, once a multi-task model
* This work is done during the intern in VIPL group, ICT, CAS.
† Corresponding author

2022

