This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLaVA-CoT: Let Vision Language Models Reason Step-by-Step
Guowei Xu♣ * Peng Jin♠,∗

Ziang Wu♠∗ Hao Li♠ Yibing Song Lichao Sun Li Yuan♠,
♠
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
♣
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University

Rabbitpre AI & PKU Shenzhen AIGC Joint Lab  DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University
xgw23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn

6 Multimodal Reasoning Benchmarks

Abstract
Ours

Large language models have demonstrated substantial advancements in reasoning capabilities. However, current
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) often struggle to perform
systematic and structured reasoning, especially when handling complex visual question-answering tasks. In this
work, we introduce LLaVA-CoT1 , a large VLM designed
to conduct autonomous multistage reasoning. Unlike chainof-thought prompting, LLaVA-CoT independently engages
in sequential stages of summarization, visual interpretation,
logical reasoning, and conclusion generation. This structured approach enables LLaVA-CoT to achieve marked
improvements on reasoning-intensive tasks. To accomplish
this, we construct the LLaVA-CoT-100k dataset, integrating samples from various visual question answering
sources and providing structured reasoning annotations.
Besides, we propose a test-time stage-wise retracing search
method (SWIRES), which enables effective and efﬁcient testtime scaling. Remarkably, with only 100k training samples
and test-time scaling, LLaVA-CoT not only outperforms
its base model by 9.4% on a wide range of multimodal reasoning benchmarks, but also surpasses the performance of
larger and even closed-source models, such as Gemini-1.5pro, GPT-4o-mini, and Llama-3.2-90B-Vision-Instruct. The
code, dataset, and pre-trained weights are publicly available at https://github.com/PKU-YuanGroup/LLaVA-CoT.

Base Model
Open-Source
Models

Closed-Source
Models

LLaVA-CoT (11B)
Llama-3.2V (11B)
Llama-3.2V (90B)
InternVL2-8B
Qwen2-VL-7B
Gemini Pro 1.5
GPT-4o-mini
Average Score

Figure 1. Performance of LLaVA-CoT and other models across
six multimodal reasoning benchmarks. Although LLaVA-CoT
is ﬁne-tuned from the Llama-3.2-11B-Vision-Instruct [43] model
(which has the lowest average score), it outperforms many larger
open-source models and even some closed-source models. Detailed benchmark results are shown in Table 5.

Therefore, developing a multimodal model that integrates
both language and vision while facilitating effective, systematic, and deep reasoning holds substantial signiﬁcance.
Early open-source vision language models (VLMs)
mainly employ a direct prediction approach, generating
brief answers immediately in response to a question [26, 33,
35]. The main limitation of this direct-response paradigm is
its lack of a structured reasoning process, making it less effective for tasks demanding logical reasoning [66]. Recent
studies have shown that incorporating Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) reasoning encourages the model to reason step by
step, signiﬁcantly improving its question-answering capabilities [56]. However, even with CoT reasoning, most
VLMs frequently produce errors or hallucinated outputs
during the reasoning progress [29, 34, 53].
Our ﬁndings suggest that a signiﬁcant cause of these issues is the insufﬁciently systematic and structured nature of

1. Introduction
Large language models, represented by OpenAI o1 [68] and
Deepseek R1 [15], demonstrate strong capabilities for systematic and in-depth reasoning, validating the effectiveness
of test-time scaling for language models [51]. However, vision is equally important for enabling models to fully understand the world and extend their cognitive abilities [6, 65].
* G. Xu, P. Jin, and Z. Wu contribute equally.
1 Our LLaVA-CoT is built upon Llama-3.2-Vision model [43].

2087

