This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniVerse: Unleashing the Scene Prior of Video Diffusion Models for
Robust Radiance Field Reconstruction
Jin Cao1†
1

Hongrui Wu2†

Ziyong Feng3

Hujun Bao1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

2

Xiaowei Zhou1

Tongji University

Sida Peng1∗
3

DeepGlint

(a) Input Inconsistent Images

(b) 3D scene reconstructed from (a)

(c) Restored Images

(d) 3D scene reconstructed from (c)

Figure 1. Given a set of inconsistent multi-view images with inconsistencies such as photometric variation or transient occlusions, as
shown in (a), existing robust reconstruction methods often fail to produce a high-quality 3D scene with minimal artifacts and floaters when
the views are not dense enough, as illustrated in (b). In contrast, our method first utilizes a Video Diffusion Model to restore all images
into a consistent state in (c), and then reconstructs the 3D scene from these restored images, resulting in the high-quality 3D scene in (d).
(c) Restored Images

then uses a specially designed video diffusion model to restore them into consistent images, and finally reconstructs
the 3D scenes from these restored images. Compared
with case-by-case per-view degradation modeling, the diffusion model learns a general scene prior from large-scale
data, making it applicable to diverse image inconsistencies. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate the strong generalization capability and superior performance of our method in robust
reconstruction. Moreover, UniVerse can control the style of
the reconstructed 3D scene. The code will be released for
the reproducibility.

Abstract
This paper tackles the challenge of robust reconstruction,
i.e., the task of reconstructing a 3D scene from a set of
inconsistent multi-view images. Some recent works have
attempted to simultaneously remove image inconsistencies
and perform reconstruction by integrating image degradation modeling into neural 3D scene representations. However, these methods rely heavily on dense observations for
robustly optimizing model parameters. To address this issue, we propose to decouple robust reconstruction into two
subtasks: restoration and reconstruction, which naturally
simplifies the optimization process. To this end, we introduce UniVerse, a unified framework for robust reconstruction based on a video diffusion model. Specifically, UniVerse first converts inconsistent images into initial videos,

1. Introduction

† Co-first author. ∗ Corresponding author.

Novel view synthesis have long been a high-profile and
complicated task in computer graphics, which plays a significant role in many applications like virtual reality (VR)
and autonomous driving. Traditional approaches [48, 50]

27031

