This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-Supervised Learning of Dense Functional Correspondences
Stefan Stojanov*

Linan Zhao*

Yunzhi Zhang Daniel L. K. Yamins
Stanford University

Abstract

Jiajun Wu

Given a demonstration with an object, such as pouring with
a kettle, establishing dense functional correspondence with
another object that supports this function, e.g., a bottle, enables the efficient transfer of the demonstration.

Establishing dense correspondences across image pairs is
essential for tasks such as shape reconstruction and robot
manipulation. In the challenging setting of matching across
different categories, the function of an object, i.e., the effect
that an object can cause on other objects, can guide how
correspondences should be established. This is because object parts that enable specific functions often share similarities in shape and appearance. We derive the definition
of dense functional correspondence based on this observation and propose a weakly-supervised learning paradigm to
tackle the prediction task. The main insight behind our approach is that we can leverage vision-language models to
pseudo-label multi-view images to obtain functional parts.
We then integrate this with dense contrastive learning from
pixel correspondences to distill both functional and spatial
knowledge into a new model that can establish dense functional correspondence. Further, we curate synthetic and
real evaluation datasets as task benchmarks. Our results
demonstrate the advantages of our approach over baseline
solutions consisting of off-the-shelf self-supervised image
representations and grounded vision language models.1

It becomes harder to find dense correspondence when the
input images shift from being two views of the same object
to different objects from the same category, and finally to
objects from distinct categories, as the visual similarity becomes less apparent. This work focuses on the most challenging scenario with objects from different categories. We
aim to establish dense pixel-level correspondence between
pairs of images containing objects with parts whose shape
enables the execution of similar functions. Specifically, by
“function”, we refer to the effect one object can have on another object or substance, e.g., the function “cut-with” for a
knife and a spatula or “hang-onto” for objects with hooks.
Practically, training and evaluation for this task are challenging due to the lack of labeled data. Supervised training
at scale is infeasible because manual dense correspondence
labeling is intractable, emphasizing the need for a self- or
weakly-supervised approach. For evaluation, while datasets
exist for dense within-category correspondence [34, 68, 77]
and sparse functional keypoint correspondence across categories [37], there is still no established task or dataset for
dense correspondence across categories. In this work, we
make progress toward addressing both the challenges of
training and evaluation.

1. Introduction
Finding pixel correspondence across image pairs is fundamental for object understanding and is critical for applications like shape reconstruction [39, 43, 46, 72], editing [19],
and object manipulation in robotics [17, 28, 29, 55]. This
task requires reasoning beyond visual similarity in local
appearance, geometry, and texture across images. It also
involves structural similarity, e.g., the part-whole relationships of objects and their part components, and semantic
similarity, e.g., the functional properties of parts of objects.
These aspects of similarity are essential for learning
efficient generalizable systems for downstream applications. For example, in imitation learning in robotics, human demonstrations are a scarce and valuable data source.

The key insight behind our training approach is that the
capabilities of self-supervised image representations like
DINOv2 [54] or Stable Diffusion [62] and vision language
models (VLMs) [24, 78] are complementary but individually insufficient for solving this task. On the one hand,
surprisingly accurate dense correspondences can be established using image features from pre-trained self-supervised
models. This works well when the input images contain visually similar object instances from the same category, e.g.,
two cats or two cars [87]. However, the accuracy decreases
for the more generic scenario when objects come from distinct categories. On the other hand, VLMs can detect the
bounding boxes of object parts with similar functions in a
zero-shot manner [24, 78] but cannot perform fine-grained
reasoning about correspondences across objects.

* Equal contribution.
1 Project website: https://dense-functional-correspond
ence.github.io/

6981

