This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAMPLE: Semantic Alignment through Temporal-Adaptive Multimodal Prompt
Learning for Event-Based Open-Vocabulary Action Recognition
Jing Wang1,2 , Rui Zhao1,2 , Ruiqin Xiong1,2 *, Xingtao Wang3 , Xiaopeng Fan3 , Tiejun Huang1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
jingw@stu.pku.edu.cn
{rqxiong, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, {xtwang, fxp}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Fusion

Open-vocabulary action recognition (OVAR) extends
recognition systems to identify unseen action categories.
While large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) like
CLIP have enabled OVAR in image domains, their adaptation to event data remains underexplored. Event cameras offer high temporal resolution and inherent privacy
preservation, making them suitable for capturing finegrained motion dynamics. However, leveraging event data
for OVAR presents challenges: 1) bridging the domain
gap between static image-based models and event streams,
and 2) preserving the generalization capabilities of pretrained VLMs in open-vocabulary settings. In this paper, we propose SAMPLE, a lightweight adaptation of
VLMs for event-based action recognition, balancing supervised and open-vocabulary performance. We introduce a
Temporal-Adaptive Multimodal Prompt Learning strategy
that can be divided into: 1) Unimodal prompt on both
the event and text branches to learn the data distribution
2) Event-Text cross-modal prompt for representation space
alignment 3) Temporal-Adaptive prompt to model temporal dependencies across event data. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that SAMPLE outperforms prior methods across fully supervised, few-shot, base-to-novel and
zero-shot settings. Notably, in zero-shot scenarios, SAMPLE achieves gains of +15.46%, +29.76%, and +23.79%
on SeAct, DVS128Gesture, and PAF respectively with lower
computational cost. Our codes are released at here.

Event Encoder

Alignment

Text Encoder

Prompts

Event
Frames

Text Input

(a) Existing Language-driven Event-based Action Recognition Method
Fusion

Alignment
Temporal-Adaptive
Multimodal Prompt Learning

Event Encoder

Event-Text Pmt.
Temporal Pmt.

Event-Text Pmt.

Temporal Pmt.

Event-Text Pmt.

Text Encoder

Event-Text Pmt.
Prompts

Prompts

Text Input

(b) Proposed SAMPLE

Figure 1. Fine-tuning vs. Prompting for event-based action recognition. (a) Existing methods [56] fine-tune the event encoder
for alignment. (b) SAMPLE introduces a lightweight Temporaladaptive Multimodal Prompting to adapt both branches.

1. Introduction

hancing recognition systems for real-world applications.
The rise of large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) like
CLIP [38] and ALIGN [18] has been pivotal, enabling remarkable zero-shot and few-shot performance in image domains by learning joint image-text representations. Inspired
by this, many works have adapted CLIP for video-based
OVAR by fine-tuning [31, 39, 45], prompting [1, 5, 46, 51],
or knowledge distillation [16]. However, these RGB-based
methods struggle with high-speed motion and low-light
conditions, and raise privacy concerns in human-centric
scenarios, motivating the need for alternative sensors.
Recently, bio-inspired event cameras have created a new
visual paradigm that asynchronously and sparsely measure

Open-vocabulary action recognition (OVAR) aims to identify action categories that are unseen during training, en* Corresponding author.

14409

