This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VAGUE: Visual Contexts Clarify Ambiguous Expressions
Heejeong Nam* 1 , Jinwoo Ahn*2 , Keummin Ka3 , Jiwan Chung3 , and Youngjae Yu†3
1

Brown University
2
UC Berkeley
3
Yonsei University

Abstract

Hey person1, looks like you're planning
a party for the neighborhood squirrels.

Human communication often relies on visual cues to resolve
ambiguity. While humans can intuitively integrate these cues,
AI systems often find it challenging to engage in sophisticated
multimodal reasoning. We introduce VAGUE, a benchmark
evaluating multimodal AI systems’ ability to integrate visual
context for intent disambiguation. VAGUE consists of 1.6K
ambiguous textual expressions, each paired with an image
and multiple-choice interpretations, where the correct answer is only apparent with visual context. The dataset spans
both staged, complex (Visual Commonsense Reasoning) and
natural, personal (Ego4D) scenes, ensuring diversity. Our
experiments reveal that existing multimodal AI models struggle to infer the speaker’s true intent. While performance
consistently improves from the introduction of more visual
cues, the overall accuracy remains far below human performance, highlighting a critical gap in multimodal reasoning.
Analysis of failure cases demonstrates that current models
fail to distinguish true intent from superficial correlations in
the visual scene, indicating that they perceive images but do
not effectively reason with them. We release our code and
data at https://hazel-heejeong-nam.github.io/vague/.

Visual Context 1

Visual Context 2

Person 1
1
Envelop

1

Person 1
Cereal Box

The speaker wants person1 to…

close the cereal box

≠

hand out the envelop
to the squirrels

Figure 1. A motivating example demonstrating the importance of
visual context in understanding intention. Without a predetermined
context, a single expression can convey multiple different intentions.
The textual expression and Context 1 are from our dataset, while
Context 2 is generated using DALL·E 3 [2] to help understanding.

from visual cues, the speaker’s intention can vary, thus remaining ambiguous. This implies that the visual contexts
play important roles in communication, raising the question: can AI systems integrate visual cues with ambiguous
dialogue to infer the speaker’s intent?
We introduce Visual Contexts ClArify ambiGUous
Expressions (VAGUE), a benchmark consisting of 1.6K ambiguous textual expressions, each paired with a single image.
VAGUE aims to model diverse and natural human-to-human
interactions by setting each image as the speaker’s viewpoint,
where the speaker implicitly requests a certain action from
a person within their field of view. We define the problem
addressed through this setup as Multimodal Intention Disambiguation (MID), which involves reasoning about the most
plausible request conditioned on visual context. Each sample in VAGUE is annotated with four multiple-choice candi-

1. Introduction
Human communication is inherently contextual; for example,
exclaiming “Hey, this is a disaster!” upon seeing a cluttered
room conveys frustration or exaggeration rather than referring to an actual catastrophe. Without surrounding cues,
textual dialogues can be ambiguous, making it difficult for
models to accurately capture intent and nuance.
We consider the case of visual contextual cues. Consider Fig. 1, which depicts a speaker making a remark in
a certain situation. Without specifying contexts introduced
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

1537

