This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Expressive Talking Human from Single-Image with Imperfect Priors
Jun Xiang1,2
1

Yudong Guo1∗
Yancheng Yuan2

Leipeng Hu1
Juyong Zhang1
2

University of Science and Technology of China

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

…

One-Shot Photos

Boyang Guo1

…

Animatable Expressive Talking Avatars

Figure 1. Given a one-shot image (e.g., your favorite photo) as input, our method reconstructs a fully expressive whole-body talking avatar
that captures personalized details and supports realistic animation, including vivid body gestures and natural expression changes.

Abstract

talking avatar from just a single image. Project page:
https://ustc3dv.github.io/OneShotOneTalk/.

Building realistic and animatable avatars still requires minutes of multi-view or monocular self-rotating videos, and
most methods lack precise control over gestures and expressions. To push this boundary, we address the challenge of constructing a whole-body talking avatar from
a single image. We propose a novel pipeline that tackles two critical issues: 1) complex dynamic modeling and
2) generalization to novel gestures and expressions. To
achieve seamless generalization, we leverage recent poseguided image-to-video diffusion models to generate imperfect video frames as pseudo-labels. To overcome the dynamic modeling challenge posed by inconsistent and noisy
pseudo-frames, we introduce a tightly coupled 3DGS-mesh
hybrid avatar representation and apply several key regularizations to mitigate inconsistencies caused by imperfect
labels. Extensive experiments on diverse subjects demonstrate that our method enables the creation of a photorealistic, precisely animatable, and expressive whole-body
∗ Corresponding author: Yudong Guo.

1. Introduction
Realistic rendering and precise control of gestures and expressions for whole-body talking avatars hold significant
potential for AR/VR applications, such as telepresence and
immersive remote conferencing. While extensively studied
in the fields of 3D Vision and Graphics, most productionlevel body avatars still require a light stage [11, 65] to capture hours or minutes of multi-view frames, making them
unsuitable for typical consumer usage. To address this, we
focus on the challenging task of constructing an animatable
whole-body avatar that supports both photo-realistic rendering and precise 3D control of gestures and expressions,
from only a single image. This one-shot pipeline primarily
faces the following challenges.
Complex dynamic modeling. Humans exhibit complex gestures and facial movements when communicating
with each other. To model the motion space of the entire body, SMPL-X [46] integrates several previous mod-

10398

