This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CODE-CL: Conceptor-Based Gradient Projection for Deep Continual Learning
Marco P. E. Apolinario Sakshi Choudhary Kaushik Roy
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University, West Lafayete, IN 47906
mapolina@purdue.edu, choudh23@purdue.edu, kaushik@purdue.edu

Abstract

ments underscores the necessity for these models to retain
past knowledge and mitigate catastrophic forgetting, as well
as utilize it to enhance learning on new tasks by encouraging knowledge transfer [6, 9, 12, 28].

Continual learning (CL) – the ability to progressively acquire and integrate new concepts – is essential to intelligent systems to adapt to dynamic environments. However,
deep neural networks struggle with catastrophic forgetting
(CF) when learning tasks sequentially, as training for new
tasks often overwrites previously learned knowledge. To address this, recent approaches constrain updates to orthogonal subspaces using gradient projection, effectively preserving important gradient directions for previous tasks.
While effective in reducing forgetting, these approaches inadvertently hinder forward knowledge transfer (FWT), particularly when tasks are highly correlated. In this work,
we propose Conceptor-based gradient projection for Deep
Continual Learning (CODE-CL), a novel method that leverages conceptor matrix representations, a form of regularized reconstruction, to adaptively handle highly correlated
tasks. CODE-CL mitigates CF by projecting gradients
onto pseudo-orthogonal subspaces of previous task feature
spaces while simultaneously promoting FWT. It achieves
this by learning a linear combination of shared basis directions, allowing efficient balance between stability and plasticity and transfer of knowledge between overlapping input
feature representations. Extensive experiments on continual
learning benchmarks validate CODE-CL’s efficacy, demonstrating superior performance, reduced forgetting, and improved FWT as compared to state-of-the-art methods.1

To address the challenges mentioned above, extensive
research has focused on enabling continual learning (CL)
in DNNs. Existing techniques fall into three categories:
regularization-based, expansion-based, and memory-based
methods. Regularization-based methods constrain updates
to important model parameters for previous tasks, preserving essential features while allowing flexibility in less critical regions of the parameter space [10, 17, 25, 26, 35].
Expansion-based methods overcome forgetting by dynamically allocating new network resources for each task [18,
21, 30, 32, 33]. Memory-based approaches, on the other
hand, store representative samples for data replay or track
important gradient directions from previous tasks to maintain performance on earlier data distributions [2, 3, 5, 16,
19, 23, 29, 34]. While these techniques significantly reduce
catastrophic forgetting, they inherently limit the model’s
ability to leverage shared information across tasks. In other
words, they help retain past task performance, but have limited ability to utilize prior knowledge to improve learning
on new tasks. Recent works have attempted to enhance
knowledge transfer in continual learning scenarios by leveraging task similarities to integrate past knowledge into new
learning[14, 15, 22]. However, these approaches concentrate on coarse-grained analyses of task overlap, leaving
room for further improvements.
In this paper, we propose Conceptor-Based Gradient
Projection (CODE-CL), a novel continual learning algorithm that minimizes catastrophic forgetting while promoting forward knowledge transfer between tasks with highly
correlated input activation subspaces. CODE-CL leverages
conceptor matrices [8] to enforce constrained gradient updates, preventing interference with prior tasks. More precisely, conceptor matrices provide a mathematical framework for computing the basis vectors of each layer’s input activation/feature space, which, in turn, identify the key
gradient directions necessary to retain knowledge from past

1. Introduction
Humans possess the innate ability to continually acquire,
retain and update knowledge to adapt naturally to dynamically changing environments. In contrast, while deep neural networks (DNNs) excel at leveraging massive amounts
of data to generalize across various visual recognition tasks,
traditional learning paradigms rely on static datasets. This
misalignment with the ever-evolving real-world environ1 Our code is available at https://github.com/mapolinario94/CODE-CL

775

