This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynFaceRestore: Balancing Fidelity and Quality in Diffusion-Guided Blind Face
Restoration with Dynamic Blur-Level Mapping and Guidance
Yi-Cheng Liao1 ,
Chi-Wei Hsiao2 ,
Yu-Wei Chen1 *,
Huu-Phu Do1 *,
2
1
Han-Yang Wang ,
Wei-Chen Chiu ,
Ching-Chun Huang1†
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan

2

MediaTek Inc., Taiwan

Abstract
Blind Face Restoration aims to recover high-fidelity, detailrich facial images from unknown degraded inputs, presenting significant challenges in preserving both identity and
detail. Pre-trained diffusion models have been increasingly
used as image priors to generate fine details. Still, existing
methods often use fixed diffusion sampling timesteps and a
global guidance scale, assuming uniform degradation. This
limitation and potentially imperfect degradation kernel estimation frequently lead to under- or over-diffusion, resulting in an imbalance between fidelity and quality. We propose DynFaceRestore, a novel blind face restoration approach that learns to map any blindly degraded input to
Gaussian blurry images. By leveraging these blurry images
and their respective Gaussian kernels, we dynamically select the starting timesteps for each blurry image and apply
closed-form guidance during the diffusion sampling process to maintain fidelity. Additionally, we introduce a dynamic guidance scaling adjuster that modulates the guidance strength across local regions, enhancing detail generation in complex areas while preserving structural fidelity in
contours. This strategy effectively balances the trade-off between fidelity and quality. DynFaceRestore achieves stateof-the-art performance in both quantitative and qualitative
evaluations, demonstrating robustness and effectiveness in
blind face restoration.

Figure 1. Blind face restoration demands both high fidelity and
rich detail. Compared to other SOTA methods that leverage GAN
priors, codebook priors, or diffusion priors, our proposed method,
DynFaceRestore (denoted as an asterisk), demonstrates superior
image fidelity (PSNR↑) and quality (FID↓) on the CelebA-Test.

1. Introduction

often introduce artifacts. Recently, diffusion models (DM)
[13] have demonstrated great generative capabilities to create more realistic details. However, DMs can still compromise fidelity in the restored faces.
Previous approaches [10, 37, 40] have effectively
demonstrated the use of pre-trained diffusion models (DM)
with high-quality (HQ) image priors to generate realistic facial details. Typically, [37, 40] apply DM for fine detail enhancement after mitigating degradation and recovering the
structural information of low-quality (LQ) images using a
restoration model. Meanwhile, [5, 10] aims to maintain image structures by guiding the DM through the measurement
model. Despite these advancements, these methods still
face challenges in maintaining fidelity. Below, we outline
possible reasons for this limitation.
First, these methods assume that all LQ inputs exhibit
uniform degradation severity and thus use a fixed starting timestep for diffusion sampling in image restoration.
This approach often results in under- or over-diffusion
when the DM adds details, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Sec-

Blind face restoration (BFR) involves recovering highfidelity, detail-rich facial images from degraded inputs with
unknown kernels [24, 33]. The main difficulty lies in
enhancing facial details while preserving the individual’s
identity, as shown in Fig. 1. Although GAN-based approaches [1, 22, 39] are effective at adding fine details, they
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author, Ching-Chun Huang (chingchun@nycu.edu.tw)

10432

