This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Personalized Federated Learning under Local Supervision
Qiqi Liu1,2∗ , Jiaqiang Li3∗ , Yuchen Liu4 , Yaochu Jin1 †, Lingjuan Lyu5 , Xiaohu Wu6 , Han Yu7
1
Westlake University, Hangzhou, China
2
Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, China
3
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
4
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
5
Sony AI
6
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
7
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{qiqi6770304@gmail.com, jiaqiangli1626@gmail.com, jinyaochu@westlake.edu.cn}

1. Introduction
Abstract

With the increasing importance of data privacy in the digital era, federated learning (FL) has emerged as a response
to the growing need for data in artificial intelligence [9]. FL
aims to maximize the use of local data while maintaining
privacy and minimizing communication costs by training
a global machine learning model. Despite its widespread
use, the traditional federated learning method FedAvg [33]
often suffers from performance degradation and slow convergence due to data heterogeneity [18, 34]. This issue is
prevalent in real-world applications, where data gathered
from different sources, such as users, devices, and organizations, typically exhibit distributional shifts (Non-IID data).
Personalized federated learning (pFL) [43] has emerged
as an effective solution for handling Non-IID data. Mainstream pFL methods can be broadly divided into two
groups, one focusing on training a global model that generalizes well across all clients, while the other on training personalized models for each client to better address
data heterogeneity. For instance, the algorithms reported in
[2, 10, 30] construct client-specific models by dividing the
model for each client into a feature extractor (the backbone)
and a classifier. The backbone serves as the shared component to capture generalization information across clients,
while the classifier focuses on learning personalized information. Motivated by the observation that the decoupling
approach, which extracts information from model parameters, may not fully exploit all the potential of the data, Zhang
et al. [51] propose generating a conditional policy for each
sample to separate global and personalized information in
its characteristics. Furthermore, it has been found that retaining all layers sensitive to Non-IID data for extracting
personalization information can degrade the collaborative
effect. To address this, Wu et al. [47] propose a sensitivity-

A crucial issue in federated learning is the heterogeneity of data across clients, which may lead to model divergence, eventually deteriorating the model performance.
Personalized federated learning (pFL) has been shown to
be an effective approach to addressing data heterogeneity in federated learning. However, many existing pFL
studies rely on directly using the global model for local
training without fully assessing its impact on the performance of the local model, resulting in a potential conflict between personalization and generalization. To address this issue, we propose a parallel structure of a local supervisor and an inter-learning model for the local
model and introduce a novel pFL method called federated
learning by considering data similarity across clients assisted by a local supervisor (FedSimSup). Specifically, FedSimSup maintains an inter-learning model for each client
and refines the inter-learning model using a local supervisor for each client. The local supervisor monitors the
aggregated global information and ensures that the interlearning model aligns with the local heterogeneous data to
enhance local model performance. Additionally, the similarity between clients is measured based on differences in
local data distributions, and this similarity is used to adjust
the weights of the inter-learning models. Experimental results show that FedSimSup outperforms eight state-of-theart federated learning methods in handling heterogeneous
data. Additionally, it supports different model architectures
across clients, providing greater flexibility when computational resources vary among them. Our code can be found
at https://github.com/jqLi1626/FedSimSup.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

4069

