This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling 3D Compositional Models for Robust Classification and Pose Estimation
Xiaoding Yuan∗,†,1

Guofeng Zhang∗,1 Prakhar Kaushik∗,1 Artur Jesslen2
Adam Kortylewski2,3 Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 University of Freiburg 3 Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Abstract

unified way using compositional representations [2, 3, 20].
We hypothesize that endowing computer vision models with
3D representations will improve their performance, particularly in challenging out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios,
including domain shifts due to changes in weather, occlusions, and unfamiliar viewpoints, for which humans show
big robustness [40], but where standard deep network models
struggle [5, 16, 40]. The key insight is that the 3D structure
of objects rarely varies in most OOD settings while deep
network features are much more variable.
One promising avenue involves neural mesh models
[11, 14, 21, 30, 31]. These models are compositional in
the sense that they represent objects by 3D meshes of vertices which are associated with learned vertex features. The
vertex features are computed by a DNN feature extractor,
CNN or Transformer, which are learned to be independent
of each other and be invariant to object viewpoint and instance. Using these compositional models, recent works
demonstrated superior performance in generalizing to OOD
scenarios for tasks such as image classification[11], 3D pose
estimation [14, 31] and 6D pose estimation [21].
However, to date, these neural mesh models have only
been demonstrated on small datasets, such as Pascal3D+ [36] (12 object classes) and OOD-CV[38] (10 object
classes), for two reasons. Firstly, because they require
datasets with accurate 3D annotations for learning. Secondly, because their learning algorithms scale badly. For
example, their contrastive learning includes every vertex
from every object class which scales quadratically.
This raises the challenges we address in this work: (I) Can
neural mesh models be scaled to a large number of object
classes efficiently? (II) How will they perform compared to
conventional neural networks in independent and identically
distributed (IID) testing? (III) Most importantly, will they
retain their important robustness properties, e.g., robustness
to out-of-distribution (OOD) data, when scaled up?
In this work, we reformulate neural mesh models to allow
scaling up to a large number (i.e., 188) of object classes
efficiently exploiting the recent availability of 3D annotated
data [22, 23], We will refer to it as 3D compositional models
in the following sections.

Deep learning algorithms for object classification and 3D
object pose estimation lack robustness to out-of-distribution
factors such as synthetic stimuli, changes in weather conditions, and partial occlusion. Recently, a class of Neural
Mesh Models have been developed where objects are represented in terms of 3D meshes with learned features at the
vertices. These models have shown robustness in small-scale
settings, involving 10 objects, but it is unclear that they can
be scaled up to 100s of object classes. The main problem is
that their training involves contrastive learning among the
vertices of all object classes, which scales quadratically with
the number of classes. We present a strategy which exploits
the compositionality of the objects, i.e. the independence of
the feature vectors of the vertices, which greatly reduces the
training time while also improving the performance of the
algorithms. We first restructure the per-vertex contrastive
learning into contrasting within class and between classes.
Then we propose a process that dynamically decouples the
contrast between classes which are rarely confused, and
enhances the contrast between the vertices of classes that
are most confused. Our large-scale 3D compositional model
not only achieves state-of-the-art performance on the task of
predicting classification and pose estimation simultaneously,
surpassing Neural Mesh Models and standard DNNs, but
is also more robust to out-of-distribution testing including
occlusion, weather conditions, synthetic data, and generalization to unknown classes.

1. Introduction
Large-scale training images and annotations have significantly advanced deep learning, leading to remarkable
achievements in various computer vision tasks, including
object classification, detection, and pose estimation [19].
Cognitive scientists, however, suggest that human vision is
more sophisticated and when classifying objects also recognizes their 3D structure including their shape and pose in a
∗ Equal contributions. † Lead author.

6406

