This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ISP2HRNet: Learning to Reconstruct High Resolution Image from
Irregularly Sampled Pixels via Hierarchical Gradient Learning
Yuanlin Wang1 , Ruiqin Xiong1 *, Rui Zhao1 , Jin Wang2 , Xiaopeng Fan3 , Tiejun Huang1
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
{wangyuanlin, ruizhao}@stu.pku.edu.cn
ijinwang@bjut.edu.cn

fxp@hit.edu.cn

Pixel Value

Abstract
While image signals are typically defined on a regular 2D
grid, there are scenarios where they are only available at irregular positions. In such cases, reconstructing a complete
image on regular grid is essential. This paper introduces
ISP2HRNet, an end-to-end network designed to reconstruct
high resolution image from irregularly sampled pixels that
do not fall on a regular grid. To handle the challenges
brought by irregular sampling, we propose an architecture
to extract gradient structure hierarchically and learn continuous image representation. Specifically, we derive image gradient for each irregularly sampled pixel and further
learn higher order gradient structural features according to
the geometric and photometric information at the vertices of
neighboring triangles. To convert the features from irregular pixels to regular grid, we propose a dual branch contentdependent weight generator to adaptively fuse the information from neighboring irregular pixels. Subsequently, an encoder captures deep structural details on regular grid and
forms latent codes. Implicit neural representation parameterized by multi-layer perceptron decodes the latent codes
and coordinates to pixel values for generating high resolution image. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed network effectively solves the problem of high resolution image reconstruction from irregularly sampled pixels
and achieves promising results. The source code is available at https://github.com/yuanlinwang/ISP2HRNet.

1. Introduction
Image signals are generally represented by a regular 2D
grid. However, there also exist scenarios where they are
* Corresponding author.

{rqxiong, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Pixel Value

x
y
Irregularly Sampled Pixels

ISP2HRNet

x
y
Continuous Image Function

...

Figure 1. Overview of high resolution image reconstruction from
irregularly sampled pixels.

only sampled at irregular positions [14, 36, 41, 44, 47].
Reconstructing image from irregularly sampled pixels is a
classic problem in image processing field. Many works
have been conducted to address this issue in the past
decades. Spline-based interpolation methods [9, 16, 23, 46]
fit a polynomial for irregular pixels and use the fitted
polynomial to estimate pixel values at arbitrary positions.
Filtering-based methods [33, 42, 45] estimate pixel values at
arbitrary positions by weighted averaging surrounding pixels. The performance of these methods is limited due to
insufficient adaptability to complex textures. Some works
[3, 12, 13] deal with irregular data in an intuitive but ad
hoc way by assigning zero to non-informative pixels, creating an artificial Cartesian image as input, and designing an
end-to-end trainable network to restore the degraded input.
However, in some cases, mapping all irregular pixels onto
a finite-resolution grid and forming a regular array with unknown pixels set to zero can be challenging.
This paper addresses the problem of reconstructing high
resolution (HR) image from irregularly sampled pixels. The

11547

