This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Surface Wave Elastography:
Revealing Subsurface Physical Properties via Visible Surface Waves
Berthy T. Feng∗ Jihoon Ahn Katherine L. Bouman
California Institute of Technology

Abstract

Chiara Daraio

estimated with VSWE
true
25

Wave propagation on the surface of a material contains
information about physical properties beneath its surface.
We propose a method for inferring the thickness and stiffness of a structure from just a video of waves on its surface. Our method works by extracting a dispersion relation from the video and then solving a physics-based optimization problem to find the best-fitting thickness and stiffness parameters. We validate our method on both simulated and real data, in both cases showing strong agreement with ground-truth measurements. Our technique provides a proof-of-concept for at-home health monitoring of
medically-informative tissue properties, and it is further applicable to fields such as human-computer interaction.

20

excitation

surface
waves

tissue thickness [mm]

Alexander C. Ogren∗

+

15

−

10

normal
displacement

5
10

15

20

tissue stiffness [kPa]

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Estimating subsurface tissue properties of a human leg
with VSWE. From a video of surface wave motion, VSWE estimates the thickness and stiffness of the soft tissue layer. In this
example, we are able to recover the three different thicknesses of
the three regions highlighted on the leg. We also recover the stiffness of the leg tissue, which does not change across the leg.

How waves propagate on the surface of a medium reveals
information about its subsurface properties. For example,
by watching how ocean waves evolve and break as they near
the shore, one can infer the rises and dips of the seafloor
below [49]. Waves can also be observed on the surfaces
of biological systems. Imagine applying a massage gun
to your calf. The ripples on your skin convey information
about the underlying layers of fat, muscle, and bone. In
fact there is a well-defined relationship linking the thickness
and stiffness of each layer to the wave propagation behavior.
We propose Visual Surface Wave Elastography (VSWE), a
physics-based method to estimate the thickness and stiffness of a medium from a video of waves on its surface.
We are primarily motivated by the task of biological
tissue characterization, which has broad applications including at-home health monitoring. For example, tumors
[26, 30], musculoskeletal degeneration [31, 44, 45], and
liver disease [23, 42] often lead to changes in tissue thickness or stiffness. However, existing techniques for elastography (i.e., measuring tissue stiffness) require specialized
*equal contribution

ultrasound [43, 50] and sometimes magnetic resonance [34]
devices, along with medical experts to operate the equipment [7, 12]. We show that it is possible to obtain coarse
estimates of thickness and stiffness given surface waves
measured with just a video camera. Another application
is human computer interaction (HCI), where visually inferring subsurface changes in muscle stiffness may unlock new
modes of gesture recognition. In biomechanics, many regions of the body are often modeled as a series of layers of
biological tissue, such as skin, muscle, or bone [4, 22]. Similarly, in this work, we model the medium as a layer of soft
tissue with unknown thickness and stiffness atop a layer of
bone. We leverage the mathematical relationship between
the geometric and mechanical properties of the soft layer
and the wave propagation behavior of the medium.
The wave propagation behavior of a material is compactly described by a mathematical object known as a dispersion relation. Under some common biomechanical as-

26446

