This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Where am I? Cross-View Geo-localization with Natural Language Descriptions
Junyan Ye1,2 ,* Honglin Lin2* , Leyan Ou1 ,
Dairong Chen4,1 , Zihao Wang1 , Qi Zhu1 , Conghui He2,3 , Weijia Li1†
1
Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Sensetime Research, 4 Wuhan University

Figure 1. Towards Text-guided Geo-localization. In scenarios where GPS signals are interfered with, users must describe their surroundings
using natural language, providing various location cues to determine their position (Up). To address this, we introduce a text-based cross-view
geo-localization task, which retrieves satellite imagery or OSM data only based on text queries for position localization (Down).

Abstract

1. Introduction
Accurate positioning of ground-level images is crucial for
various applications, including pedestrian navigation [35],
mobile robot localization [32], and noisy GPS signals correction in crowded urban areas [16, 37]. Traditional localization
methods typically rely on 3D point cloud positioning [17, 26]
or cross-view retrieval using GPS-tagged satellite images
[10, 44, 45]. However, most research focuses on matching
image-to-3D data or image-to-image data. Recent studies
have begun to explore a novel localization approach based
on natural language text, which holds significant value for
many practical applications [35, 39, 40]. As shown in Figure
1, taxi drivers rely on verbal instructions from passengers to
determine their location [21], or pedestrians describe their
position during emergency calls [7].
Recent natural language localization methods, such as
Text2Pose[21] and Text2Loc [40], have been limited to using natural language to identify individual locations within
point clouds. Constructing 3D maps using LiDAR or photogrammetry is expensive on a global scale [1, 13, 27], and
the storage costs for 3D maps are also high, often requiring costly cloud infrastructure, which hinders localization
on mobile devices. Notably, the cross-view retrieval geo-

Cross-view geo-localization identifies the locations of streetview images by matching them with geo-tagged satellite
images or OSM. However, most existing studies focus on
image-to-image retrieval, with fewer addressing text-guided
retrieval, a task vital for applications like pedestrian navigation and emergency response. In this work, we introduce
a novel task for cross-view geo-localization with natural
language descriptions, which aims to retrieve corresponding satellite images or OSM database based on scene text
descriptions. To support this task, we construct the CVGText dataset by collecting cross-view data from multiple
cities and employing a scene text generation approach that
leverages the annotation capabilities of Large Multimodal
Models to produce high-quality scene text descriptions with
localization details. Additionally, we propose a novel textbased retrieval localization method, CrossText2Loc, which
demonstrates excellent long-text retrieval capabilities. In
terms of explainability, it not only provides similarity scores
but also offers retrieval reasons. More can be found at
https://github.com/yejy53/CVG-Text.

5890

