This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Moto: Latent Motion Token as the Bridging Language for
Learning Robot Manipulation from Videos
Yi Chen1,2 , Yuying Ge2† , Weiliang Tang3 , Yizhuo Li1,2 , Yixiao Ge2 ,
Mingyu Ding4 , Ying Shan2 , Xihui Liu1†
1
The University of Hong Kong, 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 University of California, Berkeley
https://chenyi99.github.io/moto/

Next Latent Motion Token Prediction

Moto-GPT

0.75
0.55
0.35
Pick

S
Text

Motion
Priors
I have learned about:
• Motion Semantics.
• Trajectory Rationality.
• Future Anticipation.
• …

Move

Drawer

Overall

PERFORMANCE ON CALVIN

Tokenized Motion Trajectory

Initial Frame

Act

SUCCESS RATE

Videos

PERFORMANCE ON SIMPLER

SUCCESS RATE

Latent Motion
Tokenizer

0.95
0.55
0.15
1

2

3

Moto w/o Motion Token

4

5
Moto

Figure 1. The overview of Moto, which utilizes Latent Motion Tokens as a bridging “language” for autoregressive pretraining on video
data. The Moto-GPT pre-trained through next motion token prediction learns a wealth of motion-related prior knowledge from videos,
which can be seamlessly transferred to enhance downstream robot manipulation tasks with significant performance gains.

Abstract
Recent developments in Large Language Models (LLMs)
pre-trained on extensive corpora have shown significant
success in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks
with minimal fine-tuning. This success offers new promise
for robotics, which has long been constrained by the high
cost of action-labeled data. We ask: given the abundant
video data containing interaction-related knowledge available as a rich “corpus”, can a similar generative pretraining approach be effectively applied to enhance robot
learning? The key challenge is to identify an effective
representation for autoregressive pre-training that benefits
robot manipulation tasks. Inspired by the way humans
learn new skills through observing dynamic environments,
we propose that effective robotic learning should emphasize
motion-related knowledge, which is closely tied to low-level
actions and is hardware-agnostic, facilitating the transfer

of learned motions to actual robot actions. To this end,
we introduce Moto, which converts video content into latent Motion Token sequences by a Latent Motion Tokenizer,
learning a bridging “language” of motion from videos in
an unsupervised manner. We pre-train Moto-GPT through
motion token autoregression, enabling it to capture diverse
visual motion knowledge. After pre-training, Moto-GPT
demonstrates the promising ability to produce semantically
interpretable motion tokens, predict plausible motion trajectories, and assess trajectory rationality through output
likelihood. To transfer learned motion priors to real robot
actions, we implement a co-fine-tuning strategy that seamlessly bridges latent motion token prediction and real robot
control. Extensive experiments show that the fine-tuned
Moto-GPT exhibits superior robustness and efficiency on
robot manipulation benchmarks, underscoring its effectiveness in transferring knowledge from video data to downstream visual manipulation tasks.

† Corresponding Authors.

19752

