This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fair Generation without Unfair Distortions:
Debiasing Text-to-Image Generation with Entanglement-Free Attention
Jeonghoon Park*
KAIST

Juyoung Lee*
Kakao Corp.

Chaeyeon Chung
KAIST

jeonghoon park@kaist.ac.kr

zealota11@gmail.com

cy chung@kaist.ac.kr

Jaeseong Lee
Yonsei University

Jaegul Choo
KAIST

Jindong Gu
University of Oxford

jasonlee1995@yonsei.ac.kr

jchoo@kaist.ac.kr

jindong.gu@eng.ox.ac.uk

“face of successful man with his house”
Stable Diffusion

Interpret Diffusion

UCE

EFA (Ours)

Racial attributes changed

Racial attributes changed

Non-racial attributes preserved

Non-racial attributes preserved

Figure 1. Generated images from the pretrained model (e.g., Stable Diffusion [1]), by previous debiasing methods (e.g., UCE [11] and
Interpret Diffusion [15]), and ours. Previous debiasing methods often alter the non-target attributes (e.g., house) while modifying target bias
attributes (e.g., racial attributes). In contrast, our approach preserves non-target attributes during bias mitigation (i.e., changing the racial
attributes without modifying the house in the background), thereby preventing the introduction of unintended biases. The corresponding
aligned images were generated using the same random seed.

Abstract
Recent advancements in diffusion-based text-to-image (T2I)
models have enabled the generation of high-quality and
photorealistic images from text. However, they often exhibit
societal biases related to gender, race, and socioeconomic
status, thereby potentially reinforcing harmful stereotypes
and shaping public perception in unintended ways. While
existing bias mitigation methods demonstrate effectiveness,
they often encounter attribute entanglement, where adjustments to attributes relevant to the bias (i.e., target attributes) unintentionally alter attributes unassociated with
the bias (i.e., non-target attributes), causing undesirable
distribution shifts. To address this challenge, we introduce
Entanglement-Free Attention (EFA), a method that accurately incorporates target attributes (e.g., White, Black, and

Asian) while preserving non-target attributes (e.g., background) during bias mitigation. At inference time, EFA randomly samples a target attribute with equal probability and
adjusts the cross-attention in selected layers to incorporate
the sampled attribute, achieving a fair distribution of target attributes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that EFA
outperforms existing methods in mitigating bias while preserving non-target attributes, thereby maintaining the original model’s output distribution and generative capacity.

1. Introduction

17567

Diffusion-based text-to-image (T2I) models [2, 18, 21, 23,
24] have gained significant attention due to their ability to
reflect user intent through text input, making them highly
applicable across various domains. However, despite their

