This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auto-Regressively Generating Multi-View Consistent Images
JiaKui Hu1,2,3,4 ,* Yuxiao Yang5,2 ,* Jialun Liu2†, Jinbo Wu2‡, Chen Zhao2 , Yanye Lu1,3,4†
1
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center, Peking University
2
Baidu VIS
3
Biomedical Engineering Department, College of Future Technology, Peking University
4
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
5
Tsinghua University
jkhu29@stu.pku.edu.cn, yangyuxi23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liujialun95@gmail.com,
yanye.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

code and models are released here.

Generating multi-view images from human instructions is
crucial for 3D content creation. The primary challenges
involve maintaining consistency across multiple views and
effectively synthesizing shapes and textures under diverse
conditions. In this paper, we propose the Multi-View AutoRegressive (MV-AR) method, which leverages an autoregressive model to progressively generate consistent multiview images from arbitrary prompts. Firstly, the next-tokenprediction capability of the AR model significantly enhances
its effectiveness in facilitating progressive multi-view synthesis. When generating widely-separated views, MV-AR
can utilize all its preceding views to extract effective reference information. Subsequently, we propose a unified
model that accommodates various prompts via architecture
designing and training strategies. To address multiple conditions, we introduce condition injection modules for text,
camera pose, image, and shape. To manage multi-modal
conditions simultaneously, a progressive training strategy
is employed. This strategy initially adopts the text-to-multiview (t2mv) model as a baseline to enhance the development of a comprehensive X-to-multi-view (X2mv) model
through the randomly dropping and combining conditions.
Finally, to alleviate the overfitting problem caused by limited high-quality data, we propose the “Shuffle View” data
augmentation technique, thus significantly expanding the
training data by several magnitudes. Experiments demonstrate the performance and versatility of our MV-AR, which
consistently generates consistent multi-view images across
a range of conditions and performs on par with leading
diffusion-based multi-view image generation models. The

1. Introduction
Generating multi-view images from human instructions,
e.g., texts, reference images, and geometric shapes, represents a crucial endeavor with profound implications in
domains such as 3D content creation, robotic perception,
and simulation. The challenge lies in the development of
models capable of generating multi-view consistent images
while addressing diverse prompts in a unified architecture.
Recent multi-view image generation approaches [17,
21–23, 35, 36] concentrate on leveraging the image generation priors of the pre-trained diffusion model [33]. With
the advancement of video diffusion models, some methods have evolved to utilize pre-trained video diffusion
models [3] for multi-view images with exemplary outcomes [48]. As shown in Figure 1, these methods utilize
text or images as conditions, facilitating simultaneous synthesis across multiple views. However, when synthesizing
images from distant views, the overlap between reference
and target images decreases significantly, weakening the effectiveness of reference guidance. In extreme cases, such as
generating a back-view image from a front-view reference,
the visual reference information becomes nearly negligible
due to minimal overlapping textures. Consequently, this insufficient reference between distant views severely compromises the multi-view consistency.
To address this limitation, we propose employing AutoRegressive (AR) generation for multi-view image generation. As shown in Figure 1, in AR-based generation, the
model leverages information derived from the preceding
n − 1 views as conditions to generate the n-th view, allowing the model to utilize information derived from previously
generated views. This generation process is highly consis-

* This work was done when they interned in Baidu. Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Project leader.

2556

