This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-term Traffic Simulation with
Interleaved Autoregressive Motion and Scenario Generation
Xiuyu Yang*

Ego agent

Shuhan Tan*
UT Austin

Philipp Krähenbühl

Dynamically generated agents

Prior Work [24]

InfGen

Initially placed agents

t = 1s

t = 16s

t = 9s

t = 24s

t = 30s

Figure 1. Long-term traffic simulation with InfGen and prior SOTA [31]. InfGen keeps scene layout realistic while [31] becomes empty.

Abstract
An ideal traffic simulator replicates the realistic longterm point-to-point trip that a self-driving system experiences during deployment. Prior models and benchmarks
focus on closed-loop motion simulation for initial agents
in a scene. This is problematic for long-term simulation. Agents enter and exit the scene as the ego vehicle
enters new regions. We propose InfGen, a unified nexttoken prediction model that performs interleaved closedloop motion simulation and scene generation. InfGen automatically switches between closed-loop motion simulation and scene generation mode. It enables stable long-term
rollout simulation. InfGen performs at the state-of-theart in short-term (9s) traffic simulation, and significantly
outperforms all other methods in long-term (30s) simulation. The code and model of InfGen will be released at
https://orangesodahub.github.io/InfGen.

1. Introduction
Traffic simulation is a cornerstone of the extensive and safe
development of self-driving systems. The ultimate goal of
traffic simulation is to create realistic trip-level driving experiences that faithfully reflect real-world self-driving con* Equal contribution. Work done while Xiuyu interned at UT Austin.

ditions [1, 7, 9, 13, 30]. A simulator should provide a realistic model of the environment, the ego-vehicle, and all
other traffic agents throughout the trip. Existing simulators
easily handle an expansive static environment [1, 9, 30] and
intricate ego-vehicle dynamics [7, 13]. However, they often
lack a stable long-term simulation of non-ego traffic agents.
In this paper, we introduce InfGen, a long-term traffic
simulator: Given a short (1 second) driving-log, InfGen
simulates realistic traffic flow around the ego agent for up to
30 seconds. This long-term setting leads to new challenges.
The ego agent may move outside its initial simulation area,
leading to logged agents moving out of sight and becoming
irrelevant. Furthermore, when the ego agents drive into new
map area not covered in the log, these street areas have no
agents. Gradually, a scenario becomes sparser and eventually empty (Fig. 1 bottom row). This is clearly unrealistic.
InfGen models this by combining closed-loop motion simulation with scene generation to remove exiting agents and
spawn new agents according to the spatial scene layout.
InfGen (Fig. 2) is a unified autoregressive transformer
with interleaved token prediction. It handles temporal motion simulation and spatial scene generation in a unified
model. We design a set of tokenizers to convert task-specific
behaviors of motion simulation and scenario generation into
discrete tokens. We then add mode-control tokens to mark

25305

