This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAP-MAE: Domain-Adaptive Point Cloud Masked Autoencoder for Effective
Cross-Domain Learning
Ziqi Gao1,3,4,* , Qiufu Li2,3,4,* , Linlin Shen2,3,4,†
School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shenzhen University
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University
1

gaoziqi2023@email.szu.edu.cn, {liqiufu, llshen}@szu.edu.cn

Obj domain data (𝕆)

Obj 𝕆 Pre-trained
Masked Autoencoder
Same domain

Face domain data (𝔽)

Face 𝔽 Pre-trained
Masked Autoencoder

Different

Same domain
domain
Object Classification Expression recognition
Airplane

Happy

CLS Acc
94.15% 91.73%

FER Acc
86.11% 87.69%

Scene domain data (𝕊) Obj domain data (𝕆) Face domain data (𝔽) Scene domain data (𝕊)

Scene 𝕊 Pre-trained
Masked Autoencoder

Obj domain data (𝕆) Face domain data (𝔽)

Domain-Adaptive Masked Autoencoder
Heterogeneous Domain Adapter

Simple combine 𝕆+𝔽+𝕊 to
pre-train Masked Autoencoder

Domain
Feature
Generator

Transformer Encoder

Same domain
Object detection

Object classification Expression recognition Object detection
Happy

Airplane

DET AP50
42.7%

(a) Existing Point Cloud MAEs

CLS Acc
94.32%

FER Acc
87.23%

Scene domain data (𝕊)

Object classification Expression recognition Object detection
Airplane

DET AP50
42.5%

(b) MAE pre-trained on cross-domain data

CLS Acc: 95.18%

Happy

FER Acc: 88.45%

DET AP50: 43.2%

(c) Our DAP-MAE

Figure 1. (a) Existing point cloud MAEs are typically pre-trained and fine-tuned within a single domain, leading to performance degradation when applied to other tasks in different domains. (b) Pre-training MAE directly on cross-domain data could also lead to performance
decrease due to the misinterpretation of out-of-domain information. (c) Our DAP-MAE collaboratively learns from point cloud data across
various domains using the heterogeneous domain adapter and adopts the domain feature generator to extract diverse domain features, allowing the model to achieve high performance across multiple tasks with one pre-training in a single modality.

Abstract

ferent domains, while employing a fusion mode in the finetuning to enhance point cloud features. Meanwhile, DAPMAE incorporates a domain feature generator to guide the
adaptation of point cloud features to various downstream
tasks. With only one pre-training, DAP-MAE achieves excellent performance across four different point cloud analysis tasks, reaching 95.18% in object classification on
ScanObjectNN and 88.45% in facial expression recognition on Bosphorus. The code will be released at https:
//github.com/CVI-SZU/DAP-MAE

Compared to 2D data, the scale of point cloud data in different domains available for training, is quite limited. Researchers have been trying to combine these data of different domains for masked autoencoder (MAE) pre-training
to leverage such a data scarcity issue. However, the prior
knowledge learned from mixed domains may not align well
with the downstream 3D point cloud analysis tasks, leading
to degraded performance. To address such an issue, we propose the Domain-Adaptive Point Cloud Masked Autoencoder (DAP-MAE), an MAE pre-training method, to adaptively integrate the knowledge of cross-domain datasets for
general point cloud analysis. In DAP-MAE, we design a
heterogeneous domain adapter that utilizes an adaptation
mode during pre-training, enabling the model to comprehensively learn information from point clouds across dif-

1. Introduction
Point cloud analysis is gaining increasing attention in
the fields of autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented/virtual reality, etc. It involves tasks such as point
cloud-based object classification, part segmentation, facial
expression recognition, and object detection, all of them require training feature extraction models that can effectively
represent the geometric information of 3D point clouds.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

3488

