This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recognizing Actions from Robotic View for Natural Human-Robot Interaction
Ziyi Wang1
1
2

Peiming Li1 Hong Liu1 Zhichao Deng2 Can Wang3
Jun Liu4 Junsong Yuan5 Mengyuan Liu1†

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School

Sun Yat-sen University

3

Kiel University

4

Lancaster University

{ziyiwang,lipeiming1001}@stu.pku.edu.cn
canwang@pku.edu.cn

5

State University of New York at Buffalo

hongliu@pku.edu.cn

j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk

dengzhch3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract

liumengyuan@pku.edu.cn

Movable
Camera & LiDAR

Actions in N-HRI

3 - 50 meters

Natural Human-Robot Interaction (N-HRI) requires robots
to recognize human actions at varying distances and states,
regardless of whether the robot itself is in motion or stationary. This setup is more flexible and practical than conventional human action recognition tasks. However, existing benchmarks designed for traditional action recognition
fail to address the unique complexities in N-HRI due to limited data, modalities, task categories, and diversity of subjects and environments. To address these challenges, we introduce ACTIVE (Action from Robotic View), a large-scale
dataset tailored specifically for perception-centric robotic
views prevalent in mobile service robots. ACTIVE comprises 30 composite action categories, 80 participants, and
46,868 annotated video instances, covering both RGB and
point cloud modalities. Participants performed various
human actions in diverse environments at distances ranging from 3m to 50m, while the camera platform was also
mobile, simulating real-world scenarios of robot perception with varying camera heights due to uneven ground.
This comprehensive and challenging benchmark aims to advance action and attribute recognition research in N-HRI.
Furthermore, we propose ACTIVE-PC, a method that accurately perceives human actions at long distances using
Multilevel Neighborhood Sampling, Layered Recognizers,
Elastic Ellipse Query, and precise decoupling of kinematic
interference from human actions. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of ACTIVE-PC. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/wangzy01/
ACTIVE-Action-from-Robotic-View.

Raising

Rightward

Phone Call

Stretching

Figure 1. Data Collection Process and Samples of the ACTIVE
Dataset: The movable camera and LiDAR capture human motion
at distances ranging from 3 to 50 meters, with scene shaking introduced during the recording process. For visualization purposes,
the samples have been scaled and cropped.

1. Introduction

experience by adapting to changes in user needs and evolving action patterns. It has a wide range of applications, such
as in service robots [19], public safety surveillance [10], and
medical diagnostics [3, 32]. N-HRI requires robots to have
the ability to adapt in real-time, not only understanding human actions but also considering changes in human position
(e.g., walking, standing) and their own motion. Therefore,
compared to traditional human action recognition, human
action recognition in N-HRI involves handling more complex human-robot interaction scenarios.
Compared to traditional human action recognition
videos, videos captured from perception-centric robotic
views in N-HRI scenarios exhibit diverse viewpoints,
greater kinematic disturbances, and varied subject resolutions due to changing human-robot positions, robot
movements, and uneven ground. While different from
manipulator-mounted or end-effector perspectives common
in industrial robots, this perception-centric viewpoint aligns
closely with real-world applications, such as mobile assistants and patrol robots sensing humans at distances of 3–50
meters using forward-facing sensors. These challenges necessitate specialized methods tailored specifically to the

A robust Natural Human-Robot Interaction (N-HRI) system
can provide a more personalized and intelligent interaction
† Corresponding author: Mengyuan Liu (liumengyuan@pku.edu.cn)

14218

