This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAViD: Data-efficient and Accurate Vision Models from Synthetic Data*
Fatemeh Saleh
Sadegh Aliakbarian
Charlie Hewitt
Antonio Criminisi
Thomas J. Cashman

Lohit Petikam
Tadas Baltrušaitis

Xiao-Xian

Microsoft, Cambridge, UK

Figure 1. Given a single, real image of a person, our human-centric models, trained entirely on synthetic data, predict accurate relative depth,
surface normals, and soft foreground segmentation. Please zoom in to see details such as hair strands, eye glasses and clothes folds.

Abstract

0.5
DepthAnythingV2-Base

The state of the art in human-centric computer vision
achieves high accuracy and robustness across a diverse
range of tasks. The most effective models in this domain
have billions of parameters, thus requiring extremely large
datasets, expensive training regimes, and compute-intensive
inference. In this paper, we demonstrate that it is possible
to train models on much smaller but high-fidelity synthetic
datasets, with no loss in accuracy and higher efficiency. Using synthetic training data provides us with excellent levels
of detail and perfect labels, while providing strong guarantees for data provenance, usage rights, and user consent.
Procedural data synthesis also provides us with explicit control on data diversity, that we can use to address unfairness
in the models we train. Extensive quantitative assessment
on real input images demonstrates accuracy of our models
on three dense prediction tasks: depth estimation, surface
normal estimation, and soft foreground segmentation. Our
models require only a fraction of the cost of training and inference when compared with foundational models of similar
accuracy. Our human-centric synthetic dataset and trained
models are available at https://aka.ms/DAViD.

DepthAnythingV2-Large

DepthPro

RMSE

0.4
Sapiens-0.3B

0.3
Sapiens-2B
Ours-Base
Ours-Large

0.2

0.1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
GMACs

0.8

1
·104

Figure 2. Compute cost vs error, comparing our method with stateof-the-art depth estimation models. Compute cost and error are
measured with giga-multiply-accumulate count (GMACs) and rootmean-squared error (RMSE), respectively, on the combination of
Goliath [25] and Hi4D [47] datasets. The radius of each marker is
proportional to the number of model parameters. The most efficient
and accurate models are in the lower-left corner.

1. Introduction
* DAViD also references Michelangelo’s David—an iconic symbol of

Progress in human-centric computer vision has been driven
in large part by advances in data. This is both due to the

anatomical precision—and the David vs. Goliath story, reflecting our small
yet powerful dataset and models.

5348

