This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Language Splatting
Saimouli Katragadda1 , Cho-Ying Wu2 , Yuliang Guo2 *, Xinyu Huang2 , Guoquan Huang1 , Liu Ren2
1

University of Delaware, 2 Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{saimouli,ghuang}@udel.edu
{Cho-Ying.Wu,yuliang.guo2,xinyu.huang,liu.ren}@us.bosch.edu

LangSplat

RGB

Replica Dataset

TUM Dataset

Ours: 0.8 s/frame
LangSplat: 2.8 min/frame

Ours: 0.6 s/frame
LangSplat: 2.1 min/frame

“Tablet”

“Monitor”

(Outside GT box)
(At the border of
secondary GT box)

Ours

Ground-Truth
(GT) Box
Maximal Feature
Response

Figure 1. We introduce an online language splatting framework that incrementally constructs a 3D Gaussian-based language feature map
using 3D Gaussian Splatting within a SLAM framework. Results are compared to the offline state-of-the-art LangSplat [36] across two
datasets, presented in two panels. For each panel, the left column displays rendered language feature maps, and the right column shows
target localization results. Our method not only outperforms in localization accuracy, but also achieve more than 40× improved efficiency.

Abstract
To enable AI agents to interact seamlessly with both humans
and 3D environments, they must not only perceive the 3D
world accurately but also align human language with 3D
spatial representations. While prior work has made significant progress by integrating language features into geometrically detailed 3D scene representations using 3D Gaussian Splatting (GS), these approaches rely on computationally intensive offline preprocessing of language features
for each input image, limiting adaptability to new environments. In this work, we introduce Online Language Splatting, the first framework to achieve online, near real-time,
open-vocabulary language mapping within a 3DGS-SLAM
system without requiring pre-generated language features.
The key challenge lies in efficiently fusing high-dimensional
language features into 3D representations while balancing
the computation speed, memory usage, rendering quality
and open-vocabulary capability. To this end, we innovatively design: (1) a high-resolution CLIP embedding module capable of generating detailed language feature maps

in 18ms per frame, (2) a two-stage online auto-encoder that
compresses 768-dimensional CLIP features to 15 dimensions while preserving open-vocabulary capabilities, and
(3) a color-language disentangled optimization approach
to improve rendering quality. Experimental results show
that our online method not only surpasses the state-of-theart offline methods in accuracy but also achieves more than
40× efficiency boost, demonstrating the potential for dynamic and interactive AI applications.

1. Introduction

* Project Lead.

Radiance Fields [17, 32, 39] have emerged as a transformative technology for 3D scene representation. Among them,
3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) [17] has become particularly
popular due to its high rendering quality and efficiency in
differentiable rendering research. While radiance fields provide detailed geometric and textured 3D representations for
photorealistic image rendering, they lack the semantic information necessary for interaction with humans.
The integration of language features into 3D scene representations has recently enabled open-vocabulary language
queries, improving both interpretability and interactivity in
human-computer interaction [18, 36, 42, 60]. For example,

25882

