This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PART F IELD: Learning 3D Feature Fields for Part Segmentation and Beyond
Minghua Liu* † 1,4 Mikaela Angelina Uy* 1 Donglai Xiang1 Hao Su4
Sanja Fidler1,2,3 Nicholas Sharp1 Jun Gao1,2,3
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute 4 UCSD

PartField

n
tio
ta
m

en

SAMPart3D

ar
lp
ica

1min 6min
Runtime

UltraMetric

1hour

ch

10s

PartSLIP

ar

Find3D

ts

eg

SAMesh

er

0%

Ours

hi

Accuracy

80%

Downstream Applications

Input Modalities

AI Generated

Mechanical Parts

3D Gaussian
Splatting

Cosegmentation

Interactive Selection

Correspondence

Figure 1. We propose PART F IELD, a feedforward model that predicts part-based feature fields for 3D shapes. The learned features can be clustered to yield a
high-quality part decomposition, and our method outperforms the latest open-world 3D part segmentation approaches in both quality and speed. PART F IELD
can be applied to a wide variety of inputs in terms of modality, semantic class, and style. The learned feature field exhibits consistency across shapes, enabling
applications such as cosegmentation, interactive selection, and correspondence.

Abstract

learned field emerges across shapes, enabling tasks such as
co-segmentation and correspondence, which we demonstrate
in several applications of these general-purpose, hierarchical, and consistent 3D feature fields. Check our Webpage! https://research.nvidia.com/labs/
toronto-ai/partfield-release/

We propose PartField, a feedforward approach for learning
part-based 3D features, which captures the general concept of parts and their hierarchy without relying on predefined templates or text-based names, and can be applied
to open-world 3D shapes across various modalities. PartField requires only a 3D feedforward pass at inference time,
significantly improving runtime and robustness compared
to prior approaches. Our model is trained by distilling 2D
and 3D part proposals from a mix of labeled datasets and
image segmentations on large unsupervised datasets, via a
contrastive learning formulation. It produces a continuous
feature field which can be clustered to yield a hierarchical
part decomposition. Comparisons show that PartField is up
to 20% more accurate and often orders of magnitude faster
than other recent class-agnostic part-segmentation methods.
Beyond single-shape part decomposition, consistency in the

1. Introduction
Human visual perception parses 3D shapes into parts based
on their geometric structure, semantics, mobility, or functionality, while generalizing easily to new shapes. Such
part-level understanding is critical to many applications, including 3D shape editing, physical simulation, robotic manipulation, and geometry processing. To empower machines
with similar capabilities, 3D part segmentation has been studied as a standard task in computer vision [46, 55, 61], yet it
remains challenging.
The first key challenge is data. Widely-adopted supervised learning-based methods [17, 46, 47, 55, 58, 61]
are limited by the lack of scale and diversity in 3D part-

* Equal Contribution
† Work done during an internship at NVIDIA

9704

