This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transformer-based Tooth Alignment Prediction with Occlusion and Collision
Constraints
Zhenxing Dong, Jiazhou Chen*
Zhejiang University of Technology

Abstract
The planning of digital orthodontic treatment requires providing tooth alignment, which relays clinical experiences
heavily and consumes a lot of time and labor to determine
manually. In this work, we proposed an automatic tooth
alignment neural network based on Swin-transformer. We
first re-organized 3D point clouds based on dental arch
lines and converted them into order-sorted multi-channel
textures, improving both accuracy and efficiency. We then
designed two new orthodontic loss functions that quantitatively evaluate the occlusal relationship between the upper
and lower jaws. They are important clinical constraints,
first introduced and lead to cutting-edge prediction accuracy. To train our network, we collected a large digital
orthodontic dataset in more than 2 years, including various complex clinical cases. We will release this dataset after the paper’s publishment and believe it will benefit the
community. Furthermore, we proposed two new orthodontic dataset augmentation methods considering tooth spatial
distribution and occlusion. We compared our method with
most SOTA methods using this dataset, and extensive ablation studies and experiments demonstrated the high accuracy and efficiency of our method. Our dataset and
source codes are available at https://californiachen.
github.io/publications/2025ICCV/.

1. Introduction
Tooth correction, medically known as orthodontics[32],
primarily involves the use of metal braces[9] or clear
aligners[18] to alleviate or rectify the conditions of dental misalignment and malformation. With the widespread
adoption of digital acquisition technologies, computer-aided
alignment design has been paid extensive attention, such as
those based on intraoral scanners[35] and cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT)[2]. 3D tooth models are initially segmented individually[16, 24, 45, 46], and then repositioned by the clinician considering various alignment factors such as the extent of dental protrusion, dental skeletal
* Corresponding author. Email: cjz@zjut.edu.cn.

relationship, and periodontal conditions of the patient, etc.
It heavily relies on the clinical expertise of orthodontists and
is time-consuming, thereby significantly increasing the duration and cost of orthodontic treatment planning.
With the advancement of artificial intelligence,
learning-based methods for tooth alignment are emerging rapidly[20], aiming at achieving fully automated tooth
alignment. Among these methods, PointNet-based[33] ones
are particularly representative[21, 23, 25, 44]. TANet[44]
employs PointNet to construct a feature extraction module,
encoding both jaw global information and teeth local
information, and utilizes MLP to design regressors for predicting the position of each tooth. PSTN[23] utilizes both
PointNet[33] and PointNet++[34] for feature encoding,
refining features based on a combination of local and global
latent vectors to regress tooth transformation parameters.
TAligNet[25], also based on PointNet encoders and MLP
decoders, employs Squeeze-and-Excitation Blocks[13] and
shared FC sequences for feature propagation to predict
alignment parameters.
PointNet-based tooth alignment prediction methods
showed great potential, but limitations have been revealed
in representing local features of point clouds[40] recently.
This paper introduces a more advanced shift window transformer (referred to as Swin-T). It incorporates sliding window operations and hierarchical merging design on the foundation of traditional vision transformers, addressing issues
such as lower precision due to the variability of objects,
excessive pixel count leading to high computational complexity, and low computational efficiency encountered in
transformer-based methods. As teeth share similar sizes
and structures, they are sampled into uniformly sized 3D
point clouds and transformed into regular multi-channel
data, forming ordered data. Building upon this data organization, this paper proposes a multi-level channel compression structure based on Swin-T (SWTBS) and an SWTP
module to respectively extract global information of tooth
centers and local information of tooth point clouds. Benefiting from the performance optimization of shift windows and
communication between windows, features of individual
teeth can mutually inform one another, gradually expand-

25145

