This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Point Maps: A Versatile Representation for Dynamic 3D Reconstruction
Edgar Sucar Zihang Lai Eldar Insafutdinov Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group (VGG), University of Oxford
{edgarsucar,zlai,eldar,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1. We introduce the concept of Dynamic Point Maps (DPM). Differently from previous extension of point maps to dynamics, DPMs
are time invariant in addition to be viewpoint invariant. Because of this, by predicting DPMs from a pair of images in a feed-forward manner
we can easily solve key 3D tasks, such as recovering the camera parameters and reconstructing shape, as well 4D ones, such as estimating
scene flow and 3D object tracking.

Abstract

We train a DPM predictor on a mixture of synthetic and real
data and evaluate it across diverse benchmarks, including
video depth prediction, dynamic point cloud reconstruction,
3D scene flow, and object pose tracking, achieving stateof-the-art performance. Additional results are available
at https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/dynamic-pointmaps/.

DUSt3R has recently demonstrated that many tasks in multiview geometry, including estimating camera intrinsics and
extrinsics, reconstructing 3D scenes, and establishing image correspondences, can be reduced to predicting a pair
of viewpoint-invariant point maps, i.e., pixel-aligned point
clouds defined in a common reference frame. While this
formulation is elegant and powerful, it is limited to static
scenes. To overcome this limitation, we introduce the concept of Dynamic Point Maps (DPM), which extends standard point maps to support 4D tasks such as motion segmentation, scene flow estimation, 3D object tracking, and
2D correspondence. Our key insight is that, when time
is introduced, several possible spatial and temporal references can be used to define the point maps. We identify a minimal subset of these combinations that can be
regressed by a network to solve the aforementioned tasks.

1. Introduction
The impact of machine learning on 3D computer vision has
been growing steadily. For instance, DUSt3R [69], a recent
breakthrough, proposed learning a neural network that, given
two images of a scene, maps each pixel to its corresponding
3D point, expressed in a shared 3D reference frame. Notably,
they showed that knowledge of these viewpoint-invariant
point maps enables solving a variety of core 3D tasks, such
as estimating camera intrinsics and extrinsics (by aligning

7295

