This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RIOcc: Efficient Cross-Modal Fusion Transformer with Collaborative Feature
Refinement for 3D Semantic Occupancy Prediction
Baojie Fan1 * Xiaotian Li1 Yuhan Zhou1 Yuyu Jiang1 Jiandong Tian2 Huijie Fan2
1
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jobfbj, xiaotianli981, yuhanzhou521, jyy01731}@gmail.com

{tianjd, fanhuijie}@sia.cn

Abstract
Fusion
module

Backbone

The multi-modal 3D semantic occupancy task provides a
comprehensive understanding of the scene and has received
considerable attention in the field of autonomous driving. However, existing methods mainly focus on processing
large-scale voxels, which bring high computational costs
and degrade details. Additionally, they struggle to accurately capture occluded targets and distant information. In
this paper, we propose a novel LiDAR-Camera 3D semantic
occupancy prediction framework called RIOcc, with collaborative feature refinement and multi-scale cross-modal fusion transformer. Specifically, RIOcc encodes multi-modal
data into a unified Bird’s Eye View (BEV) space, which
reduces computational complexity and enhances the efficiency of feature alignment. Then, multi-scale feature processing substantially expands the receptive fields. Meanwhile, in the LiDAR branch, we design the Dual-branch
Pooling (DBP) to adaptively enhance geometric features
across both the Channel and Grid dimensions. In the camera branch, the Wavelet and Semantic Encoders are developed to extract high-level semantic features with abundant
edge and structural information. Finally, to facilitate effective cross-modal complementarity, we develop the Deformable Dual-Attention (DDA) module. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RIOcc achieves state-of-the-art performance, with 54.2 mIoU and 25.9 mIoU on the Occ3DnuScenes and nuScenes-Occupancy datasets, respectively.

L
FVox

Backbone

VT

C
FVox

DBP
DDA

Backbone

Occupancy
head

（a）OpenOccupancy

C to H
LC
FVox

Multi-Scale

Occupancy
head

Wavelet

Backbone
VT

Semantic
Encoder

（b）RIOcc

Figure 1. Comparison between OpenOccupancy and the proposed RIOcc. Instead of processing voxel features like OpenOccupancy, we choose BEV features to achieve higher computational
efficiency. Additionally, we extracted refined multi-modal BEV
features and fed them into the efficient fusion module (DDA). The
fused BEV features are then transformed into 3D features for occupancy prediction. “VT” is view transform.

1. Introduction

but also details in the background and environment. Consequently, it provides richer and more reliable environmental perception, which is essential for applications such as
high-precision map construction and path planning in autonomous driving [5, 50].
In contrast to traditional methods that rely solely on a
single modality [19, 22, 23, 51], multi-modal fusion [1, 6,
15, 41, 59] provides higher accuracy and robustness for 3D
perception. In various 3D perception tasks, effectively combining data from cameras and LiDAR presents a crucial
challenge for achieving high-precision predictions. Cameras provide rich semantic and texture information, while
LiDAR captures accurate geometric and depth information.
The complementary of the two has driven research on fusion strategies to improve the performance of 3D semantic

3D semantic occupancy prediction is a complex and vital
task that aims to jointly estimate the geometric structure and
semantic categories of voxels within a scene. Compared to
traditional tasks [13, 25, 37, 42] like 3D object detection,
3D semantic occupancy prediction focuses more on understanding the overall scene, which includes not only objects
* Corresponding Author.

25851

