This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Few Shot CLIP Benchmarks: A Critical Analysis in the
Inductive Setting
Alexey Kravets, Da ChenB
, Vinay P. Namboodiri
University of Bath, UK
ak3095@bath.ac.uk, da.chen@bath.edu, vpn22@bath.ac.uk

Abstract

Neurons with Dog-related
knowledge
Neurons with Other
knowledge

CLIP is a foundational model with transferable classification performance in the few-shot setting. Several methods have shown improved performance of CLIP using fewshot examples. However, so far, all these techniques have
been benchmarked using standard few-shot datasets. We
argue that this mode of evaluation does not provide a true
indication of the inductive generalization ability using fewshot examples. As most datasets have been seen by the
CLIP model, the resultant setting can be termed as partially transductive. To solve this, we propose a pipeline
that uses an unlearning technique to obtain true inductive
baselines. In this new inductive setting, the methods show
a significant drop in performance (-55% on average among
13 baselines with multiple datasets). We validate the unlearning technique using oracle baselines. An improved
few-shot classification technique is proposed that consistently obtains state-of-the-art performance over 13 other
recent baseline methods on a comprehensive analysis with
5880 experiments - varying the datasets, differing number
of few-shot examples, unlearning setting, and with different seeds. Thus, we identify the issue with the evaluation of
CLIP-based few-shot classification, provide a solution using unlearning, propose new benchmarks, and provide an
improved method. Our code and models are available here.

Pretrained CLIP
M1
M2

71%
75%
63%

M3
Evaluation Dataset

StanfordDogs

Unlearned CLIP
M1
M2

11%
15%
23%

M3

Figure 1. Comparisons between the previous evaluation pipeline
(Top: partially transductive) and the proposed pipeline (Bottom:
inductive). Top: The tested methods (M1−3 ) apply the pretrained
CLIP model which the target classes are likely to be included during training. Bottom: The proposed inductive pipeline aims to
provide the test methods with an updated CLIP model with target
class information unlearned. The target dataset, unlearning module and few-shot methods are all replaceable.

limited samples. Existing methods can achieve good results with tasks such as classifying the latest dress styles for
which the related knowledge has been learned during pretraining on CLIP. However, there are also lots of practical
scenarios that need to classify unseen classes with few-shot
techniques, e.g., when it is used to identify new types of AIgenerated harmful content or emerging diseases. For these
use cases, the methods need to be evaluated using inductive benchmarks where the model learns specific information about a class from the few-shot examples of the class.
However, the current evaluation of few-shot CLIP classification models is obtained using standard few-shot classification datasets. These results are not indicative of true
few-shot generalization performance for unseen classes. As
CLIP is trained with a large corpus, most existing datasets
would have been seen by the model. Evaluating using a
few-shot classification method would result in a partially
transductive evaluation - where the performance for a specific class is based on previously seen test samples for that
specific class. As shown in Fig. 1, we investigate this aspect of the problem and propose a pipeline for evaluating

1. Introduction
Contrastive Language Image Pretraining (CLIP) model [28]
is a widely used vision-language foundational model. Radford et al. [28] demonstrated the ability for CLIP to improve
its classification using a few examples (termed linear probing). Subsequently, various works have further improved
the ability for a CLIP model to be used as a few-shot classification method. [10, 13, 18, 19, 30, 38, 39, 42–44]
The improvement obtained from the few-shot classification is crucial as it can benefit the classification tasks with
B Corresponding author

1902

