This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExploreGS: Explorable 3D Scene Reconstruction
with Virtual Camera Samplings and Diffusion Priors
Minsu Kim

Subin Jeon In Cho Mijin Yoo
Yonsei University

Seon Joo Kim

{minsu1206, subinjeon, join, mijin6690, seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr












  
    

     

   

  

   

Figure 1. (a) Explorable 3D scene reconstruction results. Our method renders photorealistic images from any arbitrary viewpoints. (b)
Virtual cameras are sampled in regions with missing information, and pseudo-ground truth is generated using diffusion priors. (c) After
optimizing 3D Gaussians with virtual viewpoint samples, our method enables real-time scene exploration.

Abstract

demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing 3DGSbased methods, enabling high-quality, artifact-free rendering from arbitrary viewpoints.

Recent advances in novel view synthesis (NVS) have enabled real-time rendering with 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS). However, existing methods struggle with artifacts
and missing regions when rendering from viewpoints that
deviate from the training trajectory, limiting seamless scene
exploration. To address this, we propose a 3DGS-based
pipeline that generates additional training views to enhance
reconstruction. We introduce an information-gain-driven
virtual camera placement strategy to maximize scene coverage, followed by video diffusion priors to reﬁne rendered
results. Fine-tuning 3D Gaussians with these enhanced
views signiﬁcantly improves reconstruction quality. To evaluate our method, we present Wild-Explore, a benchmark
designed for challenging scene exploration. Experiments

1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of novel view synthesis (NVS) has seen significant advancements, enabling photorealistic rendering of
scenes from previously unseen viewpoints. Much of this
progress is attributed to NeRF [24] and its variants [1, 25].
This advancement has been further accelerated by recent
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [11], which enables highquality rendering in real-time. The real-time capability of
3DGS broadens the applications of NVS in domains such
as AR, VR, and gaming, leading users to expect the experience of freely exploring reconstructed scenes.

27042

