This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoAvatar: Adaptive Geometrical Gaussian Splatting for 3D Head Avatar
SeungJun Moon1 ,* Hah Min Lew1 ,* Seungeun Lee1 , Ji-Su Kang1 , and Gyeong-Moon Park2†
1
Klleon AI Research, 2 Korea University
1

{seungjun.moon, hahmin.lew, seungeun.lee, jisu.kang}@klleon.io 2 gm-park@korea.ac.kr
Novel Pose & Expression

Anatomical Mouth Mesh

Animation

Rigid Rigging

Rigid Set

Δ

Mouth Rigging
Mouth Set
Flexible Set

DynamicFace (Monocular Videos Dataset)

Part-wise Deformation

Flexible Rigging

Adaptive Geometrical Gaussian Splatting

Rendered Results

Figure 1. Overview of GeoAvatar. We propose GeoAvatar, a novel adaptive geometrical Gaussian Splatting framework, and release a new
monocular video dataset, DynamicFace. Given an input novel animation, GeoAvatar generates robust and high textured 3D head avatars.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in deep learning-based 3D modeling
techniques [20, 22, 35, 37] have spurred active research into
their applications for 3D head avatar generation [2, 4–7, 11,
12, 15, 17, 18, 23, 27, 29, 34, 40, 44, 45, 49–55, 57, 59–
63, 65]. Among these, Gaussian Splatting [22], originally
developed for reconstructing static scenes, has been used
due to its explicit representations of Gaussians in 3D space.
Since adapting the reconstruction-oriented approach for
animation poses significant challenges, recent methods have
leveraged the deformable 3D Morphable Model (3DMM)
[28, 32] as a 3D prior [11, 40, 44, 51, 60] to extend its applicability to head avatar animation. However, we emphasize
that a critical challenge still lies in balancing high-fidelity
identity preservation, i.e., reconstruction, with the robustness of various novel poses and expressions, i.e., animation.
To achieve this goal, the existing works simply apply offsets, i.e., local mean, to allow deviations for Gaussians [11, 40, 44, 51, 60] while regularizing them through
the naı̈ve position loss based on the fixed threshold [40, 60].
However, we observe a key finding that local mean distributions of Gaussians vary significantly across facial regions [11, 40, 44, 51, 60]. For example, less accurate regions of 3DMM fitting, e.g., scalp or ears, exhibit higher local mean values, while well-reconstructed regions, e.g., face

Despite recent progress in 3D head avatar generation, balancing identity preservation, i.e., reconstruction, with novel
poses and expressions, i.e., animation, remains a challenge.
Existing methods struggle to adapt Gaussians to varying
geometrical deviations across facial regions, resulting in
suboptimal quality. To address this, we propose GeoAvatar,
a framework for adaptive geometrical Gaussian Splatting.
GeoAvatar leverages Adaptive Pre-allocation Stage (APS),
an unsupervised method that segments Gaussians into rigid
and flexible sets for adaptive offset regularization. Then,
based on mouth anatomy and dynamics, we introduce a
novel mouth structure and the part-wise deformation strategy to enhance the animation fidelity of the mouth. Finally,
we propose a regularization loss for precise rigging between Gaussians and 3DMM faces. Moreover, we release
DynamicFace, a video dataset with highly expressive facial motions. Extensive experiments show the superiority
of GeoAvatar compared to state-of-the-art methods in reconstruction and novel animation scenarios.

Project page: https://hahminlew.github.io/geoavatar

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

12811

