This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unraveling the Smoothness Properties of Diffusion Models:
A Gaussian Mixture Perspective

1

Yingyu Liang1,3,† Zhizhou Sha2 Zhenmei Shi3 Zhao Song4,∗ Mingda Wan5 Yufa Zhou6
The University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
University of California, Berkeley, 5 Independent Researcher, 6 University of Pennsylvania
∗

magic.linuxkde@gmail.com,

†

yliang@cs.wisc.edu,yingyul@hku.hk

Abstract
Diffusion models have made rapid progress in generating
high-quality samples across various domains. However, a
theoretical understanding of the Lipschitz continuity and
second momentum properties of the diffusion process is still
lacking. In this paper, we bridge this gap by providing a
detailed examination of these smoothness properties for the
case where the target data distribution is a mixture of Gaussians, which serves as a universal approximator for smooth
densities such as image data. We prove that if the target
distribution is a k-mixture of Gaussians, the density of the
entire diffusion process will also be a k-mixture of Gaussians. We then derive tight upper bounds on the Lipschitz
constant and second momentum that are independent of the
number of mixture components k. Finally, we apply our
analysis to various diffusion solvers, both SDE and ODE
based, to establish concrete error guarantees in terms of
the total variation distance and KL divergence between the
target and learned distributions. Furthermore, our preliminary experiments support our theoretical analysis. Our results provide deeper theoretical insights into the dynamics
of the diffusion process under common data distributions.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models, a prominent generative modeling framework, have rapid progress and garnered significant attention in recent years, due to their potential powerful ability to generate high-quality samples across various domains
and diverse applications. Score-based generative diffusion models [30, 63] can generate high-quality image samples comparable to GANs, which require adversarial optimization. Based on the U-Net [50], stable diffusion [49],
a conditional multi-modality generation model, can successfully generate business-used images. Based on the
Transformer (DiT) [45], OpenAI released a video diffusion
model, SORA [44], with a surprising performance.

11436

However, despite these technological strides, a critical
gap persists in the theoretical understanding of diffusion
processes, especially concerning the Lipschitz continuity
and second momentum properties of these models. Many
existing studies ([10, 13, 14, 21, 35] and many more) make
simplifying assumptions about these key smoothness properties but lack rigorous formulation or comprehensive analysis. This paper aims to bridge this theoretical gap by providing a detailed examination of the Lipschitz and second
momentum characteristics. To make the data distribution
analyzable, we consider the mixture of Gaussian data distribution (see illustration in Figure 1), which is a universal
approximation (Fact 1.1) for any smooth density, such as
complex image and video data distributions.
Fact 1.1. A Gaussian mixture model is a universal approximator of densities, in the sense that any smooth density can
be approximated with any specific nonzero amount of error
by a Gaussian mixture model with enough components [52].
Furthermore, we prove that if the target data distribution is a k-mixture of Gaussian, the density of the whole
diffusion process will be a k-mixture of Gaussian (Proposition 3.2). Thus, our focus is studying a mixture of Gaussian
target data distribution in the diffusion process, where we
can gain a concrete Lipschitz constant and second momentum (Lemma 3.5 and Lemma 3.6). Moreover, we explore
the implications of these properties through the lens of various solvers, both Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE)
and Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) based, providing
a deeper insight into the dynamic behavior of diffusion processes and concrete guarantees in Table 1. Moreover, our
preliminary experiments support our theoretical analysis.
Our main contribution are summarized as follows:
• As the Gaussian mixture model is a universal approximator of densities (Fact 1.1), we assume the target/image
data distribution as a k-mixture of Gaussian. Then, we
show that the density of the whole diffusion process is a
k-mixture of Gaussian (Proposition 3.2).

