This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Learning Meets Foundation Models: Fast Remote Sensing Data
Annotation for Object Detection
Marvin Burges*
TU Wien
Vienna, Vienna, Austria
mburges@cvl.tuwien.ac.at

Philipe Ambrozio Dias & Carson Woody & Sarah Walters & Dalton Lunga
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA
{ambroziodiap, woodycb, waltersse, lungadd} @ornl.gov
*

This work was conducted during a fellowship at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.

Abstract

process, which must accurately capture both object classes
and their corresponding coordinates, is labor-intensive and
time-consuming. Active Learning (AL) has emerged as a
promising strategy to alleviate this burden by selectively
choosing the most informative samples for labeling. This
approach is predicated on the idea that by intelligently selecting data points—rather than annotating a randomly sampled dataset—it is possible to train models that achieve
higher accuracy and yet this process requires substantially
fewer labeled instances.
Various AL strategies have been proposed. Uncertaintybased methods [13, 16, 48, 49] prioritize samples for which
the model exhibits low confidence, thereby targeting cases
that are most likely to improve model performance upon annotation. In contrast, diversity-based methods [1, 5, 33, 37]
aim to cover a broad spectrum of the data distribution by
selecting samples that are distinct from the already labeled
set. More recently, combined approaches that integrate both
uncertainty and diversity metrics have been developed, aiming to combine their complementary strengths [45].
Despite these advances, applying AL to OD presents
unique challenges. Unlike classification tasks, OD involves
the dual objectives of accurate localization and classification. This duality necessitates the development of AL methods that can effectively assess and balance uncertainties related to both the positioning of objects and their categories.
Moreover, an additional challenge for AL is the cold start
problem, where the initial lack of annotated data can lead to
suboptimal model performance, thus complicating the early
stages of sample selection [40].
In this paper, we present a novel interactive AL framework for OD that leverages recent advances in foundation

Object detection in remote sensing demands extensive,
high-quality annotations—a process that is both laborintensive and time-consuming. In this work, we introduce
a real-time active learning and semi-automated labeling
framework that leverages foundation models to streamline
dataset annotation for object detection in remote sensing
imagery. For example, by integrating a Segment Anything
Model (SAM), our approach generates mask-based bounding boxes that serve as the basis for dual sampling: (a) uncertainty estimation to pinpoint challenging samples, and
(b) diversity assessment to ensure broad data coverage.
Furthermore, our Dynamic Box Switching Module (DBS)
addresses the well-known cold start problem for object detection models by replacing its suboptimal initial predictions with SAM-derived masks, thereby enhancing earlystage localization accuracy. Extensive evaluations on multiple remote sensing datasets, along with a real-world user
study, demonstrate that our framework not only reduces annotation effort but also significantly boosts detection performance compared to traditional active learning sampling
methods. The code for training and the user interface is
available under https://github.com/mburgescvl/ICCV_AL4FM .

1. Introduction
Object Detection (OD) is a fundamental computer vision task that relies on vast amounts of annotated training data [22, 42, 45]. However, the manual annotation

6058

