This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDFit: 3D Object Pose and Shape by Fitting a Morphable SDF to a Single Image
Dimitrije Antić1
Theo Gevers1
1

Georgios Paschalidis1 Shashank Tripathi2
Sai Kumar Dwivedi2 Dimitrios Tzionas1

University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

{d.antic,g.paschalidis,th.gevers,d.tzionas}@uva.nl

{sdwivedi,stripathi}@tue.mpg.de

Figure 1. We present SDFit, a novel framework that recovers an object’s 3D pose and shape from a single image. To this end, SDFit
uses a learned, category-level, morphable SDF (mSDF) shape model, namely DIT [77], and ﬁts this to images in a render-and-compare
(a.k.a. analysis-by-synthesis) fashion. SDFit is robust to occlusions and uncommon poses, and requires no retraining for in-the-wild images.
For visualizing the ﬁtted mSDF overlaid on the input image, we show the mSDF’s normals with color coding.  Zoom in for details.

Abstract

correspondences between the image and the mSDF through
foundational features. We evaluate SDFit on three image
datasets, i.e., Pix3D, Pascal3D+, and COMIC. SDFit performs on par with SotA feed-forward networks for unoccluded images and common poses, but is uniquely robust to
occlusions and uncommon poses. Moreover, it requires no
retraining for unseen images. Thus, SDFit contributes new
insights for generalizing in the wild. Code is available at
https://anticdimi.github.io/sdfit.

Recovering 3D object pose and shape from a single image is a challenging and ill-posed problem. This is due to
strong (self-)occlusions, depth ambiguities, the vast intraand inter-class shape variance, and the lack of 3D ground
truth for natural images. Existing deep-network methods
are trained on synthetic datasets to predict 3D shapes,
so they often struggle generalizing to real-world images.
Moreover, they lack an explicit feedback loop for reﬁning
noisy estimates, and primarily focus on geometry without
directly considering pixel alignment. To tackle these limitations, we develop a novel render-and-compare optimization
framework, called SDFit. This has three key innovations:
First, it uses a learned category-speciﬁc and morphable
signed-distance-function (mSDF) model, and ﬁts this to an
image by iteratively reﬁning both 3D pose and shape. The
mSDF robustiﬁes inference by constraining the search on
the manifold of valid shapes, while allowing for arbitrary
shape topologies. Second, SDFit retrieves an initial 3D
shape that likely matches the image, by exploiting foundational models for efﬁcient look-up into 3D shape databases.
Third, SDFit initializes pose by establishing rich 2D-3D

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D object pose and shape (OPS) from single
images is key for building intelligent systems and mixed realities. However, the task is highly ill-posed due to strong
challenges such as depth ambiguities, (self-)occlusions, and
the huge variance in shape, appearance, and viewpoint. Yet,
humans routinely solve this task by building and exploiting rich prior models through experience. Despite progress,
computers still lack reliable methods and priors for reconstructing 3D objects from natural images. Our goal is to
recover 3D object shape and pose from a natural image.

9616

