This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DGraphLLM: Combining Semantic Graphs and Large Language Models for 3D
Scene Understanding
Tatiana Zemskova1,2 Dmitry Yudin1,2
1
AIRI, 2 MIPT

Abstract

OBJ1

lef

t

t

ht
OBJ1

t

OBJ4

d
behin

rig

A 3D scene graph represents a compact scene model by
capturing both the objects present and the semantic relationships between them, making it a promising structure for
robotic applications. To effectively interact with users, an
embodied intelligent agent should be able to answer a wide
range of natural language queries about the surrounding 3D
environment. Large Language Models (LLMs) are beneficial solutions for user-robot interaction due to their natural
language understanding and reasoning abilities. Recent
methods for learning scene representations have shown that
adapting these representations to the 3D world can significantly improve the quality of LLM responses. However, existing methods typically rely only on geometric information,
such as object coordinates, and overlook the rich semantic relationships between objects. In this work, we propose
3DGraphLLM, a method for constructing a learnable representation of a 3D scene graph that explicitly incorporates
semantic relationships. This representation is used as input
to LLMs for performing 3D vision-language tasks. In our
experiments on popular ScanRefer, Multi3DRefer, ScanQA,
Sqa3D, and Scan2cap datasets, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms baselines that do not leverage semantic
relationships between objects. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/CognitiveAISystems/
3DGraphLLM .

OBJ4
OBJ2 front

lef

Scene
Graph
OBJ3
Generation

h
rig

OBJ2

OBJ3

close

close

User query
Select the chair on the left side of the
desk and located in front of the bed

LLM Answer
<OBJ2>

2D/3D
Object
Encoders
Semantic
Relation
Encoder

LLM
3D Dense
Scene Caption
3D Question
Answer

Figure 1. The proposed 3DGraphLLM approach leverages 3D
semantic scene graph learnable representation supplied as input to
an LLM to perform various 3D vision-language tasks.

The goal of 3D dense scene captioning is to generate a textual
description of a selected object in the 3D scene, including
its attributes or relationships. Finally, the goal of the 3D
visual question answering task is to generate text answers to
various questions about the properties of the scene. It seems
promising to explicitly use a three-dimensional scene graph
to solve these tasks.
A 3D scene graph provides a unified representation of a
scene by storing multimodal information about individual
objects, along with their semantic relationships [32, 52] and
hierarchical organization [20, 53]. It also supports real-time
updates in dynamic environments, making it suitable for
interactive scenes [38, 45]. Furthermore, representing the
scene as a graph enables the use of graph algorithms for
tasks such as navigation [19, 20, 64] and object search based
on textual queries [4, 14, 17, 53].
Solving 3D vision-language tasks is essential for embodied intelligent agents [3, 5, 9]. To interact effectively with
users, such agents must be able to describe their environment and answer questions about its properties using natural
language. Large Language Models (LLMs) are particularly
well-suited for this, thanks to their strong capabilities in language understanding and commonsense reasoning. They can
interpret user queries and match them to objects in a scene,
even when the queries are vague or indirect [17, 22, 51]. By
leveraging LLMs, it becomes easier to adapt the method to
new object categories and relationships mentioned in referring expressions. LLMs can also handle complex queries
that describe an object by its function rather than its name

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider scene understanding in the context
of 3D vision-language tasks: 3D referred object grounding
task, 3D dense scene captioning and 3D visual question
answering. The 3D referred object grounding task involves
identifying a region within a 3D scene that corresponds to a
natural language query. These queries often describe object
properties (e.g., color, size) as well as spatial relationships
(e.g., a mug on a table). A common setup of this problem
assumes access to a 3D reconstruction of the scene, such as
a point cloud, mesh, or NeRF. The objective is to predict the
bounding box of the object or region referenced in the query.

8885

