This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lidar Waveforms are Worth 40x128x33 Words
Dominik Scheuble1,4 Hanno Holzhüter2 Steven Peters4 Mario Bijelic3,5 Felix Heide3,5
1

Mercedes-Benz AG

2

MicroVision

3

Torc Robotics

Abstract
Lidar has become crucial for autonomous driving, providing
high-resolution 3D scans that are key for accurate scene
understanding. To this end, lidar sensors measure the timeresolved full waveforms from the returning laser light, which
a subsequent digital signal processor (DSP) converts to
point clouds by identifying peaks in the waveform. Conventional automotive lidar DSPs process each waveform individually, ignoring potentially valuable context from neighboring waveforms. As a result, lidar point clouds are prone
to artifacts from low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regions,
highly reflective objects, and environmental conditions like
fog. While leveraging neighboring waveforms is investigated
extensively in transient imaging, applications remain limited
to scientific or experimental hardware. In this work, we
propose a learned DSP that directly processes full waveforms using a transformer architecture, leveraging features
from adjacent waveforms to generate high-fidelity multiecho point clouds. To assess our method, we capture data in
real-world driving scenarios and a weather chamber with a
conventional automotive lidar. Trained on synthetic and real
data, the method improves Chamfer distance by 32cm and
20cm compared to conventional peak finding and existing
transient imaging approaches, respectively. This translates
to maximum range improvements of up to 17m in fog and
14m in nominal real-world conditions.

1. Introduction
Scanning lidar sensors have become a cornerstone sensing
modality in autonomous driving [5, 9, 70], offering high
spatial and temporal resolution for accurate 3D scene understanding. Recent advancements in lidar technology, combining solid-state scanning with single-photon avalanche
diodes (SPADs) [48], have substantially reduced both cost
and form factor, enabling widespread adoption across different types of autonomous vehicles [26]. These sensors
operate by emitting multiple laser pulses into the scene to acquire the time-resolved full waveform of the returning light.
Subsequently, a digital signal processor (DSP) pipeline detects peaks in the waveforms and returns a 3D point cloud.

4

TU Darmstadt

5

Princeton University

Currently, automotive lidar manufacturers rely on analytic
DSP pipelines that process each measured waveform individually [2, 31]. These pipelines are fine-tuned through a
combination of visual inspection and quality metrics, enabling accurate reconstruction in high signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) areas. However, they struggle in challenging conditions, such as object discontinuities - where diverging
beams interact with multiple surfaces (Fig. 1a)) - or distant low-reflectivity targets (Fig. 1b)), both of which cause
conventional DSPs to miss peaks. As shown in Fig. 1c),
retroreflective materials generate false positive points from
blooming [36, 80], distorted waveforms resulting in false
distance estimates [52], and multipath effects from reflections off the sensor cover glass. Scattering media, such as
fog [4, 8, 19, 30], rain [8, 16, 82], and snow [20, 30, 34],
cause falsely detected peaks while heavily attenuating actual
object peaks, see Fig. 1d).
To tackle these adverse conditions, waveform shape features can be exploited to overcome the limitations of conventional DSPs. Moreover, processing waveforms jointly,
instead of individually, enables DSPs to leverage neighborhood information. Spatial neighborhoods for 3D reconstruction of waveform data have been used extensively in transient imaging, where existing work can be roughly grouped
into optimization-based and learned data-driven approaches.
Optimization-based approaches reconstruct scenes by formulating a waveform lidar imaging model and solving the
inverse problem [63]. To this end, they derive complex imaging models to account for different effects such as multiple
returns [69, 75], pulse broadening [74], or pile-up [23]. To
solve the ill-posed inverse problem, they rely heavily on
scene priors or regularization terms [63]. However, their
model assumptions and priors fail on large outdoor scenes
due to complex scene geometry and fluctuating scene parameters caused by, e.g., environmental effects. Furthermore,
their long runtimes, up to many hours [51, 75], prevent a
real-time application. On the other hand, existing learned
data-driven methods [39, 55, 73, 76] operate only on patches
instead of the full spatial resolution in order to handle the
uncompressed full waveform data. This limits their ability to
capture global context and introduces long run times. Moreover, they reconstruct only a single distance per waveform,

28913

