This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Histopathological Image Semantic Segmentation with Overlapping
Patches Consistency Constraint
Wentian Cai1,2, * Weizhao Weng1, * Zihao Huang1 Yandan Chen1 Siquan Huang1
Ping Gao3,† Victor C. M. Leung4 Ying Gao1,2,†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence in Medical Image Analysis and Application
3
Department of Geriatric Respiratory Medicine, Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia
Abstract
Massive requirement for pixel-wise annotations in
histopathological image segmentation poses a significant
challenge, leading to increasing interest in Unsupervised
Semantic Segmentation (USS) as a viable alternative.
Pre-trained model-based methods have been widely used
in USS, achieving promising segmentation performance.
However, these methods are less capable for medical image USS tasks due to their limited ability in encoding taskspecific contextual information. In this paper, we propose a
context-based Overlapping Patches Consistency Constraint
(OPCC), which employs the consistency constraint between
the local overlapping region’s similarity and global context similarity, achieving consistent class representation in
similar environments. Additionally, we introduce an InterLayer Self-Attention Fusion (ILSAF) module that employs
a multi-head self-attention mechanism along with InterLayer Importance-Weighting to generate context-aware and
semantically discriminative pixel representations, improving pixel clustering accuracy. Extensive experiments on
two public histopathological image segmentation datasets
demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by a large margin, with mIoU surpassing previous leading work by 5.74 and 8.38 percentage
points on the two datasets, respectively.

ever, deep learning-based segmentation methods typically
require pixel-level annotations from pathologists, which is
costly in terms of time and expertise [12, 20, 39]. As a result, researchers have turned their attention to weakly supervised [6, 10, 17, 22, 25, 45] and unsupervised semantic segmentation (USS) [11, 16, 18, 19, 21, 31, 33, 34, 36–38, 42]
approaches, which can train segmentation models without
pixel-level annotations and thus reduce the burden of manual labeling. In this paper, we focus on the unsupervised
semantic segmentation of histopathological images, where
we aim to capture the structural properties of tissue sections
using only unlabeled data.
Clustering-based strategies have been proposed to tackle
this problem and have become a common choice for USS.
Early methods [11, 19, 36] generally train the segmentation
network from scratch via self-supervised feature learning to
maximize the mutual information between an image and its
augmentations. This approach helps the model learn meaningful representations for clustering without relying on labeled data. More recently, STEGO [16] proposed a method
that separates feature learning from cluster compactification, leveraging large-scale pre-trained backbones and contrastive objectives to distill semantic relationships between
image patches. Based on this idea, many follow-up works
[21, 33, 34] focus on obtaining more semantically meaningful and compact patch features to aid subsequent clustering. However, we point out their limitations in that they
inevitably rely on the frozen backbone features, which are
inadequate for digital pathology image USS tasks due to the
lack of task-specific contextual information.
To alleviate this, in this paper, we propose a
context-based Overlapping Patches Consistency Constraint
(OPCC), to achieve consistent class representation in similar environments. Motivated by clinical experience [4, 8],
which indicates that contextual information plays a critical role in the interpretation of pathological images, we observe that referring to the structure and morphology of the

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an important research topic in
medical image analysis [3, 26, 30, 32, 35], which supports
critical tasks in disease diagnosis and treatment planning by
accurately delineating regions of tumors or lesions. How* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors: Ying Gao (gaoying@scut.edu.cn), Ping Gao

(gaoping8599@gdph.org.cn).

23332

