This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Separation for Better Integration: Disentangling Edge and Motion in
Event-based Deblurring
Yufei Zhu1,2 , Hao Chen* 1,2 , Yongjian Deng3 , and Wei You4
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China.
3
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
4

Advanced Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies, Beijing, China
{220232213, haochen303}@seu.edu.cn, yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn, youwei22@huawei.com

Abstract
Traditional motion deblurring methods struggle to effectively model motion information within the exposure time.
Recently, event cameras have attracted significant research
interest for its ability to model motion cues over the exposure duration. However, these methods directly fuse event
features with image, overlooking the intrinsic heterogeneity
of events. In this paper, we identify that the event modality
contains two conflicting types of information: edge features
and motion cues. Events accumulated over a short exposure period capture sharp edge details but lose motion information, while those accumulated over a long exposure
period blur edge details due to motion. To address this issue, we propose a simple yet effective approach to disentangle these two cues from event features and employ an
edge-aware sharpening module along with motion-driven
scale-adaptive deblurring module to fully leverage both.
Specifically, the first module aids in restoring sharp edges
by leveraging the clear edge features provided by events,
while the second module leverages motion cues to learn diverse blur kernels, adaptively adjusting the receptive field
for optimal deblurring. Extensive experiments on synthetic
and real-world datasets validate the effectiveness of our
approach and yield a substantial improvement over stateof-the-art single-frame methods and surpasses most multiframe-based methods. Code will be publicly available.

Figure 1. (a) Visualization of SCER(Symmetric Cumulative Event
Representation) [35]. (b) Previous fusion methods between events
and image. (c) Ours. Separate events into edge features and motion cues.

aims to recover sharp images from blurred ones by restoring clear edges and capturing fine details, ultimately enhancing the image quality. However, since image features
lack the ability to model motion cues over the exposure
time, they cannot accurately estimate the variant blur ker-

1. Introduction
Motion blur is often caused by camera shake or the movement of objects. The task of motion deblurring [1, 8, 19–21]
* Corresponding author.

14732

