This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiON-LoRA: Rethinking LoRA Fusion to Unify Controllable Spatial and
Temporal Generation for Video Diffusion
Yisu Zhang1,2 * ‡ , Chenjie Cao2,3 ,* Chaohui Yu2,3 , Jianke Zhu1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Hupan Lab
{zhyisu,jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, {caochenjie.ccj,huakun.ych}@alibaba-inc.com,

Abstract
Video Diffusion Models (VDMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in synthesizing realistic videos by
learning from large-scale data. Although vanilla Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) can learn either speciﬁc spatial or temporal movement to driven VDMs with constrained data, it is
still challenging to achieve precise control over both camera trajectories and object motion due to the unstable fusion and non-linear scalability. To address these issues,
we propose LiON-LoRA, a novel framework that rethinks
LoRA fusion through three core principles: Linear scalability, Orthogonality, and Norm consistency. Firstly, we
analyze the orthogonality of LoRA features in shallow VDM
layers, enabling decoupled low-level controllability. Secondly, norm consistency is enforced across layers to stabilize fusion during complex camera motion combinations.
Thirdly, a controllable token is integrated into the diffusion transformer (DiT) to linearly adjust motion amplitudes
for both cameras and objects with a modiﬁed self-attention
mechanism to ensure decoupled control. Finally, we extend
LiON-LoRA to temporal generation by leveraging staticcamera videos, unifying spatial and temporal controllability. Experiments demonstrate that LiON-LoRA outperforms state-of-the-art methods in trajectory control accuracy and motion strength adjustment, achieving superior
generalization with minimal training data. Project Page:
https://fuchengsu.github.io/lionlora.github.io/

1. Introduction
Rapid advancement of foundational video diffusion models
(VDMs) [3, 4, 7, 9, 18, 49, 51, 59, 65, 72, 73] has enabled
them to learn realistic interactions from the physical world,
resulting in impressive video outputs. Using vast amounts
of video data available on the Internet, VDMs have signiﬁcant potential to understand 3D spatial and even 4D tempo* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author. ‡ Work done during internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

ral information in the real world [1, 20, 24, 25, 45, 68, 70].
Consequently, reactivating the potentials of VDMs with
good controllability would largely promote many downstream applications, such as augmented reality experiences,
interactive video editing, and simulation of virtual environments. Despite the abundance of in-the-wild video data, the
lack of proper annotations presents a challenge in taming
VDMs for 3D and 4D generation, particularly in terms of
uniﬁed control of both camera and motion strength, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Recent studies made use of either explicit camera presentations [16, 53, 60, 63, 74] or motion guidance [23, 50,
53, 67] to control VDM. However, these manners usually
undermine the generalization of VDMs, leading to inferior synthesis quality as a compromise. Thus, it is still
challenging to equip VDMs with effective controllability
using limited labeled video data. Fortunately, ParameterEfﬁcient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [10] alleviates this challenge
by reducing the dependency on extensive annotated training
data while having the merit of lightweight model weights,
thus mitigating the degradation of generalization in VDMs.
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [19] has garnered considerable attention among these PEFT approaches due to its ﬂexibility and versatility. LoRA utilizes low-rank factorized
matrices with a minimal number of trainable parameters,
making it widely applicable in text-to-image and image-toimage personalization [37, 43, 76]. Additionally, AnimateDiff [20] employs 8 distinct LoRAs to drive the respective
camera controls within the VDM. DimensionX [45] further
decouples the temporal and spatial factors through uniﬁed
LoRAs for advanced 4D generation.
Despite the pioneering advances mentioned above, implicitly driving video generation via LoRA fails to achieve
as precise control as explicit injection, which could be attributed to two factors: 1) Unstable LoRA fusion. Unlike
high-level LoRA fusion techniques used for tasks such as
style and subject editing [22, 37, 43, 64], we ﬁnd that combining different camera control LoRAs suffers from obvious
instability, such as abrupt changes in direction, as illustrated
in Figure 2. 2) Non-linear LoRA scalability. The conven-

14569

