This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Visual Chain-of-Thought Reasoning via Preference Optimization
Kesen Zhao1
1

Beier Zhu1 *

Qianru Sun2

Hanwang Zhang1

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Singapore Management University
kesen002@e.ntu.edu.sg, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg
{beier.zhu, hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

handle complex vision-language tasks [42, 43, 50]. However, the visual understanding ability of MLLM is limited by fixed-granularity image processing, i.e., the MLLM
cannot dynamically adjust focus across different spatial regions of the input image, even when guided by text CoT
prompts [11]. This underscores the critical need to explicitly integrate visual cues into the CoT process.
A very recent work, Visual-CoT [35], has made an initial attempt towards this goal. The model is trained using
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) with human-labeled bounding
boxes that indicate the key image regions relevant to the
question. It performs the multimodal CoT approach with
human-annotated reasoning steps by associating textual inputs with the detected regions. An overview of Visual-CoT
is presented in Fig. 1. However, it has two key drawbacks:
(1) it relies on large-scale, high-quality labeled data, making it costly and hard to scale; and (2) SFT learns only from
positive examples (i.e., the labeled data), limiting its ability to generalize to unseen or ambiguous scenarios where
intermediate reasoning or dynamic interpretation is needed.
To address these issues, we introduce an Unsupervised
approach to Visual CoT dubbed as UV-CoT. It has two key
parts: data collection and model training. The data collection does not need human annotation, as it leverages the
data generation and evaluation capabilities of pre-trained
MLLMs. The model training is inspired by the idea of direct preference optimization (DPO). It is implemented with
an adapted version of DPO to address specific limitations in
capturing the degree of preference and fine-grained regionbased reasoning when conducting visual CoT on MLLMs.
Our method UV-CoT, as shown in Fig. 1, differs from
Visual-CoT [35] by adopting an unsupervised approach
with contrastive preference data. We design an automatic
two-step pipeline to generate this data: 1) Region Generation: Given an image, the target model generates multiple seed bounding boxes using a template prompt. Then
it answers the question by processing each bounded region together with the question as input. 2) Quality Assessment: An evaluator MLLM scores the responses, using
these scores as proxies to measure the quality of the regions.

Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning greatly improves the
interpretability and problem-solving abilities of multimodal
large language models (MLLMs). However, existing approaches focus on text CoT, limiting their ability to leverage visual cues. Visual CoT remains underexplored, and
the only work [35] is based on supervised fine-tuning that
relies on extensive labeled bounding-box data and is hard
to generalize to unseen cases. In this paper, we introduce
Unsupervised Visual CoT (UV-CoT), a novel framework
for image-level CoT reasoning via preference optimization.
UV-CoT performs preference comparisons between modelgenerated bounding boxes (one is preferred and the other is
dis-preferred), eliminating the need for bounding-box annotations. We get such preference data by introducing an
automatic data generation pipeline. Given an image, our
target MLLM (e.g., LLaVA-1.5-7B) generates seed bounding boxes using a template prompt and then answers the
question using each bounded region as input. An evaluator MLLM (e.g., OmniLLM-12B) ranks the responses,
and these rankings serve as supervision to train the target
MLLM with UV-CoT by minimizing negative log-likelihood
losses. By emulating human perception–identifying key
regions and reasoning based on them–UV-CoT can improve visual comprehension, particularly in spatial reasoning tasks where textual descriptions alone fall short. Our
experiments on six datasets demonstrate the superiority of
UV-CoT, compared to the state-of-the-art textual and visual CoT methods. Our zero-shot testing on four unseen
datasets shows the strong generalization of UV-CoT.

1. Introduction
With the recent advancements in multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) [3, 21, 22, 45], many efforts have been
made to incorporate text CoT reasoning [9, 17, 40, 49] to
* Corresponding author. The code is available in https://github.
com/kesenzhao/UV-CoT.

2303

