This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient Extrapolation for Debiased Representation Learning
Ihab Asaad1 Maha Shadaydeh1 Joachim Denzler1
1
Computer Vision Group, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
{ihab.asaad, maha.shadaydeh, joachim.denzler}@uni-jena.de

Abstract

[10, 12, 40]. This occurs because the ERM objective optimizes for the average performance [45], thereby biasing
the model toward the easy-to-learn features that are predictive for the majority of training samples. As a result, ERMtrained models often exhibit poor generalization when these
spurious features are absent in the test data. For instance, in
the Waterbirds classiﬁcation task [46], where the goal is to
classify a bird as either a waterbird or a landbird, the majority of waterbirds are associated with water backgrounds. In
contrast, the majority of landbirds are associated with land
backgrounds. A model trained with ERM might learn to
classify the birds based on the background—water for waterbirds and land for landbirds—rather than focusing on the
birds’ intrinsic characteristics. This reliance on the spurious
feature allows the model to perform well on the majority
of training samples, where these correlations hold, but fails
to generalize to test samples where these correlations are
absent (e.g., waterbirds on land). Examples of Waterbirds
images shown in Fig. 1a. Avoiding spurious correlations is
crucial across various applications, including medical imaging [25, 37], ﬁnance [11], and climate modeling [17].

Machine learning classication models trained with empirical risk minimization (ERM) often inadvertently rely on
spurious correlations. When absent in the test data, these
unintended associations between non-target attributes and
target labels lead to poor generalization. This paper addresses this problem from a model optimization perspective and proposes a novel method, Gradient Extrapolation
for Debiased Representation Learning (GERNE), designed
to learn debiased representations in both known and unknown attribute training cases. GERNE uses two distinct
batches with different amounts of spurious correlations and
denes the target gradient as a linear extrapolation of the
gradients computed from each batch’s loss. Our analysis shows that when the extrapolated gradient points toward the batch gradient with fewer spurious correlations,
it effectively guides training toward learning a debiased
model. GERNE serves as a general framework for debiasing, encompassing ERM and Resampling methods as
special cases. We derive the theoretical upper and lower
bounds of the extrapolation factor employed by GERNE.
By tuning this factor, GERNE can adapt to maximize either Group-Balanced Accuracy (GBA) or Worst-Group Accuracy (WGA). We validate GERNE on ve vision and one
NLP benchmarks, demonstrating competitive and often superior performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines.
The project page is available at: https://gernedebias.github.io/.

This pervasive challenge has spurred extensive research
into strategies for mitigating the negative effects of spurious
correlations, particularly under varying levels of attribute
information availability. The authors of [50] provide a
comprehensive review of the methods and research directions aimed at addressing this issue. In an ideal scenario,
where attribute information is available in both the training
and validation sets, methods can leverage this information
to counteract spurious correlations [16, 39, 48]. When attribute information is available only in the validation set,
methods either incorporate this set into the training process
[18, 32, 42] or restrict its use to model selection and hyperparameter tuning [27–29, 31, 35]. Despite these efforts,
existing methods still struggle to fully avoid learning spurious correlations, especially when the number of samples
without spurious correlations is very limited in the training
dataset, leading to poor generalization on the test data where
these correlations are absent.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have demonstrated signiﬁcant success in various classiﬁcation tasks, but their performance is
often compromised by datasets containing prevalent spurious correlations in the majority of samples [13, 18, 29, 52].
Spurious correlations refer to unintended associations between easy-to-learn, non-target attributes and target labels.
These correlations often cause models trained with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) [45] to rely on these correlations instead of the true, intrinsic features of the classes

In this paper, we adopt a different research approach,
seeking to address the issue of spurious correlations from

3819

