This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teleportraits: Training-Free People Insertion into Any Scene
Jialu Gao
Carnegie Mellon University

K J Joseph
Adobe Research

Fernando De La Torre
Carnegie Mellon University

jialug@andrew.cmu.edu

josephkj@adobe.com

ftorre@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The task of realistically inserting a human from a reference image into a background scene is highly challenging, requiring the model to (1) determine the correct location and poses of the person and (2) perform high-quality
personalization conditioned on the background. Previous
approaches often treat them as separate problems, overlooking their interconnections, and typically rely on training to achieve high performance. In this work, we introduce a unified training-free pipeline that leverages pretrained text-to-image diffusion models. We show that diffusion models inherently possess the knowledge to place people in complex scenes without requiring task-specific training. By combining inversion techniques with classifier-free
guidance, our method achieves affordance-aware global
editing, seamlessly inserting people into scenes. Furthermore, our proposed mask-guided self-attention mechanism
ensures high-quality personalization, preserving the subject’s identity, clothing, and body features from just a single reference image. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to perform realistic human insertions into scenes in
a training-free manner and achieve state-of-the-art results
in diverse composite scene images with excellent identity
preservation in backgrounds and subjects.

Figure 1. Illustration of Teleportraits. Teleportraits can insert
humans into scenes, while maintaining high degree of affordance.

1. Introduction

There are two major challenges to this problem: insertion and personalization. The first challenge is highly associated with the concept of affordances, proposed by J.J.
Gibson [14] to describe the functional visual relationship
between subjects and scenes. To seamlessly insert human
subjects into a given background, global affordances reasoning determines the optimal placement, while local affordance understanding refines the subject’s precise pose
and action. Previous work on global affordances includes
human pose and action estimation conditioned on input
scenes [4, 25, 47, 50]. However, these methods typically
rely on training with smaller, curated datasets containing
ground-truth annotations, which limits their performance in
diverse real-world scenes. Another line of research focuses
on local affordances [6, 21, 57], aiming to seamlessly synthesize subjects within a given background based on a userspecified location. Nevertheless, such location information
is not always available, and absence of global understanding
can significantly constrain the effectiveness of local affordance reasoning. Most recently, Text2Place [32] is the first
work to consider both levels of affordances, proposing the
use of Score Distillation Sampling loss [35] to optimize a
human mask parameterized by Gaussian blobs. An off-theshelf inpainting model [34] is then employed to generate
human poses at the predicted mask location. Still, the two
levels of affordances are treated as separate problems, and
test-time tuning is required for each individual scene.
The second challenge is achieving personalization in
affordance-aware insertion, generating realistic poses for
the person while preserving their facial and clothing fea-

Human-centric personalized image content creation has received a lot of attention in recent years due to the increasing
demand in commerce for customized experiences, including e-commerce advertising [9, 46], avatar creation [48, 56],
and virtual try-on [7, 40, 55, 62]. Recent advances in largescale text-to-image diffusion models [8, 17, 30, 37, 39,
42] have given rise to many customization methods that
can generate images with the same individual in different
scenes, poses, and styles. In this work, we study the problem of personalized human insertion into any scene, or “person teleportation”: Given a scene image and a human reference image, how can we perform personalized human insertions into the background?

18866

