This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A View-consistent Sampling Method for Regularized Training of Neural
Radiance Fields
Aoxiang Fan1 , Corentin Dumery1 , Nicolas Talabot1 , Pascal Fua1
1

Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland
{aoxiang.fan, corentin.dumery, nicolas.talabot, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch
Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has emerged as a compelling framework for scene representation and 3D recovery. To improve its performance on real-world data, depth
regularizations have proven to be the most effective ones.
However, depth estimation models not only require expensive 3D supervision in training, but also suffer from generalization issues. As a result, the depth estimations can
be erroneous in practice, especially for outdoor unbounded
scenes. In this paper, we propose to employ view-consistent
distributions instead of fixed depth value estimations to regularize NeRF training. Specifically, the distribution is computed by utilizing both low-level color features and highlevel distilled features from foundation models at the projected 2D pixel-locations from per-ray sampled 3D points.
By sampling from the view-consistency distributions, an implicit regularization is imposed on the training of NeRF. We
also utilize a depth-pushing loss that works in conjunction
with the sampling technique to jointly provide effective regularizations for eliminating the failure modes. Extensive experiments conducted on various scenes from public datasets
demonstrate that our proposed method can generate significantly better novel view synthesis results than state-of-theart NeRF variants as well as different depth regularization
methods.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction from multiple images is a longstanding vision problem [11] but the recent advent of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [28] has delivered a significant
performance boost, especially given a dense set of input images. However, in much the same way the old shape-fromshading was ill-posed [32], so is the NeRF reconstruction
problem: as shown in [62], in the absence of explicit or implicit regularization, a set of training images can be fitted independently of the recovered geometry. This phenomenon,

known as shape-radiance ambiguity, is particularly evident
when the input views are not dense enough, even though
using Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) for scene representation weakly regularizes the scene reconstructions [60, 62].
Many kinds of regularizers have been proposed to improve on this, such as imposing geometric constraints [19,
30], training to directly predict radiance fields by using networks conditioned on image features [6, 50, 59], or constraining depth [8, 49, 60]. The first is difficult to do for
complicated scenes while the second is often limited to very
specific 3-view setting and not easily generalizable to unbounded scenes or scalable to more input views. The last,
depth regularization, has proved to be the more widely applicable. However, it typically requires excessive expensive
3D supervision, and can produce unreliable predictions on
challenging open-space scenes that produce artifacts in the
final NeRF reconstruction.
To remedy this, we propose to use view-consistency distributions per-ray instead of fixed depth predictions to implement a sampling technique along the rays that implicitly regularizes the training of NeRF, as depicted by Fig. 1.
Specifically, we first distill geometric information from the
redundant feature representations of foundation models to
reduce their dimensionality and to alleviate memory requirements, while preserving the information most likely
to be consistent across views and discarding the rest. Given
these high-level distilled features along with low-level color
features, we compute a view-consistency metric for every
point along the rays and introduce an adaptive sampling
scheme that favors view-consistent points, on the assumption that they are more likely to lie on a real-world surface.
Furthermore, we also introduce a depth-pushing loss to
force the model to favor samples that are farther away from
the camera origin, which prevents the kind of background
collapse artifact [2] that frequently happens in NeRF reconstruction of real-world unbounded scenes. In effect, the
proposed view-consistent sampling and the depth-pushing
loss focus the NeRF reconstruction process on the part of
the capture volume close to the true surface, thus providing

25961

