This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tensor-aggregated LoRA in Federated Fine-tuning
Zhixuan Li1 *, Binqian Xu1 ,* Xiangbo Shu1†, Jiachao Zhang2 , Yazhou Yao1 , Guo-Sen Xie1 , Jinhui Tang3
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Nanjing Institute of Technology
3
Nanjing Forestry University
lzxlizhixuan@njust.edu.cn, xubinq11@gmail.com, shuxb@njust.edu.cn, zhangjc07@foxmail.com,
yazhou.yao@njust.edu.cn, gsxiehm@gmail.com, tangjh@njfu.edu.cn

Abstract
The combination of Large Language Models (LLMs) and
Federated Learning (FL) to leverage privacy-preserving
data has emerged as a promising approach to further enhance the Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) capabilities of LLMs. In real-world FL settings with resource
heterogeneity, the training process of Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), the representative PEFT method, still faces
two major challenges: aggregation noise and aggregation misalignment. In this paper, we propose a novel
Tensor-aggregated LoRA (Te-LoRA) in Federated Finetuning based on an alternating-freeze training strategy
to avoid aggregating noise without additional server-side
computational costs, while mitigating aggregation suboptimality caused by parameter misalignment between heterogeneous LoRAs. Especially in addressing the aggregation
suboptimality issue, we design the Pre-Aggregation Alignment strategy (PAA-strategy) and Tensor-to-Matrix strategy
(T2M-strategy) for aligning heterogeneous LoRAs and aggregating them into an united tensor, which is then decomposed into matrices adapted for client download. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of
Te-LoRA in both homogeneous and heterogeneous settings.

Figure 1. Comparison of different federated fine-tuning LoRAs.
Compared to methods (a), (b), and (c), our Te-LoRA performs
better in addressing aggregation noise, communication cost, and
aggregation misalignment issues.

datasets [9, 17, 25]. However, collecting such datasets
comes with associated costs and privacy concerns [5, 18,
38]. Consequently, researchers have turned to Federated
Learning (FL) as a technical approach to fine-tune LLMs
using distributed client data without compromising data
privacy [2, 30, 33]. In this context, researchers have explored the application of Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) [11, 19, 23] methods for federated fine-tuning of
LLMs, saving substantial computational resources. Among
these, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [14] has gained attention due to its significant reduction in the number of communication parameters.
However, simply applying LoRA in real FL environment
presents several challenges, one of the key issues being aggregation noise. In detail, traditional federated fine-tuning
of LLMs [36, 46] averages modules A and B of local LoRAs
separately, leading to discrepancies between the aggregated
and ideal global LoRAs, thereby introducing noise into the

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across various task scenarios, such as
search engines [20], chatbots [4], healthcare [37], and more.
When using pre-trained LLMs to adapt to downstream
tasks, significant computational resources are required to
fine-tune the model parameters. Therefore, to improve the
applicability of LLMs, it is necessary to fine-tune specific
* Equal contributions
† Corresponding author

1058

