This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniDiff: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Fine-grained
Image Difference Captioning
Yuan Liu1 Saihui Hou1B Saijie Hou2 Jiabao Du1
Shibei Meng1 Yongzhen Huang1,3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
WATRIX.AI
Addition & Disappearance

Removal & Orientation

Pose

Substituion & Size

Difference: The blue tissue packet on the right side of
the school bag disappeared, and at the same time, a
black charging cable appeared in the lower right
corner of the image.

Difference: The yellow stool in the left corner of
the scene, which was previously facing the right
side, is now facing the left side. The black folded
umbrella that was originally at the back wall of
the scene has moved to the right side of the white
stool on the left.

Difference: Previously, the two figures in the image
had bent legs, with one leg in front and the other
behind, and one arm stretched upward while the other
arm pointed toward the ground. Now, both figures are
standing on one leg with the other leg lifted off the
ground, and their arms are tilted horizontally toward
the ground.

Difference: The bucket of green instant noodles in the
center of the upper part of the scene has been replaced
with a bucket of red instant noodles placed upside
down. The bucket of red instant noodles at the far right
of the upper part of the scene has been replaced with a
larger bucket of blue instant noodles.

Difference: A new brown rectangular mat has appeared
on the floor in front of the bathtub, positioned near the
middle of the scene and placed between two small
stools, one blue and one pink. The rectangular pink
plastic stool in the lower right corner near the tiled
floor and shower area is no longer visible.

Difference: A wooden board placed against the wall
in front of the black bag on the left side of the
corridor moves to the curved wall on the right side of
the alley. There are two metal barrels placed on the
right wall of the alley, and the one on the right is
rotating towards the camera.

Counting & Color

OCR

Difference: The word "transit" located below
"forensic" is replaced with "transfer".

Difference: A blue sign with the word "Alert" on the
first row of pillars on the left side of the scene is
replaced by the blue letter "Alort" on the left pillar at
the front of the scene.

Difference: In the upper left corner of the scene, the
cushion on the gray stool has changed from blue to
green. In the center of the scene, the number of green
stools has increased from one to two.

Difference: The number of lamps on the ground in
front of the tent has decreased from two to one. The
color of the surface on the left side of the tent has
changed from gray to blue.

Difference: A man wearing blue pants and a white
short-sleeved shirt, who previously stood with his
hands on his hips facing the dark green building on
the right, has now turned to face the outdoor unit of
the air conditioner on the brick house to the left.

Difference: The red barrel with a yellow hazard
symbol has replaced the blue barrel with the same
symbol, located near the stacked boxes in front of the
ladder on the right side of the scene. The air
conditioning unit mounted high on the right wall
between two garage doors has decreased in size.

Illumination

Viewpoint

Difference: The lighting in the image has become
darker.

Difference: The scene remains the same.

Difference: The scene brightness has increased.

Difference: There is no difference between the
two pictures.

Figure 1. OmniDiff: a comprehensive benchmark comprising 324 complex real-world and 3D synthetic environments, featuring 12 distinct
types of variations, with an average difference caption length of 60 words per image pair.

Abstract
Image Difference Captioning (IDC) aims to generate natural language descriptions of subtle differences between
image pairs, requiring both precise visual change localization and coherent semantic expression. Despite recent advancements, existing datasets often lack breadth
and depth, limiting their applicability in complex and dynamic environments: (1) from a breadth perspective, current datasets are constrained to limited variations of objects in specific scenes, and (2) from a depth perspec-

tive, prior benchmarks often provide overly simplistic descriptions. To address these challenges, we introduce OmniDiff, a comprehensive dataset comprising 324 diverse
scenarios—spanning real-world complex environments and
3D synthetic settings—with fine-grained human annotations averaging 60 words in length and covering 12 distinct change types. Building on this foundation, we propose M3 Diff, a MultiModal large language model enhanced by a plug-and-play Multi-scale Differential Perception (MDP) module. This module improves the model’s
ability to accurately identify and describe inter-image differences while maintaining the foundational model’s gen-

B Corresponding author.

21440

