This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CA2C: A Prior-Knowledge-Free Approach for Robust Label Noise Learning via
Asymmetric Co-learning and Co-training
Mengmeng Sheng1 , Zeren Sun1 *, Tianfei Zhou2 , Xiangbo Shu1 , Jinshan Pan1 , Yazhou Yao1,3 *
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Manufacturing of Advanced Construction Machinery, Nanjing, China

(a) Label Noise Learning

Abstract

(b) Existing LNL Methods

Label noise learning (LNL), a practical challenge in realworld applications, has recently attracted significant attention. While demonstrating promising effectiveness, existing LNL approaches typically rely on various forms of
prior knowledge, such as noise rates or thresholds, to sustain performance. This dependence limits their adaptability and practicality in real-world scenarios where such priors are usually unavailable. To this end, we propose a
novel LNL approach, termed CA2C (Combined Asymmetric
Co-learning and Co-training), which alleviates the reliance
on prior knowledge through an integration of complementary learning paradigms. Specifically, we first introduce an
asymmetric co-learning strategy with paradigm deconstruction. This strategy trains two models simultaneously under distinct learning paradigms, harnessing their complementary strengths to enhance robustness against noisy labels. Then, we propose an asymmetric co-training strategy
with cross-guidance label generation, wherein knowledge
exchange is facilitated between the twin models to mitigate
error accumulation. Moreover, we design a confidencebased re-weighting approach for label disambiguation, enhancing robustness against potential disambiguation failures. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world
noisy datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of CA2C. Our source code has been made available at https://github.com/NUST- MachineIntelligence-Laboratory/CA2C.

(c) Our CA2C Framework

Aircraft Bird
Loss Function

Asymmetric Co-learning
Partial Label Neagtive
Learning
Learning

Back Propagation
Noisy Data
Sample
Selection
Co-teaching

PNP

Backbone
Label
Correction
DivideMix

Jo-SRC

Sample Reweighting
L2RW

L2B

Prior Knowledge
Noise Rates

Pre-defined
Thresholds

Noisy Data

!"

!#

Cross-guidance
Label Generation
Additional
Clean Subset

Asymmetric Co-training

Figure 1. (a) Label noise learning primarily aims to mitigate
the negative effects of noisy labels on model training, a challenge that is inevitable in real-world scenarios. (b) Existing LNL
methods (e.g., sample selection, label correction, and sample reweighting) often face challenges in real-world applications due to
their strong dependence on prior knowledge (e.g., noise rates, predefined thresholds, or additional clean subsets) to sustain performance. (c) Contrarily, our CA2C deconstructs the LNL problem
using a combined asymmetric co-learning and co-training framework, eliminating the demand for strong prior knowledge.

contributing to these successes, the availability of largescale, high-quality human-labeled datasets (e.g., ImageNet
[9]) serves as one of the most pivotal catalysts for these advancements. However, in real-world applications, acquiring
accurately annotated data is time-consuming and expensive
[59]. Accordingly, methods such as web crawlers, questionnaires, and crowd-sourcing have become widely adopted
strategies for collecting large volumes of labeled data [57].
Nevertheless, these strategies often introduce varying degrees of mislabeled data (i.e., label noise), which pose significant challenges for training deep learning models [70].
Label noise can severely degrade model performance, as
deep neural networks (DNNs) possess remarkable capacity
that empowers them to memorize and fit even incorrectly
labeled samples [58], as shown in Fig. 1(a). Consequently,

1. Introduction
In the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have garnered substantial attention due to their remarkable performance in various applications, including image recognition
[17, 20, 33, 35, 68], semantic segmentation [5, 6, 51, 67],
and object detection [4, 28, 37, 39]. Among all factors
* Corresponding Author.

901

