This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mixed Signals: A Diverse Point Cloud Dataset for Heterogeneous LiDAR V2X
Collaboration
Katie Z Luo*,1 Minh-Quan Dao*,2,†
Ezio Malis

2

1

Vincent Frémont

5

Zhenzhen Liu*,1 Mark Campbell1

Bharath Hariharan

Mao Shan

1

3

Wei-Lun Chao4 Kilian Q Weinberger1

Stewart Worrall3 Julie Stephany Berrio Perez3

Cornell University 2 Inria 3 University of Sydney 4 The Ohio State University 5 École Centrale de Nantes

Figure 1. Six samples of the scenes in the dataset. The different agent’s LiDAR point clouds are colored as follows: electric vehicle-001
(EV-1) in purple, electric vehicle-002 (EV-2) in red, urban vehicle (Laser) in yellow, and the RSU DOME and TOP LiDARs in green
and blue, respectively. We also draw the annotated bounding boxes within the scene. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) collaborative perception
has emerged as a promising solution to address the limitations of single-vehicle perception systems. However, existing V2X datasets are limited in scope, diversity, and quality.
To address these gaps, we present Mixed Signals, a comprehensive V2X dataset featuring 45.1k point clouds and
240.6k bounding boxes collected from three connected autonomous vehicles (CAVs) equipped with two different configurations of LiDAR sensors, plus a roadside unit with dual
LiDARs. Our dataset provides point clouds and bounding
box annotations across 10 classes, ensuring reliable data
for perception training. We provide detailed statistical analysis on the quality of our dataset and extensively benchmark
existing V2X methods on it. Mixed Signals is ready-to-use,
with precise alignment and consistent annotations across
time and viewpoints. We hope our work advances research

in the emerging, impactful field of V2X perception. Dataset
details at https://mixedsignalsdataset.cs.
cornell.edu/.

1. Introduction

* Denotes equal contribution.
† Correspondences can be directed to minh-quan.dao@inria.fr.

In recent years, driver assistance [19, 29] and autonomous
driving [1, 47] technologies have advanced significantly,
equipping vehicles with promising capabilities in perception [20, 44], planning [13, 15], and control [2, 8]. Most
of these developments focus on single autonomous vehicle
scenarios. Despite the advancements, such settings still face
challenges in complex or unpredictable situations [42]. For
instance, important traffic participants can be occluded from
view, or sensors can fail unexpectedly. As autonomous vehicle deployment increases, new possibilities emerge to address these issues: multiple vehicles can communicate with
each other and nearby infrastructure, enabling each vehicle to reliably detect road users even when its own sensors
miss them by leveraging shared information. This approach
is commonly referred as vehicle-to-everything (V2X) collaborative perception.

‡ This research is funded by the University of Sydney – Cornell University Ignition Grants/ Global Strategic Collaboration Awards.

28763

