This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmotiCrafter: Text-to-Emotional-Image Generation based on
Valence-Arousal Model
Shengqi Dang 1,2† , Yi He 1† , Long Ling 1 , Ziqing Qian 1 , Nanxuan Zhao 3 , Nan Cao 1,2∗
1

Tongji University

2

Shanghai Innovation Institute

3

Adobe Research

Figure 1. Generated images of the EmotiCrafter. Given a prompt and Valence-Arousal (V-A) values, our method can generate an emotional
image that reﬂects the input prompt and aligns with the speciﬁed emotion values. By adjusting the V-A values, our method can also generate
images that evoke discrete emotions, such as sadness, relaxation, anger, and amusement.

Abstract
Recent research shows that emotions can enhance users’
cognition and inﬂuence information communication. While
† Shengqi Dang and Yi He contributed equally to this work.
∗ Nan Cao is the corresponding author.

 Shengqi Dang, Yi He, Long Ling, Ziqing Qian, and Nan Cao
are with the Intelligent Big Data Visualization Lab, Tongji University.
Shengqi Dang and Nan Cao are also with the Shanghai Innovation Institute.
Email: {dangsq123, heyi 11}@tongji.edu.cn, lucyling0224@gmail.com,
2411920@tongji.edu.cn, nan.cao@gmail.com.
 Nanxuan Zhao is with Adobe Research. Email: nanxuanzhao@gmail.com.
 Code: https://github.com/idvxlab/EmotiCrafter

15218

research on visual emotion analysis is extensive, limited
work has been done on helping users generate emotionally rich image content. Existing work on emotional image
generation relies on discrete emotion categories, making it
challenging to capture complex and subtle emotional nuances accurately. Additionally, these methods struggle to
control the speciﬁc content of generated images based on
text prompts. In this paper, we introduce the task of continuous emotional image content generation (C-EICG) and
present EmotiCrafter, a general emotional image generation model that generates images based on free text prompts
and Valence-Arousal (V-A) values. It leverages a novel
emotion-embedding mapping network to fuse V-A values

