This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiGA3D: Coarse-to-Fine Diffusional Propagation of Geometry and Appearance
for Versatile 3D Inpainting

1

Jingyi Pan1 Dan Xu2 * Qiong Luo1,2 *
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
jpan305@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, {danxu, luo}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Developing a unified pipeline that enables users to remove,
re-texture, or replace objects in a versatile manner is crucial for text-guided 3D inpainting. However, there are
still challenges in performing multiple 3D inpainting tasks
within a unified framework: 1) Single reference inpainting methods lack robustness when dealing with views that
are far from the reference view; 2) Appearance inconsistency arises when independently inpainting multi-view images with 2D diffusion priors; 3) Geometry inconsistency
limits performance when there are significant geometric
changes in the inpainting regions. To tackle these challenges, we introduce DiGA3D, a novel and versatile 3D
inpainting pipeline that leverages diffusion models to propagate consistent appearance and geometry in a coarse-tofine manner. First, DiGA3D develops a robust strategy for
selecting multiple reference views to reduce errors during
propagation. Next, DiGA3D designs an Attention Feature
Propagation (AFP) mechanism that propagates attention
features from the selected reference views to other views via
diffusion models to maintain appearance consistency. Furthermore, DiGA3D introduces a Texture-Geometry Score
Distillation Sampling (TG-SDS) loss to further improve the
geometric consistency of inpainted 3D scenes. Extensive experiments on multiple 3D inpainting tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. The project page is available
at https://rorisis.github.io/DiGA3D/.

Source 3D scene

Object Re-Texturing

DiGA3D

Object Removal

Object Replacement

Figure 1. DiGA3D is a versatile 3D inpainting framework guided
by text prompts, supporting multiple inpainting tasks including object replacement, removal, and re-texturing, etc.

1. Introduction

atively less-studied area.
Although several methods [2, 8, 16, 24, 35] have explored unified pipelines for versatile 3D inpainting, they
still face some challenges: First, some methods [16, 24] rely
on a single reference image to guide the inpainting process,
which heavily depends on the quality of the single reference
image and often leads to texture degradation when views are
far from the reference view; Second, some methods [25, 35]
struggle to maintain multi-view appearance consistency as
they independently inpaint the constituent images using 2D
inpainters. Although they utilize perceptual loss [43] to
optimize the views and address these inconsistencies subsequently, they are inadequate when the appearance of the
inpainted views differs perceptually; Third, existing methods frequently suffer from inconsistent geometry, leading
to issues such as multi-facet artifacts. Although some approaches [2, 24, 37] attempt to address geometric inconsistencies by incorporating depth maps generated by monocular depth estimators, they often rely on depth maps that
are inconsistent across multiple views. This limitation becomes particularly evident when inpainting regions require
significant geometric changes.
To address these challenges, we introduce DiGA3D, a
novel and versatile 3D inpainting pipeline with a coarse-

Recent advances in 3D representations [13, 23, 36] and
text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have led to significant
progress in novel view synthesis (NVS) and 3D generation,
demonstrating substantial potential for applications in areas such as VR/AR and the Metaverse. Despite these advances, 3D inpainting, particularly the development of unified pipelines for various 3D inpainting tasks, remains a rel* Corresponding authors.

16345

