This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OCR Hinders RAG: Evaluating the Cascading Impact of OCR on
Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Junyuan Zhang1,3∗ Qintong Zhang1,2∗ Bin Wang1∗ Linke Ouyang1 Zichen Wen1,4
Ying Li5 Ka-Ho Chow3 Conghui He1‡ Wentao Zhang2
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Peking University 3 The University of HongKong
4
Shanghai Jiaotong University 5 Beihang University
Abstract
Retrieval-augmented Generation (RAG) enhances Large
Language Models (LLMs) by integrating external knowledge to reduce hallucinations and incorporate up-to-date
information without retraining. As an essential part of RAG,
external knowledge bases are commonly built by extracting
structured data from unstructured PDF documents using Optical Character Recognition (OCR). However, given the imperfect prediction of OCR and the inherent non-uniform representation of structured data, knowledge bases inevitably
contain various OCR noises. In this paper, we introduce
OHRBench, the ﬁrst benchmark for understanding the cascading impact of OCR on RAG systems. OHRBench includes
8,561 carefully selected unstructured document images from
seven real-world RAG application domains, along with 8,498
Q&A pairs derived from multimodal elements in documents,
challenging existing OCR solutions used for RAG. To better understand OCR’s impact on RAG systems, we identify
two primary types of OCR noise: Semantic Noise and Formatting Noise and apply perturbation to generate a set of
structured data with varying degrees of each OCR noise.
Using OHRBench, we ﬁrst conduct a comprehensive evaluation of current OCR solutions and reveal that none is
competent for constructing high-quality knowledge bases for
RAG systems. We then systematically evaluate the impact of
these two noise types and demonstrate the trend relationship
between the degree of OCR noise and RAG performance.
Our OHRBench, including PDF documents, Q&As, and
the ground truth structured data are released at: https:
//github.com/opendatalab/OHR-Bench

1. Introduction
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) enhances Large
Language Models (LLMs) by integrating external knowl∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

‡ Corresponding author (heconghui@pjlab.org.cn).

edge [17, 25], enabling them to respond accurately to queries
beyond their training corpus, such as recent news or proprietary content, and reducing hallucinations [23, 25, 38, 43].
This is achieved through a retrieval-then-grounding approach, where relevant documents are retrieved from external knowledge bases and incorporated into the LLM’s
prompt for grounding.
As an essential component of RAG systems, the knowledge base deﬁnes the scope and quality of documents
that RAG can access. Given that a vast amount of realworld knowledge resides in unstructured documents, such
as scanned PDFs, constructing an external knowledge base
often relies on Optical Character Recognition (OCR) 1 to
parse structured data from these unstructured PDF documents [20, 57]. For instance, MinerU [48] takes raw PDFs
as input and extracts plain text, formulas, and tables into
structured formats for subsequent RAG applications. However, imperfect predictions of OCR and non-uniform representations of parsing results impair the construction of a
high-quality knowledge base for RAG. To be speciﬁc, despite advancements in OCR [5, 48, 50], even the leading
model cannot achieve perfect accuracy across all scenarios [31, 57]. Furthermore, structural data like table can inherently be parsed in different representation, such as Markdown or LaTeX. These issues introduce OCR noise in parsing results and diminish the quality of the knowledge base.
Considering RAG is sensitive to input noise [11, 15, 54],
recent works race on downstream RAG components, including more precise retrievers [7, 26, 34] and more advanced
LLMs [1, 13, 15, 55]. However, the quality of OCR-based
external knowledge bases and its cascading impact on these
downstream RAG components have received less attention,
which highlights a critical but unaddressed gap: the absence
of benchmarks to assess OCR’s cascading impact on each
component and entire system of RAG.
Existing benchmarks either evaluate RAG holistically
1We employ the General OCR concept for document parsing from GOTOCR2.0 [50], which includes, text recognition, multimodal data extraction
(table, formula, and chart recognition), and reading order restoration.

17443

