This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DimensionX: Create Any 3D and 4D Scenes from a Single Image with
Decoupled Video Diffusion
Wenqiang Sun* 1,3 , Shuo Chen* 2 , Fangfu Liu* 2 , Zilong Chen2,3 ,
Yueqi Duan2 , Jun Zhu† 2,3 , Jun Zhang† 1 , Yikai Wang† 2
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tsinghua University 3 ShengShu
wsunap@connect.ust.hk, eejzhang@ust.hk, yikaiw@outlook.com

Input Image

Input Image

3D Scene
Optim.
Spatial
Director

Image to 3D Scene: Renderings of novel views

Image to Video: Motion fix, only camera changes
Input Image

Input Image

4D Scene
Optim.
Temporal
Director

Image to 4D Scene: Renderings of novel views

Image to Video: Camera fix, only motion changes

Figure 1. With just a single image as input, our proposed DimensionX can generate highly realistic videos and 3D/4D environments that
are aware of spatial and temporal dimensions.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce DimensionX, a framework designed to generate photorealistic 3D and 4D scenes from
just a single image with video diffusion. Our approach
begins with the insight that both the spatial structure of a
3D scene and the temporal evolution of a 4D scene can be
effectively represented through sequences of video frames.
While recent video diffusion models have shown remarkable success in producing vivid visuals, they face limitations in directly recovering 3D/4D scenes due to poor spatial and temporal controllability during generation. To
overcome this difficulty, we propose ST-Director, which
decouples spatial and temporal factors in video diffusion
by learning dimension-aware directors from dimensionvariant data. This decoupled video diffusion enables precise manipulation of spatial structures and temporal dy-

namics, allowing us to reconstruct both 3D and 4D representations from sequential frames by combining spatial
and temporal dimensions. Additionally, to bridge the gap
between generated videos and real-world scenes, we introduce a trajectory-aware mechanism for 3D generation
and an identity-preserving denoising strategy for 4D generation, respectively. Extensive experiments on various
real-world and synthetic datasets demonstrate that DimensionX achieves state-of-the-art performance in decoupled
video generation, as well as 3D and 4D scene generation.
Project Page: https://chenshuo20.github.io/
DimensionX/

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

In the context of computer graphics and vision, understanding and generating 3D and 4D content are pivotal to create
realistic visual experiences [8, 61]. By representing spatial

13695

