This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human-Object Interaction from Human-Level Instructions
Zhen Wu

Jiaman Li
Pei Xu
Stanford University

C. Karen Liu

{zhenwu,jiamanli,peixu,karenliu}@cs.stanford.edu

“Can you set up a workspace?”

“Can you put shoes away?”

“Do laundry.”

Figure 1. Given human-level instructions (top), we first use a diffusion-based motion generator to synthesize natural full-body human motion,
finger motion, and object motion to accomplish the task (middle). Next, we employ a physics-based tracking method to imitate the generated
interactions which produces physically plausible interactions (bottom). Please refer to our project page for more results.

Abstract
Intelligent agents must autonomously interact with the environments to perform daily tasks based on human-level
instructions. They need a foundational understanding of
the world to accurately interpret these instructions, along
with precise low-level movement and interaction skills to
execute the derived actions. In this work, we propose the
first complete system for synthesizing physically plausible,
long-horizon human-object interactions for object manipulation in contextual environments, driven by human-level
instructions. We leverage large language models (LLMs) to
interpret the input instructions into detailed execution plans.
Unlike prior work, our system is capable of generating detailed finger-object interactions, in seamless coordination
with full-body movements. We also train a policy to track
generated motions in physics simulation via reinforcement
learning (RL) to ensure physical plausibility of the motion.
Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our system
in synthesizing realistic interactions with diverse objects in
complex environments, highlighting its potential for realworld applications.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing physically plausible, long-horizon, humanobject interactions in contextual environments is crucial

for applications in computer graphics, embodied AI, and
robotics. When given human-level language instructions,
intelligent agents should be able to comprehend these
high-level commands and map them to executable action
sequences. For instance, when instructed to set up a
workspace, an agent must understand the abstract concept
of “workspace”, identify the relevant furniture and objects in
the room, and translate this concept into a series of concrete
actions, such as moving and orienting a desk, placing a chair
nearby, and positioning a monitor on the desk. In addition
to understanding the instructions, the agent must execute actions that lead to realistic and functional human movements,
including navigating cluttered spaces, manipulating various
objects for the task, and appropriately releasing them after
use.
Prior research has made significant progress in synthesizing human-scene interactions using large language model
(LLM) planners [57]. However, most of these interactions
have been limited to static objects without hand manipulation. Some studies [24] have demonstrated the manipulation
of dynamic objects, but the resulting interactions still lack
realistic finger movements. Recently, physics-based RL policies has demonstrated promising results in human-object
interactions [31, 52]. However, generating long-horizon
motions that interact with various objects in a scene-aware
manner remains an ongoing challenge. Build upon these
prior work, we introduce the first complete system capable

11176

