This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PLA: Prompt Learning Attack against Text-to-Image Generative Models
Xinqi Lyu, Yihao Liu, Yanjie Li, Bin Xiao*
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{xinqi.lyu,yihao5.liu,yanjie.li}@connect.polyu.hk, b.xiao@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Text-to-Image (T2I) models have gained widespread adoption across various applications. Despite the success, the
potential misuse of T2I models poses significant risks of
generating Not-Safe-For-Work (NSFW) content. To investigate the vulnerability of T2I models, this paper delves into
adversarial attacks to bypass the safety mechanisms under
black-box settings. Most previous methods rely on word
substitution to search adversarial prompts. Due to limited
search space, this leads to suboptimal performance compared to gradient-based training. However, black-box settings present unique challenges to training gradient-driven
attack methods, since there is no access to the internal architecture and parameters of T2I models. To facilitate the
learning of adversarial prompts in black-box settings, we
propose a novel prompt learning attack framework (PLA),
where insightful gradient-based training tailored to blackbox T2I models is designed by utilizing multimodal similarities. Experiments show that our new method can effectively attack the safety mechanisms of black-box T2I models including prompt filters and post-hoc safety checkers
with a high success rate compared to state-of-the-art methods. Warning: This paper may contain offensive modelgenerated content.

To avoid the misuse of T2I models, various safety mechanisms have been developed to curb harmful content. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, prompt filters [45] and post-hoc safety
checkers [8, 33, 40] are typically employed as preventive
measures of harmful generation, especially in online services, such as Stability.ai [9] and DALL·E 3 [1]. However,
numerous studies [45, 47, 50] have indicated that T2I models remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks that bypass current defense mechanisms, highlighting the persistent risks
of misuse. To delve into the vulnerability of T2I models,
this research aims to study the adversarial attack on T2I
models, thereby contributing to the development of more
robust defensive strategies in the future.

1. Introduction

In the field of adversarial attacks for T2I models, adversarial prompts have emerged as a prevalent strategy to
bypass the safety mechanism of T2I models, inducing the
generation of NSFW content [26]. Most previous studies
on adversarial prompts assume a white-box setting [45, 50],
where attackers have full knowledge of the T2I model’s architecture and parameters. Recently, given the growing interest in online T2I services, most T2I models operate under
black-box settings with restricted access to internal model
details. In light of this, researchers have increasingly shifted
toward black-box attack methods, aiming to evade detections by replacing sensitive words in target prompts with
new words. For instance, SneakyPrompt [47] employs reinforcement learning to search potential word candidates and
iteratively replace sensitive words. However, most existing
black-box attacks generate adversarial prompts by exploring words over limited search space, which often results in
suboptimal performance. Therefore, there is a pressing need
to develop a more effective approach for attacking blackbox T2I models.

Text-to-Image (T2I) models, such as Stable Diffusion [37]
and DALL·E 3 [1], have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities to generate high-quality images based on text
prompts, opening new possibilities in various fields like
artistic creation and scene design [2–4, 29]. Despite these
successes, T2I models raise significant security concerns
due to their potential misuse of generating Not-Safe-ForWork (NSFW) content, such as sexual and violent images
[33, 38, 41]. This leads to serious legal and reputational
repercussions for both T2I model developers and end-users.
* B. Xiao is the corresponding author. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/xinqilyu/PLA.git.

Compared to existing search-based methods for blackbox attacks, gradient-driven training has uncovered great
potential to navigate the learning of effective adversarial
prompts, owing to their superior capabilities of optimizing
complex problems over extensive solution space [14, 52].
However, black-box settings present unique challenges to
training gradient-driven attack methods. In particular, attackers typically lack access to the internal architecture and

16851

