This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ResGS: Residual Densification of 3D Gaussian for Efficient Detail Recovery
Yanzhe Lyu Kai Cheng Xin Kang Xuejin Chen†
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
University of Science and Technology of China
3D-GS

3D-GS

Split

(c)
Clone
PSNR: 28.81
Num: 4.7M

Under

(a) Illustration of Split and Clone
Residual Split

Ours

Ours

Optimize

Over

(d)
Residual Split

Optimize
PSNR: 29.63
Num: 3.6M

(b) Illustration of Residual Split

Rendered Image

Ellipsoids

Figure 1. We propose ResGS, a pipeline to boost the rendering quality of 3D-GS [22] while improving efficiency. (a) The 3D-GS
densification operations, split and clone, rely on binary selection and cannot adaptively address the challenges they encounter. (b) Our
ResGS employs a single densification operation, residual split, that adaptively addresses under-reconstruction and over-reconstruction. (c)
3D-GS tends to generate Gaussians with sizes in small variation and low rendering quality. (d) From the same initialization, our method
can capture fine details and retrieve sufficient geometry effectively while reducing redundancy.

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) has prevailed
in novel view synthesis, achieving high fidelity and efficiency. However, it often struggles to capture rich details and complete geometry. Our analysis reveals that
the 3D-GS densification operation lacks adaptiveness and
faces a dilemma between geometry coverage and detail
recovery. To address this, we introduce a novel densification operation, residual split, which adds a downscaled Gaussian as a residual. Our approach is capable
of adaptively retrieving details and complementing missing geometry. To further support this method, we propose a pipeline named ResGS. Specifically, we integrate a
Gaussian image pyramid for progressive supervision and
implement a selection scheme that prioritizes the densification of coarse Gaussians over time. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves SOTA rendering quality. Consistent performance improvements can

be achieved by applying our residual split on various 3DGS variants, underscoring its versatility and potential for
broader application in 3D-GS-based applications. Project
page: https://yanzhelyu.github.io/resgs.github.io/.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

Novel View Synthesis (NVS) has continued to be a hot topic
throughout the years. Traditional methods like point clouds
and meshes [4, 8, 12] can achieve high rendering speed but
often lack fidelity. On the other hand, neural volumetric
approaches [1, 28, 29] can achieve high fidelity for novel
views but significantly sacrifice rendering efficiency. Recently, 3D-GS [22] has shown both high fidelity and fast
rendering speed for novel view synthesis. However, 3D-GS
still suffers from setbacks, often failing to capture fine details or recover complete geometry, as shown by the red and
orange rectangles in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.
While various approaches [11, 40, 45, 47] have been proposed to tackle these challenges and have significantly ad-

28093

