This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-supervised Concept Bottleneck Models
Lijie Hu*,1,2 , Tianhao Huang*,1,2,3 , Huanyi Xie1,2 , Xilin Gong1,2,4 ,
Chenyang Ren1,2 , Zhengyu Hu1,6 , Lu Yu5 , Ping Ma4 , Di Wang†,1,2 ,
1
Provable Responsible AI and Data Analytics (PRADA) Lab,
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
3
University of Virginia, 4 University of Georgia, 5 Ant Group, 6 HKUST(GZ)
{lijie.hu, tianhao.huang, huanyi.xie, di.wang}@kaust.edu.sa
Abstract

able artificial intelligence (XAI) models have been developed to meet the demand for transparency, providing insights into their behavior and internal mechanisms [16–
18, 46]. Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [25] are particularly notable among these XAI models for their ability to clarify the prediction process of end-to-end AI models. CBMs introduce a bottleneck layer that incorporates
human-understandable concepts. During prediction, CBMs
first predict concept labels from original input, then use
these predicted concepts in bottleneck layer to determine
the final label. This approach results in a self-explanatory
decision-making process that users can comprehend.
A major issue in original CBMs is the need for expert
labeling, which is costly in practice. Some researchers address this problem through unsupervised learning. For example, [34] proposes a Label-free CBM that transforms any
neural network into an interpretable CBM without requiring
labeled concept data while maintaining high accuracy. Similarly, Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck models [48] can be applied to various neural networks without compromising performance, preserving interpretability advantages. However,
these methods have three issues. First, those unsupervised
methods heavily rely on large language models like GPT3, which have reliability issues [26]. Second, the concepts
extracted by these models lack evaluation metrics, undermining their interpretability. Third, the assumption that no
concept labels are available is too stringent in practice. In
reality, obtaining a small portion of concept labels is feasible and cost-effective. Therefore, we can maximize the use
of this small labeled concept dataset. This is the motivation for introducing our framework, which focuses on the
semi-supervised setting in CBM.
In this paper, we introduce a framework called the SSCBM (Semi-supervised Concept Bottleneck Model). Compared to a supervised setting, semi-supervised CBMs have
two main challenges. First, obtaining concept embeddings
requires concept labels, so we need to generate pseudo labels to obtain these concept embeddings. To achieve this,

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) have garnered increasing attention due to their ability to provide concept-based
explanations for black-box deep learning models while
achieving high final prediction accuracy using human-like
concepts. However, the training of current CBMs is heavily
dependent on the precision and richness of the annotated
concepts in the dataset. These concept labels are typically
provided by experts, which can be costly and require significant resources and effort. Additionally, concept saliency
maps frequently misalign with input saliency maps, causing
concept predictions to correspond to irrelevant input features - an issue related to annotation alignment. To address
these limitations, we propose a new framework called SSCBM (Semi-supervised Concept Bottleneck Model). Our
SSCBM is suitable for practical situations where annotated
data is scarce. By leveraging joint training on both labeled
and unlabeled data and aligning the unlabeled data at the
concept level, we effectively solve these issues. We propose
a strategy to generate pseudo labels and an alignment loss.
Experiments demonstrate that our SSCBM is both effective
and efficient. With only 10% labeled data, our model’s concept and task accuracy on average across four datasets is
only 2.44% and 3.93% lower, respectively, compared to the
best baseline in the fully supervised learning setting.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models like ResNet [13] typically feature
complex non-linear architectures, making it difficult for
end-users to understand and trust their decisions. This lack
of interpretability is a significant obstacle to their adoption, especially in critical fields such as healthcare [41]
and finance [30], where transparency is crucial. Explain* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

2110

