This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Edicho: Consistent Image Editing in the Wild
Qingyan Bai1,2∗ Hao Ouyang2 Yinghao Xu3,2 Qiuyu Wang2
Ceyuan Yang4 Ka Leong Cheng1,2 Yujun Shen2† Qifeng Chen1†
1

HKUST

2

Ant Group

3

Stanford University

4

CUHK

Figure 1. Given two images in the wild, Edicho generates consistent editing versions of them in a zero-shot manner. Our approach
achieves precise consistency for editing parts (left), objects (middle), and the entire images (right) by leveraging explicit correspondence.

1. Introduction
Abstract
As a verified need, consistent editing across in-the-wild
images remains a technical challenge arising from various unmanageable factors, like object poses, lighting conditions, and photography environments. Edicho1 steps
in with a training-free solution based on diffusion models,
featuring a fundamental design principle of using explicit
image correspondence to direct editing. Specifically, the
key components include an attention manipulation module
and a carefully refined classifier-free guidance (CFG) denoising strategy, both of which take into account the preestimated correspondence. Such an inference-time algorithm enjoys a plug-and-play nature and is compatible to
most diffusion-based editing methods, such as ControlNet
and BrushNet. Extensive results demonstrate the efficacy
of Edicho in consistent cross-image editing under diverse
settings. Project page can be found here.

The ability to consistently edit images across different instances is of paramount importance in the field of computer vision and image processing [1, 10, 65, 67]. Consistent image editing facilitates numerous applications, such
as creating coherent visual narratives and maintaining characteristics in marketing materials. As in Fig. 1, sellers or
consumers can enhance photos of their favorite products,
such as toys or shoes, by applying consistent decorative elements, making each item appear more appealing or personalized. Similarly, during themed events like a masquerade ball or Halloween, families and friends may hope to
uniformly style masks or dresses across their photos, ensuring a harmonious visual presentation. Another instance
for content creators is consistently making multiple of the
photos looks like a graceful elf or an impressive superman.
By ensuring the edits applied to one image can be reliably
replicated across the other ones, we also enhance the efficiency and quality of tasks ranging from photo editing and
retouching to data augmentation for customization [32, 50],
and 3D reconstruction [57].
Despite the significance of consistent editing, achieving
it across diverse images remains a challenging task. Pre-

∗ This work was done during an internship at Ant Group.
† Corresponding authors.
1 “Edicho” is an abbreviation of “edit echo”, implying that the edit is
echoed across images.

15277

