This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PASTA: Part-Aware Sketch-to-3D Shape Generation with Text-Aligned Prior
Seunggwan Lee1 Hwanhee Jung1 Byoungsoo Koh2 Qixing Huang3 Sang Ho Yoon4 Sangpil Kim1 *
1

Korea University

2

KOCCA

3

The University of Texas at Austin

{gwan7801, hwanyo14, spk7}@korea.ac.kr
huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

4

KAIST

kbs0753@gmail.com

sangho@kaist.ac.kr

Generation
Editing
Figure 1. PASTA enables 3D shape generation and editing from hand-drawn sketches. It processes a sketch input using Gaussian
mixture models (GMMs) for part-level decomposition, generating a corresponding 3D mesh. The framework also supports localized
modifications, such as adding, deleting, or transforming parts, for precise user interactive editing. For more details, please visit our project
page: https://kuai-lab.github.io/iccv2025pasta/

1. Introduction

Abstract

Conditional 3D shape generation, which generates a 3D
shape from user constraints, has many applications in design, gaming, and virtual reality. So far, existing approaches
have predominantly focused on two types of conditional
signals, namely user sketches [23–25, 33, 55, 56] and text
descriptions [11, 30, 36, 45, 50]. Most efforts focus on
building machine learning models to achieve improved performance under these two conditional generation tasks. In
this paper, we look at the critical question of what are the
most effective and informative conditional signals for 3D
shape generation? Such conditional signals should be concise, easy to specify, and offer accurate control of the shape
to be generated. Unfortunately, both sketch-based and textbased conditions exhibit fundamental limitations. Text descriptions are certainly concise and offer shape semantics,
but do not provide precise control of shape geometries. User
sketches, on the other hand, offer better control on shape
geometries, but they suffer from limited semantics and ambiguities in a single 2D sketch, c.f., [4, 5, 16] . In this paper,
we study how to develop a new conditional 3D shape generation approach by seamlessly integrating user sketches and
text descriptions.

A fundamental challenge in conditional 3D shape generation is to minimize the information loss and maximize the
intention of user input. Existing approaches have predominantly focused on two types of isolated conditional signals,
i.e., user sketches and text descriptions, each of which does
not offer flexible control of the generated shape. In this paper, we introduce PASTA, the flexible approach that seamlessly integrates a user sketch and a text description for 3D
shape generation. The key idea is to use text embeddings
from a vision-language model to enrich the semantic representation of sketches. Specifically, these text-derived priors specify the part components of the object, compensating for missing visual cues from ambiguous sketches. In
addition, we introduce ISG-Net which employs two types of
graph convolutional networks: IndivGCN, which processes
fine-grained details, and PartGCN, which aggregates these
details into parts and refines the structure of objects. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PASTA outperforms
existing methods in part-level editing and achieves stateof-the-art results in sketch-to-3D shape generation.
* Corresponding author

1
18585

