This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlexGen: Flexible Multi-View Generation from Text and Image Inputs
Xinli Xu1 * Wenhang Ge1∗ Jiantao Lin1∗ JiaweiFeng1 Lie Xu3
Hanfeng Zhao3 Shunsi Zhang3 Ying-Cong Chen1,2†
HKUST(GZ)1

HKUST2

Quwan3

Abstract
In this work, we introduce FlexGen, a flexible framework
designed to generate controllable and consistent multiview images, conditioned on a single-view image, or a text
prompt, or both. FlexGen tackles the challenges of controllable multi-view synthesis through additional conditioning
on 3D-aware text annotations. We utilize the strong reasoning capabilities of GPT-4V to generate 3D-aware text
annotations. By analyzing four orthogonal views of an
object arranged as tiled multi-view images, GPT-4V can
produce text annotations that include 3D-aware information with spatial relationship. By integrating the control
signal with proposed adaptive dual-control module, our
model can generate multi-view images that correspond to
the specified text. FlexGen supports multiple controllable
capabilities, allowing users to modify text prompts to generate reasonable and corresponding unseen parts. Additionally, users can influence attributes such as appearance
and material properties, including metallic and roughness.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach offers enhanced multiple controllability, marking a significant advancement over existing multi-view diffusion models. This work has substantial implications for fields requiring rapid and flexible 3D content creation, including game
development, animation, and virtual reality. Project page:
https://xxu068.github.io/flexgen.github.io/.

+"A backpack on the back"

"Monkey King with his
stick."
+ "With Long Hair"

"A charater stands
with a basketball."

+ "Mario"

"a bear wearing green
and white outfit."

+ "high-metallic, low-roughness"

"pixelated yellow
duck with a hat.
Symmetrical from
the front."

Input

Generated multi-view images

1. Introduction

Figure 1. FlexGen is a flexible framework designed to generate high-quality, consistent multi-view images conditioned on a
single-view image, or a text prompt, or both. Our method allows
editing of unseen regions and modification of material properties
through user-defined text.

Recent progress in generative models [15, 41] has significantly advanced 2D content creation, thanks to the rapid
increase in 2D data volumes. However, 3D content creation
remains challenging due to the limited accessibility of 3D
assets, which are essential for diverse downstream applications, including game modeling [12, 18], computer animation [17, 30], and virtual reality [35]. Previous 3D generation methods primarily concentrate on optimization-based
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

techniques using multi-view posed images [11, 43, 45, 50],
or employ SDS-based distillation approaches derived from
2D generative models [23, 24, 32]. Although effective,
these methods often demand significant optimization time,
limiting their practicality in real-world applications.
Multi-view diffusion models [25, 26, 37, 39, 44] have
demonstrated the potential of pre-trained 2D generative
models for 3D content creation through the synthesis of
consistent multi-view images. Despite their promising performance, the controllable generation of multi-view images

18714

