This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnyBimanual: Transferring Unimanual Policy for General Bimanual
Manipulation
Guanxing Lu1,2⋆ , Tengbo Yu1,2⋆ , Haoyuan Deng3 , Season Si Chen1,2 , Yansong Tang1,2† , Ziwei Wang3
⋆
Equal contributor † Corresponding author
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, 2 Tsinghua University
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{lgx23@mails.,ytb23@mails.,season.chen@,tang.yansong@}sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
{E230112@e.,ziwei.wang@}ntu.edu.sg
https://anybimanual.github.io/

Abstract

Any Pretrained Unimanual Policy

General-purpose bimanual manipulation is challenging due to high-dimensional action spaces and expensive
data collection. In contrast, unimanual policy has recently demonstrated impressive generalizability across a
wide range of tasks because of scaled model parameters and
training data, which can provide sharable manipulation
knowledge for bimanual systems. We propose a plug-andplay method named AnyBimanual, which transfers pretrained unimanual policy to general bimanual manipulation
policy with few bimanual demonstrations. Specifically, we
first introduce a skill manager to dynamically schedule the
skill representations discovered from pretrained unimanual policy for bimanual manipulation tasks, which linearly
combines skill primitives with task-oriented compensation
to represent the bimanual manipulation instruction. To mitigate the observation discrepancy between unimanual and
bimanual systems, we present a visual aligner to generate
soft masks for visual embedding, which aims to align visual
input of unimanual policy model for each arm with those
during pretraining stage. AnyBimanual shows superiority
on 12 simulated tasks from RLBench2 with a sizable 17.33%
improvement in success rate over previous methods. Experiments on 9 real-world tasks further verify its practicality
with an average success rate of 84.62%.

“Press the button.”

“Place in the sorter.” “Open the cabinet.” “Press the handsan.”

Skills

AnyBimanual
Generalizable Bimanual Policy

“Press two buttons.” “Bring me the item.”

“Wash the dishes.”

“Play ping pong.”

Figure 1. AnyBimanual enables plug-and-play transferring from
pretrained unimanual policies to bimanual manipulation policy, which preserves the generalizability with the proposed skill
scheduling framework.

1. Introduction

lizing the target with one arm and interacting with that using another arm [29, 44]. Even for the tasks that unimanual
policies can handle, bimanual systems are often more efficient because multiple action steps can be simultaneously
accomplished [30]. Since modern robotic applications require the robot to interact with different tasks and objects,
it is desirable to design a generalizable policy model for bimanual manipulation.
To enhance the generalization ability of the manipulation agent, prior works present to leverage the high-level
reasoning and semantic understanding capabilities of foundation models like Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vi-

Bimanual systems play an important role in robotic manipulation due to the high capacity of completing diverse tasks
in household service [69], robotic surgery [32], and component assembly in factories [9]. Compared to unimanual
systems, bimanual systems enlarge the workspace and are
able to handle more complex manipulation tasks by stabi-

13662

