This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoGA: 3D Generative Avatar Prior for Monocular Gaussian Avatar
Reconstruction
Zijian Dong1,4∗ Longteng Duan1∗ Jie Song3 Michael J. Black4 Andreas Geiger2
1
ETH Zürich 2 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
3
HKUST(GZ)&HKUST 4 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Figure 1. We propose MoGA, a method to genereate high-ﬁdelity Gaussian avatars from a single image. Left: A challenging in-the-wild
example. Middle: Unlike previous methods that struggle with such cases (Fig. 4), MoGA enables 3D-consistent full-body novel view
synthesis and detailed geometry extraction. Right: Our reconstructed Gaussian avatar supports animation without any post-processing.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present MoGA, a novel method to reconstruct highﬁdelity 3D Gaussian avatars from a single-view image. The
main challenge lies in inferring unseen appearance and geometric details while ensuring 3D consistency and realism.
Most previous methods rely on 2D diffusion models to synthesize unseen views; however, these generated views are
sparse and inconsistent, resulting in unrealistic 3D artifacts
and blurred appearance. To address these limitations, we
leverage a generative avatar model, that can generate diverse 3D avatars by sampling deformed Gaussians from a
learned prior distribution. Due to limited 3D training data,
such a 3D model alone cannot capture all image details of
unseen identities. Consequently, we integrate it as a prior,
ensuring 3D consistency by projecting input images into
its latent space and enforcing additional 3D appearance
and geometric constraints. Our novel approach formulates
Gaussian avatar creation as model inversion by ﬁtting the
generative avatar to synthetic views from 2D diffusion models. The generative avatar provides an initialization for
model ﬁtting, enforces 3D regularization, and helps in reﬁning pose. Experiments show that our method surpasses
state-of-the-art techniques and generalizes well to realworld scenarios. Our Gaussian avatars are also inherently
animatable. For code, see https:// zj-dong.github.io/ MoGA/
* Equal contribution

Animatable and realistic avatar creation enables many applications in AR/VR, movies, and the gaming industry. It
is hard to scale up this process since previous traditional
approaches [22] require expensive multi-view systems and
highly-specialized expertise to craft the avatar. To make
digital avatars widely available and consumer-friendly, it
is essential to develop methods for creating an avatar from
in-the-wild images. However, this problem is very challenging due to the ill-posed nature of the monocular setting, which causes ambiguities in the appearance, depth,
and body poses.
Embracing the challenging problem, previous methods [41, 42, 52] learn a large network to predict explicit
or implicit 3D representations from 2D pixel-aligned features. These methods are trained on small-scale datasets
due to the limited amount of available 3D data; this greatly
restricts their generalization to diverse human poses and
clothing styles. More recently, to enable more powerful
generalization ability, some methods [14, 26, 53, 59] leverage a multi-view diffusion model to hallucinate back and
side views. Despite impressive performance, most existing
multi-view diffusion models can only generate very sparse
views with high resolution due to memory constraints during training [23]. The sparsity of generated views leads to
artifacts in self-occluded regions or unobserved side views.
Furthermore, since such methods rely heavily on 2D priors

13304

