This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Multiple Instance Learning with Enhanced Localization
for Histopathological Whole Slide Image Analysis
Byung Hyun Lee1 , Wongi Jeong1 , Woojae Han2 , Kyoungbun Lee4 , Se Young Chun1,2,3,†
1
Department of ECE, 2 IPAI, 3 INMC, Seoul National University
4
Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Seoul National University
{ldlqudgus756, wg7139, wjhan24, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

Multiple instance learning (MIL) significantly reduced annotation costs via bag-level weak labels for large-scale images, such as histopathological whole slide images (WSIs).
However, its adaptability to continual tasks with minimal
forgetting has been rarely explored, especially on instance
classification for localization. Weakly incremental learning
for semantic segmentation has been studied for continual
localization, but it focused on natural images, leveraging
global relationships among hundreds of small patches (e.g.,
16 × 16) using pre-trained models. This approach seems
infeasible for MIL localization due to enormous amounts
(∼ 105 ) of large patches (e.g., 256 × 256) and no available global relationships such as cancer cells. To address these challenges, we propose Continual Multiple Instance Learning with Enhanced Localization (CoMEL), an
MIL framework for both localization and adaptability with
minimal forgetting. CoMEL consists of (1) Grouped Double Attention Transformer (GDAT) for efficient instance encoding, (2) Bag Prototypes-based Pseudo-Labeling (BPPL)
for reliable instance pseudo-labeling, and (3) Orthogonal
Weighted Low-Rank Adaptation (OWLoRA) to mitigate forgetting in both bag and instance classification. Extensive
experiments on three public WSI datasets demonstrate superior performance of CoMEL, outperforming the prior arts
by up to 11.00% in bag-level accuracy and up to 23.4% in
localization accuracy under the continual MIL setup.

Continual Multiple Instance Learning

Abstract

SLN
(Task 1)

Prostate
(Task 3)

Colon
(Task 5)

Task
sequence

Localization forgetting on Task 1

Forgetting

ConSlide

CoMEL
(Ours)

Figure 1. We propose Continual Multiple instance learning with
Enhanced Localization (CoMEL). Compared to the baseline [22],
it alleviates forgetting of localization under continual MIL setup.

1. Introduction

each slide as a bag of multiple instances (or patches).
For practical utility, it is required to learn continuously
arriving tasks while retaining previous knowledge without
forgetting. As a real-world scenario, for example, about
1,000 WSIs are generated every working day in a 1700-bedsized tertiary hospital, annually resulting in 500 terabytes of
data. Since this rapidly growing data volume could easily
exceed the storage capacity, MIL models need to continually adapt to new conditions like organs and tumor subtypes.
However, its adaptability to continually varying conditions with minimal forgetting has rarely been explored, especially on instance classification for localization. A few
studies [17, 22] integrated continual learning [1, 31, 47] into
MIL to efficiently adapt to sequential tasks while mitigating
forgetting. They achieved excellent performance in continual bag classification, but their evaluation remains underexplored on instance classification for localization, an equally
important aspect of MIL as bag classification.
Meanwhile, weakly incremental learning for semantic
segmentation [8, 20, 38, 53, 69] has been studied for continual localization. By utilizing rehearsal-based approaches
[1, 5, 11, 32] and dense pseudo-labels on data from previous tasks, they effectively mitigated forgetting of the local-

Multiple instance learning (MIL) [7, 12, 24, 33, 34, 39, 41,
56, 58, 72, 74, 76] is a promising approach to mitigate high
annotation costs by utilizing only bag-level (or slide-level)
weak labels for large-scale images like histopathological
whole slide images (WSIs). To effectively utilize the weak
labels, MIL learns to predict the slide-level class by treating
† Corresponding author.

23232

