This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Communication-Efficient Multi-Vehicle Collaborative Semantic Segmentation via
Sparse 3D Gaussian Sharing
Tianyu Hong1 Xiaobo Zhou1,2 * Wenkai Hu1 Qi Xie1 Zhihui Ke1 Tie Qiu1,2
1
Tianjin University, China 2 Qinghai Minzu University, China
{tianyu hong,xiaobo.zhou,wenkai hu,xie qi,kezhihui,qiutie}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Collaborative perception is considered a promising approach to address the inherent limitations of single-vehicle
systems by sharing data among vehicles, thereby enhancing performance in perception tasks such as bird’s-eye view
(BEV) semantic segmentation. However, existing methods
share the entire dense, scene-level BEV feature, which contains significant redundancy and lacks height information,
ultimately leading to unavoidable bandwidth waste and performance degradation. To address these challenges, we
present GSCOOP, the first collaborative semantic segmentation framework that leverages sparse, object-centric 3D
Gaussians to fundamentally overcome communication bottlenecks. By representing scenes with compact Gaussians that
preserve complete spatial information, GSCOOP achieves
both high perception accuracy and communication efficiency.
To further optimize transmission, we introduce the PriorityBased Gaussian Selection (PGS) module to adaptively select
critical Gaussians and a Semantic Gaussian Compression
(SGC) module to compress Gaussian attributes with minimal
overhead. Extensive experiments on OPV2V and V2X-Seq
demonstrate that GSCOOP achieves state-of-the-art performance, even with more than 500× lower communication volume.The code link is https://github.com/SHEVIP/GSCOOP.

1. Introduction
Bird’s Eye View (BEV) semantic segmentation plays a crucial role in autonomous driving perception systems [22, 23,
25], as it offers more comprehensive scene information compared to object detection [20]. Although the perception
capabilities of single-vehicle systems have been significantly
improved, they are still limited by inherent challenges such
as long-range detection and occlusion [4, 17, 35, 36, 45].
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication technology, which
enables the exchange of perception information between
multi-vehicle, has experienced rapid development in recent
* Corresponding author: xiaobo.zhou@tju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Comparison of pipeline in collaborative semantic segmentation. (a) BEV Feature-based pipeline rely on bandwidthinefficient dense BEV features and suffer from performance degradation due to lack of height information. (b) GSCOOP (Ours)
pipeline generates discrete and object-centric 3D Gaussians representations, achieving accurate scene representation with minimal
bandwidth.

years. Subsequently, collaborative BEV semantic segmentation based on cameras has gained increasing attention
[13, 28, 30, 31, 38, 41, 42, 44, 46], which provides a visionbased solution for the deployment of collaborative systems
in real-world scenarios without costly LiDAR sensors.
Existing methods [7, 28, 30–32, 38] (see Fig.1(a)) represent scenes using BEV feature map extracted from multiview images. This BEV feature map are compressed by
collaborative CAVs for transmission and then decompressed,
aligned, and fused with local features by the ego vehicle
to predict the BEV semantic segmentation map. However,
the 2D BEV feature maps inevitably suffer from the loss of
height information [10], which limits the effectiveness of feature fusion and degrades segmentation accuracy. Moreover,
transmitting the entire BEV feature map, typically requiring around 30 M bps, not only exceeds the practical C-V2X
bandwidth limit of 10 M bps [21] but also introduces substantial redundancy. Even more critically, extracting and
transmitting only the most relevant regions is inherently

28622

