This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Measuring the Impact of Rotation Equivariance on Aerial Object Detection
Xiuyu Wu1

Xinhao Wang1 Xiubin Zhu1 Lan Yang1 Jiyuan Liu2 Xingchen Hu2 *
1
Xidian University 2 National University of Defense Technology

{xiuyuwu, xhaowang}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, xbzhu@mail.xidian.edu.cn, yanglan@xidian.edu.cn,
liujiyuan13@nudt.edu.cn, xhu4@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Due to the arbitrary orientation of objects in aerial images, rotation equivariance is a critical property for aerial
object detectors. However, recent studies on rotationequivariant aerial object detection remain scarce. Most detectors rely on data augmentation to enable models to learn
approximately rotation-equivariant features. A few detectors have constructed rotation-equivariant networks, but
due to the breaking of strict rotation equivariance by typical downsampling processes, these networks only achieve
approximately rotation-equivariant backbones. Whether
strict rotation equivariance is necessary for aerial image
object detection remains an open question. In this paper, we implement a strictly rotation-equivariant backbone
and neck network with a more advanced network structure
and compare it with approximately rotation-equivariant
networks to quantitatively measure the impact of rotation
equivariance on the performance of aerial image detectors.
Additionally, leveraging the inherently grouped nature of
rotation-equivariant features, we propose a multi-branch
head network that reduces the parameter count while
improving detection accuracy. Based on the aforementioned improvements, this study proposes the Multi-branch
head rotation-equivariant single-stage Detector (MessDet),
which achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging aerial image datasets DOTA-v1.0, DOTA-v1.5 and
DIOR-R with an exceptionally low parameter count.

T

Inputs

Baseline

Appr. MessDet

Error!

Str. MessDet

T′

Error!

Figure 1. Visualization of features extracted by different methods. When the input is rotated, features extracted by conventional
CNNs are easily affected, leading to degraded detection performance. In contrast, our MessDet framework includes both approximately rotation-equivariant (Appr. MessDet) and strictly rotationequivariant (Str. MessDet) variants. While Appr. MessDet reduces rotation error during training, Str. MessDet eliminates such
errors entirely, resulting in more robust detection performance.

pass excessive background and make it difficult to localize the target objects accurately. In recent years, several
datasets [27, 33, 42, 50] have been introduced that utilize
oriented bounding boxes (OBB) for annotating aerial images, which can more tightly enclose the target objects.
However, bounding boxes now include angle information,
increasing the data dimensionality from 4 to 5 when this
approach is applied, which makes detection more challenging. When objects appear in arbitrary orientations, the
detector should produce consistent outputs for classification tasks, regardless of orientation, requiring rotation invariance. In contrast, the detector needs to correctly adjust the output angles, necessitating rotation equivariance
for bounding box regression. Most aerial object detectors implicitly learn rotation equivariance by increasing
model parameters [12, 37, 44], enhancing data augmentation [5, 6, 14, 21, 51, 56, 57], proposing new bounding box
representation methods [19, 24, 28, 45, 54, 55] or introduc-

1. Introduction
The primary difference between aerial object detection
[3, 7, 65] and general object detection [18, 39, 66] lies
in the bird’s-eye view perspective of aerial images, which
causes objects to appear in arbitrary orientations. If horizontal bounding boxes (commonly used in general object
detection) are applied to aerial images, they may encom* Corresponding author.
Code page: https://github.com/Nu1sance/MessDet

7329

