This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Decoupled Bézier Surface Constraint for Uneven Low-Light Image
Enhancement
Xingxiang Zhou1,2,3 , Xiangdong Su*1,2,3 , Haoran Zhang1,2,3 , Wei Chen1,2,3 , Guanglai Gao1,2,3
1
2

College of Computer Science, Inner Mongolia University

National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Information Processing Technology for Mongolian
3

Inner Mongolia Key Laboratory of Multilingual Artificial Intelligence Technology
zxx.w@outlook.com

Abstract
Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) is a fundamental task
in computer vision. Its goal is to extract more useful information from dark regions. Many existing methods have
made excellent strides in improving image brightness and
enhancing texture details. However, these approaches often
lead to overexposure in certain regions when dealing with
unevenly illuminated images, resulting in the loss of original information within the images. To address this issue,
we propose a Bézier surface constraint (BSCNet) method
based on task decoupling to enhance low-light images with
uneven brightness. Specifically, we design a diffusion model
with a branch structure that separates the enhancement process into brightness adjustment and color restoration, enabling independent control over brightness uniformity. Additionally, we use Bézier surfaces as a learning target to impose smoothness constraints on the image, thereby addressing the issue of uneven brightness in the enhanced image.
To counteract potential detail loss introduced by Bézier surfaces, we introduce a spatial-frequency reconstruction module based on the Fourier transform to enhance fine-grained
texture information. Experimental comparisons of six generalized LLIE datasets show that our proposed method has
demonstrated outstanding effectiveness.

(a) Input

(b) SCI [21]

(c) Ours

(d) GT

Figure 1. Examples of overexposure results. We have used an image outside the training dataset for validation, and when the lowlight image is not uniformly distributed, other methods will enhance the originally normal-light region to overexposure, as shown
in Fig. 1b. However, our method (Fig. 1c) handles the problem of
overexposure after enhancement due to the uneven brightness of
the image.

ticularly important for better revealing the hidden information within them.
Numerous approaches have been proposed: supervised
learning methods such as LLNet [17], DSLR [16], and PyDiff [51] use paired images for training to perform LLIE.
In unsupervised learning, EnlightenGAN [12] can map between image domains without needing paired images. To
make the enhanced image appear more natural in terms
of brightness and color, methods based on Retinex theory and deep learning, including Retinex-Net [41], TBEFN
[18], and RetinexFormer [2], have been proposed, offering greater physical interpretability. While these methods
can enhance overall image brightness, they may suffer from
overexposure issues in images with uneven brightness and
complex colors. As shown in Fig. 1, when the low-light
image input exhibits uneven brightness, the enhanced result
can suffer from overexposure in certain areas, leading to a
loss of original usable information.
The overexposure issue in the LLIE process arises pri-

1. Introduction
High-light images generally contain richer and more usable information than low-light images. However, in realworld scenarios, various factors, such as poor ambient lighting and insufficient exposure, often cause images captured
by devices to be low-light rather than high-light. In many
computer vision tasks, such as autonomous driving, road
surveillance, and multi-modal learning[50], enhancing underexposed low-light images into high-light images is par* Corresponding author: cssxd@imu.edu.cn

6859

