This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIMCIM: A Quantitative Evaluation Framework for Default-mode Diversity
and Generalization in Text-to-Image Generative Models
Revant Teotia1,2 , Candace Ross2 , Karen Ullrich2 , Sumit Chopra1 , Adriana Romero-Soriano2,3,4,5 ,
*
Melissa Hall→,2 , Matthew Muckley→,2
2
1
3
4
FAIR at Meta; New York University; Mila; McGill University; 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair
{rt2741@nyu.edu, melissahall@meta.com, mmuckley@meta.com}

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) models have
achieved impressive quality and consistency. However, this
has come at the cost of representation diversity. While automatic evaluation methods exist for benchmarking model
diversity, they either require reference image datasets or
lack specificity about the kind of diversity measured, limiting their adaptability and interpretability. To address
this gap, we introduce the Does-it/Can-it framework, DIMCIM, a reference-free measurement of default-mode diversity (“Does” the model generate images with expected attributes?) and generalization capacity (“Can” the model
generate diverse attributes for a particular concept?). We
construct the COCO-DIMCIM benchmark, which is seeded
with COCO concepts and captions and augmented by a
large language model. With COCO-DIMCIM, we find that
widely-used models improve in generalization at the cost
of default-mode diversity when scaling from 1.5B to 8.1B
parameters. DIMCIM also identifies fine-grained failure
cases, such as attributes that are generated with generic
prompts but are rarely generated when explicitly requested.
Finally, we use DIMCIM to evaluate the training data of
a T2I model and observe a correlation of 0.85 between diversity in training images and default-mode diversity. Our
work provides a flexible and interpretable framework for assessing T2I model diversity and generalization, enabling a
more comprehensive understanding of model performance.

Figure 1. DIMCIM can be used to measure default-mode diversity (Does-It Metric) and generalization capabilities (CanIt Metric) of text-to-image models. For example, LDM2.1 [34]
has a low Does-It Metric score for the “color” attribute type and
does not generate diverse colored refrigerators for generic input
prompts, revealing default-mode diversity challenges. However,
the model has a high Can-It Metric when explicitly prompted with
different colors, revealing strong generalization capabilities.

1. Introduction

of image realism and prompt-image consistency, with wellestablished metrics [7, 19, 20, 24, 26, 29, 31]. However, optimizing for human preference alone has led to
state-of-the-art models having limited representation diversity [1, 10, 17, 18, 36, 37, 42].
There have been attempts to quantify such diversity challenges, for example, in [13], which focuses on the bias of
images generated in default settings. However, these methods do not take into account model generalization capacity,
i.e., whether models can generate fully diverse sets of images through prompt adjustments. Furthermore, referencefree diversity metrics (like Vendi Score [16]) do not measure

In recent years, text-to-image (T2I) generative models have
witnessed impressive advances, yielding unprecedented
photorealistic quality. These advances have been driven by
models optimized for human preference. Performance improvements for these models are usually reported in terms
* Equal supervision

16431

