This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZIUM: Zero-Shot Intent-Aware Adversarial Attack on Unlearned Models
Hyun Jun Yook1
Ga San Jhun1
Jae Hyun Cho1
Min Jeon1
Donghyun Kim2
Tae Hyung Kim3
Youn Kyu Lee1,†
1
2
Chung-Ang University Korea University 3 Hongik University
{hyunjun6, bonuspoint, wogus2031, mulsoap0504, younkyul}@cau.ac.kr
d kim@korea.ac.kr taehyung@hongik.ac.kr

Abstract
Machine unlearning (MU) removes specific data points
or concepts from deep learning models to enhance privacy and prevent sensitive content generation. Adversarial prompts can exploit unlearned models to generate content containing removed concepts, posing a significant security risk. However, existing adversarial attack methods still
face challenges in generating content that aligns with an
attacker’s intent while incurring high computational costs
to identify successful prompts. To address these challenges,
we propose ZIUM, a Zero-shot Intent-aware adversarial attack on Unlearned Models, which enables the flexible customization of target attack images to reflect an attacker’s intent. Additionally, ZIUM supports zero-shot adversarial attacks without requiring further optimization for previously
attacked unlearned concepts. The evaluation across various
MU scenarios demonstrated ZIUM’s effectiveness in successfully customizing content based on user-intent prompts
while achieving a superior attack success rate compared to
existing methods. Moreover, its zero-shot adversarial attack
significantly reduces the attack time for previously attacked
unlearned concepts.

Figure 1. Examples of generated images by ZIUM: 1st adversarial
attack utilizing the user-intent prompt and 2nd adversarial attack
without additional optimization for the same unlearned concept.

Several adversarial attack methods targeting unlearned
models have been proposed to exploit this. Specifically, approaches [5, 12, 23, 30, 47] have been developed to identify
optimal adversarial prompts based on a target attack image containing an unlearned concept. These methods generate an image that incorporates the unlearned concept while
closely resembling the target attack image by using the optimal adversarial prompt as input to the unlearned model.
However, these methods heavily rely on the target attack
image, making it challenging to generate an image that reflects both unlearned concepts and the attacker’s intent (e.g.,
preferences and background). This is crucial for generating
an image that not only includes the unlearned concepts but
also aligns with the attacker’s intentions in different forms.
Recent approaches [12, 26, 30, 39, 44] have attempted to
align with the attacker’s intent using only a target prompt.
However, without a target attack image, fully representing a
single image in text form is challenging, and the attacker’s
prompt may lack sufficient semantic detail [17]. Therefore,

1. Introduction
Machine Unlearning (MU) selectively removes specific
data points or features from a trained deep learning model
through reweighting or pruning [20, 41]. It helps protect
privacy and prevent the generation of sensitive content
[22, 24, 37]. Recently, MU has been used to prevent the
generation of inappropriate images by eliminating concepts
such as nudity and violence—commonly associated with
NSFW (i.e., Not Safe For Work) content—from pre-trained
text-to-image generation models [11, 17, 25, 29, 45]. However, even after MU is applied, these models (i.e., unlearned
models) can still generate images of the removed concepts
(i.e., unlearned concepts) when given adversarial prompts,
posing a significant security risk [29, 31, 38].

3926

