This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Bimanual Robotic Manipulation:
Learning with Decoupled Interaction Framework
Jian-Jian Jiang1 , Xiao-Ming Wu1 , Yi-Xiang He1 , Ling-An Zeng1 ,
Yi-Lin Wei1 , Dandan Zhang5 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3,4,†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2

3

Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
5

Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China

Imperial-X Initiative and Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, U.K.

{jiangjj35, wuxm65}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; d.zhang17@imperial.ac.uk; wszheng@ieee.org

success rate (%)

Abstract

20.6 ↑ with Decoupled design

90

80 34 ↑ with Interaction design

Bimanual robotic manipulation is an emerging and critical topic in the robotics community. Previous works primarily rely on integrated control models that take the perceptions and states of both arms as inputs to directly predict their actions. However, we think bimanual manipulation involves not only coordinated tasks but also various
uncoordinated tasks that do not require explicit cooperation during execution, such as grasping objects with the
closest hand, which integrated control frameworks ignore
to consider due to their enforced cooperation in the early
inputs. In this paper, we propose a novel decoupled interaction framework that considers the characteristics of different tasks in bimanual manipulation. The key insight of
our framework is to assign an independent model to each
arm to enhance the learning of uncoordinated tasks, while
introducing a selective interaction module that adaptively
learns weights from its own arm to improve the learning of
coordinated tasks. Extensive experiments on seven tasks in
the RoboTwin dataset demonstrate that: (1) Our framework
achieves outstanding performance, with a 23.5% boost over
the SOTA method. (2) Our framework is flexible and can be
seamlessly integrated into existing methods. (3) Our framework can be effectively extended to multi-agent manipulation tasks, achieving a 28% boost over the integrated control SOTA. (4) The performance boost stems from the decoupled design itself, surpassing the SOTA by 16.5% in success
rate with only 1/6 of the model size.

70.00

70

Integrated Control baseline
failed grasp
collision

82.40
73.00

60
Our Decoupled Interaction Framework
successful grasp
coordination

52.40

50
40
30
20

36.00
18.00

10
0
Coordinated

Uncoordinated

Ours
Ours w/o Interaction design
Ours w/o Decoupled Interaction design
(Integrated Control baseline)

Figure 1. Integrated Control vs. Decoupled Interaction. The
blue bar represents the success rate of coordinated and uncoordinated tasks for the integrated control baseline built upon our
framework without decoupled interaction design. The green and
orange bars represent the success rate of coordinated and uncoordinated tasks for our framework without interaction design and our
framework respectively. Our experiments are conducted on two
coordinated tasks and five uncoordinated tasks in the RoboTwin
dataset [29]. It can be observed that adding the decoupled design
to the integrated control baseline promotes the learning of uncoordinated tasks. Furthermore, incorporating the interaction module
on top of this design facilitates the learning of coordinated tasks.

tasks such as household services [44], medical surgery [15],
health care [49] and industrial assembly [12], is an emerging and critical topic in the robotics community.

1. Introduction

Recently, with the help of imitation learning [10, 33],
bimanual robotic manipulation [3, 9, 18, 23, 46] achieves
significant progress. Previous works typically use an integrated control model that takes observations and states of
both arms as inputs and predicts actions for both arms simultaneously. However, based on taxonomy research on
bimanual manipulation [17], we think that bimanual robotic

Bimanual robotic manipulation [3, 9, 12, 15, 44, 49], which
has strong capabilities to handle a wide range of complex

12427

