This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

REDUCIO! Generating 1K Video within 16 Seconds using
Extremely Compressed Motion Latents
Rui Tian1,2 Qi Dai3 * Jianmin Bao3 Kai Qiu3 Yifan Yang3
Chong Luo3 Zuxuan Wu1,2 * Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing 3 Microsoft Research

Impressionist style, a yellow rubber duck floating on the waves at sunset.

An aerial shot of a lighthouse standing tall on a rocky cliff, its beacon cutting through the early dawn, waves crashing against the rocks below.

A wizard waves his wand.

Figure 1. Examples of generated high-resolution videos.

Abstract
Commercial video generation models have exhibited realistic, high-fidelity results but are still restricted to limited
access. One crucial obstacle for large-scale applications
is the expensive training and inference cost. In this paper,
we argue that videos contain significantly more redundant
information than images, allowing them to be encoded with
very few motion latents. Towards this goal, we design an
image-conditioned VAE that projects videos into extremely
compressed latent space and decode them based on content images. This magic Reducio charm enables 64→ reduction of latents compared to a common 2D VAE, without sacrificing the quality. Building upon Reducio-VAE, we

can train diffusion models for high-resolution video generation efficiently. Specifically, we adopt a two-stage generation paradigm, first generating a condition image via
text-to-image generation, followed by text-image-to-video
generation with the proposed Reducio-DiT. Extensive experiments show that our model achieves strong performance in evaluation. More importantly, our method significantly boosts the training and inference efficiency of video
LDMs. Reducio-DiT is trained in just 3.2K A100 GPU
hours in total and can generate a 16-frame 1024→1024
video clip within 15.5 seconds on a single A100 GPU. Code
is available at https://github.com/microsoft/
Reducio-VAE.

* Corresponding authors.

19237

