This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViT-Linearizer: Distilling Quadratic Knowledge into Linear-Time Vision Models
Guoyizhe Wei
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, US

Rama Chellappa
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, US

Abstract

Recent advances in training foundational Vision Transformers (ViTs) [13] have led to signiﬁcant breakthroughs in visual representation learning, with numerous self-attentionbased architectures now dominating the applications in visual understanding, generation, and multi-modal reasoning
tasks [1, 7, 21, 29, 34, 38, 42, 45, 47]. As self-attention
requires each token to compute its correspondence with every other positions in the sequence, ViT models are able to
produce robust token-level (i.e., patch-level) representations
even in weakly supervised or unsupervised training scenarios [7, 11, 13, 33, 38, 48, 49, 64]. Nonetheless, this strong
local representation capability comes with a quadratic com-

I

1. Introduction

//

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have delivered remarkable performence through global self-attention, yet their
quadratic complexity can become prohibitive for highresolution inputs. In this work, we present ViT-Linearizer,
a cross-architecture distillation framework that transfers
rich ViT representations into a linear-time, recurrent-style
model. Our approach leverages 1) activation matching,
an intermediate constraint that encourages a student to
align its token-wise dependencies with those produced by
the teacher, and 2) masked prediction, a contextual reconstruction objective that requires the student to predict the
teacher’s representations for unseen (masked) tokens, to effectively distill the quadratic self-attention knowledge into
the student while maintaining efﬁcient complexity. Empirically, our method provides notable speedups particularly
for high-resolution tasks, signiﬁcantly addressing the hardware challenges in inference. Additionally, it also elevates
Mamba-based architectures’ performance on standard vision benchmarks, achieving a competitive 84.3% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with a base-sized model. Our results
underscore the good potential of RNN-based solutions for
large-scale visual tasks, bridging the gap between theoretical efﬁciency and real-world effectiveness.

I
//

Figure 1. Accuracy-efﬁciency trade-offs. We distill CLIP’s
ViT-Base model into a linear-time Adventurer-Base [51] (with
Mamba-2 [10] token mixers), which exhibits substantially superior
accuracy-efﬁciency trade-offs across various datasets and tasks.

putation complexity with respect to sequence length, raising a considerable challenge in inference efﬁciency and
hardware capacities when learning from long contexts. It
is noteworthy that this computational overhead was not
particularly prohibitive in standard benchmarks featuring
medium-resolution and coarse-granularity visual tasks that
were historically focused on [6, 12, 15, 17, 32, 63]. However, as the demand for processing high-resolution, highﬁdelity visual inputs rapidly grows, the question of how
to efﬁciently leverage the quadratic knowledge learned by
ViTs has become increasingly important.
As alternatives, RNN-fashion token mixers such as
Mamba [10, 18], RWKV [35], and xLSTM [4] have recently been introduced in vision tasks, showcasing competitive prediction results and superior accuracy-computation
trade-offs compared with ViTs [2, 14, 51, 67]. These recurrent vision models, whose computational cost and memory
requirements scale linearly with sequence length, emerge

20737

