This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Image Quality Assessment via Adaptation of Vision-Language Models
Xudong Li1*

Zihao Huang2* Yan Zhang1† Yunhang Shen3 Ke Li3
Xiawu Zheng1 Liujuan Cao1 Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology 3 Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
{lxd761050753, huangzihhhh, bzhy986}@gmail.com, {zhengxiawu, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) remains an unresolved
challenge in computer vision due to complex distortions, diverse image content, and limited data availability. Existing
Blind IQA (BIQA) methods largely rely on extensive human
annotations, which are labor-intensive and costly due to
the demanding nature of creating IQA datasets. To reduce
this dependency, we propose the Gradient-Regulated MetaPrompt IQA Framework (GRMP-IQA), designed to efficiently adapt the visual-language pre-trained model, CLIP,
to IQA tasks, achieving high accuracy even with limited
data. GRMP-IQA consists of two core modules: (i) MetaPrompt Pre-training Module and (ii) Quality-Aware Gradient Regularization. The Meta Prompt Pre-training Module leverages a meta-learning paradigm to pre-train soft
prompts with shared meta-knowledge across different distortions, enabling rapid adaptation to various IQA tasks.
On the other hand, the Quality-Aware Gradient Regularization is designed to adjust the update gradients during finetuning, focusing the model’s attention on quality-relevant
features and preventing overfitting to semantic information.
Extensive experiments on standard BIQA datasets demonstrate the superior performance to the state-of-the-art BIQA
methods under limited data setting. Notably, utilizing just
20% of the training data, GRMP-IQA is competitive with
most existing fully supervised BIQA approaches. Our code
is available via https://github.com/LXDxmu/GRMP-IQA.

1. Introduction
With the rise of the mobile internet era, the focus on
computer vision has transitioned from initial concerns with
compression and image processing [38] to handling usergenerated content like smartphone photos and videos [6,
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Intuitive diagram of GRMP-IQA. (a) demonstrates using
meta-learning for efficient soft prompt initialization with quality
prior that enhances zero-shot generalization (↑ 24%), enabling
the CLIP to adapt to BIQA tasks effectively. (b) illustrates gradient regularization during fine-tuning, which clips quality gradients aligned with semantic bias to guide the model toward qualityrelevant features and reduce overly reliance on semantic content.
In the t-SNE visualization, black dots represent noise samples with
high semantic confidence (confidence > 0.8) but incorrect quality predictions. The noticeable decrease (↓ 73%) in black dots
highlights reduced semantic noise interference in IQA tasks.

35, 42], and lately to AI-generated content [5, 20]. This
evolution has sharply increased demand for effective Blind
Image Quality Assessment (BIQA) techniques, highlighting the importance of developing methodologies that can
adeptly evaluate image quality without reference images.
Data-driven BIQA models [34, 39, 48] based on deep neural networks have made significant progress in recent years.
However, the quality scores for distorted images are often
measured using the Mean Opinion Score (MOS), which is
the average of multiple ratings (sometimes up to 120). As
a result, acquiring a sufficient number of IQA training samples is quite labor-intensive and cost-expensive.

10442

