This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVTrajecter: Multi-View Pedestrian Tracking
with Trajectory Motion Cost and Trajectory Appearance Cost
Taiga Yamane
Ryo Masumura
Satoshi Suzuki
Shota Orihashi
NTT Human Informatics Laboratries, NTT Corporation
{taiga.yamane, ryo.masumura, satoshixv.suzuki, shota.orihashi}@ntt.com

Abstract
Multi-View Pedestrian Tracking (MVPT) aims to track
pedestrians in the form of a bird’s eye view occupancy map
from multi-view videos. End-to-end methods that detect and
associate pedestrians within one model have shown great
progress in MVPT. The motion and appearance information of pedestrians is important for the association, but previous end-to-end MVPT methods rely only on the current
and its single adjacent past timestamp, discarding the past
trajectories before that. This paper proposes a novel endto-end MVPT method called Multi-View Trajectory Tracker
(MVTrajecter) that utilizes information from multiple timestamps in past trajectories for robust association. MVTrajecter introduces trajectory motion cost and trajectory appearance cost to effectively incorporate motion and appearance information, respectively. These costs calculate
which pedestrians at the current and each past timestamp
are likely identical based on the information between those
timestamps. Even if a current pedestrian could be associated with a false pedestrian at some past timestamp, these
costs enable the model to associate that current pedestrian
with the correct past trajectory based on other past timestamps. In addition, MVTrajecter effectively captures the relationships between multiple timestamps leveraging the attention mechanism. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of each component in MVTrajecter and show
that it outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. Comparison of (a) previous end-to-end MVPT methods and (b) MVTrajecter. This example shows a case where three
pedestrians are on BEV occupancy maps and we want to associate
pedestrians at t with past pedestrians. The same color indicates the
same pedestrian. The filled circles indicate detected pedestrians at
each timestamp, and the empty circles indicate past pedestrians.

Copyright NTT CORPORATION

1. Introduction

track pedestrians in the form of a bird’s eye view (BEV)
pedestrian occupancy map from multi-view videos captured by multiple cameras. In contrast to monocular tracking [15, 45, 60], which uses a single non-calibrated camera,
MVPT utilizes multiple calibrated cameras with partially
overlapping fields of view. MVPT is, therefore, expected
to be more robust to occlusion in the overlapping area than
monocular tracking by combining complementary clues.
A variety of MVPT methods have been proposed. Early
methods [4, 9–11, 22, 23, 27, 28, 30, 33, 46–48, 50, 53, 59,
66, 69, 72] relied on monocular object detection [54, 79],
which uses the detection results of each view image by
monocular detection to localize pedestrians in the BEV occupancy map and identify which pedestrians are identical

Pedestrian tracking in videos is a crucial component in
various applications, such as surveillance systems [19],
sports analysis [12], and human-computer interaction [68].
In pedestrian tracking, occlusion is a significant problem because it hampers tracking pedestrians hidden behind obstacles or other pedestrians. As a potential solution, many studies have focused on Multi-View Pedestrian
Tracking (MVPT) [9, 20, 24, 25, 32, 69]. MVPT aims to

13270

