This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Planar Affine Rectification from Local Change of Scale and Orientation
Yuval Nissan
ETH Zurich

Prof. Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zurich, Microsoft

Dr. Daniel Barath
ETH Zurich, HUN-REN SZTAKI

yuval.nissan4@gmail.com

marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch

danielbela.barath@inf.ethz.ch

Figure 1. The proposed hybrid method processes an input image by detecting scale and orientation features (e.g., by SIFT [18] or
SuperPoint [8] + SelfScaleOri [11]) alongside line segments (from LSD [32] or DeepLSD [24]). It then estimates the affine rectification,
ensuring that lines parallel in the real world appear parallel in the rectified image.

Abstract
We propose a method for affine rectification of an image
plane by leveraging changes in local scales and orientations under projective distortion. Specifically, we derive a
novel linear constraint that directly relates pairs of points
with orientations to the parameters of a projective transformation. This constraint is combined with an existing linear
constraint on local scales, leading to highly robust rectification. The method reduces to solving a system of linear equations, enabling an efficient algebraic least-squares solution.
It requires only two local scales and two local orientations,
which can be extracted from, e.g., SIFT features. Unlike
prior approaches, our method does not impose restrictions
on individual features, does not require class segmentation,
and makes no assumptions about feature interrelations. It
is compatible with any feature detector that provides local
scale or orientation. Furthermore, combining scaled and
oriented points with line segments yields a highly robust algorithm that outperforms baselines. Extensive experiments
show the effectiveness of our approach on real-world images, including repetitive patterns, building facades, and
text-based content. The code is publicly available here.

1. Introduction
Planar affine rectification—the transformation of an imaged
plane into one where affine invariants, such as parallelism
and area ratios, are preserved [10]—is a fundamental pre-

processing step in computer vision. It is crucial for tasks
such as image registration [13, 14, 21], stitching [15], scene
understanding [30], image editing [19], and metric rectification [10]. Affine rectification recovers the orthographic
appearance of a plane, differing from the real-world surface
only by an affine transformation.
A common approach estimates the rectifying homography by mapping the vanishing line of the plane to the line at
infinity. This requires detecting two vanishing points, which
can be inferred from parallel lines in the scene [10]. However, line-based methods face challenges: detecting truly
parallel lines is nontrivial, small errors in line detection can
significantly impact homography estimation, and many images lack prominent linear structures (e.g., polka-dot patterns, as illustrated in Fig. 2).
Scale-based methods [5] offer an alternative by leveraging local scale variations induced by projective transformations. These approaches match at least three point-andscale features, providing a predictable measure of distortion. However, just as line-based methods fail in the absence
of linear structures, scale-based methods struggle with linedominated patterns, where scale variations are unreliable.
They also require grouping scale features into consistent
classes, adding complexity to feature selection.
Other methods, such as [26], estimate rectification using
affine-invariant features, which encode local scale, orientation, and full affine shape. These techniques rely on detectors such as Affine-SIFT (ASIFT) [22] or learned feature
extractors such as AffNet [20]. Although robust to view-

27147

