This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Few-Step Diffusion Models by Trajectory Distribution Matching
Yihong Luo 1
1

A photo of an cat wearing
gentleman hat and jacket
walking in autumn forest

Tianyang Hu 2
HKUST

2

Jiacheng Sun 2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

A photo of a Panda,
best quality

A photo of a Pikachu ,
best quality

Yujun Cai
3

Jing Tang 3,1 *

HKUST(GZ)

A worker that looks like a
mixture of cow and horse is
working hard to type code

A small cactus with a
happy face in the
Sahara desert

Figure 1. User Study Time! Which one do you think is better? Some images are generated by Pixart-α (50 NFE). Some images are
generated by TDM (4 NFE), distilling from Pixart-α in a data-free way with merely 500 training iterations and 2 A800 hours. All
images are generated from the same initial noise. We put the location of generated images by TDM in footnote‡ .

Abstract
Accelerating diffusion model sampling is crucial for efficient AIGC deployment. While diffusion distillation
methods—based on distribution matching [19, 41] and
trajectory matching [27, 35]—reduce sampling to as few
as one step, they fall short on complex tasks like textto-image generation. Few-step generation offers a better balance between speed and quality, but existing approaches face a persistent trade-off: distribution matching lacks flexibility for multi-step sampling, while trajectory matching often yields suboptimal image quality. To
bridge this gap, we propose learning few-step diffusion
models by Trajectory Distribution Matching (TDM), a unified distillation paradigm that combines the strengths of distribution and trajectory matching. Our method introduces
an image-free score distillation objective, aligning the student’s trajectory with the teacher’s at the distribution level.
Further, we develop a sampling-steps-aware objective that
decouples learning targets across different steps, enabling

more adjustable sampling. This approach supports both deterministic sampling for superior image quality and flexible multi-step adaptation, achieving state-of-the-art performance with remarkable efficiency. Our model, TDM, outperforms existing methods on various backbones, such as
SDXL and PixArt-α, delivering superior quality and significantly reduced training costs. In particular, our method
distills PixArt-α into a 4-step generator that outperforms
its teacher on real user preference at 1024 resolution. This
is accomplished with 500 iterations and 2 A800 hours— a
training cost of approximately 1% of the previous state-ofthe-art distillation method. In addition, our proposed TDM
can be extended to accelerate text-to-video diffusion. Notably, TDM can outperform its teacher model (CogVideoX2B) by using only 4 NFE on VBench, improving the total
score from 80.91 to 81.65. Project page: https://tdmt2x.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Accelerating diffusion model sampling is essential for the
efficient deployment of AIGC models. Thanks to various
diffusion distillation techniques, the number of sampling

* Corresponding Author: Jing Tang, jingtang@ust.hk.
† TDM (left to right): bottom, bottom, top, bottom, top.

17719

