This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiModal Action Conditioned Video Simulation
Yichen Li
MIT CSAIL

Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL

Abstract

Haptic
Forces

Current video models fail as world model as they lack finegraiend control. General-purpose household robots require
real-time fine motor control to handle delicate tasks and
urgent situations. In this work, we introduce fine-grained
multimodal actions to capture such precise control. We consider senses of proprioception, kinesthesia, force haptics,
and muscle activation. Such multimodal senses naturally enables fine-grained interactions that are difficult to simulate
with text-conditioned generative models. To effectively simulate fine-grained multisensory actions, we develop a feature
learning paradigm that aligns these modalities while preserving the unique information each modality provides. We
further propose a regularization scheme to enhance causality of the action trajectory features in representing intricate
interaction dynamics. Experiments show that incorporating multimodal senses improves simulation accuracy and
reduces temporal drift. Extensive ablation studies and downstream applications demonstrate the effectiveness and practicality of our work.†

1. Introduction
For general-purpose household robots to operate dexterously
and safely like humans, they need to be enabled with multipotent sensory systems. Our interoceptive senses, including
kinesthesia, proprioception, force haptics, and muscle activation, work together to enable us to dynamically engage
with our surroundings. The ability to simulate such multisensory actions is crucial for developing robust embodied
intelligence and guiding future directions for sensor design.
Traditionally, physics engines are used to simulate state
changes of the environment [23, 36, 42, 62, 63], but creating
a physics simulator with fine-grained multisensory capabilities for diverse tasks is both computationally expensive and
complex in engineering. Recent works [17, 71] demonstrate
the potential to use text-conditioned video models as simulators, but text struggles to capture the delicate control needed
for tasks such as culinary or surgical activities. In this work,
we introduce multisensory interaction signals in generative
simulation to enable fine-grained control.
† https://people.csail.mit.edu/yichenl/projects/multimodalvideo/

Hand
Pose

Task: Multisensory Simulation
Muscle
EMG

Body
Pose

MultiSensory Conditioned
Video Diffusion

Figure 1. Overview. We introduce a new task for fine-grained
control of video generative model using multisensory interaction
signals.

We focus on learning an effective multimodal representation to control generative simulation. Prior works on multimodal feature learning [16, 19, 28, 37, 59, 76] focus the
task of cross-modal retrieval. They thus emphasize multimodal alignment but overlook the unique information each
modality provides. As a result, they are insufficient for
conditioning generative simulators. For our task, we introduce an multimodal feature extraction paradigm that align
modalities to a shared representation space while preserving
the unique aspects each modality contributes. Additionally, we propose a generic feature regularization scheme to
ensure the encoded action trajectories to be more contextand-consequence-aware, allowing for seamless integration
with downstream video generation frameworks.
In this work, we introduce multisensory interoceptive
signals of haptic forces, muscle stimulation, hand poses,
and body proprioception to generative simulation for finegrained responses. We focus on learning effective multisensory action representation to control generative video models. Our proposed multimodal feature extraction paradigm
aligns different sensory signals while preserving the unique
contributions from each modality. Additionally, we introduce a novel feature regularization scheme that the extracted
latent representations of action trajectories to capture the
intricate causality in context and consequences in interaction dynamics. Extensive comparisons to existing methods
shows that our multisensory method helps increase accu-

14173

