This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeshAnything V2: Artist-Created Mesh Generation
with Adjacent Mesh Tokenization
Yiwen Chen1,2
Zilong Chen2,3

Yikai Wang3*
Jun Zhu2,3

Yihao Luo4
Chi Zhang5*

Zhengyi Wang2,3
Guosheng Lin1*

1

3

Nanyang Technological University 2 Shengshu
Tsinghua University 4 Imperial College London 5 Westlake University
Abstract

Meshes are the de facto 3D representation in the industry but are labor-intensive to produce. Recently, a line of
research has focused on autoregressively generating meshes.
This approach processes meshes into a sequence composed
of vertices and then generates them vertex by vertex, similar
to how a language model generates text. These methods have
achieved some success but still struggle to generate complex
meshes. One primary reason for this limitation is their inefﬁcient tokenization methods. To address this issue, we
introduce MeshAnything V2, an advanced mesh generation
model designed to create Artist-Created Meshes that align
precisely with speciﬁed shapes. A key innovation behind
MeshAnything V2 is our novel Adjacent Mesh Tokenization
(AMT) method. Unlike traditional approaches that represent
each face using three vertices, AMT optimizes this by employing a single vertex wherever feasible, effectively reducing
the token sequence length by about half on average. This
not only streamlines the tokenization process but also results
in more compact and well-structured sequences, enhancing
the efﬁciency of mesh generation. With these improvements,
MeshAnything V2 effectively doubles the face limit compared
to previous models, delivering superior performance without
increasing computational costs.

1. Introduction
Due to the controllable and compact advantages of meshes,
they serve as the predominant 3D representation in various
industries, including games, movies, and virtual reality. For
decades, the 3D industry has relied on human artists to manually create meshes, a process that is both time-consuming
and labor-intensive.
To address this issue, very recently, a line of work [2,
* Corresponding authors.

4, 5, 15, 19, 28] has focused on automatically generating
Artist-Created Meshes (AMs) to replace manual labor. Inspired by the success of large language models (LLMs),
these approaches treat AMs as sequences of faces and learn
to generate them with autoregressive transformers [24] in a
manner similar to LLMs. Unlike methods that produce dense
meshes in a reconstruction manner, these methods learn from
the distribution of meshes created by human artists, thereby
generating AMs that are efﬁcient, beautiful, and can seamlessly replace manually created meshes.
Although these methods have achieved some success,
they still face signiﬁcant challenges. One major limitation
is that current methods [2, 4, 5, 15, 19, 28] cannot generate
meshes with a large number of faces. A primary reason for
this constraint is the inadequacy of existing mesh tokenization methods. These methods treat a mesh as a sequence of
faces, where each face consists of three vertices, and each
vertex typically requires three tokens to represent. Consequently, each mesh is tokenized into a sequence nine times
the number of its faces, resulting in substantial computational and memory demands. Besides, the resulting token
sequence is highly redundant, which harms sequence learning and reduces performance.
Observing the above issues, we focus on the tokenization
method of mesh generation in this work, aiming to improve
the efﬁciency and quality of mesh generation. Extensive research in language models has demonstrated the importance
of tokenization in sequence learning [10, 17, 30]. Moreover, unlike text, which inherently has a sequential structure,
meshes are graph-based structures with 3D characteristics.
For any given mesh, there are countless ways to represent it
as a 1D token sequence, making the inﬂuence of tokenization
methods even more pronounced for meshes. Therefore, we
emphasize that research on mesh tokenization methods is of
great importance.
The impact of mesh tokenization on autoregressive mesh
generation can be considered in two main aspects. The
ﬁrst is efﬁciency: representing a mesh with shorter, more

13922

