This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-ViM: Bidirectional State Space Model for Mitigating Label Imbalance in
Semi-Supervised Learning
Hongyang He*
University of Warwick

Hongyang Xie
University of Warwick

Haochen You
Columbia University

Victor Sanchez
University of Warwick

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is often hindered by learning biases when imbalanced datasets are used for training, which limits its effectiveness in real-world applications. In this paper, we propose Semi-ViM, a novel SSL
framework based on Vision Mamba, a bidirectional state
space model (SSM) that serves as a superior alternative
to Transformer-based architectures for visual representation learning. Semi-ViM effectively deals with imbalanced
datasets and improves model stability through two key innovations: LyapEMA, a stability-aware parameter update
mechanism inspired by Lyapunov theory, and SSMixup, a
novel mixup strategy applied at the hidden state level of
bidirectional SSMs. Experimental results on ImageNet-1K
and ImageNet-LT demonstrate that Semi-ViM significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art SSL models, achieving 85.40%
accuracy with only 10% of the labeled data, surpassing
Transformer-based methods such as Semi-ViT.

Figure 1. Semi-ViT-Small trained with only 1% of the labeled data
of ImageNet-1K. Left: Training fails when FixMatch is used. The
loss decreases but test accuracy remains near zero. Right: Training
is unstable and fails when EMA-Teacher is used: The loss and
accuracy oscillate heavily.

ever, Semi-ViT has a weaker inductive bias, requiring largescale data for effective training [39]. Moroever, as shown
by our experiments, Semi-ViT does not perform well on
long-tailed imbalanced datasets, like ImageNet-LT, confirming its limitations in handling label imbalance. Although the performance of Semi-ViT can be improved by
increasing the model size, e.g., Semi-ViT-Huge, this comes
at the expense of a larger number of trainable parameters,
around 632M [4]. Vision Mamba (ViM), which incorporates a bidirectional state space model (SSM), has modeling capabilities comparable to those of ViT, while achieving
subquadratic-time computational and linear memory complexities [47].
Based on the previous discussions, this paper integrates
ViM into an SSL framework for classification and proposes a ViM-based SSL model, hereinafter called SemiViM. Semi-ViM incorporates two key innovations aimed at
improving model stability during training and performance:
LyapEMA and SSMixup. LyapEMA is a novel parameter
update mechanism that leverages the Lyapunov theory to
dynamically adjust parameter updates, ensuring a more stable training process. LyapEMA addresses the training failures encountered when using only a small amount of labeled

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to mitigate the
scarcity of large-scale labeled training data while reducing annotation costs [16]. In the context of classification,
however, a challenge remains: Most state-of-the-art (SOTA)
SSL models are trained under the assumption that access to
a dataset with a balanced number of labeled samples per
class is possible, which is often overly idealized and deviates significantly from real-world conditions [20]. In practice, label imbalance induces learning biases in SSL, ultimately compromising model performance [41].
Due to its outstanding performance, many studies have
integrated the vision Transformer (ViT) into SSL methods [4, 43, 46]; e.g., Semi-ViT, adopts a pre-training and
fine-tuning approach to achieve SOTA results [4]. How* Corresponding author.

765

