This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Visual Localization Interoperability: Cross-Feature for Collaborative
Visual Localization and Mapping
Alberto Jaenal∗1
1

Paula Carbó Cubero∗1,2
2

Ericsson Research, Sweden

José Araujo1

André Mateus1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Abstract
The growing presence of vision-based systems in the physical world comes with a major requirement: highly accurate
estimation of the pose, a task typically addressed through
methods based on local features. The totality of the available feature-based localization solutions are designed under the assumption of using the same feature for mapping
and localization. However, as the implementation provided
by each vendor is based on heterogeneous feature extraction algorithms, collaboration between different devices is
not straightforward or even not possible. Although there are
some alternatives, such as re-extracting the features or reconstructing the image from them, these are impractical or
costly to implement in a real pipeline. To overcome this,
and inspired in the seminal work Cross-Descriptor [13],
we propose Cross-Feature, a method that applies a patchbased training strategy to a simple MLP which projects features to a common embedded space. As a consequence,
our proposal allows to establish suitable correspondences
between features computed through heterogeneous algorithms, e.g. SIFT [25] and SuperPoint [10]. We experimentally demonstrate the validity of Cross-Feature by evaluating it in tasks as Image Matching, Visual Localization and
a new Collaborative Visual Localization and Mapping scenario. We believe this is the first step towards full Visual
Localization interoperability. Code is available at https:
//github.com/EricssonResearch/crossfeat.

(a) To enable matching heterogeneous features, e.g., SIFT and ORB, we
use a simple MLP that projects them to a common embedding space emb.

(b) Our patch-based training procedure increases the matchability of the
projections in case of heterogeneous features, which overcomes the limitation of using the same detector from Cross-Descriptor [13].

Figure 1. In this work, we pursue improving the accuracy of Interoperable feature-based Visual Localization.

1. Introduction

position in the environment by means of visual sensors, typically using local features due to their accuracy, reduced
cost and reliability [29, 49]. Nevertheless, collaboration between devices requires them to operate within an unified
coordinate system, which involves sharing maps and determining their relative poses [15]. Unfortunately, most solutions for Visual Localization (VL) are based on proprietary
or specific visual pipelines that are not compatible, making
interoperability (see Fig. 1a), the ability for devices from
different vendors to work together, challenging to achieve.
There are some potential solutions for VL interoperability, but they struggle to meet the same requirements than
their homogeneous counterparts. Sharing images across devices is generally avoided due to serious privacy concerns
and increased bandwidth usage. Consequently, interoper-

Nowadays, Visual Systems have become mature enough to
bridge the gap between reality and the digital world. This is
evidenced by the fact that they play a crucial role in complex
applications such as autonomous robotics, extended reality
or self-driving vehicles. There exist a plethora of commercialized products that, to fulfill their purpose, estimate their
* Both authors contributed equally.

26783

