This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-turn Consistent Image Editing

Multi-Turn Reconstruction

Zijun Zhou1,3 Yingying Deng2 * Xiangyu He3 Weiming Dong3 Fan Tang1†
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Turn #1

Turn #3

Turn #6

Turn #8

Turn #10

Turn #1

Turn #1

Turn #1

Turn #4

Ours
Turn #8

source

Vanilla RF

RF-Solver

DDIM

Turn #

Multi-Turn Editing

Turn #2

RF-Inversion

Turn #

Turn #

round

Figure 1. Our method efficiently preserves the original image’s features during multi- turn image reconstruction. Additionally, it enables
flexible editing capabilities in multi- turn editing tasks, providing the user with an iterative editing framework.

Abstract
Many real- world applications, such as interactive photo retouching, artistic content creation, and product design, require flexible and iterative image editing. However, existing image editing methods primarily focus on achieving the
desired modifications in a single step, which often struggles with ambiguous user intent, complex transformations,
or the need for progressive refinements. As a result, these
methods frequently produce inconsistent outcomes or fail
to meet user expectations. To address these challenges, we
propose a multi- turn image editing framework that enables
users to iteratively refine their edits, progressively achieving more satisfactory results. Our approach leverages flow
matching for accurate image inversion and a dual- objective
Linear Quadratic Regulators (LQR) for stable sampling,
effectively mitigating error accumulation. Additionally,

by analyzing the layer- wise roles of transformers, we introduce a adaptive attention highlighting method that enhances editability while preserving multi- turn coherence.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework significantly improves edit success rates and visual fidelity
compared to existing methods. The code is available at:
https://zhouzj- dl.github.io/Multi- turn_
Consistent_Image_Editing/.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author: Yingying Deng, email: dyy15@outlook.com
† Project lead: Fan Tang, email: tfan.108@gmail.com

Current image editing methodologies often strive for a
single- step editing solution that perfectly aligns with a given
textual prompt. This paradigm, however, proves inadequate
for practical applications like product design, where user
specifications are often inherently ambiguous and necessitate progressive refinement. A more effective framework
should incorporate iterative editing capabilities, enabling
users to sequentially refine outputs through multiple edit-

15792

