This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HORT: Monocular Hand-held Objects Reconstruction with Transformers
Zerui Chen1
1

Rolandos Alexandros Potamias2

Shizhe Chen1

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Cordelia Schmid1
2

Imperial College London

r.potamias@imperial.ac.uk

https://zerchen.github.io/projects/hort.html

Abstract
HORT (Ours)

Reconstructing hand-held objects in 3D from monocular
images remains a significant challenge in computer vision.
Most existing approaches rely on implicit 3D representations, which produce overly smooth reconstructions and are
time-consuming to generate explicit 3D shapes. While more
recent methods directly reconstruct point clouds with diffusion models, the multi-step denoising makes high-resolution
reconstruction inefficient. To address these limitations, we
propose a transformer-based model to efficiently reconstruct dense 3D point clouds of hand-held objects. Our
method follows a coarse-to-fine strategy, first generating a
sparse point cloud from the image and progressively refining it into a dense representation using pixel-aligned image features. To enhance reconstruction accuracy, we integrate image features with 3D hand geometry to jointly predict the object point cloud and its pose relative to the hand.
Our model is trained end-to-end for optimal performance.
Experimental results on both synthetic and real datasets
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy with much faster inference speed, while generalizing
well to in-the-wild images.

D-SCO
Methods based on
implicit functions

HO

Figure 1. Comparison of inference speed and reconstruction quality on the ObMan dataset. Inference time includes meshing time.
Implicit methods [14, 16, 38, 95] require approximately 2 seconds
to generate the mesh but fail to achieve compelling results. Explicit methods face trade-offs between reconstruction quality and
inference speed: HO [32] uses meshes while D-SCO [25] employs
point clouds, but neither achieves optimal performance in both
metrics. HORT demonstrates superior performance by achieving
high-quality reconstruction with fast inference speed.

3D inputs such as multi-view images, videos, depths or
known object meshes. Moreover, they often require several hours to optimize the pose and shape using complex
objective functions, making them impractical for real-time
applications. To alleviate these issues, the second category
explores learning-based approaches. A predominate line of
work leverages deep implicit functions [1, 12, 57, 66], such
as signed distance functions [14, 16, 38, 71, 95] and directed
distance functions [99], to reconstruct hand-held objects.
However, methods based on implicit functions tend to generate overly smooth 3D surfaces, failing to capture fine geometric details [18, 66]. Additionally, obtaining explicit 3D
meshes from learned implicit fields requires another postprocessing step with the Marching Cubes algorithm [51],
which not only reduces inference speed (Figure 1) but also
limits flexibility for downstream tasks.
A few learning-based methods [25, 32] have explored

1. Introduction
Reconstructing hand-held objects in 3D from monocular
images has shown great potential for widespread real-world
applications, ranging from action recognition [4, 21, 23,
26], human-computer interaction [10, 19, 20] to robotics
manipulation [17, 53, 72]. Despite notable advancements
in this task, achieving robust and efficient 3D reconstruction remains a significant challenge.
Existing approaches for hand-held object reconstruction
can be broadly categorized into two types. The first category employs optimization-based algorithms to predict 3D
object poses [7, 28, 33, 92, 101] alone or jointly with 3D
shapes [24, 36, 96]. While these methods achieve promising reconstruction accuracy, they often rely on additional

6046

