This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GazeGaussian: High-Fidelity Gaze Redirection with 3D Gaussian Splatting
Xiaobao Wei1,2

Peng Chen1,2 Guangyu Li1 Ming Lu3 Hui Chen1,2,† Feng Tian1,2
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Intel Labs China
weixiaobao0210@gmail.com

Abstract
Gaze estimation encounters generalization challenges when
dealing with out-of-distribution data. To address this problem, recent methods use neural radiance fields (NeRF) to
generate augmented data. However, existing methods based
on NeRF are computationally expensive and lack facial details. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become the prevailing representation of neural fields. While 3DGS has been
extensively examined in head avatars, it faces challenges
with accurate gaze control and generalization across different subjects. In this work, we propose GazeGaussian, the
first high-fidelity gaze redirection method that uses a twostream 3DGS model to represent the face and eye regions
separately. Leveraging the unstructured nature of 3DGS,
we develop a novel representation of the eye for rigid eye
rotation based on the target gaze direction. To enable synthesis generalization across various subjects, we integrate
an expression-guided module to inject subject-specific information into the neural renderer. Comprehensive experiments
show that GazeGaussian outperforms existing methods in
rendering speed, gaze redirection accuracy, and facial synthesis across multiple datasets. The code is available at:
https://ucwxb.github.io/GazeGaussian.

1. Introduction
Gaze estimation is a fundamental component across various
applications [1, 27, 29], yet current estimators [3, 4, 50] often
struggle to generalize effectively to out-of-distribution data.
To address this, recent approaches [36, 42, 52] have started
exploring gaze redirection, which manipulates the gaze in an
input image toward a target direction. This process generates
augmented data to enhance the generalization capabilities of
gaze estimators.
Earlier methods [10, 53, 54, 57] formulate gaze redirection as a 2D image manipulation task, relying on deep learning techniques to warp eye regions of the image toward
† Corresponding author.

Y

Input Image

GazeGaussian
Rotate

Z

X

Deform

Head Redirection

Gaze Redirection

Figure 1. Gaze redirection: Given an input image, GazeGaussian
deforms face and eye Gaussians from canonical space to generate
high-fidelity head images with accurate gaze redirection.

the target gaze direction. However, these 2D approaches
overlook the inherently 3D nature of head and gaze manipulation, often resulting in poor spatial consistency and
limited synthesis fidelity. With advancements in Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [28] and its variants [44, 46], several methods [12, 16, 60, 62] have achieved 3D dynamic
head representation and high-fidelity avatar synthesis. Meanwhile, to enable precise control of gaze direction, recent
research [36, 42, 52] has introduced approaches that decouple the face and eye regions, modeling each with separate
neural fields to achieve accurate gaze redirection.
As NeRF-based methods are hindered by high computational demands, 3D Gaussian Splatting [18] and its
variants [17, 25, 45] achieve impressive rendering quality with significantly faster training speeds. Recent research [33, 49, 51] has applied these methods to 3D head

13293

