This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reminiscence Attack on Residuals: Exploiting Approximate Machine
Unlearning for Privacy
Yaxin Xiao§

Qingqing Ye§

Li Hu§

20034165r@connect.polyu.hk

qqing.ye@polyu.edu.hk

lily23.hu@polyu.edu.hk

†

§‡∗

Huadi Zheng

Haibo Hu

Zi Liang§

zhenghuadi@huawei.com

haibo.hu@polyu.edu.hk

zi1415926.liang@connect.polyu.hk

§

Haoyang Li

Yijie Jiao§

hao-yang9905.li@connect.polyu.hk

22103037d@connect.polyu.hk

§

Department of Electronical and Electronic Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University † Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

‡

Research Centre for Privacy and Security Technologies in Future Smart Systems ∗ Corresponding author: haibo.hu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

uals the right to protect their privacy. Notably, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [33] and the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act
(PIPEDA) [1] incorporate the right to be forgotten, requiring organizations to delete user data upon request. In addition to traditional database systems, machine learning (ML)
systems, which are trained on vast amounts of private data,
must comply with this right by removing data from their
training sets. This is critical because ML systems are vulnerable to data privacy breaches, such as membership inference attacks [39, 46] and model inversion attacks [29].
The techniques that support such data removal in
ML systems are collectively called machine unlearning
(MU) [6]. State-of-the-art (SOTA) machine unlearning
methods can be categorized into exact unlearning and approximate unlearning. Exact unlearning necessitates retraining the model from scratch using only the remaining
dataset, which is resource-intensive even with optimization
techniques [6]. In contrast, approximate machine unlearning (AMU) modifies the parameters of pre-trained machine
learning models to approximate the retained model, allowing selective forgetting while maintaining efficiency. Currently, various AMU methods [10, 17, 24, 25, 45, 48] have
achieved near-retrained unlearning efficacy when measured
by legacy metrics such as prediction accuracy [25]. Due
to their significantly lower resource demands, AMU algorithms have become a focal point in this field.
However, while machine unlearning initially aims to protect the privacy of the target data, it may inadvertently introduce new privacy risks. Such risks come from the imprint
of unlearned data left behind in unlearned models, which
becomes a source of privacy leakage. According to the imprint types, existing privacy attacks against unlearned data
can be divided into two categories: version-dependent and

Machine unlearning enables the removal of specific data
from ML models to uphold the right to be forgotten. While
approximate unlearning algorithms offer efficient alternatives to full retraining, this work reveals that they fail to
adequately protect the privacy of unlearned data. In particular, these algorithms introduce implicit residuals which
facilitate privacy attacks targeting at unlearned data. We
observe that these residuals persist regardless of model
architectures, parameters, and unlearning algorithms, exposing a new attack surface beyond conventional outputbased leakage. Based on this insight, we propose the
Reminiscence Attack (ReA), which amplifies the correlation between residuals and membership privacy through
targeted fine-tuning processes. ReA achieves up to 1.90×
and 1.12× higher accuracy than prior attacks when inferring class-wise and sample-wise membership, respectively. To mitigate such residual-induced privacy risk, we
develop a dual-phase approximate unlearning framework
that first eliminates deep-layer unlearned data traces and
then enforces convergence stability to prevent models from
“pseudo-convergence”, where their outputs are similar to
retrained models but still preserve unlearned residuals.
Our framework works for both classification and generation tasks. Experimental evaluations confirm that our approach maintains high unlearning efficacy, while reducing the adaptive privacy attack accuracy to nearly random
guess, at the computational cost of 2−12% of full retraining
from scratch.

1. Introduction
As the significance of individual privacy grows, numerous
laws and regulations have been established to grant individ-

3058

