This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Purification via Super-Resolution and Diffusion
Mincheol Park1,2 , Cheonjun Park5 , Seungseop Lim4 , Mijin Koo6 ,
Hyunwuk Lee2 , Won Woo Ro3 , Suhyun Kim7 *
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, 2 Samsung Electronics, 3 Yonsei University, 4 AITRICS,
5
Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, 6 Seoul National University, 7 Kyung Hee University
{mincheol.park, cheonjun.park, hyunwuk.lee, wro}@yonsei.ac.kr,
ss.lim@aitrics.com, starmj09@snu.ac.kr, dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com

Abstract

x2 SR image

Adversarial image
“lynx, catamount” (false)

Deep neural networks are widely used in various computer
vision tasks, but their vulnerability to adversarial perturbations remains a significant challenge for reliable decisionmaking. Adversarial purification, a test-time defense strategy, has shown potential in countering these threats by removing noise through diffusion models. This plug-and-play
method, using off-the-shelf models, appears highly effective. However, the purified data from diffusion often deviates more from the original data than the adversarial examples, leading to missing critical information and causing misclassification. In this study, we propose that upsampling with Super-Resolution (SR), followed by downsampling, can also aid in eliminating adversarial noise, similar
to the noise addition and removal process in diffusion models. While SR alone is not as effective as the diffusion process, it better restores the original features typically associated with the early layers of networks. By combining SR,
which initially mitigates damage to early-layer information
from adversarial attacks, with diffusion, we observe a synergistic effect, leading to enhanced performance over diffusion models alone. Our comprehensive evaluations demonstrate that this combined approach, PuriFlow, significantly
improves accuracy and robustness, working synergistically
with state-of-the-art methods.

Super
Resolution

Reverse

Forward

Downsampled SR image
Diffusion

t=0

t=t’
Purified image (t=0)

t=0

“PuriFlow”

Classifier
“Persian cat” (true)
Figure 1. The overview of PuriFlow, which begins with restoring
features of adversarial examples using the SR and drifting downsampled SR images within the forward diffusion. The perturbed
images are then denoised in the reverse diffusion for classification.

types of attacks [3, 9, 13, 34], leaving many DNNs vulnerable and posing substantial challenges to their deployment
in AI-powered systems.
To counter the adversarial threats, adversarial purification [38, 58] has emerged as a test-time defense strategy.
This approach is powered by leveraging off-the-shelf diffusion models. At its core, noise removal through stochastic
denoising effectively eliminates artifacts introduced by various attacks. Unlike adversarial training and certified methods [27, 30, 34], which require prior knowledge of target
attacks, this simple application of generative power excels
in protecting classifier without the need for training, pointing to a new direction.
While diffusion models appear effective in purification, a
key problem remains widely discussed in studies [5, 11, 32,

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been widely accepted
in various computer vision tasks. However, their susceptibility to small, human-imperceptible noises can lead to
untrustworthy decision-making. In particular, the subtle,
maliciously manipulated noises, known as adversarial perturbations, produce fatal images called adversarial examples [10]. This intentional threat appears across numerous
* Corresponding author

4605

