This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Pattern Detection via Template Matching and Regression
Eunchan Jo

Dahyun Kang

Sanghyun Kim

Yunseon Choi

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/TMR

Abstract
We address the problem of few-shot pattern detection, which
aims to detect all instances of a given pattern, typically
represented by a few exemplars, from an input image. Although similar problems have been studied in few-shot object counting and detection (FSCD), previous methods and
their benchmarks have narrowed patterns of interest to object categories and often fail to localize non-object patterns.
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective detector
based on template matching and regression, dubbed TMR.
While previous FSCD methods typically represent target exemplars as spatially collapsed prototypes and lose structural information, we revisit classic template matching and
regression. It effectively preserves and leverages the spatial
layout of exemplars through a minimalistic structure with a
small number of learnable convolutional or projection layers on top of a frozen backbone. We also introduce a new
dataset, dubbed RPINE, which covers a wider range of patterns than existing object-centric datasets. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on the three benchmarks, RPINE, FSCD-147, and FSCD-LVIS, and demonstrates strong generalization in cross-dataset evaluation.

1. Introduction
Few-shot detection aims to identify target patterns with
minimal labeled examples. While signiﬁcant progress has
been made in few-shot object detection [7, 8, 18, 68, 69],
most existing methods remain object-centric, focusing primarily on identifying object-level patterns with relatively
clear boundaries. However, many real-world applications
require detecting arbitrary target patterns that extend beyond objects to include structural, geometric, or abstract
patterns across diverse visual data. Despite recent progress
based on deep neural networks, current methods still fall
short in addressing these broader pattern detection tasks.
Furthermore, the object-centric design of conventional fewshot detectors may lead to performance degradation when
the target object lacks clear boundaries or when occlusion
and deformation cause its boundaries to become indistinct.

one-shot exemplars

ground-truth pattern detection

Figure 1. Few-shot pattern detection. Given a few exemplar for
each target pattern (left), the task is to detect all matching instances
of each pattern (right). This example include non-object patterns
(e.g., green and blue) as well as object patterns (e.g., red).

The task of few-shot pattern detection is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Recent related research topics for few-shot detection include few-shot counting and detection [47], and fewshot object detection [7]. Both aim to reduce the annotation
cost of object detection [12, 33, 57, 64] by learning to detect all instances of given support exemplars. Consequently,
many of these methods are heavily biased on object-centric
benchmarks prior [6, 16, 32, 47]. In addition, many recent
approaches [7, 18, 23, 52, 68, 69] represent the support exemplars as the spatially pooled vector, often named as a prototype [60]. While this pooling strategy is effective for detecting objects, it collapses the geometric properties, such
as the shape and structure of the support exemplars. As
a consequence, these methods tend to underperform when
detecting non-object geometric patterns such as object parts
or shape-intensive elements as shown in Fig. 3.
In this work, we revisit the classic template matching
strategy and propose a simple yet effective few-shot detector for arbitrary patterns. The proposed method, dubbed
template matching and regression (TMR), is designed to be
aware of the structure and shape of given exemplars. Given
an input image, TMR ﬁrst extracts a feature map using a
backbone network. It then crops a template feature from
the support exemplar’s bounding box using a template extraction technique based on RoIAlign [22]. This template
is correlated with the image feature map to produce a template matching feature map. Using this correlation map, the

21578

