This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Open-World Segmentation with Multi-Modal Prompts
Yang Liu1 *
1

Yufei Yin2∗
Chenchen Jing3
Muzhi Zhu1
Hao Chen1†
Bo Feng4
Hao Wang4
Shiyu Li4
Chunhua Shen1

Zhejiang University

2

3

Hangzhou Dianzi University

Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation

Open-Vocabulary Instance Segmentation

Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation

Yuling Xi1

Zhejiang University of Technology

Open-Vocabulary Panoptic Segmentation

4

Apple

Referring Segmentation

chair, table

COSINE

car
Few-Shot Instance Segmentation

Combined Prompt Segmentation

Video Object Segmentation

Figure 1. COSINE is a unified open-world segmentation model that consolidates open-vocabulary and in-context segmentation. COSINE
can simultaneously support text prompts (green boxes) and image prompts (blue boxes) as inputs to perform various segmentation tasks,
including semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, panoptic segmentation, referring segmentation, and video object segmentation. In
addition, COSINE can collaboratively use different types of prompts to perform various segmentation tasks.

Abstract
In this work, we present COSINE, a unified open-world
segmentation model that Consolidates Open-vocabulary
Segmentation and IN-context sEgmentation with multimodal prompts (e.g., text and image). COSINE exploits
foundation models to extract representations for an input image and corresponding multi-modal prompts, and
a SegDecoder to align these representations, model their
interaction, and obtain masks specified by input prompts
across different granularities. In this way, COSINE overcomes architectural discrepancies, divergent learning objectives, and distinct representation learning strategies of

previous pipelines for open-vocabulary segmentation and incontext segmentation. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that COSINE has significant performance improvements in both open-vocabulary and in-context segmentation tasks. Our exploratory analyses highlight that the
synergistic collaboration between using visual and textual prompts leads to significantly improved generalization
over single-modality approaches. Our code is released at
https://github.com/aim-uofa/COSINE.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation [17, 24, 61] aims to provide accurate
conceptual localization, enabling precise understanding and

* Equal contribution. † HC is the corresponding author.

21557

