This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parameter-Efficient Adaptation of
Geospatial Foundation Models through Embedding Deflection
Romain Thoreau∗
CNES

Valerio Marsocci∗
European Space Agency Φ-Lab

Dawa Derksen
CNES

romain.thoreau@cnes.fr

valerio.marsocci@esa.int

dawa.derksen@cnes.fr

Abstract
As large-scale heterogeneous data sets become increasingly
available, adapting foundation models at low cost has become a key issue. Seminal works in natural language processing, e.g. Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), leverage the low
”intrinsic rank” of parameter updates during adaptation. In
this paper, we argue that incorporating stronger inductive
biases on both the data and the models can enhance the
adaptation of Geospatial Foundation Models (GFMs), pretrained on RGB satellite images, to other types of optical
satellite data. Specifically, the pretrained parameters of
GFMs serve as a strong prior for the spatial structure of
multispectral images. For this reason, we introduce DEFLECT (Deflecting Embeddings for Finetuning Latent representations for Earth and Climate Tasks), a novel strategy
for adapting GFMs to multispectral satellite imagery with
very few additional parameters. DEFLECT improves the
representation capabilities of the extracted features, particularly enhancing spectral information, which is essential for geoscience and environmental-related tasks. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method across three
different GFMs and five diverse datasets, ranging from forest monitoring to marine environment segmentation. Compared to competing methods, DEFLECT achieves on-par
or higher accuracy with 5-10× fewer parameters for classification and segmentation tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/VMarsocci/DEFLECT.
Figure 1. (a) Performance (IoU and F1-score) averaged across
tasks, datasets and models, against the proportion of tuned GFM
parameters. Our method, DEFLECT, performs almost as well as
full fine tuning (oracle), while adjusting < 1% of the encoder parameters. (b) Performance averaged across models for each dataset.
DEFLECT consistently performs competitively for classification
and semantic segmentation across five datasets, spanning from the
urban domain to the forestry domain.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the diversity and availability of satellite data
have skyrocketed. This unprecedented access to multi/hyperspectral satellite imagery has opened up new prospects for
monitoring the Earth’s biosphere. Real-world applications
of Remote Sensing (RS) include several tasks such as agricultural monitoring from multispectral images [49], canopy
∗ Equal contribution.

9594

