This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenM3 : Generative Pretrained Multi-path Motion Model
for Text Conditional Human Motion Generation
Junyu Shi1 , Lijiang Liu1 , Yong Sun1 , Zhiyuan Zhang1 , Jinni Zhou1 , Qiang Nie1 *
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{jshi890, lliu135, ysun691, zzhang400}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract

Our Method

Scaling up motion datasets is crucial to enhance motion
generation capabilities. However, training on large-scale
multi-source datasets introduces data heterogeneity challenges due to variations in motion content. To address
this, we propose Generative Pretrained Multi-path Motion
Model (GenM3 ), a comprehensive framework designed to
learn uniﬁed motion representations. GenM3 comprises two
components: 1) a Multi-Expert VQ-VAE (MEVQ-VAE) that
adapts to different dataset distributions to learn a uniﬁed
discrete motion representation, and 2) a Multi-path Motion Transformer (MMT) that improves intra-modal representations by using separate modality-speciﬁc pathways,
each with densely activated experts to accommodate variations within that modality, and improves inter-modal alignment by the text-motion shared pathway. To enable largescale training, we integrate and unify 11 high-quality motion datasets (approximately 220 hours of motion data) and
augment it with textual annotations (nearly 10,000 motion
sequences labeled by a large language model and 300+ by
human experts). After training on our integrated dataset,
GenM3 achieves a state-of-the-art FID of 0.035 on the HumanML3D benchmark, surpassing state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin. It also demonstrates strong zero-shot
generalization on IDEA400 dataset, highlighting its effectiveness and adaptability across diverse motion scenarios.

1. Introduction
Generating diverse and accurate human motion from textual descriptions has emerged as a vital area in generative
computer vision [4, 10, 13, 25, 31, 32, 39], which has broad
applications across animation, virtual reality, and robotics.
Inspired by breakthroughs of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) on large-scale datasets, recent research in human motion generation leverages larger models [17] and expanded datasets [10, 19] to produce more
realistic and nuanced motion sequences. On the data side,
* Corresponding author

{eejinni, qiangnie}@hkust-gz.edu.cn

MotionGPT

Text input: A person raises one leg in front of
them, slowly performing a high kick, keeping their
balance steady.

Figure 1. Due to the limited motion and text in the dataset, MotionGPT [14] is unable to respond to this relatively simple text
input. We expanded the dataset in both motion and text modalities and pre-trained our model on this large-scale dataset. This
enabled our model, GenM3 , to generate high-precision human motions based on diversity descriptions.

datasets like HumanML3D [10] and Motion-X [19] have
broadened available training samples. In terms of modeling, approaches like MotionGPT [14] ﬁne-tunes pre-trained
LLMs on the HumanML3D dataset to jointly model motion tokens and text tokens. Building upon this, MotionChain [15] extends the use of pretrained LLMs for multiturn motion dialogue, enabling dynamic interactions over
sequential motions. Another pioneering model, OMG [17],
incorporates multiple motion datasets and utilizes a largescale diffusion model to achieve strong zero-shot performance. These approaches underscore the promising role of
pretrained LLMs and large-scale data integration in enhancing the realism of human motion generation.
Despite above advancements, several challenges persist
in motion generation: 1) Heterogeneity in motion data distribution. The heterogeneity arising from differences in
motion types, recording devices, and similar factors poses
a challenge for joint training, as optimizing performance

13129

