This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FVGen: Accelerating Novel-View Synthesis with Adversarial Video Diffusion
Distillation

1

Wenbin Teng1,2 , Gonglin Chen1,2 , Haiwei Chen1,2 , Yajie Zhao1,2 *
2
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
{wenbinte, gonglinc}@usc.edu, {chenh, zhao}@ict.usc.edu,

Figure 1. We present FVGen, a method of fast novel-view synthesis for 3D scene reconstruction with sparse inputs. Recent method [52]
unleash the generation capabilities of video diffusion models conditioned on a prior 3D cue for dense view creation, but always suffers
from a long sampling time. We propose a novel framework that can significantly reduce the sampling time and maintain the generation
quality.

Abstract
Recent progress in 3D reconstruction has enabled realistic 3D models from dense image captures, yet challenges
persist with sparse views, often leading to artifacts in unseen areas. Recent works leverage Video Diffusion Models (VDMs) to generate dense observations, filling the gaps
when only sparse views are available for 3D reconstruction tasks. A significant limitation of these methods is their
slow sampling speed when using VDMs. In this paper, we
present FVGen, a novel framework that addresses this challenge by enabling fast novel view synthesis using VDMs in
as few as four sampling steps. We propose a novel video
diffusion model distillation method that distills a multi-step
denoising teacher model into a few-step denoising student
model using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and
softened reverse KL-divergence minimization. Extensive ex-

periments on real-world datasets show that, compared to
previous works, our framework generates the same number
of novel views with similar (or even better) visual quality
while reducing sampling time by more than 90%. FVGen
significantly improves time efficiency for downstream reconstruction tasks, particularly when working with sparse
input views (more than 2) where pre-trained VDMs need
to be run multiple times to achieve better spatial coverage.
Project Page: https://wbteng9526.github.io/fvgen/

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Reconstructing 3D scenes from 2D images remains a pivotal research area at the intersection of computer vision and
graphics. This field has extensive social impact, with broad
applications in autonomous navigation, augmented reality,
and more. With the recent development of neural rendering techniques such as NeRF [29] and 3DGS [16], creating
high-quality 3D assets from 2D images has become more

26095

