This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D2 ST-Adapter: Disentangled-and-Deformable Spatio-Temporal
Adapter for Few-shot Action Recognition
Wenjie Pei† 1,2 Qizhong Tan1 Guangming Lu1 Jiandong Tian3 Jun Yu1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
wenjiecoder@outlook.com, 24B951007@stu.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Adapting pre-trained image models to video modality
has proven to be an effective strategy for robust fewshot action recognition.
In this work, we explore
the potential of adapter tuning in image-to-video model
adaptation and propose a novel video adapter tuning
framework, called Disentangled-and-Deformable SpatioTemporal Adapter (D2 ST-Adapter). It features a lightweight
design, low adaptation overhead and powerful spatiotemporal feature adaptation capabilities. D2 ST-Adapter is
structured with an internal dual-pathway architecture that
enables built-in disentangled encoding of spatial and temporal features within the adapter, seamlessly integrating
into the single-stream feature learning framework of pretrained image models. In particular, we develop an efﬁcient
yet effective implementation of the D2 ST-Adapter, incorporating the specially devised anisotropic Deformable SpatioTemporal Attention as its pivotal operation. This mechanism can be individually tailored for two pathways with
anisotropic sampling densities along the spatial and temporal domains in 3D spatio-temporal space, enabling disentangled encoding of spatial and temporal features while
maintaining a lightweight design. Extensive experiments by
instantiating our method on both pre-trained ResNet and
ViT demonstrate the superiority of our method over stateof-the-art methods. Our method is particularly well-suited
to challenging scenarios where temporal dynamics are critical for action recognition. Code is available at https:
//github.com/qizhongtan/D2ST-Adapter.

1. Introduction
Few-shot action recognition aims to learn an action recognition model from a set of base classes of video data, which
can recognize novel categories of actions using only a few
support samples. To this end, learning an effective feature
† Corresponding author.

extractor that is generalizable across different classes is crucial. A typical way [1, 3, 33, 35, 45] is to leverage pretrained large image models [10, 24, 29] for feature learning
by image-to-video model adaptation.
Most existing methods [23, 34, 35] seek to adapt large
vision models to few-shot action recognition by ﬁne-tuning
either the entire or partial model. While such methods have
achieved promising performance, there are two important
limitations that hamper them from exploiting the full potential of the pre-trained models. First, fully ﬁne-tuning
pre-trained models tends to overﬁt in few-shot learning scenarios, whereas partial ﬁne-tuning is less effective due to
its limited capacity for adaptation. Second, most large vision models are trained on image data due to the scarcity of
video data. Thus, these ﬁne-tuning based methods require
to learn the temporal features as a post-processing step after feature extraction by the pre-trained backbone, typically
by constructing an auxiliary module to model the temporal dynamics [28, 33, 34, 38], which has limited effectiveness compared to methods that incorporate temporal learning throughout the entire feature learning stage.
As a prominent parameter-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning technique [9, 11, 13, 50], adapter tuning [4, 11, 32] is particularly well-suited to few-shot learning scenarios due to much
lower parameter-learning overhead. A straightforward way
to apply adapter tuning to image-to-video model adaptation
is to employ the vanilla image adapter [11] to adapt the prelearned spatial and temporal features separately, which is
exactly adopted by AIM [44] and DUALPATH [22]. As
shown in Figure 1, both AIM and DUALPATH ﬁrst prelearn the spatial and temporal features separately by duplicating the multi-head self-attention modules, either in
cascaded manner (AIM) or parallel manner (DUALPATH).
Subsequently, they insert individual vanilla adapters in each
duplicated module for speciﬁc feature adaptation. However,
such methods inevitably result in a heavyweight model architecture and substantial computational overhead. As illustrated in Figure 1, ST-Adapter [21] is the ﬁrst to design
a specialized adapter for video data by incorporating a 3D

11317

