This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mixture-of-Scores: Robust Image-Text Data Valuation via Three Lines of Code
Sitong Wu1,† Haoru Tan2,: Yukang Chen3 Shaofeng Zhang5
Bei Yu1‡ Xiaojuan Qi2,; Jiaya Jia4,;

Jingyao Li1

1

4

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 NVIDIA
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
https://github.com/dvlab-research/MoS

Abstract
Evaluating the valuation of image-text pairs is essential
for data processing in vision-language pre-training. Most
metrics currently use off-the-shelf models, like CLIP-Score,
to score pairs based on feature similarity. However, we
find that different scoring models often produce inconsistent
quality scores for the same data. This disparity impacts
data processing results, leading to variations in datasets and,
consequently, in model performance when trained on these
datasets. Notably, no single quality score excels across all
tasks, as each has biases toward specific concepts, resulting in complementary effects on model performance. This
complicates the selection of scoring models. In this paper,
we analyze these disparities and propose a method called
Mixture-of-Scores (MoS). This approach integrates various
quality scores into a robust ensemble score, effectively mitigating biases. It can be implemented easily in just three
lines of code. Our extensive experiments show that MoS
outperforms existing single quality scores across multiple
vision-language tasks and benchmarks. We aim to offer new
insights and practical tools to help the community navigate
the challenges of scoring model selection.

1. Introduction
Large-scale web image-text datasets [17, 36, 38, 41, 47,
48] have greatly promoted the breakthroughs in visionlanguage representation learning and driven the development
of vision-language foundation models [1, 20, 49]. Nevertheless, these web-crawled datasets are generally noisy [1, 9, 36],
e.g., the text description does not precisely match the visual
content of its corresponding image. Recently, more and more
works found that data quality plays a crucial role in model
† Equal contribution
‡ Corresponding author

learning [1, 25, 53]. Noisy image-text data with poor alignment will seriously hinder the representation learning and
may lead to training instability [1, 9, 40]. Therefore, evaluating the quality of image-text data is becoming a critical and
valuable research topic, that serves as an essential tool for
various data processing strategies [4, 14, 36, 42, 52, 64] to
mitigate the negative impact on vision-language representation learning caused by noisy and low-quality data [1, 9].
Early works relied on manual criteria to evaluate the quality of image-text pairs, for example, human judgement [65]
and invalid text detection [17, 47]. Since the emergence of
CLIP [20], model-based quality score has become the most
widely-used metric [1, 36, 38, 48], which is formulated as the
similarity between image and text embedding extracted from
an off-the-shelf vision-language model (VLM), such as CLIP
[20], BLIP [1] and their follow-up works [7, 59]. Related
works are discussed in Sec.3 of supplementary material.
Observation and Motivation. However, we observe a prevalent phenomenon, that is, for the same data, there are significant differences between the quality scores derived from
different scoring models (quality score disparity). As depicted in Figure 1(a), the standard deviations of these quality
scores are quite substantial (between 0.01 and 0.29), reaching
around 60% of its upper-bound1 .
Consequently, this quality score disparity has a direct impact on the data processing result, leading to the discrepancy
between datasets processed using different quality scores.
Taking the example of data filtering that removes ρ% data
with the lowest quality scores, it is noteworthy that there is
almost no intersection between the filtered subsets under different quality scores when 0 ă ρ ď 50 (refer to Figure 1(b)).
This can be attributed to the fact that the quality rank of
each data fluctuates significantly (ranging from 4% to 46%)
when sorting the whole dataset by different quality scores, as
shown in Figure 1(c).
1 The upper-bound for standard deviation of multiple scores is 0.5, see
supplementary material Sec.2 for proof.

24603

