This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyPiDecoder: Hybrid Pixel Decoder for Efficient Segmentation and Detection
Fengzhe Zhou, Humphrey Shi
SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech
fzhou87@gatech.edu, shi@gatech.edu

Abstract
Recently, Mask2Former has achieved significant success as a universal image segmentation framework, with its
Multi-Scale Deformable Attention (MSDeformAttn) Pixel
Decoder becoming a widely adopted component in current segmentation models. However, the inefficiency of
MSDeformAttn has become a performance bottleneck for
segmenters. To address this, we propose the Hyper Pixel
Decoder (HyPiDecoder), an improved Pixel Decoder design that replaces parts of the MSDeformAttn layers with
convolution-based FPN layers, introducing explicit locality information and significantly boosting inference speed.
Experimental results show that HyPiDecoder can be applied to both universal segmentation models and unified segmentation and detection models, achieving improvements in both speed and accuracy across object detection, semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation
tasks. The Mask DINO model integrated with HyPiDecoder achieves a new SOTA of 58.8 PQ on COCO panoptic segmentation with SwinL-scale backbone and no extra
training data, with a 127% increase in inference speed
compared to the original model. Code is available at
https://github.com/HyPiDecoder/HybridPixelDecoder.

Figure 1. Performance and speed of our proposed HyPiDecoder
incorporated Mask DINO with SwinL backbone on COCO. Consistent improvement can be observed in both accuracy and inference fps.

1. Introduction

a component called the pixel decoder, which fuses and processes multi-scale features from the backbone to generate high-resolution per-pixel embeddings. As pointed out
in [1], the pixel decoder accounts for over 50% of the overall computational cost in efficient networks. This component also specifically applies the multi-scale deformable attention (MSDeformAttn) operator proposed in [42]. Despite its relatively low FLOPs, this operator theoretically
has a low compute-to-memory access ratio, and practical implementations remain suboptimal, resulting in subpar
runtime performance on hardware and making the pixel decoder one of the bottlenecks of Mask2Former.
Based on the observations above, some recent works
have identified the optimization potential in the pixel decoder, such as [1, 40], but these primarily focus on object
detection. Li et al. [22] focuses on segmentation; however,
it only reports the reduction in FLOPs of the new module
without emphasizing the change in actual inference latency.
Additionally, Aich et al. [1] can at best ensure no drop in
accuracy, but cannot provide any improvement.
In this paper, inspired by a series of elegant convolutionbased Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) layer designs [15,
27], we propose the Hyper Pixel Decoder (HyPiDecoder).
We replace some layers in the originally MSDeformAttnbased pixel decoder with convolution-based FPN layers, introducing explicit locality awareness into the pixel decoder.

Segmentation and object detection are both important
tasks in the field of computer vision. Both tasks aim to localize objects of interest in an image, which gives them similarities in research methodologies. Significant progress has
been achieved using classical convolution-based architectures for feature representation and learning in segmentation
and object detection, such as [18, 26, 29, 32]. Recently, following the pioneering work of DETR [4], researchers have
started to employ attention mechanisms to solve both tasks.
In segmentation methods using attention mechanisms,
Mask2Former [8] stands out for using a single universal
architecture to solve semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation tasks, achieving SOTA performance and inspiring many subsequent approaches. Mask2Former introduces

22100

