This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReFlex: Text-Guided Editing of Real Images in Rectified Flow
via Mid-Step Feature Extraction and Attention Adaptation
Jimyeong Kim1 Jungwon Park1 Yeji Song1 Nojun Kwak1,2 Wonjong Rhee1,2,3
Department of Intelligence and Information1 & IPAI2 , & RICS3 Seoul National University
{wlaud1001, quoded97, ldynx, nojunk, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr

Image translation

“”

“”

“a photo of an origami
man”

“a photo of origami
couple dancing
in the kitchen”

Local editing

“a photo of grizzly
bear jumping in front
of the cabin”

“a photo of silver robot
in the snow”

“a photo of crochet
dolls dancing
in the playground”

“a photo of silver
robots dancing
in the garden”

“a woman sitting in the
grass with a book”

“a woman sitting in the
grass with a laptop”

Style change

“a sports car driving
down the street”

“stained glass window of a
sports car driving down the
street”

Figure 1. Given a source image and a target prompt, our method can preserve core information of the source image, including structure and
background, while adapting high-level attributes in accordance with the target prompt.

1. Introduction

abled text-guided editing of real images [2–4, 11, 13, 22, 23,
36]. While early methods on text-guided real-image editing were predominantly developed using U-Net based diffusion models (DMs), such as Stable Diffusion [30], their
effectiveness is often constrained by the inherent performance limitations of DMs, leading to compromised image
quality and weaker text alignment in the edited images. Recently, Rectified Flow (ReFlow)-based text-to-image models, such as FLUX [17], have demonstrated substantially
higher image quality and stronger text alignment than DMs
by leveraging flow matching [19, 20] and multi-modal diffusion transformer (MM-DiT) [8, 26]. However, existing
ReFlow-based image editing methods [7, 15, 32, 39] often
struggle with real image editing, particularly in preserving
the source structure and handling significant modifications,
such as color changes. While techniques developed for DMbased editing methods provide a useful starting point, adapting them to ReFlow models has been challenging. This difficulty arises from the differences in training process and architecture between DMs and ReFlow, meaning that a simple
plug-and-play approach cannot be applied.

The emergence of text-to-image foundation models [28, 30,
33] has not only empowered image generation but also en-

In DM-based editing, feature-based methods have
emerged as the most effective and widely adopted approach

Abstract
Rectified Flow text-to-image models surpass diffusion models in image quality and text alignment, but adapting ReFlow for real-image editing remains challenging. We propose a new real-image editing method for ReFlow by analyzing the intermediate representations of multimodal transformer blocks and identifying three key features. To extract these features from real images with sufficient structural preservation, we leverage mid-step latent, which is
inverted only up to the mid-step. We then adapt attention
during injection to improve editability and enhance alignment to the target text. Our method is training-free, requires
no user-provided mask, and can be applied even without a
source prompt. Extensive experiments on two benchmarks
with nine baselines demonstrate its superior performance
over prior methods, further validated by human evaluations
confirming a strong user preference for our approach.

15939

