This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PBCAT: Patch-Based Composite Adversarial Training against Physically
Realizable Attacks on Object Detection
Xiao Li1→ Yiming Zhu1,2→ Yifan Huang1,2 * Wei Zhang1 Yingzhe He3 Jie Shi3 Xiaolin Hu1,4†
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist,
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, THBI, Tsinghua University
2
University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
Huawei Technologies 4 Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR)
{lixiao20, zhang-w19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {U202241171, U202240988}@xs.ustb.edu.cn,
{heyingzhe, shi.jie1}@huawei.com, xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object detection, which requires simultaneously classifying
and localizing all objects in an image, is a fundamental task
in computer vision. Recent advancements in object detection methods [25, 39, 46, 59] have greatly benefited from
the utilization of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). However,
DNNs are known to be susceptible to adversarial examples
[43] crafted by adding deliberately designed perturbations
to the original examples.
Adversarial examples exist not only in the digital world
but also in the physical world [3, 16, 17, 45, 51, 52]. Several studies have demonstrated that object detectors can be
easily fooled by physically realizable attacks, e.g., adversarial patches [3, 45] and adversarial textures [16, 17] 2 .
Specifically, adversarial patch attacks craft localized adversarial patterns within a fixed region (e.g., a square patch),
while adversarial texture attacks craft more pervasive adversarial perturbations that spread across the entire surface
of the object, e.g., adversarial modifications to clothing textures that cover most of the surface of an object. Given
the crucial role of object detection in numerous securitysensitive real-world applications, such as autonomous driving [1] and video surveillance [22], it is imperative to improve the adversarial robustness of object detectors against
these physically realizable attacks, which pose realistic and
severe threats.
Numerous studies [21, 32, 34–36, 50, 54, 55, 60] have
proposed various defense methods against physically realizable attacks. However, three critical limitations still hinder their effectiveness: 1) Most existing defenses are designed specifically for patch attacks, which represent only
the simplest form of physically realizable attacks. Recent

Object detection plays a crucial role in many securitysensitive applications. However, several recent studies have
shown that object detectors can be easily fooled by physically realizable attacks, e.g., adversarial patches and recent adversarial textures, which pose realistic and urgent
threats. Adversarial Training (AT) has been recognized
as the most effective defense against adversarial attacks.
While AT has been extensively studied in the l→ attack settings on classification models, AT against physically realizable attacks on object detectors has received limited exploration. Early attempts are only performed to defend against
adversarial patches, leaving AT against a wider range of
physically realizable attacks under-explored. In this work,
we consider defending against various physically realizable
attacks with a unified AT method. We propose PBCAT, a
novel Patch-Based Composite Adversarial Training strategy. PBCAT optimizes the model by incorporating the combination of small-area gradient-guided adversarial patches
and imperceptible global adversarial perturbations covering the entire image. With these designs, PBCAT has the
potential to defend against not only adversarial patches
but also unseen physically realizable attacks such as adversarial textures. Extensive experiments in multiple settings demonstrated that PBCAT significantly improved robustness against various physically realizable attacks over
state-of-the-art defense methods. Notably, it improved the
detection accuracy by 29.7% over previous defense methods under one recent adversarial texture attack1 .

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1 Code is available at https : / / github . com / LixiaoTHU /
oddefense-PatchAT

2 Both adversarial patches and adversarial textures can be implemented
in the physical world and are thereby called physically realizable attacks.

24456

