This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DyWA: Dynamics-adaptive World Action Model
for Generalizable Non-prehensile Manipulation
Jiangran Lyu1,2 , Ziming Li1,2 , Xuesong Shi2 , Chaoyi Xu2 , Yizhou Wang1,3,4,† , He Wang1,2,†
1
3

Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University

Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

4

2

Galbot

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

https://pku-epic.github.io/DyWA/

Figure 1. Illustration of the high-level idea and generalization ability of DyWA. Given a target object’s 6D pose and single-view object
point cloud, our non-prehensile manipulation policy aims to rearrange the object without grasping. Left: Our key insight is to enhance
action learning by jointly predicting future states while adapting to dynamics from historical trajectories. (For clarity, rendered images are
used for visualization, while the actual visual input consists of partial point clouds.) Right: After being trained in simulation, our policy
achieves zero-shot sim-to-real transfer and generalizes across diverse dynamic properties, including variations in object geometry, object
physical property (e.g., slipperiness and non-uniform mass distribution), and surface friction.

Abstract
Nonprehensile manipulation is crucial for handling objects that are too thin, large, or otherwise ungraspable in
unstructured environments. While conventional planningbased approaches struggle with complex contact modeling, learning-based methods have recently emerged as a
promising alternative. However, existing learning-based
approaches face two major limitations: they heavily rely
on multi-view cameras and precise pose tracking, and they
fail to generalize across varying physical conditions, such
as changes in object mass and table friction. To address
these challenges, we propose the Dynamics-Adaptive World
Action Model (DyWA), a novel framework that enhances action learning by jointly predicting future states while adapting to dynamics variations based on historical trajectories. By unifying the modeling of geometry, state, physics,

and robot actions, DyWA enables more robust policy learning under partial observability. Compared to baselines,
our method improves the success rate by 31.5% using only
single-view point cloud observations in the simulation. Furthermore, DyWA achieves an average success rate of 68%
in real-world experiments, demonstrating its ability to generalize across diverse object geometries, adapt to varying
table friction, and robustness in challenging scenarios such
as half-filled water bottles and slippery surfaces.

1. Introduction

†: Corresponding authors

Non-prehensile manipulation—such as pushing, sliding,
toppling, and flipping—greatly extends the capabilities of
robotic manipulators beyond traditional pick-and-place operations. These dexterous actions enable robots to handle
tasks where grasping is infeasible or inefficient due to object
geometry, clutter, or workspace constraints. Over the years,
significant progress has been made in this area, particularly

11058

