This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-Light Image Enhancement Using Event-Based Illumination Estimation
Lei Sun1
1

Yuhan Bao2

Jiajun Zhai2 Jingyun Liang3 Yulun Zhang4†
Danda Pani Paudel1 Luc Van Gool1

Kaiwei Wang2†

INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski” 2 Zhejiang University
3
Alibaba Group 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

(b)

(a)

Low-light Image

Motion events

Result of EvLight [23]

Temporal-mapping events Reflectance / Illumination

Our result

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) event-based LLIE methods using motion events [21] and (b) our R ETIN EV using temporal mapping
events. Best viewed when zoomed in.

Abstract

https://github.com/AHupuJR/RetinEV .

Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) aims to improve the
visibility of images captured in poorly lit environments.
Prevalent event-based solutions primarily utilize events
triggered by motion, i.e., “motion events” to strengthen
only the edge texture, while leaving the high dynamic range
and excellent low-light responsiveness of event cameras
largely unexplored. This paper instead opens a new avenue
from the perspective of estimating the illumination using
“temporal-mapping” events, i.e., by converting the timestamps of events triggered by a transmittance modulation
into brightness values. The resulting fine-grained illumination cues facilitate a more effective decomposition and
enhancement of the reflectance component in low-light images through the proposed Illumination-aided Reflectance
Enhancement module. Furthermore, the degradation model
of temporal-mapping events under low-light conditions is
investigated for realistic training data synthesis. To address
the lack of datasets under this regime, we construct a beamsplitter setup and collect EvLowLight dataset that includes
images, temporal-mapping events, and motion events. Experiments across 5 synthetic datasets and our real-world
EvLowLight dataset substantiate that the devised pipeline,
dubbed R ETIN EV, excels in producing well-illuminated,
high dynamic range images, outperforming previous stateof-the-art event-based methods by up to 6.62 dB, while
maintaining an efficient inference speed of 35.6 framesper-second on a 640 × 480 image. Codes and datasets:

1. Introduction
Images captured under insufficient lighting suffer from reduced visibility, resulting in an unsatisfactory visual experience and a decline in performance of computer vision systems optimized for well-lit images [20]. Addressing this
issue, low-light image enhancement (LLIE) has become a
pivotal yet challenging task [4, 8, 10, 45, 47]. The primary objective is to enhance visibility, Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), and contrast for images taken under suboptimal illumination, while mitigating various distortions such
as noise, artifacts, and color inaccuracies. Beyond image
sensors, researchers have explored leveraging additional
modalities to enhance outcomes further. In this paper, we
aim to utilize event cameras for the same.
Event cameras, also known as Dynamic Vision Sensors
(DVSs), are neuromorphic sensors that respond to light
changes [3, 7, 27, 28, 33, 54, 59], capturing “event” information, at high temporal resolution (in the order of µs).
Different from conventional frame-based cameras, the asynchronous architecture of event cameras endows them with
high dynamic range (HDR) and exceptional low-light responsiveness. Events are triggered if a change occurs in the
scene, even under insufficient illumination, providing clues
for LLIE. Prevalent event-based methods [14, 21] focus on
fusing low-light images with events, in which the information derived from motion events plays a crucial role in enhancing low-light images. We will refer to these approaches

† Corresponding authors.

6667

