This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Competitive Distillation: A Simple Learning Strategy for
Improving Visual Classification
Daqian Shi1 , Xiaolei Diao2 , Xu Chen1 , and Cédric M. John1 *
Digital Environment Research Institute (DERI), Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
2
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
1

{d.shi, x.diao, xu.chen, cedric.john}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have significantly advanced the field of computer vision. To improve DNN training process, knowledge distillation methods demonstrate
their effectiveness in accelerating network training by introducing a fixed learning direction from the teacher network
to student networks. In this context, several distillationbased optimization strategies are proposed, e.g., deep mutual learning and self-distillation, as an attempt to achieve
generic training performance enhancement through the cooperative training of multiple networks. However, such
strategies achieve limited improvements due to the poor understanding of the impact of learning directions among networks across different iterations. In this paper, we propose
a novel competitive distillation strategy that allows each
network in a group to potentially act as a teacher based
on its performance, enhancing the overall learning performance. Competitive distillation organizes a group of networks to perform a shared task and engage in competition,
where competitive optimization is proposed to improve the
parameter updating process. We further introduce stochastic perturbation in competitive distillation, aiming to motivate networks to induce mutations to achieve better visual
representations and global optimum. The experimental results show that competitive distillation achieves promising
performance in diverse tasks and datasets.

Figure 1. Comparison of parameter update strategies between general model distillation, mutual learning-based distillation, and proposed competitive distillation.

up a teacher-student learning paradigm, knowledge distillation allows a student network to learn from a teacher network by imitating its outputs [14]. Such a paradigm is
considered a manifestation of collective intelligence [24],
which is a dynamic optimization strategy aimed at leveraging collaborative and competitive processes among multiple
entities to generate complex decisions. The effectiveness
of knowledge distillation methods demonstrates that learning by network collaboration is often an easier optimization
task than directly learning from the target function [2].
The most common cases of the teacher-student paradigm
allow a student network to learn from a fixed teacher network, named model distillation, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The
success of such methods in enhancing the efficiency of
training student networks validates the rationality and effectiveness of the distillation process. Meanwhile, some

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in computer vision have been greatly
facilitated by deep neural networks (DNNs), which have
proven significant success in tasks such as image classification [21], object detection [31], and semantic segmentation
[40]. Knowledge distillation exploits the deep representation capabilities of pre-trained DNNs, aiming to achieve effective network training with a lower cost [28]. By setting
* Corresponding author

2981

