This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Avat3r: Large Animatable Gaussian Reconstruction Model
for High-fidelity 3D Head Avatars
∗

∗

Tobias Kirschstein1,2 Javier Romero2 Artem Sevastopolsky1,2 Matthias Nießner1 Shunsuke Saito2
Technical University of Munich1
Meta Reality Labs Pittsburgh2

Avat3r
(a) Phone scan

(b) Sparse 3D head reconstruction

(c) Zero-shot 3D facial animation

Figure 1. Avat3r. Given just four images of a person’s head (a), Avat3r achieves two things: (b) it creates a faithful 3D reconstruction
of the head in a feed-forward manner, and (c) it allows facial animation without having seen any of the corresponding expressions of the
person. This simplifies the capturing process as it drops the need for recording long sequences of facial movement. As a result, the entire
pipeline from head scan to final 3D head avatar can be executed within a few minutes and runs on a single consumer-grade GPU.

Abstract
Traditionally, creating photo-realistic 3D head avatars requires a studio-level multi-view capture setup and expensive optimization during test-time, limiting the use of digital human doubles to the VFX industry or offline renderings. To address this shortcoming, we present Avat3r, which
regresses a high-quality and animatable 3D head avatar
from just a few input images, vastly reducing compute requirements during inference. More specifically, we make
Large Reconstruction Models animatable and learn a powerful prior over 3D human heads from a large multi-view
video dataset. For better 3D head reconstructions, we employ position maps from DUSt3R and generalized feature
maps from the human foundation model Sapiens. To animate the 3D head, our key discovery is that simple crossattention to an expression code is already sufficient. Finally,
we increase robustness by feeding input images with different expressions to our model during training, enabling the

reconstruction of 3D head avatars from inconsistent inputs,
e.g., an imperfect phone capture with accidental movement,
or frames from a monocular video. We compare Avat3r with
current state-of-the-art methods for few-input and singleinput scenarios, and find that our method has a competitive advantage in both tasks. Finally, we demonstrate the
wide applicability of our proposed model, creating 3D head
avatars from images of different sources, smartphone captures, single images, and even out-of-domain inputs like antique busts.

1. Introduction

∗ Work done while Tobias Kirschstein and Artem Sevastopolsky were
interns at Reality Labs Research, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Project website: https://tobias-kirschstein.github.io/avat3r/

Lifelike 3D head avatars find use in a variety of applications such as telepresence, movie production, personalized
games, or digital education. Typically, the creation of a
high-fidelity avatar requires studio-quality videos that have
to be recorded in hour-long sessions in expensive capture
setups. This limits the applicability of a 3D head avatar
creation pipeline, especially in casual settings where users
may only want to use a few images taken with their smartphone to create a convincing digital double. In this paper,

12089

