This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Predict-Optimize-Distill: A Self-Improving Cycle for 4D Object Understanding
Mingxuan Wu* Huang Huang* Justin Kerr Chung Min Kim
Anthony Zhang Brent Yi Angjoo Kanazawa
University of California, Berkeley

Figure 1. Predict-Optimize-Distill (POD) takes in a multi-view scan of an object and casually captured long-form human interaction
video, and estimates 3D part poses over time. (A) Existing optimization-based methods experience failures under heavy occlusion or when
incremental frame optimization drifts. (B) In contrast, POD utilizes a cycle consisting of a predictive feed-forward model, an optimization
stage, and a self-distillation phase to iteratively improve the object part pose predictions. By training an object part pose prediction model,
POD can predict correct part poses even under heavy occlusions in the observations (red circle).

Abstract

tion back into the model by generating synthetic self-labeled
training data from novel viewpoints. Each iteration improves both the predictive model and the optimized motion
trajectory, creating a virtuous cycle that bootstraps its own
training data to learn about the pose configurations of an
object. We also introduce a quasi-multiview mining strategy for reducing depth ambiguity by leveraging long video.
We evaluate POD on 14 real-world and 5 synthetic objects
with various joint types, including revolute and prismatic
joints as well as multi-body configurations where parts detach or reattach independently. POD demonstrates significant improvement over a pure optimization baseline which
gets stuck in local minima, particularly for longer videos.
We also find that POD’s performance improves with both
video length and successive iterations of the self-improving
cycle, highlighting its ability to scale performance with additional observations and looped refinement.

Humans can resort to long-form inspection to build intuition on predicting the 3D configurations of unseen objects. The more we observe the object motion, the better we get at predicting its 3D state immediately. Existing systems either optimize underlying representations from
multi-view observations or train a feed-forward predictor
from supervised datasets. We introduce Predict-OptimizeDistill (POD), a self-improving framework that interleaves
prediction and optimization in a mutually reinforcing cycle to achieve better 4D object understanding with increasing observation time. Given a multi-view object scan and
a long-form monocular video of human-object interaction,
POD iteratively trains a neural network to predict local
part poses from RGB frames, uses this predictor to initialize
a global optimization which refines output poses through inverse rendering, then finally distills the results of optimiza-

6575

