This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAM2Long: Enhancing SAM 2 for Long Video Segmentation
with a Training-Free Memory Tree
Shuangrui Ding1 Rui Qian1 Xiaoyi Dong1,2 * Pan Zhang2
Yuhang Zang2 Yuhang Cao2 Yuwei Guo1 Dahua Lin1,2,3 Jiaqi Wang2 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 CPII under InnoHK
https://mark12ding.github.io/project/SAM2Long/

Abstract

1. Introduction

The Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM 2) has emerged as
a powerful foundation model for object segmentation in
both images and videos. The crucial design of SAM 2 for
video segmentation is its memory module, which prompts
object-aware memories from previous frames for current
frame prediction. However, its greedy-selection memory design suffers from the “error accumulation” problem, where
an errored or missed mask will cascade and influence the
segmentation of the subsequent frames, which limits the performance of SAM 2 toward complex long-term videos. To
this end, we introduce SAM2Long, an improved trainingfree video object segmentation strategy, which considers the
segmentation uncertainty within each frame and chooses
the video-level optimal results from multiple segmentation
pathways in a constrained tree search manner. In practice, we maintain a fixed number of segmentation pathways
throughout the video. For each frame, multiple masks are
proposed based on the existing pathways, creating various
candidate branches. We then select the same fixed number
of branches with higher cumulative scores as the new pathways for the next frame. After processing the final frame,
the pathway with the highest cumulative score is chosen as
the final segmentation result. Benefiting from its heuristic
search design, SAM2Long is robust toward occlusions and
object reappearances, and can effectively segment and track
objects for complex long-term videos. Without further training, SAM2Long significantly and consistently outperforms
SAM 2 on nine VOS benchmarks and three VOT benchmarks.
Notably, SAM2Long achieves an average improvement of 3.7
points across all 12 direct comparisons, with gains of up to
5.3 points in J &F on long-term video object segmentation
benchmarks such as SA-V and LVOS. The code is released at
https://github.com/Mark12Ding/SAM2Long.

* Corresponding Author.

The Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM 2) has gained significant attention as a unified foundational model for promptable object segmentation in both images and videos. Notably, SAM 2 [50] has achieved state-of-the-art performance
across various video object segmentation tasks, significantly
surpassing previous methods. Building upon the original
SAM [33], SAM 2 incorporates a memory module that enables it to generate masklet predictions using stored memory
contexts from previously observed frames. This module
allows SAM 2 to seamlessly extend SAM into the video domain, processing video frames sequentially, attending to the
prior memories of the target object, and maintaining object
coherence over time.
While SAM 2 demonstrates strong performance in video
segmentation and downstream tasks [25], its greedy segmentation strategy struggles to handle complex video scenarios
with frequent occlusions and object reappearance. In detail,
SAM 2 confidently and accurately segments frames when
clear visual cues are present. However, in scenarios with
occlusions or reappearing objects, it can produce mask proposals that are highly variable and uncertain. Regardless of
the frame’s complexity, a uniform greedy selection strategy
is applied to both scenarios: the mask with the highest predicted IoU is selected. Such greedy choice works well for
the easy cases but raises the error potential for the challenging frames. Once an incorrect mask is selected into memory,
it is uncorrectable and will mislead the segmentation of the
subsequent frames. Figure 1 illustrates the problem of “error
accumulation” both qualitatively and quantitatively. The performance of SAM 2 gradually declines as the propagation
progresses into later temporal segments, underscoring its
limitations in keeping accurate tracking over time.
To this end, we redesign the memory module of SAM 2
to enhance its long-term capability and robustness against
occlusions and error propagation. Our approach is motivated
by the observation that the SAM 2 mask decoder generates multiple diverse masks, accompanied by predicted IoU

13614

