This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large Scene Generation with Cube-Absorb Discrete Diffusion
Qianjiang Hu
Wei Hu !
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
No. 128 Zhongguancun North Street, Haidian District, Beijing, 100871, P. R. China
{hqjpku,forhuwei}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)
!! ~Uniform(1, -)
Upsample

Generating realistic 3D outdoor scenes is essential for applications in autonomous driving, virtual reality, environmental science, and urban development. Traditional 3D
generation approaches using single-layer diffusion methods can produce detailed scenes for individual objects but
struggle with high-resolution, large-scale outdoor environments due to scalability limitations. Recent hierarchical diffusion models tackle this by progressively scaling up lowresolution scenes. However, they often sample fine details from pure noise rather than from the coarse scene,
which limits the efficiency. We propose a novel cubeabsorb discrete diffusion (CADD) model, which employs
low-resolution scenes as the base state in the diffusion process to generate fine details, eliminating the need to sample entirely from noise. Moreover, we introduce the Sparse
Cube Diffusion Transformer (SCDT), a transformer-based
model with a sparse cube attention operator, optimized for
generating large-scale sparse voxel scenes. Our method
demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on the CarlaSC
and KITTI360 datasets, supported by qualitative visualizations and extensive ablation studies that highlight the impact of the CADD process and sparse cube attention operator on high-resolution 3D scene generation.

(b)

Coarse input

PDD

Diffusion

Coarse input

Sample

Guidance

Diffusion

Sample

Upsample

Ours

Figure 1. (a) Upsampling with uniform diffusion causes scale mismatches. (b) The coarse-to-fine sampling process of different diffusion methods. PDD [28] samples from pure noise while we sample from the coarse input. The dashed boxes show a zoomed-in
view of our cube-absorb discrete diffusion (CADD) process. Voxels within each cube share the same absorb state as their corresponding coarse voxels.

37, 63] typically adopts a single layer of diffusion. While
this class of methods can generate detailed scenes with individual objects, they struggle to produce high-resolution,
large-scale outdoor scenes. To overcome the limited scalability of these models, hierarchical diffusion models [28,
46] have been introduced to generate high-resolution, largescale outdoor environments. These models start by generating low-resolution 3D scenes, then progressively scale up to
create larger environments. After generating coarse scenes,
these methods typically sample fine scenes from pure noise,
with a low-resolution scene as a guide. However, diffusion models often produce data closely tied to the initial
noise [13, 43], potentially causing semantic and detail misalignment, as shown in Figure 1(a).

1. Introduction
3D outdoor scene generation aims to create threedimensional realistic representations of outdoor environments, often with elements like roads, buildings, vegetation and sometimes even dynamic elements like weather or
traffic. 3D outdoor scene generation plays a fundamental
role in various applications, ranging from autonomous driving [50, 51, 69], virtual reality [20, 38, 56] to urban development [5, 10, 49], providing an efficient and scalable way
to interact with complex outdoor environments.
Previous research on 3D generation [11, 18, 31, 35–
! Corresponding author: Wei Hu.

25186

