This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Image to Video: An Empirical Study of Diffusion Representations
Pedro Vélez∗† Luisa F. Polanı́a∗† Yi Yang Chuhan Zhang Rishabh Kabra Anurag Arnab Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi†

Abstract
Diffusion models have revolutionized generative modeling, enabling unprecedented realism in image and video
synthesis. This success has sparked interest in leveraging
their representations for visual understanding tasks. While
recent works have explored this potential for image generation, the visual understanding capabilities of video diffusion models remain largely uncharted. To address this gap,
we analyze the performance of latent image and video diffusion representations on various downstream tasks including
image classification, action recognition, depth estimation,
and tracking. For the most informative comparison, we utilize the same model architecture, WALT, across image and
video generation objectives. Our results show that video
generation pre-training consistently outperforms its image
counterpart, though we find a striking range in the extent
of this superiority. We further analyze features extracted
from different layers and with varying noise levels, as well
as the effect of model size and training budget on representation and generation quality. This work marks the first
direct comparison of video and image diffusion objectives
for visual understanding, offering insights into the role of
temporal information in representation learning.

1. Introduction
The field of computer vision has made remarkable strides
towards imbuing machines with the ability to see and interpret the visual world. A key challenge in realizing this
goal lies in learning effective representations that capture
both the rich semantic information and dynamic 4D structure (3D & motion) inherent in real-world visual data. Leading approaches in visual representation learning have primarily focused on contrastive learning and reconstruction.
Contrastive models can be exemplified by DINO [8] which
applies knowledge distillation between augmented views of
images, and CLIP [41] which aligns image and text representations, while MAE [23] and I-JEPA [1] are commonly
used reconstruction models that predict masked pixels and
features, respectively.

Figure 1. Video vs. image diffusion representations – The diffusion model V-WALT trained on generating videos learns better features than the same model trained on generating images (I-WALT,
normalized to 100% here) as measured across a range of readout
tasks. See Sec. 4.2 for details.

Meanwhile, generative models have demonstrated an unprecedented ability to synthesize novel, photo-realistic imagery [27, 29]. Among generative approaches, diffusion
models [25] have emerged as the state-of-the-art for both
image and video generation, achieving remarkable results
in synthesizing high-quality visual content [19]. Image diffusion models have also demonstrated their capacity to learn
powerful representations for downstream tasks such as image classification [28], depth estimation [48] and semantic
keypoint matching [24, 51], suggesting that the denoising
process enables these models to acquire a deep understanding of visual semantics and structure. However, despite
the recent emergence of video diffusion models capable of
generating high-fidelity video content, the representational
power of these models remains largely unexplored, particularly in the context of dynamic scene understanding. This
leaves a crucial question unanswered: how effectively do
video diffusion models capture the interplay between motion and spatial scene understanding, and how do they perform compared to image diffusion models?

∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors: pedrovelez@google.com, polania@google.com, i2v@msajjadi.com.

16948

