This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing and Seeing Through the Glass:
Real and Synthetic Data for Multi-Layer Depth Estimation
Hongyu Wen Yiming Zuo Venkat Subramanian Patrick Chen
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

Jia Deng

{hongyu.wen,zuoym,venkat.subra,patrickchen,jiadeng}@princeton.edu

Abstract

plastic bag or accidentally walk into glass doors and walls.
To achieve human-level understanding of transparent objects, a perception system must be capable of capturing
multi-layer depth information. To this end, we introduce a
novel task multi-layer depth estimation, which aims to predict the depth for all visible surfaces on and behind transparent objects by taking a single RGB image as input.
Existing datasets do not support this task. First, existing
datasets only have single-layer depth annotations. While
some datasets [6, 16] define depth on the objects behind the
transparent surface and others [9, 30, 34, 41] define depth on
the transparent surfaces themselves, they offer only a partial
representation of the scene and do not capture the full visual and geometric complexity of transparent surfaces. Second, existing datasets either contain only a small number of
transparent objects [13, 16, 25, 32, 36, 37, 44, 53], or are
restricted to a narrow set of indoor environments and typically tabletop objects [9, 14, 30, 34, 41, 47]. This limited
scope makes it difficult to train or evaluate the generalizability of depth estimation methods for a perception system’s
real-world understanding of transparent objects.
In this paper, we introduce a real and a synthetic dataset
tailored to the multi-layer depth estimation task. The real
dataset is for benchmark purposes, containing in-the-wild
images with high-quality, human-annotated relative depth
ground-truth. Complementary to the real-world benchmark,
our synthetic dataset allows us to train good-performing
models for multi-layer depth estimation.
Our real-world benchmark consists of 1,500 images of
transparent objects collected from diverse environments,
including households, retail spaces, restaurants, laboratories, urban environments, and art installations, under various lighting conditions. Since ground-truth numerical depth
cannot be accurately obtained for transparent objects, let
alone multi-layer depth, we turn to relative depth annotations instead. Relative depth provides rich information
about 3D structures and serves as an effective evaluation
metric. Moreover, human annotators excel at determining relative depth, as they can reliably judge which of two
points is closer to the camera and provide accurate annota-

Transparent objects are common in daily life, and understanding their multi-layer depth information—perceiving
both the transparent surface and the objects behind it—is
crucial for real-world applications that interact with transparent materials. In this paper, we introduce LayeredDepth,
the first dataset with multi-layer depth annotations, including a real-world benchmark and a synthetic data generator, to support the task of multi-layer depth estimation.
Our real-world benchmark consists of 1,500 images from
diverse scenes, and evaluating state-of-the-art depth estimation methods on it reveals that they struggle with transparent objects. The synthetic data generator is fully procedural and capable of providing training data for this task
with an unlimited variety of objects and scene compositions. Using this generator, we create a synthetic dataset
with 15,300 images. Baseline models training solely on
this synthetic dataset produce good cross-domain multilayer depth estimation. Fine-tuning state-of-the-art singlelayer depth models on it substantially improves their performance on transparent objects, with quadruplet accuracy on
our benchmark increased from 55.14% to 75.20%. All images and validation annotations are available under CC0
at https://layereddepth.cs.princeton.edu.

1. Introduction
Transparent objects are common in daily life, and understanding them is crucial for many real-world applications,
such as autonomous navigation, 3D reconstruction, and
dexterous manipulation.
For many tasks, it is equally important to see both the
transparent surfaces themselves as well as the objects behind them—in other words, to perceive depth across multiple layers. For instance, without the ability to see through
glass, simple tasks like retrieving items from transparent
containers or recognizing a scene behind a window would
become difficult. In contrast, without the ability to perceive
the transparent surface itself, we might struggle to grasp a

6715

