This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FE-CLIP: Frequency Enhanced CLIP Model
for Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection and Segmentation

1

Tao Gong 1, 2, 3 , Qi Chu 1, 2, 3 * , Bin Liu1, 2, 3 , Wei Zhou4 , Nenghai Yu1, 2, 3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security
3
the CCCD Key Lab of Ministry of Culture and Tourism
4
Ling Yang Industrial Internet Co., Ltd.
{tgong, qchu, ﬂowice, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn, wezhou8@iﬂytek.com
Abstract

Zero-shot anomaly detection (ZSAD) requires detection
models trained using auxiliary data to detect anomalies
without any training sample in a target dataset. It is challenging since the models need to generalize to anomalies
across different domains. Recently, CLIP-based anomaly
detection methods, such as WinCLIP and AnomalyCLIP,
have demonstrated superior performance in the ZSAD task,
due to the strong zero-shot recognition of the CLIP model.
However, they overlook the utilization of frequency information of images. In this paper, we ﬁnd that frequency information could beneﬁt the ZSAD task, since some properties of the anomaly area, such as appearance defects,
can also be reﬂected based on its frequency information. To this end, We propose Frequency Enhanced CLIP
(FE-CLIP), taking advantage of two different but complementary frequency-aware clues, (1) Frequency-aware Feature Extraction adapter, and (2) Local Frequency Statistics
adapter, in the visual encoder of CLIP, to deeply mine frequency information for the ZSAD task. We apply DCT as
the frequency-domain transformation. Through comprehensive experiments, we show that the proposed FE-CLIP has
good generalization across different domains and achieves
superior zero-shot performance of detecting and segmenting anomalies in 10 datasets of highly diverse class semantics from various defect inspections and medical domains.
Besides, FE-CLIP also achieves superior performance under the few-normal-shot anomaly detection settings.

1. Introduction
Anomaly Detection aims to predict an image or a pixel
as normal or anomalous, and has been widely applied in
* Correponding Author

various applications, such as industrial defect inspection
[4, 5, 7, 16, 28, 35, 37, 47, 51] and medical image analysis
[11, 27, 31, 42, 43]. Existing AD approaches typically assume that training examples in a target application domain
are available for learning the detection models. However,
this assumption may not hold in various scenarios, such as i)
when accessing training data violates data privacy policies,
or ii) when the target domain does not have relevant training data. Therefore, Zero-shot anomaly detection (ZSAD)
is an emerging task for AD in such scenarios, to which the
AD methods mentioned above are not viable, as it requires
detection models to detect anomalies without any training
sample in a target dataset. ZSAD is challenging since the
models need to generalize to anomalies across different domains where the appearance of foreground objects, abnormal regions, and background features can vary signiﬁcantly.
Recently, large pre-trained vision-language models
(VLMs) have demonstrated strong zero-shot recognition
ability in various vision tasks. Particularly, being pretrained using millions/billions of image-text pairs, CLIP
[33] has been applied to empower various downstream tasks
with its strong generalization capability. WinCLIP [17] is
the ﬁrst work to apply the CLIP model in the ZSAD line.
It uses a large number of hand-crafted text prompts and extraction of window/patch/image-level features aligned with
text to ﬁnish the ZSAD task. However, WinCLIP involves
multiple forward passes of image patches for anomaly segmentation, which leads to inefﬁciency. Besides, WinCLIP
only performs the testing of the CLIP model in the ZSAD
without any ﬁne-tuning using the anomaly detection task
data, which also limits its performance in the ZSAD task.
Subsequently, several works [8, 22, 32, 52] attempt to adapt
the CLIP into the ZSAD task by ﬁntuning. Speciﬁcally,
AnomalyCLIP [52] learns object-agnostic text prompts that
capture generic normality and abnormality in an image regardless of its foreground objects. ClipSAM [22] introduces

21220

