This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Routing of Text-to-Image Generation Requests Between
Large Cloud Model and Light-Weight Edge Model
Zewei Xin, Qinya Li*, Chaoyue Niu*, Fan Wu, Guihai Chen
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{xin zewei 12138, qinyali, rvince}@sjtu.edu.cn, {fwu, gchen}@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large text-to-image models demonstrate impressive generation capabilities; however, their substantial size necessitates expensive cloud servers for deployment. Conversely, light-weight models can be deployed on edge devices at lower cost but often with inferior generation quality for complex user prompts. To strike a balance between
performance and cost, we propose a routing framework,
called RouteT2I, which dynamically selects either the
large cloud model or the light-weight edge model for each
user prompt. Since generated image quality is challenging to measure and compare directly, RouteT2I establishes multi-dimensional quality metrics, particularly, by
evaluating the similarity between the generated images and
both positive and negative texts that describe each specific quality metric. RouteT2I then predicts the expected
quality of the generated images by identifying key tokens
in the prompt and comparing their impact on the quality.
RouteT2I further introduces the Pareto relative superiority to compare the multi-metric quality of the generated
images. Based on this comparison and predefined cost constraints, RouteT2I allocates prompts to either the edge or
the cloud. Evaluation reveals that RouteT2I significantly
reduces the number of requesting large cloud model while
maintaining high-quality image generation.

Text-to-Image Model
Stable Diffusion 1.6 [28]
Stable Diffusion XL [24]
Stable Diffusion 3 Medium [9]
Stable Diffusion 3 [9]
Stable Diffusion 3.5 [1]

#Param
0.86 B
2.6 B
2B
8B
8B

Pricing ($/M)
9K
9K
35 K
65 K
65 K

Table 1. For the Stable Diffusion models, newer versions come
with more parameters and higher API costs.

1. Introduction

The high cost of cloud-based image generation drives the
trend of deploying T2I models on edge devices. Techniques
such as quantization [16, 34, 41], structural pruning [4, 17],
and reducing denoising steps [20, 22, 30] are used to minimize model sizes and speed up inference, showing that edge
deployment is feasible. Compared to cloud models, edge
models leverage users’ local computing devices to provide
instant services anytime and anywhere without cloud serving cost and communication overhead. However, the lightweight edge T2I models often have lower generation quality
compared to the cloud large models.
Although cloud models often offer superior quality, not
all user prompts need these large models. For some
prompts, light-weight edge models can produce comparable
or even better results. To ensure high-image quality generation while limiting requests to cloud models to reduce
cost, it is necessary to introduce a routing mechanism such
that suitable models are selected for different user prompts
based on their complexity. Intuitively, as shown in Fig. 1, a
routing framework for T2I models routes only challenging
prompts to the cloud, while handling easy ones on the edge.
Previous routing methods are primarily designed for
large language models (LLMs) [8, 11, 21, 23], presenting
significant challenges when applied to T2I models. One
major challenge lies in comparing the quality of generated
images. Unlike text, image quality does not have unified
metrics and is subject to many influencing factors, including
color, clarity, and the unique distortions typical of generated
images [15]. This makes it hard to compare image quality
to guide routing decisions. Furthermore, the output space of

Nowadays, text-to-image (T2I) models like Imagen [3], Stable Diffusion [28], and DALL·E [27] have achieved significant success in generating diverse, high-quality images
given user prompts. However, the impressive generation
quality comes with large model and high cost. For example, Stable Diffusion 3.5 [1] has 8 billion parameters. Such
a large model necessitates reliance on cloud servers, leading
to high serving cost. As shown in Tab. 1, it is particularly
costly in commercial scenarios with millions of requests.
* Q. Li and C. Niu are the corresponding authors.

19482

