This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

p-MoD: Building Mixture-of-Depths MLLMs via Progressive Ratio Decay
Jun Zhang1,* , Desen Meng1,* , Zhengming Zhang 2 , Zhenpeng Huang 1 , Tao Wu 1 , Limin Wang 1,3, B
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

2

China Mobile Research Institute

3

Shanghai AI Lab

https://github.com/MCG-NJU/p-MoD

Abstract
Despite the remarkable performance of multimodal large
language models (MLLMs) across diverse tasks, the substantial training and inference costs impede their advancement. In this paper, we propose p-MoD, an efficient MLLM
architecture that significantly reduces training and inference costs while maintaining model performance. The majority of computation in MLLMs stems from the overwhelming volume of vision tokens processed by the transformerbased LLM. Accordingly, we leverage the Mixture-ofDepths (MoD) mechanism, where each LLM layer selects
essential vision tokens to process while skipping redundant
ones. However, integrating MoD into MLLMs is non-trivial.
To address the challenges of training and inference stability as well as limited training data, we adapt the MoD
module with two novel designs: tanh-gated weight normalization (TanhNorm) and symmetric token reweighting
(STRing). Moreover, we observe that vision tokens exhibit
higher redundancy in deeper layers and thus design a progressive ratio decay (PRD) strategy, which gradually reduces the token retention ratio layer by layer, employing a
shifted cosine schedule. This crucial design fully unleashes
the potential of MoD, significantly boosting the efficiency
and performance of our models. Extensive experiments on
two baseline models across 15 benchmarks show that our
model matches or even surpasses the performance of corresponding baselines, while requiring only 55.6% TFLOPs
and 53.7% KV cache storage during inference, and 77.7%
GPU hours during training.

LLaVANeXT

-46.3% KV cache

Ours

-44.4% TFLOPs

Figure 1. Comparison with the LLaVA-NeXT [28] baseline.
Our model demonstrates comparable performance with the baseline model on 15 benchmarks across various domains, with 46.3%
fewer KV cache storage and 44.4% fewer TFLOPs during inference.

verse demands of real-world applications, increasing efforts
have broadened the forms of visual inputs that MLLMs
can support, including multiple high-resolution images and
videos [6, 24, 45, 47, 55].
Current state-of-the-art MLLMs handle high-resolution
images either by dividing the original image into multiple
slices [6, 28, 55] which are independently processed by the
vision encoder, or by using a stronger vision encoder with
improved positional encoding which can process any image
at its native resolution [1, 31, 47]. Consequently, when processing multiple high-resolution images or videos, the number of vision tokens increases dramatically, proportional to
the number of pixels and the number of images or video
frames. The overwhelming volume of vision tokens processed by the transformer-based LLM results in explosion
of computational costs, which severely hampers further de-

1. Introduction
Recently, both academia and industry have witnessed the
rapid development of multimdodal large language models
(MLLMs) [1, 14, 24, 46, 47, 51, 55], which have demonstrated exceptional performance across various visionlanguage understanding tasks. Pioneering works in this
field [8, 27, 29, 59] focused on processing single lowresolution image inputs. Subsequently, to meet the di* Equal contribution. B Corresponding author.

3705

