This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenDoP: Auto-regressive Camera Trajectory Generation as a Director of
Photography
Mengchen Zhang1,2 , Tong Wu3B , Jing Tan4 , Ziwei Liu5 , Gordon Wetzstein3 , Dahua Lin2,4,6B
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Stanford University,
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 Nanyang Technological University, 6 CPII under InnoHK
zhangmengchen@zju.edu.cn, {wutong16,gordon.wetzstein}@stanford.edu
{tj023,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Dataset Construction

LLM

[Directorial Caption]: (Movements + Scene + Intent)

[Motion Caption]: The camera remains static while
yawing right, stays static, and then moves forward.
LLM

Pre-processing and Trajectory extraction

[Motion Tags]: (translation + rotation)
Frames 0-47: static + yaw right
Frames 48-67: static + static
Frames 68-119: move forward + static

The camera starts static, yawing right to capture
the extensive area and reveal more equipment
as it pivots. The shot continues to hold steady,
allowing for clear observation of the
surroundings, including dirt inclines and the still
water reflecting nearby trees. The camera then
smoothly moves forward to the water's edge,
keeping focus on the calm water surface.

Motion Tagging

Trajectory Generation & Applications

time

Multi-modal Input
Text

Trajectory Gen

Camera-Controlled Video

4

+ A sunflower swaying in the wind.

[Motion Caption] The camera stays
static while rolling right, then moves
forward continuing to roll right.

Text + RGBD
[Directorial Caption] The camera moves
forward along the valley, showcasing
the rolling hills and yellow fields.

+

Figure 1. Overview. Top: DataDoP data construction. Given RGB video frames, we extract RGBD images and camera poses, then tag
the pose sequence with different motion categories (in different colors). With LLM, we generate two types of captions from motion tags
and RGBD inputs: Motion Caption describes the camera movements, while Directorial Caption describes the camera movements along
with their interaction with the scene and directorial intent. Bottom: Our GenDoP method supports multi-modal inputs for trajectory
creation. The generated camera sequence can be easily applied to various video generation tasks, including text-to-video (T2V) [12] and
image-to-video (I2V) generation [14]. GenDoP paves the way for future advancements in camera-controlled video generation.

Abstract
Camera trajectory design plays a crucial role in video
production, serving as a fundamental tool for conveying directorial intent and enhancing visual storytelling. In cinematography, Directors of Photography meticulously craft
camera movements to achieve expressive and intentional
framing. However, existing methods for camera trajec-

tory generation remain limited: Traditional approaches
rely on geometric optimization or handcrafted procedural systems, while recent learning-based methods often
inherit structural biases or lack textual alignment, constraining creative synthesis. In this work, we introduce
an auto-regressive model inspired by the expertise of Directors of Photography to generate artistic and expressive camera trajectories. We first introduce DataDoP,

18229

