This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Upsampling Process in Light Field Super-Resolution with
Spatial-Epipolar Implicit Image Function
†

Ruixuan Cong1,2*, Yu Wang1,2*, Mingyuan Zhao1,2 , Da Yang2 , Rongshan Chen1,3 , Hao Sheng1,2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Data Science and Intelligent Computing Laboratory,
Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University
3
Faculty of Applied Sciences, Macao Polytechnic University
{congrx, wy4ward, mingyuanzhao, da.yang, rongshan, shenghao}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

capturing spatial and angular information of scenes at the
same time. Its rich description promotes many applications
like scene reconstruction [26], post-capture refocusing [35]
and semantic segmentation [24]. With the development of
imaging technology, hand-held plenoptic cameras that can
record LF in a single shot are available. Unfortunately, restricted by the limited number of sensors, spatial resolution
has to be sacrificed so as to retain more angular cues. In this
circumstance, LF spatial super-resolution (LFSSR) that performs super-resolution (SR) on each raw sub-aperture image (SAI) becomes an essential problem and a vital step for
many downstream applications.
Owing to the rising pervasiveness of deep learning, existing methods utilize convolutional neural network (CNN)
[19, 37, 38], transformer [7, 17, 18] and even mamba [8, 20]
to recover low-resolution (LR) LF back to high-resolution
(HR) in spatial dimension, greatly contributing to the rapid
progress of LFSSR. It is worth noting that most works concentrate on encoder design but neglect the significance of
upsampling process in decoder part. As shown in Fig. 1(a),
general workflow sequentially performs transpose convolution or pixel shuffle-based upsampling on each SAI. Such
simple operation fails to make use of the geometric structure of 4D LF. Another inevitable issue is the low flexibility
for upsampling factor. Once practical desired scale factor
changes to an unseen numerical value, the well-trained network becomes invalid to generate reliable results.
Compared with LFSSR task, single image SR has widely
explored the possibility of arbitrary scale SR with variety of
upsampling modules and achieved initial success in recent
years. Relevant methods [1, 3, 4, 10, 15] mainly utilize implicit image function to predict RGB values at all coordinates in HR space, resulting in arbitrary scale SR with good
visual quality. Motivated by this, a naive thought is to directly transfer such methods to macro-pixel image (MacPI)

Deep learning-based light field image super-resolution
methods have witnessed remarkable success in recent years.
However, most of them only focus on the encoder design and
overlook the importance of upsampling process in decoder
part. Inspired by the recent progress in single image domain
with implicit neural representation, we elaborately propose
spatial-epipolar implicit image function (SEIIF), which optimizes upsampling process to significantly improve performance and supports arbitrary-scale light field image superresolution. Specifically, SEIIF contains two complementary
upsampling patterns. One is spatial implicit image function
(SIIF) that exploits intra-view information in sub-aperture
images. The other is epipolar implicit image function (EIIF)
that mines inter-view information in epipolar plane images.
By unifying the upsampling step of two branches, SEIIF extra introduces cross-branch feature interaction to fully fuse
intra-view information and inter-view information. Besides,
given that line structure in epipolar plane image integrates
spatial-angular correlation of light field, we present an oriented line sampling strategy to exactly aggregate inter-view
information. The experimental results demonstrate that our
SEIIF can be effectively combined with most encoders and
achieve outstanding performance on both fixed-scale and
arbitrary-scale light field image super-resolution. Our code
is available at https://github.com/Congrx/SEIIF.

1. Introduction
Light field (LF) encodes both intensity and directional
information of light rays into four-dimensional signal, thus
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7559

