This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large-scale Pre-training for Grounded Video Caption Generation
Evangelos Kazakos1 , Cordelia Schmid2 , Josef Sivic1
1

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University
https://ekazakos.github.io/grounded_video_caption_generation/

a woman is stirring something in a wok by using a spatula

Figure 1. Output of our GROunded Video caption gEneration (GROVE) model on an instructional video. The model outputs a video-level
caption (bottom) with key noun phrases in the caption coloured and localised (grounded) in the video by temporally consistent bounding
boxes (top). Note how the objects are consistently annotated (with the same color) despite changes in scale and viewpoint and how the
person is marked as occluded (orange box not present) in frames 1 and 4 when the person (or their hand) is not visible.
1

Abstract

1. Introduction

We propose a novel approach for captioning and object grounding in video, where the objects in the caption
are grounded in the video via temporally dense bounding
boxes. We introduce the following contributions. First,
we present a large-scale automatic annotation method that
aggregates frame-level captions grounded with bounding
boxes into temporally dense and consistent annotations.
We apply this approach on the HowTo100M dataset to
construct a large-scale pre-training dataset, named HowToGround1M. We also introduce a Grounded Video Caption Generation model, dubbed GROVE, and pre-train
the model on HowToGround1M. Second, we introduce
iGround–a dataset of 3513 videos with manually annotated
captions and dense spatio-temporally grounded bounding
boxes. This allows us to measure progress on this challenging problem, as well as to fine-tune our model on
this small-scale but high-quality data. Third, we demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art results
on the proposed iGround dataset, as well as on the VidSTG, ActivityNet-Entities, GroundingYouTube, and YouCookInteractions datasets. Our ablations demonstrate the importance of pre-training on our automatically annotated
HowToGround1M dataset followed by fine-tuning on the
manually annotated iGround dataset and validate the key
technical contributions of our model. The dataset and code
are available at https://ekazakos.github.io/
grounded_video_caption_generation/.

We seek to generate grounded captions for a given input
video. As illustrated in Figure 1, the task is challenging as
it entails both (i) generating the natural language caption
for the video and (ii) predicting temporally dense bounding
boxes for multiple noun phrases from the caption. Compared
to grounded captioning in still images [6, 21, 30, 47, 50],
the task in the video domain has the additional difficulty
that objects might disappear in some frames because of
occlusions and we need to produce temporally dense and
consistent bounding boxes across the frames of the input
video. This problem is important as spatio-temporal grounding of individual objects with natural language descriptions on a large scale is one of the key steps to advance
areas such as human-robot interaction and embodied perception [18, 23, 29, 35, 53].
Despite the advances on the grounded video caption generation problem [22, 45, 51] one of the key limiting factors
hindering further progress is the lack of suitable large-scale
videos datasets with captions densely grounded with multiple spatio-temporal boxes in the video. Existing datasets are
restricted to localising a single spatio-temporal tube for each
short textual description [5, 38, 39, 49], have limited temporal consistency as they provide bounding boxes for only a few
sparsely sampled frames per video [10, 13, 51], or are limited
to a specific domain such as egocentric videos [8, 10, 20].
In this work, we address this key limitation by the following three contributions. First, to address the issue of limited

24434

