This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NavM rph: A Self-Evolving World Model for Vision-and-Language Navigation
in Continuous Environments
Xuan Yao1,2 , Junyu Gao1,2 ,* and Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
yaoxuan2022@ia.ac.cn; {junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

NavM rph

瀡Go past by
the dining…瀢

‫ݐ‬

‫ݐ‬

瀡Turn left and
wait right by
the table …瀢

Vision-and-Language Navigation in Continuous Environments (VLN-CE) requires agents to execute sequential navigation actions in complex environments guided by natural
language instructions. Current approaches often struggle
with generalizing to novel environments and adapting to ongoing changes during navigation. Inspired by human cognition, we present NavMorph, a self-evolving world model
framework that enhances environmental understanding and
decision-making in VLN-CE. NavMorph employs compact
latent representations to model environmental dynamics,
equipping agents with foresight for adaptive planning and
policy reﬁnement. By integrating a novel Contextual Evolution Memory, NavMorph leverages scene-contextual information to support effective navigation while maintaining
online adaptability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
NavMorph achieves notable performance improvements on
popular VLN-CE benchmarks. Our Code is available at
https://github.com/Feliciaxyao/NavMorph.

Cognition
瀡Go to
the …瀢

Observation
瀡Walk through
the entry and
down the hall …瀢

Action
VLN-CE
Episodes

Latent Learning

VLN-CE
Episodes

Online Interaction

Figure 1. Self-Evolving World Model for Online VLN-CE tasks.

build a structured understanding of scenes from current observations and instructions, enabling them to predict the
outcomes of their actions and make reasonable inferences
about subsequent steps in response to ongoing environmental changes. Inspired by remarkable human capacity to construct mental representations of environments, facilitating
deliberate planning for complex tasks like motor control,
imagery, inference, and decision-making [23], world models have emerged as promising frameworks that explicitly
model environmental dynamics by simulating actions and
their effects on world states. By maintaining a compact latent representation, world models encapsulate dynamic and
structural characteristics through agent-environment interactions [38], enabling prediction of state transitions and potential future observations. Despite a few pioneering efforts,
such as Navigation World Models [9], DreamWalker [56]
and PathDreamer [32], have demonstrated the potential of
world models for navigation, their application in VLN remains underexplored. Speciﬁcally, these approaches either
lack the capacity to learn underlying action-state transitions
or rely on discrete state dynamics, limiting their ability to
capture the continuous nature of spatial-temporal dynamics
inherent in VLN tasks. The limitation becomes even evident during online deployment, where agents frequently encounter complex and varied environments with substantial
distributional shifts from training data [15, 46, 63]. Such environmental disparities pose risks of performance degradation [16], while existing world model approaches [9, 32, 56]

1. Introduction
In recent years, Embodied AI [41, 43, 57, 64] has emerged
as a pivotal research direction, attracting signiﬁcant attention across computer vision, natural language processing,
and robotics communities due to its interdisciplinary nature.
Among its core challenges, Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [5] has gained prominence for its broad applicability in many intriguing real-world applications, such
as robotic assistance [7, 14, 15, 37], autonomous navigation [31, 45], and smart home systems [17, 54, 55].
VLN tasks require agents to interpret natural language
instructions, process visual information in dynamic environments, and execute sequential actions to reach target locations. To navigate effectively, agents must dynamically
* Corresponding author

5536

