This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing the Unseen: A Semantic Alignment and Context-Aware Prompt
Framework for Open-Vocabulary Camouflaged Object Segmentation
Peng Ren1,2

Tian Bai1,2 * Jing Sun3

Fuming Sun3

1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University
3
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian Minzu University
renpeng24@mails.jlu.edu.cn, baitian@jlu.edu.cn, {jingsun, sunfuming}@dlnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Open-Vocabulary Camouflaged Object Segmentation (OVCOS) aims to segment camouflaged objects of any category based on text descriptions. Despite existing openvocabulary methods exhibit strong segmentation capabilities, they still have a major limitation in camouflaged scenarios: semantic confusion, which leads to incomplete segmentation and class shift in the model. To mitigate the
above limitation, we propose a framework for OVCOS,
named SuCLIP. Specifically, we design a context-aware
prompt scheme that leverages the internal knowledge of the
CLIP visual encoder to enrich the text prompt and align
it with local visual features, thereby enhancing the text
prompt. To better align the visual semantic space and the
text semantic space, we design a class-aware feature selection module to dynamically adjust text and visual embeddings, making them more matched with camouflaged object. Meanwhile, we introduce a semantic consistency loss
to mitigate the semantic deviation between the text prompt
and visual features, ensuring semantic consistency between
the segmentation results and the text prompt. Finally, we design a text query decoder that precisely maps textual semantics to pixel-level segmentation results, thereby achieving
semantic-spatial consistent decoding. Experimental results
show that SuCLIP significantly outperforms the advanced
method OVCoser on the OVCamo dataset.

Input Image

moth

butterfly

butterfly

chameleon

chameleon

chameleon

Ours

GT

OVCoser

Figure 1. A visual case of semantic confusion. Semantic confusion leads to incomplete segmentation results (yellow box marked)
and class shift (red box marked). Here, class shift refers to different parts of the same camouflaged entity being assigned to semantically close classes. The results indicate that our approach enables
precise and high-accuracy segmentation.

1. Introduction

merous datasets and algorithms, the field has made remarkable progress. Despite deep learning-based methods [7, 14, 17, 26–28, 35, 40, 42] perform well in closed-set
scenarios, their heavy reliance on predefined classes makes
it difficult to accurately segment unknown objects, significantly limiting their practical applicability in real-world settings.
Recently, Open-vocabulary learning [34, 50] has provided new insights for segmentation tasks.
OpenVocabulary Semantic Segmentation (OVSS) [1, 2, 13, 15,
24, 25, 32, 33, 36, 37] breaks the limitations of traditional
closed-set methods by utilizing the image-text alignment
capabilities of pre-trained vision-language model (e.g.,
CLIP [20]), enabling segmentation of any category based
on text prompts. Although existing OVSS methods show
impressive performance, they still follow the generalized
segmentation paradigm in semantic segmentation and focus on regular scenes. In camouflaged scenarios, because
objects and backgrounds share highly similar visual characteristics, existing OVSS methods struggle to achieve effec-

Camouflaged Object Segmentation (COS) is a fundamental vision task that aims to identify objects that are highly
similar to their surroundings. With the emergence of nu* Corresponding authors.

23657

