This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robustifying Zero-Shot Vision Language Models by Subspaces Alignment
Junhao Dong1,2 , Piotr Koniusz3,4*, Liaoyuan Feng5 , Yifei Zhang1 , Hao Zhu3 , Weiming Liu6 ,
Xinghua Qu5 , and Yew-Soon Ong1,2*
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, 3 Data61 CSIRO,
4
Australian National University, 5 Bytedance, 6 Zhejiang University
{junhao003, yifei.zhang, asysong}@ntu.edu.sg, piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au,
{fengliaoyuan, xinghua.qu1}@bytedance.com, allenhaozhu@gmail.com, 21831010@zju.edu.cn
1.75

60

* Corresponding authors.

Non-Augmented (TeCoA)
Augmented (TeCoA)
Non-Augmented (Ours)
Augmented (Ours)

10

1

2

dmax(ϕ, ϕaug_adv) (Ours)

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25

3

Perturbation Radius (255⋅ε)

(a) Robust Accuracy

4

0.00

1

2

3

4

Perturbation Radius (255⋅ε)

(b) Difference in Feat. Distance

Figure 1. Motivation (ImageNet). Fig. 1a: robust accuracy of nonaugmented samples vs. their augmented counterparts. TeCoA [38]
was trained on clean & augmented samples, and their adversaries
(TeCoA aligns visual and text embeddings). However, at test time,
the robust accuracy for augmented test samples drops faster w.r.t.
attack radius (255 · ϵ) than for non-augmented test samples, creating a gap (transparent red) due to variations of test/train augmentations, further exacerbated by adversarial attacks. For our method,
a group of adversarial samples on the subspace gets aligned with
another group (subspace) of non-adversarial augmented & clean
samples. Aligning subspaces equals aligning all samples that
could lie on each subspace even if they are not in the dataset, leading to better robustness/smaller gaps. Fig. 1b: ℓ2 feature distances
(average over test embeddings). Vertical lines between curves
are the feature distance gap, dmax (ϕ, ϕaug adv )−dmax (ϕ, ϕadv ),
where dmax (·, ·) means we searched for the largest distance between embedding ϕ of each clean sample and its augmented adversary ϕaug adv (or its non-augmented adversary ϕadv , respectively). The smaller gap for our model indicates that it aligns augmented adversaries with the clean sample better than TeCoA.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [23, 26, 44] and VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) [6, 36, 51] are vulnerable to
adversarial examples [47], limiting the public trust in AI
[10, 13, 15]. Enhancements of zero-shot robustness of
VLMs (e.g., CLIP [43]) focus on adversarial fine-tuning
[38, 45, 48] and rely on sample-wise feature-level alignment
between each adversarial sample and the static text prompt
class target, which inevitably fails to capture distribution
trends of groups of related samples (e.g., augmented samples of a given image), degrading the robustness of zeroshot inference on unseen adversaries.

20

6

dmax(ϕ, ϕadv) (Ours)

1.25

30
ℓ2 distance

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) enjoy strong zero-shot
performance but are vulnerable to adversarial attacks posing security risks. Adversarially robust fine-tuning enhances zero-shot robustness on new datasets while preserving the natural performance of pre-trained VLMs. However,
prior methods use sample-wise adversarial fine-tuning, neglecting the underlying second-order statistics that represent entire groups of samples. This leads to a feature-level
discrepancy between clean and adversarial samples of their
augmented variants. Thus, we propose to represent groups
of samples as subspaces to capture distributions and turn
the traditional sample-wise adversarial fine-tuning into its
distributional counterpart. For each image, we build distributions from (i) a clean sample with its augmentations
and (ii) their adversarial counterparts. For text, we build
distributions from (iii) a clean prompt and its synonymous
prompts and (iv) their adversarial counterparts. We then
perform alignment between image and text subspaces, and
“adversarial” subspaces are also aligned toward “clean”
subspaces. Thus, all samples underlying these distributions
(think infinite number) also get aligned, leading to generalizable robustness. Evaluations on 15 datasets are provided.

Robust Accuacy (%)

Abstract

dmax(ϕ, ϕadv) (TeCoA)
dmax(ϕ, ϕaug_adv) (TeCoA)

1.50

40

To substantiate our claim, we augment a set of clean
samples from ImageNet by an efficient image augmentation
strategy [35]. Fig. 1a shows the robust accuracy gap between augmented and no-augmented samples. For TeCoA
[38], as the perturbation radius (255 · ϵ) grows, augmented
test samples become more susceptible to attacks than clean
ones. Our method remains stable, indicating that subspace
alignment is superior to sample-wise alignment.
Fig. 1b depicts the distance gap dmax (ϕ, ϕaug adv ) −
dmax (ϕ, ϕadv ), where ϕ, ϕaug adv , and ϕadv are embeddings of a clean sample, its augmented adversary, and its
non-augmented adversary. Averaged results on the test set

21037

