This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gain-MLP: Improving HDR Gain Map Encoding via a Lightweight MLP
Trevor D. Canham1
SaiKiran Tedla1
Michael J. Murdoch2
Michael S. Brown1
1
2
York University
Rochester Institute of Technology

Abstract

50 KB
embedded
metadata

HDR image (BT.2020)

While most images shared on the web and social media
platforms are encoded in standard dynamic range (SDR),
many displays now can accommodate high dynamic range
(HDR) content. Additionally, modern cameras can capture
images in an HDR format but convert them to SDR to ensure maximum compatibility with existing workflows and
legacy displays. To support both SDR and HDR, new encoding formats are emerging that store additional metadata
in SDR images in the form of a gain map. When applied
to the SDR image, the gain map recovers the HDR version
of the image as needed. These gain maps, however, are
typically down-sampled and encoded using standard image
compression, such as JPEG and HEIC, which can result
in unwanted artifacts. In this paper, we propose to use a
lightweight multi-layer perceptron (MLP) network to encode the gain map. The MLP is optimized using the SDR
image information as input and provides superior performance in terms of HDR reconstruction. Moreover, the MLPbased approach uses a fixed memory footprint (10 KB) and
requires no additional adjustments to accommodate different image sizes or encoding parameters. We conduct extensive experiments on various MLP based HDR embedding
strategies and demonstrate that our approach outperforms
the current state-of-the-art. Readers can access the code at
https://gain-mlp.github.io/.

JPEG
/HEIF
(SDR)

JPEG
/HEIF
gain
map

gain map
JPEG/HEIF gain map HDR reconstruction

SDR image (BT. 709/sRGB)
embedded
metadata

1.3 MB

JPEG
/HEIF
(SDR)

MLP

JPEG 10 KB
/HEIF
(SDR)
MLP gain map HDR reconstruction

Figure 1. High-dynamic-range (HDR) reconstruction methods
embed HDR metadata in a standard dynamic range (SDR) image
file in the form of a per-channel gain map. Current approaches
rely on 8-bit JPEG (or HEIF) to encode the gain map. We show
that a lightweight MLP (10 KB) that uses the SDR image as input
provides better reconstruction with minimum memory overhead.

1. Introduction

The availability of better-quality displays has created a
need for new, flexible encoding strategies that accommodate
both legacy SDR devices and newer HDR displays. Major
device manufacturers, software companies, and standards
organizations are actively developing encoding recommendations for adaptive dynamic range formats. Examples include Apple’s Extended Dynamic Range (EDR), Android’s
UltraHDR, Samsung’s SuperHDR, Adobe’s gain map specification, and the ISO 21496 recommendation for digital
photography [19], which allow for images to be appropriately adapted to varying brightness settings in real-time.
These strategies all agree on storing pixel-wise gain
maps that allow easy translation or interpolation between
image versions intended for SDR and HDR display. Specifically, gain maps, calculated as a ratio between SDR and
HDR pixel values, are quantized to 8-bits and compressed
in a multiple image format (e.g., HEIF, JPEG-XL, etc.) to
serve as metadata for the primary 8-bit SDR image. This
gain map can be decompressed and used to reconstruct the
HDR version of the image by multiplying it with the SDR
image. This reliance on conventional compression, however, can lead to unwanted artifacts even at standard compression quality factors, while increasing the compression
quality leads to increased memory size (Figure 1).

High dynamic range (HDR) and wide color gamut displays
are now commonly found in smartphones and tablets. HDR
displays enable contrast ratios that mimic real-world scenes
with the ability to produce high-quality luminance gradations from 0.01 to 1000 cd/m2 (nits), unlike the standard
dynamic range (SDR) displays, which are limited to 1 to
100 cd/m2 [34]. Additionally, cameras—particularly smartphone cameras—can now natively capture images in HDR
format. However, to ensure compatibility with existing
SDR displays, most images are still encoded in SDR formats, such as the BT.709 [33] (sRGB) standard used in 8-bit
JPEG.

18619

