This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Low-light Scene Restoration via Illumination Transition
Ze Li1,2

Feng Zhang3,2 Xiatian Zhu4 Meng Zhang1,2 Yanghong Zhou2 P. Y. Mok1 *
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
3
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
4
University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom

Abstract
Synthesizing normal-light novel views from low-light multiview images is an important yet challenging task, given
the low visibility and high ISO noise present in the input images. Existing low-light enhancement methods often struggle to effectively preprocess such low-light inputs, as they fail to consider correlations among multiple views. Although other state-of-the-art methods have
introduced illumination-related components offering alternative solutions to the problem, they often result in drawbacks such as color distortions and artifacts, and they provide limited denoising effectiveness. In this paper, we propose a novel Robust Low-light Scene Restoration framework (RoSe), which enables effective synthesis of novel
views in normal lighting conditions from low-light multiview image inputs, by formulating the task as an illuminance transition estimation problem in 3D space, conceptualizing it as a specialized rendering task. This multiviewconsistent illuminance transition field establishes a robust
connection between low-light and normal-light conditions.
By further exploiting the inherent low-rank property of illumination to constrain the transition representation, we
achieve more effective denoising without complex 2D techniques or explicit noise modeling. To implement RoSe, we
design a concise dual-branch architecture and introduce a
low-rank denoising module. Experiments demonstrate that
RoSe significantly outperforms state-of-the-art models in
both rendering quality and multiview consistency on standard benchmarks. The codes and data are available at
https://pegasus2004.github.io/RoSe.

Figure 1. Image/video enhancement (Zero-DCE [8]+NeRF, RUAS
[15] +NeRF, LLVE [43] +NeRF) vs. state-of-the-art models (LLNeRF [34], Aleth-Nerf [5]) vs. our RoSe.

data acquisition is often not feasible. Recent advancements
in techniques such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [19]
have demonstrated impressive capabilities in 3D scene representation; however, they struggle in low-light conditions
because of the reliance on direct color optimization, which
becomes unreliable in cases of low visibility or high ISO
noise.
Exsiting low-light enhancement methods [4, 8, 15, 17,
43] offer a straightforward solution by converting low-light
inputs into normal-light images either before or after 3D
scene optimization. However, these methods often result
in low-quality novel view images with artifacts and color
distortion (Fig. 1(b-d)), as these enhancement methods primarily focus on improving individual views independently
without considering the multiview relationship.
More recently, new approaches are proposed. For
example, LLNeRF [34] improves brightness by learning
per-view enhancement coefficients for the view-dependent
color component of 3D sampling points. However, since the
view-dependent components decoupled from the same sampling point vary across different viewpoints, LLNeRF may
introduce conflicting enhancements for that point, leading
to artifacts and color distortion in the synthesized images
(Fig. 1(e)). Aleth-NeRF [5] proposes a counter intuitive yet
effective approach by assigning non-zero transmittance val-

1. Introduction
The synthesis of a normal-light 3D scene from low-light
multiview images [5, 34] remains a valuable yet challenging task, as in many real-world applications where well-lit
* Corresponding author: tracy.mok@ust.hk

6188

