This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReassembleNet: Learnable Keypoints and Diffusion for 2D Fresco
Reconstruction
Adeela Islam1,2 Stefano Fiorini1 Stuart James3 Pietro Morerio1 Alessio Del Bue1
Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 2 University of Genova 3 Durham University
{adeela.islam, pietro.morerio}@iit.it

1

Abstract
The task of reassembly is a significant challenge across
multiple domains, including archaeology, genomics, and
molecular docking, requiring the precise placement and orientation of elements to reconstruct an original structure.
In this work, we address key limitations in state-of-the-art
Deep Learning methods for reassembly, namely i) scalability; ii) multimodality; and iii) real-world applicability:
beyond square or simple geometric shapes, realistic and
complex erosion, or other real-world problems. We propose ReassembleNet, a method that reduces complexity by
representing each input piece as a set of contour keypoints
and learning to select the most informative ones by Graph
Neural Networks pooling inspired techniques. ReassembleNet effectively lowers computational complexity while
enabling the integration of features from multiple modalities, including both geometric and texture data. Further enhanced through pretraining on a semi-synthetic dataset. We
then apply diffusion-based pose estimation to recover the
original structure. We improve on prior methods by 57%
and 87% for RMSE Rotation and Translation, respectively.

Figure 1. We introduce ReassembleNet as a method for fresco reassembly. Our ReassembleNet addresses key challenges that have
been ignored by traditional methods, including complex geometry, texture and erosion, missing pieces, often in a data-scarcity
scenario.

their wide range of applications, including genomics [21],
assistive technologies [39], and molecular docking [3].
In recent years, AI techniques for reassembling objects
have gained increasing traction in the heritage field, particularly in fresco reconstruction [38]. This growing application of AI is driven by the fundamental challenge archaeologists face in reconstructing the past. After extensive and painstaking work involving site surveys and excavations, they are often confronted with the daunting task of
reassembling countless fragments of varying sizes, shapes,
and appearances to recreate ancient artifacts or artworks.
Depending on the complexity of the artifact, this reassembly process can span months, years, or even decades. In
cases involving a vast number of pieces, the task may become nearly insurmountable, regardless of the skill of the
experts. Despite recent advances, state-of-the-art methods
for solving this task remain far from achieving a satisfactory
accuracy [36]. The challenges persist not only in the 3D domain but also in the 2D space, where the reduced degrees of

1. Introduction
Reassembly requires placing each element in its correct position and orientation to form the original shape as a whole
– whether it be a 2D or 3D object. This ability is a form
of spatial intelligence, which refers to the capacity to accurately perceive the visual-spatial environment and manipulate that perceived space [9]. This skill is typically evaluated through reassembly tasks, where individual components must be arranged and connected to form a coherent,
functional whole—such as solving 2D jigsaw puzzles or assembling 3D structures with LEGO blocks.
Since the advent of the first puzzle solver [5], reassembly tasks have posed a significant challenge to the machine
learning community due to their inherent combinatorial
complexity. These challenges are further underscored by

9048

