This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E-NeMF: Event-based Neural Motion Field for Novel Space-time View Synthesis
of Dynamic Scenes
Yan Liu1,2, Zehao Chen1,2 Haojie Yan1,2 De Ma1,2 Huajin Tang1,2 Qian Zheng1,2,† Gang Pan1,2,†
1
2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

{rliuyan2, zehao, hjyan, made, htang, qianzheng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

relies on accurately reconstructing the scene motion, appearance, and geometry of the dynamic scene. However,
the absence of inter-frame information prevents the continuous capture of motion, thereby hindering accurate dynamic
scene reconstruction. Previous approaches [24, 25, 38, 39]
mitigate this issue by imposing linear motion assumption,
yet they often yield unrealistic results when dealing with
complex motions, such as deformation or nonlinear motion
(shown in Fig. 1 Top 2
⃝- 4
⃝).

Synthesizing novel space-time views from a monocular
video is a highly ill-posed problem, and its effectiveness relies on accurately reconstructing motion and appearance of
the dynamic scene. Frame-based methods for novel spacetime view synthesis in dynamic scenes rely on simplistic motion assumptions due to the absence of inter-frame cues,
which makes them fall in complex motion. Event camera
captures inter-frame cues with high temporal resolution,
which makes it hold the promising potential to handle complex motion. However, it is still difficult due to the event
noise and sparsity. To mitigate the impact caused by event
noise and sparsity, we propose E-NeMF, which alleviates
the impact of event noise with Parametric Motion Representation and mitigates the event sparsity with Flow Prediction Module. Experiments on multiple real-world datasets
demonstrate our superior performance in handling complex
motion. Codes will be released at https://github.com/zjubmi-lab/E-NeMF.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis [14, 21, 25, 30, 61, 65] in dynamic
scenes is a challenging and long-standing vision problem,
with applications in autonomous driving [28], games [40]
and entertainment [5]. Recently, several works [24, 38, 39,
51, 64, 70] have explored novel space-time synthesis of dynamic scenes from a monocular video, with the aim of synthesizing novel views across both space and time. This enables viewing dynamic scenes from arbitrary temporal and
spatial perspectives, offering a more comprehensive understanding of the scene and benefiting applications such as
virtual reality [3, 10] and slow motion generation [24].
Synthesizing novel space-time views from a monocular
video is a highly ill-posed problem, and its effectiveness
† Corresponding author.

Event cameras [13] capture brightness changes asynchronously, offering high temporal resolution and eliminating the inter-frame information loss found in frame-based
cameras. Thus, event cameras have great potential to enable
novel space-time synthesis in dynamic scenes with complex
motion. However, the presence of noise and the inherent
sparsity of the event streams affect the accuracy of motion
trajectory estimation, preventing existing event-based methods [33] from effectively achieving novel space-time view
synthesis (shown in Fig. 1, Bottom right).
In this paper, we propose Event-based Neural Motion
Field (E-NeMF), a framework designed for novel spacetime view synthesis in dynamic scenes. Using frames and
event streams, we optimize the motion trajectory, appearance, and geometry of dynamic scenes, enabling the synthesis of realistic novel space-time views. The optimization
of motion trajectory is guided by event streams, which are
grouped across temporal (for each point) and spatial (for
each moment) domains, respectively, to mitigate the impact
of event noise and event sparsity. Specifically, E-NeMF predicts motion trajectory for each spatial point, which holistically fits noisy events across the temporal domain using the
Parametric Motion Representation. To counteract the impact of event sparsity, we propose a Flow Prediction Module that converts the sparse event stream into dense optical flow. This optical flow is then used to refine and optimize the neural motion field. To enhance consistency in
novel space-time synthesis for complex motion, we align
information from neighboring temporal domains along the

10854

