This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Perspective: Neural 360-Degree Video Compression
Andy Regensky, Marc Windsheimer, Fabian Brand, André Kaup
Multimedia Communications and Signal Processing
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany
andy.regensky, marc.windsheimer, fabian.brand, andre.kaup@fau.de

Abstract

ξo

Neural video codecs (NVCs) have seen fast-paced advancement in recent years and already perform close to stateof-the-art traditional video codecs like H.266/VVC. However, NVC investigations have so far focused on improving
performance for classical perspective video leaving the increasingly important 360-degree video format unexplored.
In this paper, we address this issue and present how existing
NVCs can be optimized for 360-degree video while also improving performance on perspective video. As no suitable
datasets for neural 360-degree video compression exist, we
publish a large-scale 360-degree video dataset consisting
of more than 6000 user generated 9-frame sequences with
resolutions ranging from 0.5K to 8K. We propose a novel
method for training data augmentation exploiting the spherical characteristics of 360-degree video that shows to be
crucial for achieving maximum compression performance.
An additional positional feature encoding further supports
the NVC in dynamic bitrate allocation notably improving
the performance for both 360-degree and perspective video.
Overall, we achieve rate savings of almost 8% for 360degree video and more than 3% for perspective video with
minimal complexity overhead. The dataset is available
at: https://huggingface.co/datasets/FAULMS/UGC360. Source code and pre-trained model weights
are available at: https://github.com/FAU-LMS/
NVC360.

ξ−1
o

Bitrate
increase savings

(a) Spherical domain

(b) Equirectangular projection

−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8

Performance for 360-degree video
Performance for perspective video
Naive
Naive optimization
optimization on on 360-degree and
360-degree video perspective video

Our 360-degree
optimization
framework

(c) Rate savings

Figure 1. 360-degree image in (a) spherical domain representation
and (b) equirectangular projection format. Bjøntegaard Delta rate
savings (c) of our proposed framework for optimizing neural video
codecs for 360-degree video. Tested with DCVC-HEM [29] using
the JVET360 [19], HEVC [7], and UVG [37] datasets. The anchor
is DCVC-HEM trained on perspective video.

1. Introduction

video requires immense resolutions in order to match the
human visual systems’ angular resolution such that individual pixels are indistinguishable. While this effect is
reached with 8K video for conventional planar perspective
video [15], resolutions of up to 21K are required in order to reach the same effect with 360-degree video [12].
This leads to major challenges in storing and transmitting
360-degree videos and highlights the importance of efficient
360-degree video compression technologies.
As 360-degree video provides image information for an
all-around field of view, its natural representation lies on
the surface of a sphere in 3D space as shown in Fig. 1(a).
Most state-of-the-art image and video processing tech-

360-degree video allows to provide a feeling of presence
and immersion that is unprecedented in traditional perspective video technologies. This feeling of presence has shown
to support focus, emotional attachment, and motivation in
diverse application areas including education, communication, and entertainment [5, 25, 46]. However, 360-degree
The authors gratefully acknowledge that this work has been supported
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under project number 418866191.

16143

