This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVQA: Mamba with Unified Sampling for Efficient Video Quality Assessment
Yachun Mi1

Yu Li1
Weicheng Meng1
Chaofeng Chen
1,2 *
1*
Chen Hui
Shaohui Liu
1
Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology

Abstract
The rapid growth of long-duration, high-definition
videos has made efficient video quality assessment (VQA)
a critical challenge. Existing research typically tackles
this problem through two main strategies: reducing model
parameters and resampling inputs. However, light-weight
Convolution Neural Networks (CNN) and Transformers often struggle to balance efficiency with high performance
due to the requirement of long-range modeling capabilities.
Recently, the state space model, particularly Mamba, has
emerged as a promising alternative, offering linear complexity with respect to sequence length. Meanwhile, efficient VQA heavily depends on resampling long sequences
to minimize computational costs, yet current resampling
methods are often weak in preserving essential semantic
information. In this work, we present MVQA, a Mambabased model designed for efficient VQA along with a novel
Unified Semantic and Distortion Sampling (USDS) approach. USDS combines semantic patch sampling from
low-resolution videos and distortion patch sampling from
original-resolution videos. The former captures semantically dense regions, while the latter retains critical distortion details. To prevent computation increase from dual
inputs, we propose a fusion mechanism using pre-defined
masks, enabling a unified sampling strategy that captures
both semantic and quality information without additional
computational burden. Experiments show that the proposed
MVQA, equipped with USDS, achieve comparable performance to state-of-the-art methods while being 2× as fast
and requiring only 1/5 GPU memory. Code is available at
https://github.com/xiao-mi-d/MVQA

(a) GPU Memory Comparison

(b) Speed Comparison

(c) GPU Memory Comparison

(d) Accuracy Comparison

Figure 1. Performance and efficiency comparisons between FASTVQA[74] and our MVQA-tiny. Our method achieves comparable
results while running up to 2× faster than the current most efficient
FAST-VQA, and reducing GPU memory usage by 5.3×. This advantage further scales with increased video frames and batch size.

1. Introduction

nary users can now effortlessly capture long-duration, highresolution videos (e.g., 2K, 4K) and upload them to online
platforms. The increasing length and size of video present
substantial challenges for video quality assessment (VQA)
algorithms. Thus, developing efficient methods to quickly
evaluate massive video data is a pressing challenge.
Traditional VQA methods [1, 5, 7, 34, 42, 55, 60, 68]
primarily rely on handcrafted features. While these approaches are computationally efficient and have low complexity, they struggle to effectively capture the intricate,
high-dimensional characteristics of videos. As a result,
their performance tends to be limited when processing highresolution videos with rich details and diverse content. In
contrast, deep learning-based VQA methods [2, 37, 38,
44, 64, 74–78, 84, 87, 90, 92, 93], particularly Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [18, 19, 21, 22, 61, 65–67]
and Transformers [6, 47, 48], have demonstrated substantial advantages in handling complex video tasks. However,

With the widespread adoption of high-definition portable
recording devices and the ongoing advancements in video
compression [9, 10, 25, 26] and network technologies, ordi* Corresponding author.

18498

