This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P LACE I T 3D: Language-Guided Object Placement in Real 3D Scenes
Ahmed Abdelreheem2,∗ Filippo Aleotti1 Jamie Watson1 Zawar Qureshi1 Abdelrahman Eldesokey2
Peter Wonka2 Gabriel Brostow1,3 Sara Vicente1 Guillermo Garcia-Hernando1
1
Niantic Spatial 2 KAUST 3 UCL
https://nianticlabs.github.io/placeit3d/
“Place the asset so that it is
hidden from the window and in
the vicinity of the toilet. The
asset should be oriented
towards the cabinet.”

“Put the asset so that it is
between the window and
the television. It should be
on the table.”
3D Asset

3D Scene

Textual Prompt

3D Asset

3D Scene

Placement
Result

Textual Prompt

Placement
Result

Figure 1. Language-guided 3D Object Placement in Real 3D Scenes: Given a text prompt, the task is to find a valid placement for
an asset, requiring semantic and geometric understanding of the scene, the asset’s shape, and spatial relationships. Colored dots show
referenced objects (for visualization only, not given to the model), and the yellow arrow indicates the predicted frontal direction.

Abstract

1. Introduction
At two to three years old, neurotypical children learn to
follow two-step instructions like “Get your shoes and put
them on the shelf” [42]. These tasks may appear simple, yet
children need time to grasp basic vocabulary and to learn the
physical affordances of both 3D objects and scene layout.
Perhaps AIs could obtain similar capabilities.
In this paper, we focus on the novel task of languageguided 3D object placement in a reconstructed real 3D
scene. As in the shoe example, the goal is to find a valid
placement of the object among multiple configurations that
satisfy the instruction. As shown in Figure 1, the placement must also respect the physical constraints of the space
and of the 3D asset. Excelling at this task would unlock
applications such as instructing a robot, through language,
to move a real object to a new location. It is also relevant
to augmented reality (AR). For instance, a shopper wearing
an AR headset could use natural-language commands to anchor a virtual product on a real-world surface or reposition
digital décor anywhere in the room.

We introduce the task of Language-Guided Object Placement in Real 3D Scenes. Given a 3D reconstructed
point-cloud scene, a 3D asset, and a natural-language instruction, the goal is to place the asset so that the instruction is satisfied. The task demands tackling four intertwined challenges: (a) one-to-many ambiguity in valid
placements; (b) precise geometric and physical reasoning;
(c) joint understanding across the scene, the asset, and language; and (d) robustness to noisy point clouds with no
privileged metadata at test time. The first three challenges
mirror the complexities of synthetic scene generation, while
the metadata-free, noisy-scan scenario is inherited from
language-guided 3D visual grounding. We inaugurate this
task by introducing a benchmark and evaluation protocol,
releasing a dataset for training multi-modal large language
models (MLLMs), and establishing a first nontrivial baseline. We believe this challenging setup and benchmark will
provide a foundation for evaluating and advancing MLLMs
in 3D understanding.

∗ Work done during an internship at Niantic.

6645

