This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causal-Entity Reflected Egocentric Traffic Accident Video Synthesis
Lei-Lei Li1 , Jianwu Fang1† , Junbin Xiao2 , Shanmin Pang1 , Hongkai Yu4 , Chen Lv3 ,
Jianru Xue1 , and Tat-Seng Chua2
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University

2

National University of Singapore

3

Nanyang Technological University

4

Cleveland State University

http://lotvsmmau.net/Causal-VidSyn *

Abstract

Text Prompt: The pedestrian does not notice the ego-car, resulting in that the ego-car hits the
pedestrian. (Causal-entity reflected text change: pedestrian→motorbike).

Egocentricly comprehending the causes and effects of car
accidents is crucial for the safety of self-driving cars, and
synthesizing causal-entity reflected accident videos can facilitate the capability test to respond to unaffordable accidents
in reality. However, incorporating causal relations as seen
in real-world videos into synthetic videos remains challenging. This work argues that precisely identifying the accident
participants and capturing their related behaviors are of
critical importance. In this regard, we propose a novel diffusion model Causal-VidSyn for synthesizing egocentric traffic
accident videos. To enable causal entity grounding in video
diffusion, Causal-VidSyn leverages the cause descriptions
and driver fixations to identify the accident participants and
behaviors, facilitated by accident reason answering and
gaze-conditioned selection modules. To support CausalVidSyn, we further construct Drive-Gaze, the largest driver
gaze dataset (with 1.54M frames of fixations) in driving
accident scenarios. Extensive experiments show that CausalVidSyn surpasses state-of-the-art video diffusion models in
terms of frame quality and causal sensitivity in various tasks,
including accident video editing, normal-to-accident video
diffusion, and text-to-video generation.

1. Introduction
The emerging fully self-driving (FSD) technique [65], while
bringing convenience to our daily life, has also led to various ethical, trustworthy, and economic disputes in handling
car accidents [51]. Therefore, an egocentric comprehension
of the car accident is paramount not only for improving
self-driving safety but also for disambiguating accident responsibility. Yet, the scarcity of egocentric accident data
severely hinders research in this field.
With the tremendous advancements in video diffusion
models [11, 14, 24, 25, 32, 81, 83], synthetic videos could
be a promising solution for data scarcity. However, the stateof-the-art (SOTA) video diffusion models are developed for
* †Corresponding author.

Video
Diffusion
Model

Visual Prompt

Abductive-OAVD Causal-Insensitive CogVideoX-2B

Casual-VidSyn

Figure 1. We show the inability of two state-of-the-art diffusion
models (i.e., Abductive-OAVD [17] and CogVideoX-2B [82]) for
editing accident video content. Abductive-OAVD cannot generate
the needed motorbike, while CogVideoX fails to reflect the collision
situation. Our Causal-VidSyn accurately generates the collision
motorbike and maintains the background scenes.

common video generation; they often fail to generate egocentric accident videos that achieve a causal-entity reflected
synthesis [48, 82]. As shown in Fig. 1, when facing a counterfactual text edit from “pedestrian” to “motorbike” collision,
one of the SOTA model Abductive-OAVD [17] fails to generate the motorbike. While CogVideoX [82] responds to the
needed motorbike, the requested collision is not reflected.
To overcome such issues, precisely identifying the causal
entities (or objects) in accidents and capturing their accidentrelated behaviors is the key to success. However, accident
scenarios often involve tiny objects in fast scene changes,
which makes it extremely difficult to identify the objects,
especially in the ego view, not to mention analyzing their
nuanced behaviors related to the accidents. In this paper, we
highlight the incorporation of two critical information cues:
accident reason-collision descriptions and driver gaze fixations. The reason-collision descriptions contain rich information about the accidents, including the major participants
and their misbehavior that resulted in the accidents. Despite
being informative, finding the right reason for the accident
is still challenging. Also, there is a modality gap between
textual descriptions to visual accident appearances. As a
remedy, driver gaze fixations provide direct visual attention
to the accident regions, since human drivers can perceive the
road hazard incisively based on their driving experience.
To effectively exploit such information for egocentric
accident video diffusion, we propose the Causal-VidSyn,
which makes the video diffusion backbone (e.g., 3D-Unet)
causal-grounded, facilitated by 1) an accident reason answer-

11208

