This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PBFG: A New Physically-Based Dataset and Removal of Lens Flares and Glares
Jie Zhu1
Sungkil Lee1,2, *
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
{jzhu, sungkil}@skku.edu

Abstract
Flare and glare are common nighttime artifacts that degrade image quality and hinder computer vision tasks. Existing synthetic datasets lack physical realism and diversity, while deep learning-based removal methods struggle
in complex scenes, posing significant challenges. To address these issues, we introduce the high-quality annotated
Physically-Based Flare and Glare (PBFG) dataset and a
Flare and Glare Removal Network (FGRNet). PBFG comprises 2,600 flares and 4,000 glares using our computational rendering scheme with diverse lens systems and optical configurations. Our advanced streak synthesis enhances template fidelity and improves streak removal accuracy. FGRNet leverages spatial-frequency features for
comprehensive local and global feature extraction. It introduces a Spatial-Frequency Enhanced Module with a
Spatial Reconstruction Unit and a Frequency-Enhanced
Unit to extract multi-scale spatial information and enhance frequency representation. This design effectively removes complex artifacts, including large-area glares, diverse flares, and multiple or off-screen-induced streaks. Additionally, a histogram-matching module ensures stylistic
and visual consistency with ground truth. Extensive experiments confirm that PBFG accurately replicates real-world
patterns, and FGRNet outperforms state-of-the-art methods
both quantitatively and qualitatively, resulting in significant
gains of PSNRs (up to 2.3 dB and 3.14 dB in an image and
its glare regions, respectively).

Wu et al. [37]

Flare7k [5]

Flare-R [6]

PBFG (Ours)

Figure 1. A comparison of synthetic flare and glare patterns between our dataset and previous works [5, 6, 37].

corresponding to reflective flare and scattering flare in prior
work [6]. Flare and glare, prominent at night, impair detail, visibility, and contrast, posing challenges for tasks like
nighttime autonomous driving [18], license plate recognition [29], and object detection [8]. Therefore, effectively
removing flare and glare is essential for enhancing the accuracy and robustness of computer vision systems. However,
this task is complex, requiring separating artifacts from the
background and restoring overexposed and occluded regions, further complicated by the diverse shapes, textures,
and positions of real-world flares and glares.
Previous approaches include physical solutions like specialized lenses, hoods, and anti-reflective coatings [22],
which reduce stray light but fail under intense lighting.
Computational methods, such as inpainting [3], deconvolution [9, 23], template matching, intensity thresholding [1, 31], and physical priors [20], remove artifacts but
often assume uniform artifact distribution or are limited
to specific flare types, resulting in potential inaccuracies.
Deep learning models offer a promising alternative, but the
lack of large-scale, realistic nighttime datasets limits their
effectiveness. Existing datasets rely on non-physical synthesis [5, 37], which fails to capture the diversity and complexity of real-world conditions. This limitation highlights
the need for more realistic and diverse datasets to improve

1. Introduction
Lens flare arises from reflections between optical elements,
while glare stems from diffraction caused by the aperture
and fingerprints, as well as scattering caused by surface contaminants and lens imperfections [13, 16, 18, 37]. For clarity, we adopt the terms flare and glare based on their physical principles, aligning with computer graphics [25] and
* Corresponding author.

Code is available: https://github.com/cgskku/pbfg.

5448

