This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Counting Stacked Objects
Corentin Dumery1 , Noa Etté1 , Aoxiang Fan1 , Ren Li1 , Jingyi Xu2 , Hieu Le1 , Pascal Fua1
1

EPFL, 2 Stony Brook University

{name.surname}@{epfl.ch, stonybrook.edu}

Figure 1. 3D Counting (3DC). From multiple views of objects to be counted and their container, we estimate both the total volume they
occupy and the fraction of this volume taken up by the objects. Combining these estimates yields the total number of objects.

Abstract
Visual object counting is a fundamental computer vision
task underpinning numerous real-world applications, from
cell counting in biomedicine to trafﬁc and wildlife monitoring. However, existing methods struggle to handle the
challenge of stacked 3D objects in which most objects are
hidden by those above them. To address this important yet
underexplored problem, we propose a novel 3D counting
approach that decomposes the task into two complementary subproblems - estimating the 3D geometry of the object stack and the occupancy ratio from multi-view images.
By combining geometric reconstruction and deep learningbased depth analysis, our method can accurately count
identical objects within containers, even when they are irregularly stacked. We validate our 3D Counting pipeline on
large-scale synthetic and diverse real-world datasets with
manually veriﬁed total counts. Our datasets and code and
can be found at https://corentindumery.github.

counting in biomedical imaging [27] to trafﬁc [12] and
wildlife [1] monitoring. However, these methods [10, 11,
18, 21, 29] can only count visible objects such as apples
spread across a table or people in a crowd. The problem
becomes signiﬁcantly harder when objects are stacked on
top of each other, as in Fig. 1: Only a subset of them is
visible, making counting much more difﬁcult. In fact, our
experiments show that this task is truly challenging even for
humans. Nevertheless, solving it would have signiﬁcant applications in industrial and agricultural settings, where precise quantiﬁcation of items—such as products on a pallet or
fruits in crates—not only prevents stock and quality errors
but also enhances operational efﬁciency and logistics.

io/projects/stacks.html

1. Introduction
Visual object counting—the task of quantifying the number of instances in a scene—serves as a fundamental building block for numerous real-world applications and autonomous decision-making systems. This ranges from cell

19774

Overcoming the above-mentioned challenges requires
inferring the presence and quantity of hidden instances from
limited visual cues. This means not only detecting visible object features but also reasoning about hidden ones
through contextual understanding. The challenge is further
ampliﬁed by variations in stacking patterns, object orientations, and irregular arrangements, making traditional counting approaches inadequate.
At the heart of our proposed solution is a key insight: the
fraction of space occupied by objects, which we will refer
to as the occupancy ratio, can be accurately inferred from a
depth map computed by a monocular depth estimator from
a view in which enough objects of interest are clearly visi-

