This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Player-Centric Multimodal Prompt Generation for Large Language Model
Based Identity-Aware Basketball Video Captioning
Zeyu Xi1 , Haoying Sun1 , Yaofei Wu1 , Junchi Yan2 , Haoran Zhang1 , Lifang Wu1∗ ,
Liang Wang3 , Changwen Chen4
1

Beijing University of Technology; 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University; 3 Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
∗
Corresponding author: lfwu@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract

Video:

Existing sports video captioning methods often focus on
the action yet overlook player identities, limiting their applicability. Although some methods integrate extra information to generate identity-aware descriptions, the player
identities are sometimes incorrect because the extra information is independent of the video content. This paper
proposes a player-centric multimodal prompt generation
network for identity-aware sports video captioning (LLMIAVC), which focuses on recognizing player identities from
a visual perspective. Specifically, an identity-related information extraction module (IRIEM) is designed to extract
player-related multimodal embeddings. IRIEM includes a
player identification network (PIN) for extracting visual
features and player names, and a bidirectional semantic interaction module (BSIM) to link player features with video
content for mutual enhancement. Additionally, a visual context learning module (VCLM) is designed to capture the key
video context information. Finally, by integrating the outputs of the above modules as the multimodal prompt for
the large language model (LLM), it facilitates the generation of descriptions with player identities. To support this
work, we construct a new benchmark called NBA-Identity,
a large identity-aware basketball video captioning dataset
with 9,726 videos covering 9 major event types. The experimental results on NBA-Identity and VC-NBA-2022 demonstrate that our proposed model achieves advanced performance. Code and dataset are publicly available at https:
//github.com/Zeyu1226-mt/LLM-IAVC.

Captions:
(a): A group of people are playing the basketball
(b): [PLAYER] ( ) makes 2-pt jump shot ( ) (assist ( ) by [PLAYER] ( ))
(c): D. Murray ( ) makes 2-pt jump shot ( ) (assist ( ) by W. Carter ( ))
(d): T. Ross ( ) makes 3-pt jump shot ( ) (assist ( ) by W. Carter ( ))

Figure 1. Caption comparison of current sports video captioning
methods and our method. The different player names are marked
red and blue. The actions are marked pink and cyan. The green
checkmarks indicate correct name/action predictions, while the
red crosses indicate incorrect ones.

1. Introduction

tions including sports video understanding [24, 29, 33, 45,
47], video storytelling [19] and online video search [16, 25].
The traditional video captioning methods [21, 38, 39,
44, 50] achieve impressive results in open domains, which
provide only a broad summary of the visual content, as
shown in Fig. 1 (a). However, in some specific scenarios, such as sports live text broadcast, the players’ identities and the actions are crucial, as audiences are particularly interested in these details. Such requirements cannot
be satisfied by the general descriptions. Anonymous methods replace entities in descriptions with special tokens (e.g.,
[PLAYER] and [TEAM]) [24, 28, 33, 34] or numeric IDs
(e.g., “PLAYER0961226”) [45]. They can provide detailed
actions and distinguish different entity types. However,
their descriptions are still missing entity identities, specifically player names, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
Recently, some methods [29, 47, 48] have introduced
extra information, such as game news, player statistics,
and the candidate player list, to generate descriptions with
player identities. Due to the fact that the extra information
is independent of the video clips, player identities in the
descriptions are derived from the static extra information

Video captioning is a critical research topic in video understanding with the aims of generating precise descriptions to
comprehend the visual contents of the given videos. It has
attracted increasing attention due to a variety of its applica-

24330

