This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstantEdit: Text-Guided Few-Step Image Editing with Piecewise Rectified Flow
Yiming Gong, Zhen Zhu, Minjia Zhang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yimingg8, zhenzhu4, minjiaz}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We propose a fast text-guided image editing method called
InstantEdit based on the RectifiedFlow framework, which
is structured as a few-step editing process that preserves
critical content while following closely to textual instructions. Our approach leverages the straight sampling trajectories of RectifiedFlow by introducing a specialized inversion strategy called PerRFI. To maintain consistent while
editable results for RectifiedFlow model, we further propose a novel regeneration method, Inversion Latent Injection, which effectively reuses latent information obtained
during inversion to facilitate more coherent and detailed
regeneration. Additionally, we propose a Disentangled
Prompt Guidance technique to balance editability with detail preservation, and integrate a Canny-conditioned ControlNet to incorporate structural cues and suppress artifacts. Evaluation on the PIE image editing dataset demonstrates that InstantEdit is not only fast but also achieves better qualitative and quantitative results compared to stateof-the-art few-step editing methods. Our code is available
here: https://github.com/SupercomputingSystem-AI-Lab/InstantEdit

A village at night

at day

in snow

in rain

in Halloween

in mountains

A cat

with hat

with glasses

with black mask

with colorful mask

with scarf

Figure 1. Examples of InstantEdit with various editing operations
in just 4 steps.

tions, whereas users expect instant feedback when editing
images. Reducing the lengthy denoising steps helps improve the generation speed but generally compromises the
generation quality, which motivates a design space of fast
and accurate editing techniques to make text-guided image
editing more practical for real-world deployment.
There has been many studies of existing literature in reducing the computation cost of the backbone diffusion models, primarily through various distillation techniques to train
so called few-step diffusion models, which significantly decrease the generation process to less than ten sample steps
(e.g., 1-8 steps) [20, 21, 26, 28, 35]. However, applying these few-step diffusion models for text-guided imageediting raises new challenges:
• Inaccurate inversion trajectory with few steps. Early
efforts in text-guided image editing rely on refined DDIM
inversion [14, 22, 23], which is a deterministic sampling
process that maps a generated image to a series of noise
vectors. However, DDIM inversion becomes accurate
only when using a large number of diffusion steps (e.g.,
more than 20 steps) [12], which is hard to apply to fewstep diffusion models.
• Insufficient editability. The traditional DDIM inversion and its corresponding regeneration method lacks
editability in few-step setting. Recent work introduces
“edit-friendly” DDPM-noise inversion [12], which enables text-based editing with few diffusion steps [5].
However, we find that DDPM-noise inversion is still hard
to achieve desirable control over edited regions, generating images that loosely follow the target prompt.

1. Introduction
Text-guided image editing has emerged as a powerful tool
for creative expression, with diffusion models leading the
way in generating high-quality results. The general approach to text-guided image editing includes two steps, image inversion and regeneration. The inversion process maps
the input image into the model’s latent space through the
reversed generation trajectory [2, 11, 14, 23, 30]. The conditional regeneration starts from the inverted noise latent
coupled with the editing prompt, allowing modification to
happen in the noise space, which then gets mapped back to
the image space through the regeneration process.
Despite showing promising results, the computational
demands of text-guided image editing is quite high, creating
a significant barrier to real-time interactive editing applica-

16808

