This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Recovery of Cameras from Fundamental Matrices
Rakshith Madhavan and Federica Arrigoni
DEIB – Politecnico di Milano, Italy
rakshith.madhavan@polimi.it, federica.arrigoni@polimi.it

Abstract
The viewing graph is a compact tool to encode the geometry of multiple views: nodes represent uncalibrated
cameras and edges represent fundamental matrices (when
available). Most research focuses on theoretical analyses,
exploring for which viewing graphs it is possible (in principle) to retrieve cameras from fundamental matrices, in the
sense that the problem admits a unique solution for noiseless data. However, the practical task of recovering cameras from noisy fundamental matrices is still open, as available methods are limited to special graphs (such as those
covered by triplets). In this paper, we develop the first
method that can deal with the recovery of cameras from
noisy fundamental matrices in a general viewing graph. Experimental results demonstrate the promise of the proposed
approach on a variety of synthetic and real scenarios.

Figure 1. In the camera recovery problem, the task is to recover
unknown 3 ⇥ 4 projective camera matrices, P1 , . . . , P5 from the
known subset of the fundamental matrices, {Fij }, between them.
The problem has a unique solution, up to a global projective transformation, only if the associated viewing graph is solvable.

1. Introduction

struction. In this respect, the task of camera recovery from
fundamental matrices – addressed in this paper – has significant theoretical relevance, as it aims to answer the following question: what can be done in terms of camera recovery,
when we are given only partial information, represented as
fundamental matrices? This problem is poorly studied and
highly challenging, as clarified in the subsequent sections.

In this paper we consider the task of computing a number
of uncalibrated cameras starting from a set of fundamental
matrices between pairs of views (see Fig. 1). Cameras are
represented as nodes in the so-called viewing graph [16],
whereas fundamental matrices correspond to the edges.
Typically, such a graph is not complete but it contains only
a subset of all possible fundamental matrices, which in turn
are corrupted by noise/outliers. Exploiting redundancy in
the data is the key to achieve error compensation.
The task of camera recovery from fundamental matrices is related to projective structure from motion (SfM)
[10, 19, 21–23, 29], which aims at recovering both uncalibrated cameras and 3D scene points starting from image
point correspondences. Note that fundamental matrices can
be derived in closed-form from image points [13], however,
there is loss of information when discarding points and using fundamental matrices only as the starting point for projective SfM. This is akin to what happens in the calibrated
case with the global SfM approach [1, 25], where essential
matrices only (or, equivalently, relative rotations and translation directions) are used as input to perform camera recon-

1.1. Related Work
We first clarify differences between solvability [16], compatibility [7] and camera recovery from fundamental matrices [15], that are tightly related problems. In this paper, we
address the latter. All these tasks involve a viewing graph,
and they differ on assumptions and objectives on this graph.

20934

• Solvability: in this case, we are given a noiseless set
of fundamental matrices, and the question is how many
camera configurations are compliant with them. Specifically, it is assumed that a solution (i.e., a set of compatible cameras) exists, and the question is whether such
solution is unique or not (up to a single projective transformation). Viewing graphs are typically analyzed using
random configurations of cameras, in order to focus on
the graph structure itself and understand if the available
edges are generically enough to constrain a single solution: in the case of uniqueness (under generic camera
configurations), the graph is called solvable.

