This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamFuse: Adaptive Image Fusion with Diffusion Transformer
Junjia Huang1,2 * Pengxiang Yan3∗ Jiyang Liu3∗† Jie Wu3
Zhao Wang3 Yitong Wang3 Liang Lin1,2,4 Guanbin Li1,2,4‡
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 ByteDance Intelligent Creation
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
huangjj77@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wantong1017@163.com
linliang@ieee.org, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{yanpengxiang.ai, liujiyang.liu, wujie.10, zhaoxu.bit}@bytedance.com

https://ll3rd.github.io/DreamFuse/
STYLE
TRANSFER

WEARABLE

LOGO
PRINTING

PLACEMENT

EDIT

HANDHELD

“a golden car”

Figure 1. DreamFuse demonstrates adaptive performance across diverse scenarios, including style transfer, wearable items, logo printing,
placement and handheld. Notably, when given a text prompt, our method effectively responds by further editing the attributes of the
foreground object (e.g., a golden car).

Abstract
Image fusion seeks to seamlessly integrate foreground objects with background scenes, producing realistic and harmonious fused images. Unlike existing methods that directly
insert objects into the background, adaptive and interactive fusion remains a challenging yet appealing task. It requires the foreground to adjust or interact with the background context, enabling more coherent integration. To address this, we propose an iterative human-in-the-loop data
generation pipeline, which leverages limited initial data
with diverse textual prompts to generate fusion datasets

across various scenarios and interactions, including placement, holding, wearing, and style transfer. Building on
this, we introduce DreamFuse, a novel approach based on
the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) model, to generate consistent and harmonious fused images with both foreground and
background information. DreamFuse employs a Positional
Affine mechanism to inject the size and position of the foreground into the background, enabling effective foregroundbackground interaction through shared attention. Furthermore, we apply Localized Direct Preference Optimization
guided by human feedback to refine DreamFuse, enhancing
background consistency and foreground harmony. DreamFuse achieves harmonious fusion while generalizing to text-

* Equal Contribution. † Project Lead. ‡ Corresponding Author.

17292

