This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Spatial Reasoning in Multimodal Large Language Models through
Reasoning-based Segmentation
Zhenhua Ning1,2,3†∗

Zhuotao Tian1∗ Shaoshuai Shi4 Guangming Lu1 Daojing He1
Wenjie Pei1,2B Li Jiang3B
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Pengcheng Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 4 Voyager Research, Didi Chuxing
wenjiecoder@outlook.com

Abstract

jiangli@cuhk.edu.cn

Building upon these foundations, recent developments
in MLLMs have led to the emergence of 3D MLLMs [6,
16, 17, 33, 35], which demonstrate remarkable capabilities in 3D point cloud perception through enhanced visionlanguage alignment. Despite these achievements, current
3D MLLM-based approaches exhibit limitations in processing instructions that require sophisticated spatial reasoning.
As shown in Fig. 1, the baseline model fails to accurately
localize the target object. This observation raises an important question: while 3D point clouds inherently contain
richer spatial information (e.g., precise measurements of
size and position) compared to 2D images, why do models
still struggle to effectively leverage these geometric properties? We posit that the development of robust spatial reasoning capabilities requires two critical components: an explicit reasoning mechanism and a dataset that encompasses
complex reasoning scenarios.

Recent advances in point cloud perception have demonstrated remarkable progress in scene understanding
through vision-language alignment leveraging large language models (LLMs). However, existing methods may
still encounter challenges in handling complex instructions
that require accurate spatial reasoning, even if the 3D
point cloud data provides detailed spatial cues such as size
and position for identifying the targets. To tackle this issue, we propose Relevant Reasoning Segmentation (R2 S), a
reasoning-based segmentation framework. The framework
emulates human cognitive processes by decomposing spatial reasoning into two sequential stages: first identifying
relevant elements, then processing instructions guided by
their associated visual priors. Furthermore, acknowledging
the inadequacy of existing datasets in complex reasoning
tasks, we introduce 3D ReasonSeg, a reasoning-based segmentation dataset comprising 25,185 training samples and
3,966 validation samples with precise annotations. Both
quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that
the R2 S and 3D ReasonSeg effectively endow 3D point cloud
perception with stronger spatial reasoning capabilities, and
we hope that they can serve as a new baseline and benchmark for future work.

In this work, we introduce the Relevant Reasoning Segmentation (R2 S), a reasoning-based segmentation framework that enhances the spatial reasoning capabilities of 3D
MLLMs through two key steps: 1) Reasoning Prior Learning and 2) Prior-guided Refinement. In the first step, the
model is trained to generate spatial priors by identifying
target-relevant objects, providing essential contextual information. In the second step, the model leverages these reasoning priors to refine hidden representations, facilitating
precise target localization. In other words, the two steps
emulate human reasoning behavior, i.e., initially identifying relevant elements broadly and then scrutinizing them
closely to pinpoint the target.

1. Introduction
In recent years, multi-modal large language models
(MLLMs) [1, 25, 34, 37, 38, 43] have managed to connect
language and vision, bringing in a new era of artificial intelligence. These models have shown unprecedented abilities,
enabling various fields to understand and create textual and
visual content, such as human-computer interaction, multimedia understanding, embodied intelligence, and more.

Analysis of existing datasets reveals that instructions
requiring reasoning are often oversimplified and ambiguous, as illustrated in Fig. 5. This limitation constrains the
training and evaluation processes for developing reasoning capabilities in 3D MLLMs. To address this limitation,
we present 3D ReasonSeg, a reasoning-based segmentation
dataset that focuses on object functionality, visual attributes,

† Research Assistant at CUHKSZ.
* Equal contribution to this work. B Corresponding author.

7851

