This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Human-like Virtual Beings: Simulating Human Behavior in 3D Scenes
Chen Liang,

Wenguan Wang,*

Yi Yang

State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/leonnnop/BehaviorHub

(a)

Short-horizon Task:
Brush teeth
Linguistic Plan:
1. Walk to bathroom
2. Pick up toothbrush
3. Brush teeth

(b)

High-level, Long-horizon, Abstract Goal:
Preparing for work from home

(c)

Low-level Action:
Sit on chair

Actions in 3D Scene (partial)

Prepare for work

...

Walk to bathroom

Get up

Get up

Previous Works

Structured Behavior Plan (partial)

Eat breakfast

Use toilet
Walk to
bathroom

Personal
hygiene

Take
Use shower
toilet

Prepare
breakfast
Eat
... breakfast

Open
fridge

Work from
home

...
Type
keyboard

Human Behavior Simulation in 3D Scenes (Ours)

Figure 1. Previous research has primarily focused on: (a) linguistic-based short-horizon task planning, and (b) low-level human-scene
interaction. (c) This study investigates the simulation of high-level, long-horizon, abstract goal-driven human behaviors in 3D scenes.

Abstract
Building autonomous agents that can replicate human behavior in the realistic 3D world is a key step toward artificial general intelligence. This requires agents to be holistic
goal achievers and to naturally adapt to environmental dynamics. In this work, we introduce ACTOR, an agent capable of performing high-level, long-horizon, abstract goals in
3D households, guided by its internal value similar to those
of humans. ACTOR operates in a perceive-plan-act cycle,
extending the ungrounded, scene-agnostic LLM controller
with deliberate goal decomposition and decision-making
through actively searching the behavior space, generating
activity choices based on a hierarchical prior, and evaluating these choices using customizable value functions to
determine the subsequent steps. Furthermore, we introduce
B EHAVIOR H UB, a large-scale human behavior simulation
dataset in scene-aware, complicated tasks. Considering
the unaffordable acquisition of human-authored 3D human
behavior data, we construct B EHAVIOR H UB by exploring
the commonsense knowledge of LLMs learned from large
* Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

corpora, and automatically aligning motion resources with
3D scene for knowledgeable generation. Extensive experiments on our established benchmark demonstrate that the
proposed architecture leads to effective behavior planning
and simulation. B EHAVIOR H UB also proves beneficial for
downstream task development.

1. Introduction
Building autonomous agents (e.g., virtual beings, or humanoid robots) that can replicate human behavior in the
realistic 3D world, has been a long-standing pursuit since
the inception of AI [1]. The study could empower nonplayer game character [2], underpin human-robot interaction [3, 4] and cooperation [5], populate virtual reality communities [6], and accelerate Embodied AI [7–10]. Much
progress has been made in vision and language models that
imitate human motions (cf . Fig. 1 (b)) or propose linguistic
plans (cf . Fig. 1 (a)). However, an effective 3D humanoid
agent must go beyond by conquering three major barriers:
(i) Holistic goal achievement from perception to action. As
depicted in Fig. 1 (c), to accomplish a high-level goal (e.g.,

10753

