This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Democratizing High-Fidelity Co-Speech Gesture Video Generation
Xu Yang1∗‡

Shaoli Huang2∗ Shenbo Xie1∗ Xuelin Chen2 Yifei Liu1 Changxing Ding1†
1
South China University of Technology 2 Tencent AI Lab

ftyang xu@mail.scut.edu.cn
xuelin.chen.3d@gmail.com

shaol.huang@gmail.com

eeshbx34@mail.scut.edu.cn

ft lyf@mail.scut.edu.cn

chxding@scut.edu.cn

Driving Audio

Reference Image

Generated Video

Figure 1. Examples of co-speech gesture videos created by our framework. These examples demonstrate the advantages of our framework
regarding visual quality and synchronization while being adaptable to various speakers and contexts. To address privacy concerns, all
reference images of speakers are synthesized using AI.

Abstract
Co-speech gesture video generation aims to synthesize realistic, audio-aligned videos of speakers, complete with synchronized facial expressions and body gestures. This task
presents challenges due to the significant one-to-many mapping between audio and visual content, further complicated
by the scarcity of large-scale public datasets and high computational demands. We propose a lightweight framework
that utilizes 2D full-body skeletons as an efficient auxiliary condition to bridge audio signals with visual outputs.
Our approach introduces a diffusion model conditioned on
fine-grained audio segments and a skeleton extracted from

the speaker’s reference image, predicting skeletal motions
through skeleton-audio feature fusion to ensure strict audio coordination and body shape consistency. The generated skeletons are then fed into an off-the-shelf human video
generation model with the speaker’s reference image to synthesize high-fidelity videos. To democratize research, we
present CSG-405—the first public dataset with 405 hours
of high-resolution videos across 71 speech types, annotated with 2D skeletons and diverse speaker demographics. Experiments show that our method exceeds state-of-theart approaches in visual quality and synchronization while
generalizing across speakers and contexts. Code, models,
and CSG-405 are publicly released at https://mpilab.github.io/Democratizing-CSG/

∗ Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.
‡ Part of his work was done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.

14283

