This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Omni-scene Perception-oriented Point Cloud Geometry Enhancement
for Coordinate Quantization

1

Wang Liu1 , Wei Gao1,2 *
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
lw.pkac@gmail.com, gaowei262@.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Information quantization has been widely adopted in multimedia content, such as images, videos, and point clouds.
The goal of information quantization is to achieve efficient
storage and transmission by reducing data precision or
redundancy. However, the information distortion caused
by quantization will lead to the degradation of signal fidelity and the performance of downstream tasks. This
paper focuses on the geometry quantization distortion of
point clouds and proposes a unified learning-based quality enhancement framework for omni-scene point clouds.
Based on the characteristics of geometry quantization distortion, we analyze and find that existing upsampling methods are not competitive in dealing with point reduction and
geometry displacement simultaneously caused by coordinate quantization. Therefore, we design a general rootinggrowing-pruning paradigm to efficiently perceive the geometry feature of quantized point clouds and improve the quality significantly. In addition, a novel loss constraint term
related to the quantization step parameter is proposed to
further improve quality and accelerate model convergence.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first unified quality
enhancement framework for object and scene point clouds
with coordinate quantization. Extensive experiments verify
the superiority of the proposed method on multi-scale point
clouds with different levels of quantization distortion, including object (ModelNet40, 8iVFB) and scene (KITTI). In
particular, the enhanced point clouds improve the performance of downstream analysis tasks, including classification and 3D object detection.

Figure 1. Simple visualization of common point cloud distortion types. It
includes: (a) downsampling, (b) partial incompleteness, (c) noise, and (d)
geometry quantization distortion (point reduction and coordinate offset).
Their inverse processes lead to mainstream quality enhancement tasks, including upsampling, completion, denoising, and geometry enhancement.
The black and red points represent the raw positions and the points with
coordinate shifts caused by distortion, respectively. The dotted line depicts
the latent surface, while the green band shows the area around it.

1. Introduction

action of heterogeneous sensor data through precision conversion. The latter realizes efficient storage, transmission
and calculation by reducing data precision. With the development of sensor technology, multimedia information is
becoming more and more abundant, such as images, videos,
audio, and point clouds. To reduce the burden of massive
data calculation and interaction, information quantization
converts continuous or high-precision data into discrete or
low-precision representation. On the one hand, information quantization technology is concentrated in multimedia
information compression algorithms. For example, the Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG) [35] proposed a series
of codec standards for images, videos and point clouds. On
the other hand, the rapid development of large multimodal
foundation models has posed great challenges to parameter storage and transmission. Quantization technology for
model parameters alleviates this burden as much as possible while maintaining model performance, especially for
lightweight deployment on mobile terminals.

As a preprocessing process of sensor data, information
quantization can achieve data precision alignment and reduce information redundancy. The former realizes the inter* Corresponding author.

As the basic and mature point cloud compression solution in MPEG, the geometry compression algorithm in the
geometry-based point cloud compression standard (G-PCC)
[34] directly adopts quantization technology to compress

26055

