This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDFFDNet: Towards Accurate and Efﬁcient Unsupervised
Multi-Grid Image Registration
Haokai Zhu1,2,∗ Bo Qu2,∗ Si-Yuan Cao1,3,† Runmin Zhang2
Shujie Chen4 Bailin Yang4 Hui-Liang Shen2
1
2
3

Ningbo Global Innovation Center, Zhejiang University

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University

NingboTech University

4

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data and Future E-Commerce Technology, Hangzhou, China

hkzhu.zju@gmail.com {22431157, cao siyuan, runmin zhang}@zju.edu.cn
{chenshujie, ybl}@zjgsu.edu.cn

shenhl@zju.edu.cn

8',6

Abstract
Previous deep image registration methods that employ
single homography, multi-grid homography, or thin-plate
spline often struggle with real scenes containing depth disparities due to their inherent limitations. To address this,
we propose an Exponential-Decay Free-Form Deformation
Network (EDFFDNet), which employs free-form deformation with an exponential-decay basis function. This design achieves higher efﬁciency and performs well in scenes
with depth disparities, beneﬁting from its inherent locality. We also introduce an Adaptive Sparse Motion Aggregator (ASMA), which replaces the MLP motion aggregator
used in previous methods. By transforming dense interactions into sparse ones, ASMA reduces parameters and improves accuracy. Additionally, we propose a progressive
correlation reﬁnement strategy that leverages global-local
correlation patterns for coarse-to-ﬁne motion estimation,
further enhancing efﬁciency and accuracy. Experiments
demonstrate that EDFFDNet reduces parameters, memory,
and total runtime by 70.5%, 32.6%, and 33.7%, respectively, while achieving a 0.5 dB PSNR gain over the state-ofthe-art method. With an additional local reﬁnement stage,
EDFFDNet-2 further improves PSNR by 1.06 dB while
maintaining lower computational costs. Our method also
demonstrates strong generalization ability across datasets,
outperforming previous deep learning methods.

('))'1HW RXUV

5HIHUHQFH,PDJH

7DUJHW,PDJH

D

,QFUHDVLQJ
3DUDPHWHUV

('))'1HW RXUV

E

F

Figure 1. Performance comparison on the UDIS-D dataset [30].
(a) The reference and target images from a sample in the UDISD dataset. (b) Warp results of UDIS++ [31], our EDFFDNet, and
EDFFDNet-2 on the sample. We combine the green and blue channels of the reference image with the red channel of the warped target image for visualization. Our method achieves better alignment
in challenging regions with depth disparities (zoomed-in areas).
(c) Performance comparison plot. Our method exhibits lower computational overhead while maintaining competitive performance.

plied in various domains, including image/video stitching
[14, 32, 40], video stabilization [26, 43], camera calibration [42], HDR imaging [13], and SLAM [46]. Traditional
methods typically rely on the extraction of geometric features [22, 27, 33], followed by robust estimation strategies
[2, 3, 11] with outlier rejection to achieve registration. Although these methods are effective in various scenarios,
they often exhibit limited robustness in low-texture scenes.
Deep learning-based methods are then proposed. Pioneer work [9] proposes a VGG-style network to estimate

1. Introduction
Image registration is a fundamental task in computer vision, establishing spatial correspondence between images
captured under varying conditions. It has been widely ap∗ Equal Contributions. † Corresponding author.

5102

