This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDiT: Efficient Diffusion Transformers with Linear Compressed Attention
Philipp Becker1,2
Abhinav Mehrotra1
Ruchika Chavhan1
Malcolm Chadwick1
Luca Morreale1
Mehdi Noroozi1
Alberto Gil C. P. Ramos1
Sourav Bhattacharya1
1
2
Samsung, AI Center Cambridge
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) have emerged as a leading architecture for text-to-image synthesis, producing
high-quality and photorealistic images. However, the
quadratic scaling properties of the attention in DiTs hinder image generation with higher resolution or on devices
with limited resources. This work introduces an efficient diffusion transformer (EDiT) to alleviate these efficiency bottlenecks in conventional DiTs and Multimodal DiTs (MMDiTs). First, we present a novel linear compressed attention method that uses a multi-layer convolutional network
to modulate queries with local information while keys and
values are aggregated spatially. Second, we formulate a
hybrid attention scheme for multimodal inputs that combines linear attention for image-to-image interactions and
standard scaled dot-product attention for interactions involving prompts. Merging these two approaches leads to
an expressive, linear-time Multimodal Efficient Diffusion
Transformer (MM-EDiT). We demonstrate the effectiveness
of the EDiT and MM-EDiT architectures by integrating
them into PixArt-Σ (conventional DiT) and Stable Diffusion
3.5-Medium (MM-DiT), achieving up to 2.2× speedup with
comparable image quality after distillation.

icantly, joint attention scales poorly due to the increased
number of involved tokens. This limitation is further aggravated when generating high-resolution images, mainly
due to the increase in the amount of input tokens, prohibiting the efficient deployment of SOTA text-to-image models,
particularly on resource-constrained devices.
Existing research has explored strategies to alleviate this
computational bottleneck within DiTs primarily by focusing on linearizing the attention mechanism [14, 22] or reducing the number of tokens [2]. For instance, Linfusion [14] relies on multi-layer non-linear transformations
to map input tokens, thereby enhancing the expressiveness
of the linear attention mechansim. Whereas, SANA [22]
combines standard linear attention [10] with convolutional
operations in the feed forward part of the transformer, leveraging the inherent structure of images while capturing local
relationships more effectively. Recent work, e.g., PixArtΣ [2], reduces the number of key and value tokens to improve computational efficiency.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we present an Efficient Diffusion Transformer
(EDiT) architecture, using a novel linear compressed attention mechanism. EDiT employs: (i) a multi-layer convolutional network to effectively integrate local information
in query tokens, (ii) it spatially aggregates token information in keys and values using depthwise convolutions. These
components result in an expressive and computationally efficient attention mechanism. We evaluate EDiT by distilling
PixArt-Σ, a conventional DiT model, showing significant
speedups while obtaining comparable image quality.

Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) [16], have quickly become the de-facto choice of architecture for state-ofthe-art (SOTA) text-to-image generation models such as
FLUX [11], PixArt-Σ [2], Stable Diffusion v3 [5], and
Lumina-Next [24]. The majority of these models rely
on standard quadratic scaled dot-product attention [20] to
capture long-range dependencies and global context, enabling them to generate high-quality, photorealistic, and
aesthetically pleasing images. Earlier versions of DiTs relied mainly on the conventional transformer architecture,
i.e., image tokens were processed through self-attention,
whereas prompt conditioning was achieved by applying
cross-attention [2, 3]. More recently, Multimodal DiTs
(MM-DiTs) have introduced joint attention mechanisms to
handle both image and prompt tokens within a single selfattention layer [5]. While enhancing image quality signif-

19608

To efficiently handle multimodal inputs, we introduce a hybrid attention mechanism that combines the strengths of
linear and scaled dot-product attention, enabling effective
MM-DiT-based models. In particular, we include EDiT’s
linear compressed attention for the computationally intensive interactions, i.e., when computing image-to-image dependencies, on the other hand, scaled dot-product attention
is used for capturing text interactions. These modifications
introduce a novel Multimodal Efficient Diffusion Transformer (MM-EDiT) architecture that achieves linear-time
complexity with respect to image size without sacrificing
quality. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our hybrid at-

