This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ponimator: Unfolding Interactive Pose for Versatile Human-human
Interaction Animation
Shaowei Liu∗ Chuan Guo2 † Bing Zhou2 † Jian Wang2 †
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Snap Inc.
https://stevenlsw.github.io/ponimator/
Input

Generated Interaction Animation (left→right: time steps)

Two-person image

Estimated interactive pose

Single-person image

Generated interactive pose

Single-person image
+ ”Lift the other onto his back”

Generated interactive pose

Figure 1. Ponimator enables versatile interaction animation applications anchored on interactive poses. For two-person images (top),
Ponimator generates contextual dynamics from estimated interactive poses (green box). For single-person images (middle) with optional
text prompts (bottom), Ponimator first generates partner interactive poses (magenta box) and then fulfill the interaction dynamics.

Abstract
Close-proximity human-human interactive poses convey rich contextual information about interaction dynamics. Given such poses, humans can intuitively infer the
context and anticipate possible past and future dynamics,
drawing on strong priors of human behavior. Inspired by
this observation, we propose Ponimator, a simple framework anchored on proximal interactive poses for versatile
interaction animation. Our training data consists of closecontact two-person poses and their surrounding temporal
context from motion-capture interaction datasets. Leveraging interactive pose priors, Ponimator employs two conditional diffusion models: (1) a pose animator that uses

the temporal prior to generate dynamic motion sequences
from interactive poses, and (2) a pose generator that applies the spatial prior to synthesize interactive poses from
a single pose, text, or both when interactive poses are unavailable. Collectively, Ponimator supports diverse tasks,
including image-based interaction animation, reaction animation, and text-to-interaction synthesis, facilitating the
transfer of interaction knowledge from high-quality mocap data to open-world scenarios. Empirical experiments
across diverse datasets and applications demonstrate the
universality of the pose prior and the effectiveness and robustness of our framework. Codes and video visualization
can be found at https://stevenlsw.github.io/ponimator/

* Work done at an internship at Snap Research NYC, Snap Inc.
† Co-corresponding author

12068

