This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Visual Hierarchies in Hyperbolic Space for Image Retrieval
Ziwei Wang12∗ Sameera Ramasinghe1∗ Chenchen Xu1
Julien Monteil1 Loris Bazzani1 Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan1∗
1

Amazon

2

Australian National University

Abstract




Structuring latent representations in a hierarchical
manner enables models to learn patterns at multiple levels of abstraction. However, most prevalent image understanding models focus on visual
similarity, and learning visual hierarchies is relatively unexplored. In this work, for the ﬁrst time,
we introduce a learning paradigm that can encode
user-deﬁned multi-level complex visual hierarchies
in hyperbolic space without requiring explicit hierarchical labels. As a concrete example, ﬁrst, we
deﬁne a part-based image hierarchy using objectlevel annotations within and across images. Then,
we introduce an approach to enforce the hierarchy
using contrastive loss with pairwise entailment metrics. Finally, we discuss new evaluation metrics to
effectively measure hierarchical image retrieval. Encoding these complex relationships ensures that the
learned representations capture semantic and structural information that transcends mere visual similarity. Experiments in part-based image retrieval
show signiﬁcant improvements in hierarchical retrieval tasks, demonstrating the capability of our
model in capturing visual hierarchies.

 





   



   
 

 

     
 


 

Figure 1. An illustration of part-based image hierarchy
organized in hyperbolic space. At the highest level, we
see the urban environment, composed of buildings, streets,
and sky. Zooming in, we ﬁnd the building category, which
further divides into skyscrapers, mid-rise structures, and
more. Each of them has its own visual elements, which in
turn can be decomposed into sub-elements.

crucial for creating systems with holistic world understanding aligned with human perception. While
this topic spans various modalities, we focus on encoding hierarchies in the visual domain. For many
large image datasets, objects can be organized according to latent hierarchies [26], as evidenced by
power law distributions [34]. However, most prevalent image understanding models [4, 14–16, 36]
focus on preserving visual similarity, and consequently, learning hierarchies in the visual domain
remains relatively unexplored. These limitations
hinder models’ ability to generalize to tasks requiring hierarchical reasoning such as understanding
scenes, object parts, and their interactions at multiple levels of abstraction. We illustrate in Fig. 1 an
example that shows the complexity of a visual hier-

1. Introduction
Humans organize knowledge of the world into hierarchies [26] for efﬁcient knowledge management.
Developing models that encode such hierarchies is
∗ work done while at Amazon

9924

