This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Efficient and Generalizable Human Representation
with Human Gaussian Model
Teaser

1,∗

1,∗

1

Yifan Liu , Shengjun Zhang , Chensheng Dai , Yang Chen3 , Hao Liu2 , Chen Li2 , Yueqi Duan1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 WeChat Vision, Tecent Inc., 3 Nanyang Technological University
{liuyifan22, zhangsj23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, duanyueqi@tsinghua.edu.cn

https://github.com/Simon-Dcs/Human_Gaussian_Graph/

Novel Views

multi-view video
monocular video

Novel Poses
(a) Examples of novel views and novel poses from our model

(b) Performance and runtime comparison

Figure 1. Our method achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality while maintaining remarkable fast run-time performance. (a) Qualitative
results: Our approach delivers high-fidelity results for both novel view synthesis and novel pose animation. (b) Performance comparison:
Our method achieves the highest PSNR in both single view (yellow) and multi-view (blue) settings with superior computational efficiency.

Abstract
Modeling animatable human avatars from videos is a
long-standing and challenging problem. While conventional methods require per-instance optimization, recent
feed-forward methods have been proposed to generate 3D
Gaussians with a learnable network. However, these methods predict Gaussians for each frame independently, without fully capturing the relations of Gaussians from different
timestamps. To address this, we propose Human Gaussian
Graph to model the connection between predicted Gaussians and human SMPL mesh, so that we can leverage information from all frames to recover an animatable human
representation. Specifically, the Human Gaussian Graph
contains dual layers where Gaussians are the first layer
nodes and mesh vertices serve as the second layer nodes.
Based on this structure, we further propose the intra-node
operation to aggregate various Gaussians connected to one

mesh vertex, and inter-node operation to support message
passing among mesh node neighbors. Experimental results
on novel view synthesis and novel pose animation demonstrate the efficiency and generalization of our method.

1. Introduction

11797

Realistic human reconstruction is a fundamental task in
computer vision with widespread application in virtual reality, gaming, healthcare and social media. Remarkable
progress has been made using neural implicit representations [26, 27, 30] to model flexible topology, but these methods [4, 13, 14, 36, 38] suffer from expensive time consumption in training and rendering. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting [18] (3DGS) has drawn increasing attention
for explicit Gaussian representations and real-time rendering performance. Benefiting from rasterization-based rendering, 3DGS avoids dense points querying in scene space

