This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SViM3D: Stable Video Material Diffusion for Single Image 3D Generation
†

Andreas Engelhardt1,2 Mark Boss1 Vikram Voletti1 Chun-Han Yao1
Hendrik P. A. Lensch2 Varun Jampani1
1

Single Image

Camera Control

2

University of Tübingen

Multi-view Material Generation

...

...

SViM3D

Stability AI

Video Diffusion Denoising

K x {RGB Basecolor Roughness Metallic Normal}

Relighting,
Material Editing

3D
Reconstruction

...

Figure 1. SViM3D. SViM3D predicts multi-view-consistent spatially-variant material parameters and normals in addition to RGB, conditioned
on a single image and a camera path. In addition to relighting and material editing a subsequent optimization stage enables high-quality 3D
asset generation for physically based rendering (PBR). Visit the project page at https://svim3d.aengelhardt.com.

Abstract
We present Stable Video Materials 3D (SViM3D), a framework to predict multi-view consistent physically based rendering (PBR) materials, given a single image. Recently,
video diffusion models have been successfully used to reconstruct 3D objects from a single image efficiently. However,
reflectance is still represented by simple material models or
needs to be estimated in additional steps to enable relighting
and controlled appearance edits. We extend a latent video
diffusion model to output spatially varying PBR parameters
and surface normals jointly with each generated view based
on explicit camera control. This unique setup allows for relighting and generating a 3D asset using our model as neural
prior. We introduce various mechanisms to this pipeline that
improve quality in this ill-posed setting. We show state-ofthe-art relighting and novel view synthesis performance on
multiple object-centric datasets. Our method generalizes to
diverse inputs, enabling the generation of relightable 3D assets useful in AR/VR, movies, games and other visual media.

1. Introduction
3D asset generation and relighting are important tasks for various use cases in movies, gaming, e-commerce, and AR/VR.
In nearly all cases, objects are placed in new environments
and lighting conditions. This means illumination information
needs to be disentangled from an object’s shape and material robustly for it to integrate seamlessly into a new scene.
Think of the subtle, yet essential differences between a glossy
metallic and a matte finish. For generative 3D models without precise material prediction, relighting becomes nearly
impossible, resulting in assets that feel out of place. Estimating these properties from a single image under natural illumination, also known as inverse rendering [10, 50, 71, 78, 104],
is a highly ill-posed and still unsolved problem.

† Work done during internship at Stability AI.

Multi-view Material Generation. In this work, we present
Stable Video Materials 3D (SViM3D), a probabilistic generative diffusion model that tackles object-centric inverse
rendering from a single image. Conditioned on a camera
pose sequence it generates both high-quality appearances

28428

