This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temperature in Cosine-based Softmax Loss
Takumi Kobayashi†‡
†
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan
‡
University of Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
While deep models are effectively trained based on a softmax cross-entropy loss, a cosine-based softmax loss also
works for producing favorable feature embedding. In the
cosine-based softmax, temperature plays a crucial role in
properly scaling the logits of cosine similarities, though being manually tuned in ad-hoc ways as there is less prior
knowledge about the temperature. In this paper, we address
the challenging problem to adaptively estimate the temperature of cosine-based softmax in the framework of supervised
image classification. By analyzing the cosine-based softmax representation from a geometrical viewpoint regarding
features and classifiers, we construct a criterion in a leastsquare fashion which enables us to optimize the temperature
at each sample via simple greedy search. Besides, our thorough analysis about temperature clarifies that feature embedding by the cosine-based softmax loss is endowed with
diverse characteristics which are controllable by the temperature in an explainable way. The experimental results
demonstrate that our optimized temperature contributes to
determine a feasible range of temperature to control the feature characteristics and produces favorable performance on
various image classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are applied in various computer vision fields with great success [11]. While the network architecture has been steadily advancing, those models are effectively trained based on a softmax cross-entropy loss in
most cases. In the softmax loss, relationships between input features and classifiers are exploited by means of innerproduct, which is fundamentally characterized by the angle
between those vectors, i.e., cosine similarity; feature embedding by the softmax loss exhibits angular discriminativity [25, 40]. Thus, a cosine-based softmax loss is an important variant of the softmax loss, paying much attention
to the angle through L2 -normalization both of features and
classifiers in the inner-product form.

22199

The cosine-based softmax loss, dubbed as cos-softmax
loss, is applied to lean feature embeddings [42, 45] such as
for face images [9, 25, 37]. Lots of face classes (individuals)
are effectively embedded on a hyper-sphere through the cossoftmax loss, frequently equipped with large-margin regularization, to attain discriminative and generalization power
applicable to novel face images. For feature embedding, the
cos-softmax loss is also applied in self-supervised learning, especially contrastive learning [5, 6, 12]; unlabeled
samples are compared by means of cosine similarity in a
way of instance discrimination. The feature representation
learned by the cos-softmax loss is recently shown to exhibit
favorable discriminativity for detecting out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples based on feature norms [31].
While a cos-softmax loss contributes to effective feature
embedding, it contains a critical issue regarding temperature. In the literature of deep learning using a standard
softmax loss, softmax temperature is effectively utilized
in knowledge distillation [13] and is also analyzed from a
viewpoint of training dynamics [2]. For the cos-softmax
loss, the temperature plays a more important role in scaling the cosine similarity bounded in [−1, 1] for building
meaningful loss function; either too low or too high temperature deteriorates the cos-softmax loss. Thus, in most
cases, the temperature of cos-softmax is manually tuned so
as to produce favorable performance in an empirical manner. Thus, it is a challenging problem to automatically determine proper temperature as it could be variable according
to classification tasks and/or feature embedding space.
In this paper, we explore an approach to adaptively estimate the temperature of cos-softmax in a framework of
supervised classification. For establishing criteria to optimize the temperature, we analyze the cos-softmax from
two viewpoints of probabilistic and geometrical formulation. While the probabilistic aspect of cos-softmax is derived from von Mises-Fisher distribution [28] on a hypersphere, we also propose a geometrical viewpoint to connect
the cos-softmax with projection onto a convex hull spanned
by the classifier vectors, inspired by sparse-representation
classification [41]. The method enables us to optimize tem-

