This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffuman4D: 4D Consistent Human View Synthesis from
Sparse-View Videos with Spatio-Temporal Diffusion Models
Yudong Jin1 Sida Peng1 Xuan Wang2 Tao Xie1 Zhen Xu1
Yifan Yang1 Yujun Shen2 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1

Input
Sparse-View Video

Zhejiang University

Generation

2

Ant Research

4D-Consistent
Multi-View Video

Reconstruction

Free-Viewpoint
Volumetric Video

Figure 1. Diffuman4D enables high-fidelity free-viewpoint rendering of human performances from sparse-view videos. The bottom row
shows representative results.

timestamp, then alternately denoise the latent grid along
spatial and temporal dimensions with a sliding window, and
finally decode the videos at target viewpoints from the corresponding denoised latents. Through the iterative sliding,
information flows sufficiently across the latent grid, allowing the diffusion model to obtain a large receptive field and
thus enhance the 4D consistency of the output, while making
the GPU memory consumption affordable. The experiments
on the DNA-Rendering and ActorsHQ datasets demonstrate
that our method is able to synthesize high-quality and consistent novel-view videos and significantly outperforms the
existing approaches. See our project page for interactive
demos and video results: https://diffuman4d.github.io/.

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of high-fidelity view synthesis of humans with sparse-view videos as input. Previous
methods solve the issue of insufficient observation by leveraging 4D diffusion models to generate videos at novel viewpoints. However, the generated videos from these models
often lack spatio-temporal consistency, thus degrading view
synthesis quality. In this paper, we propose a novel sliding
iterative denoising process to enhance the spatio-temporal
consistency of the 4D diffusion model. Specifically, we define a latent grid in which each latent encodes the image,
camera pose, and human pose for a certain viewpoint and
† Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

11047

