This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Baking Gaussian Splatting into Diffusion Denoiser for Fast
and Scalable Single-stage Image-to-3D Generation and Reconstruction
Yuanhao Cai1,∗ , He Zhang2 , Kai Zhang2 , Yixun Liang3,† ,
Mengwei Ren2 , Fujun Luan2 , Qing Liu2 , Soo Ye Kim2 , Jianming Zhang2 ,
Zhifei Zhang2 , Yuqian Zhou2 , Yulun Zhang4,† , Xiaokang Yang4 , Zhe Lin2 , Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University, 2 Adobe Research, 3 HKUST, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Figure 1. Single-view object generation (upper) and scene reconstruction (lower) results of our method. For single-view object generation,
the prompt views are shown in the left dashed box. The generated novel views and 3D Gaussian point clouds are depicted on the right. For
single-view scene reconstruction, our model can handle hard cases with occlusion and rotation, as illustrated in the dashed boxes of the
third row. The prompt views of object and scene text-to-3D demos are generated by stable diffusion [58] and Sora [4], respectively.

Abstract
Existing feedforward image-to-3D methods mainly rely on
2D multi-view diffusion models that cannot guarantee 3D
consistency. These methods easily collapse when changing
the prompt view direction and mainly handle object-centric
cases. In this paper, we propose a novel single-stage 3D diffusion model, DiffusionGS, for object generation and scene
reconstruction from a single view. DiffusionGS directly outputs 3D Gaussian point clouds at each timestep to enforce
view consistency and allow the model to generate robustly
given prompt views of any directions, beyond object-centric

inputs. Plus, to improve the capability and generality of
DiffusionGS, we scale up 3D training data by developing
a scene-object mixed training strategy. Experiments show
that DiffusionGS yields improvements of 2.20 dB/23.25 and
1.34 dB/19.16 in PSNR/FID for objects and scenes than
the state-of-the-art methods, without depth estimator. Plus,
our method enjoys over 5× faster speed (∼6s on an A100
GPU). Project page: https://caiyuanhao1998.
github.io/project/DiffusionGS/

1. Introduction
Image-to-3D task is important and challenging. It aims to
reconstruct or generate a 3D representation of scenes or ob-

∗ Work done during the internship in Adobe Research. † Corresponding Authors.

25062

