This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STD-GS: Exploring Frame-Event Interaction for SpatioTemporal-Disentangled
Gaussian Splatting to Reconstruct High-Dynamic Scene
Hanyu Zhou1, 2 *, Haonan Wang1 *, Haoyue Liu1 , Yuxing Duan1 , Luxin Yan1†, Gim Hee Lee2†
1
National Key Lab of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{hy.zhou, gimhee.lee}@nus.edu.sg

yanluxin@hust.edu.cn

https://github.com/Haonan-Wang-aurora/STD-GS

Abstract

Background
Splat

Map

High-dynamic scene reconstruction aims to represent static
background with rigid spatial features and dynamic objects
with deformed continuous spatiotemporal features. Typically,
existing methods adopt unified representation model (e.g.,
Gaussian) to directly match the spatiotemporal features of
dynamic scene from frame camera. However, this unified
paradigm fails in the potential discontinuous temporal features of objects due to frame imaging and the heterogeneous
spatial features between background and objects. In this
work, we introduce event camera to compensate for frame
camera, and propose a spatiotemporal-disentangled Gaussian splatting framework for high-dynamic scene reconstruction. As for dynamic scene, we figure out that background
and objects have appearance discrepancy in frame-based
spatial features and motion discrepancy in event-based temporal features, which motivates us to distinguish the spatiotemporal features between background and objects via
clustering. As for dynamic object, we discover that Gaussian representations and event data share the consistent
spatiotemporal characteristic, which could serve as a prior
to guide the spatiotemporal disentanglement of object Gaussians. Within Gaussian splatting framework, the cumulative
scene-object disentanglement can improve the spatiotemporal discrimination between background and objects to render
the time-continuous dynamic scene. Extensive experiments
are performed to verify the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Traditional scene reconstruction [1, 2] aims to represent
the 3D static scene with rigid spatial features from 2D frame
images. Unlike static scene, dynamic scene includes dy* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.

mismatch

Render

Object

Scene Gaussian
scene
Dynamic

Novel view

Spatiotemporal feature

(a) Unified Gaussian Representation

Splat
p
Ma Background Gaussian

Ma
p

Dynamic

Background

distinguish

Tim
e

Splat

scene

Object Gaussian

Render

Object

Spatiotemporal feature

Novel view

(b) Disentangled Gaussian Representation

Figure 1. Illustration of Gaussian splatting paradigms. Unified
Gaussian representation directly model the spatiotemporal features
of dynamic scene using the Gaussian with same form, while may
suffer the feature mismatch due to heterogeneous feature distribution between static background and dynamic objects. Instead,
we explore a disentangled Gaussian representation to disentangle
dynamic scene into various latent Gaussians for distinguishing the
background and objects. In this work, we introduce event to assist
frame, and propose a spatiotemporal-disentangled Gaussian splatting framework for high-dynamic scene reconstruction.

namic objects with deformed continuous spatiotemporal features, which are mixed with the spatial features of the static
background, limiting existing scene reconstruction methods
(e.g., Gaussian splatting [2]). As the motion patterns of dynamic objects intensify, distinguishing the spatiotemporal
features of the objects and the spatial features of the background becomes more challenging in such high-dynamic
scenarios. In this work, we aim to propose a novel Gaussian
splatting method for high-dynamic scene reconstruction.
Typically, existing dynamic scene reconstruction methods
[3–7] mainly adopt unified representation model (e.g., 3D
Gaussian [2]) to directly match the spatiotemporal features
of dynamic scene captured from 2D frame images in Fig.
1 (a). For example, Wang et al. [7] matched multiple key
points in 2D images via tracking, and then directly generated
multiple 3D Gaussians centered on these points to model

24801

