This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating, Fast and Slow: Scalable Parallel Video Generation with Video
Interface Networks
Bhishma Dedhia1,2,* , David Bourgin2 , Krishna Kumar Singh2 , Yuheng Li2 ,
Yan Kang2 , Zhan Xu2 , Niraj K. Jha1 , Yuchen Liu2,†
1
Princeton University, 2 Adobe Research

(b) "Fluffy Persian cat in pearl

(1) Full Denoising

"Young woman in a yellow
jacket walking in the forest"

necklace, studio, portrait"

"Shark swimming in the clear
Carribean ocean"

Full Video

Full

(d)

Autoregressive

VINs

128 frames

(a)

Chunk 2

Chunk 3

(c)

"A fat rabbit wearing a purple robe walking through a fantasy landscape"

256 frames

(2) Autoregressive Denoising

Chunk 1

Chunk 2

512 frames

(3) Parallel Denoising

Chunk 1

Chunk 3

Autoregressive Denoising

Full Denoising

VINs

Relative FLOPs
MAWE
(Lower is better)

Figure 1. (a) Concept: Video generation has traditionally proceeded with the computationally expensive full generation or the autoregressive alternative that requires repeated inference through a sampling chain. Instead, we formulate a parallel inference paradigm: Video
Interface Networks (VINs). (b) VINs enable the generation of long dynamic realistic videos that (c) often stagnate in the full attention setting or lose temporal coherence in the autoregressive setting. (d) Our method uses fewer FLOPs and achieves greater temporal consistency
as captured by the Motion Aware Warped Error [18].

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) can generate short photorealistic videos, yet directly training and sampling longer
videos with full attention across the video remains computationally challenging. Alternative methods break long videos
down into sequential generation of short video segments, requiring multiple sampling chain iterations and specialized
consistency modules. To overcome these challenges, we introduce a new paradigm called Video Interface Networks
(VINs), which augment DiTs with an abstraction module to
enable parallel inference of video chunks. At each diffusion
step, VINs encode global semantics from the noisy input of
local chunks and the encoded representations, in turn, guide
DiTs in denoising chunks in parallel. The coupling of VIN
and DiT is learned end-to-end on the denoising objective.
Further, the VIN architecture maintains fixed-size encoding tokens that encode the input via a single cross-attention
step. Disentangling the encoding tokens from the input thus
enables VIN to scale to long videos and learn essential semantics. Experiments on VBench demonstrate that VINs

surpass existing chunk-based methods in preserving background consistency and subject coherence. We then show
via an optical flow analysis that our approach attains stateof-the-art motion smoothness while using 25-40% fewer
FLOPs than full generation. Finally, human raters favorably assessed the overall video quality and temporal consistency of our method in a user study. Videos shown in this
manuscript can be found in the supplementary material.

1. Introduction

15385

Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) [35] have heralded a revolution in generative modeling and have been scaled up to
generate images [5], videos [3, 9, 45, 55], and 3D assets
[32] at unprecedented fidelity. Training DiTs on longer input contexts yields remarkable generalization, albeit imposing quadratic computational and memory bottlenecks. The
implications are particularly apparent in the case of highdimensional modalities like video, where training and inference with DiTs on long videos (> 64 frames) are slow
and expensive [9] (see Fig 1(a), Full Denoising). Further* Work partially done during an internship at Adobe
† Corresponding Author {yuliu@adobe.com}

