This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GigaTok: Scaling Visual Tokenizers to 3 Billion Parameters
for Autoregressive Image Generation
Tianwei Xiong1

Jun Hao Liew2
Zilong Huang2
Jiashi Feng2
2
The University of Hong Kong
ByteDance
Project page: https://silentview.github.io/GigaTok/

Xihui Liu1†

1

Generation

In autoregressive (AR) image generation, visual tokenizers compress images into compact discrete latent tokens, enabling efficient training of downstream autoregressive models for visual generation via next-token prediction.
While scaling visual tokenizers improves image reconstruction quality, it often degrades downstream generation quality—a challenge not adequately addressed in existing literature. To address this, we introduce GigaTok, the first
approach to simultaneously improve image reconstruction,
generation, and representation learning when scaling visual tokenizers. We identify the growing complexity of latent space as the key factor behind the reconstruction vs.
generation dilemma. To mitigate this, we propose semantic
regularization, which aligns tokenizer features with semantically consistent features from a pre-trained visual encoder.
This constraint prevents excessive latent space complexity
during scaling, yielding consistent improvements in both
reconstruction and downstream autoregressive generation.
Building on semantic regularization, we explore three key
practices for scaling tokenizers: (1) using 1D tokenizers for
better scalability, (2) prioritizing decoder scaling when expanding both encoder and decoder, and (3) employing entropy loss to stabilize training for billion-scale tokenizers.
By scaling to 3 billion parameters, GigaTok achieves stateof-the-art performance in reconstruction, downstream AR
generation, and downstream AR representation quality.

Reconstruction

Abstract

Tokenizer: rFID ↓

Tokenizer Params

Original image
111M AR model with Tokenizer Params
different tokenizers:
gFID ↓
AR generation
with Baseline
Tokenizer

136M

622M

2.9B

Better reconstruction with larger tokenizer
136M

622M

2.9B

Tokenizer
Fails to
Converge
Worse generation with larger tokenizer

AR generation
with GigaTok

Better generation with larger tokenizer

Figure 1. Reconstruction vs. generation dilemma: Naively scaling visual tokenizers achieves better reconstruction but degrades
downstream autoregressive (AR) generation. In contrast, GigaTok
achieves better performance for both reconstruction and generation as tokenizers scale up.

1. Introduction

with image reconstruction supervision, while the AR generator models the distribution of these discrete tokens through
next-token prediction. The image tokenizer plays a pivotal
role in AR visual generation, providing a compact and expressive latent space that enables effective generative modeling by downstream AR models.
Despite its pivotal role, scaling of visual tokenizer is
rarely explored in the literature. In fact, unlike the downstream AR models whose scalability has been widely validated [11, 25, 53, 55], scaling the visual tokenizer presents
a significant challenge. Specifically, there exists a reconstruction vs. generation dilemma, where scaling tokenizer
improves reconstruction fidelity but degrades downstream
generation quality, as shown in Fig. 1. This dilemma is also
observed in prior works [12, 18]. In this work, we seek
to overcome this limitation and explore strategies for effectively scaling tokenizers to enhance both reconstruction and
generation performance.
To investigate the root cause of this dilemma, we propose

Autoregressive (AR) language models (LM) have emerged
as a promising approach for visual generation [14, 43, 59,
62], driven by their proven scalability [2, 4, 13, 17, 31, 44,
45, 47, 48] and the potential for unified multimodal modeling [11, 38, 55]. The AR image generation framework consists of a visual tokenizer and a downstream AR generator.
The tokenizer encodes images into discrete tokens, trained
† Corresponding Author.

18770

