This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Staining and locking computer vision models without retraining
Oliver J. Sutton*
Synoptix Ltd. and
King’s College London

Qinghua Zhou*
King’s College London

George Leete
Synoptix Ltd.

qinghua.zhou@kcl.ac.uk

oliver.sutton@kcl.ac.uk

Alexander N. Gorban
Central Univ. Moscow

Ivan Y. Tyukin
King’s College London and AI Center, Bol’shoi Bul’var 30, Moscow
and ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence

Abstract

ature [5, 23], can be viewed as a form of ‘copyright trap’.
By embedding specific (unnatural) behavioural quirks into
the model, an identifying fingerprint is produced which can
later be used to determine the provenance of a stolen or
copied model. Locking, on the other hand, has a more direct
aim [6, 14, 16]: unless the thief knows the secret trigger,
they are unable to use the model to its full capability.

We introduce new methods of staining and locking computer
vision models, to protect their owners’ intellectual property.
Staining, also known as watermarking, embeds secret behaviour into a model which can later be used to identify
it, while locking aims to make a model unusable unless a
secret trigger is inserted into input images. Unlike existing
methods, our algorithms can be used to stain and lock pretrained models without requiring fine-tuning or retraining,
and come with provable, computable guarantees bounding
their worst-case false positive rates. The stain and lock are
implemented by directly modifying a small number of the
model’s weights and have minimal impact on the (unlocked)
model’s performance. Locked models are unlocked by inserting a small ‘trigger patch’ into the corner of the input image.
We present experimental results showing the efficacy of our
methods and demonstrating their practical performance on
a variety of computer vision models.

Here, we present new methods for both staining and locking neural network models in computer vision. Unlike existing approaches in the literature (reviewed in Sec. 2), our
algorithms do not require model training or fine-tuning. They
directly modify the model’s weights, and can therefore be
used to stain or lock pre-trained models with minimal performance impact. Since re-training is not required, a single
model can be supported and updated across multiple customers, while providing each with a separate stain or lock. A
further key advantage of our staining and locking techniques
is that implementing them does not require access to training or validation data. We also provide two distinct novel
theoretical guarantees on the worst-case false positive rate
of our staining and locking algorithms, analogues of which
do not appear to be present in the literature.

1. Introduction

Staining methods are broadly composed of two parts: a
schema describing the information encoded in the stain and
how it may later be read, and a mechanism through which this
information is implanted into the model. Numerous schemas
have been proposed in the literature, e.g. hiding a message
in the model’s weights, its activations or its class predictions
for specific trigger inputs. Until now, however, only two
families of mechanisms have been available, both requiring
model retraining: through special loss functions [7, 8, 11, 28,
45, 46], or by manipulating the training data [1, 17, 26, 32].
Our novel training-free staining mechanism implants highly
selective detector neurons into the model, which produce a
strong output only when a special trigger is present in the
model’s input. Sec. 3.1 shows how several standard staining

Designing, training and validating a computer vision model
can be an expensive undertaking. The effect on an organisation if such a valuable investment is leaked or stolen, can be
deleterious, particularly since model weights can be difficult
for a human judge to distinguish confidently. Developing
methods for protecting such intellectual property, which may
be deployed on a vulnerable edge device, is therefore crucial.
Two natural approaches that a model’s owner may wish
to take are either to imprint an identifiable stain within its
weights, or to add a lock to make the model unusable without adding a separate secret unlocking trigger to the model’s
input. Staining, also known as watermarking in the liter* These authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.

2346

