This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Im2Haircut: Single-view Strand-based Hair Reconstruction for Human Avatars
Vanessa Sklyarova1,2

1

Egor Zakharov2
Michael J. Black1

Malte Prinzler1,2
Justus Thies1,3
2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

,QSXW,PDJH

ETH Zürich

5HFRQVWUXFWHG'+DLU6WUDQGV

3

Giorgio Becherini1

Technical University of Darmstadt

,QSXW,PDJH

5HFRQVWUXFWHG'+DLU6WUDQGV

Figure 1. Given a single image, our method, Im2Haircut, generates high-quality, strand-based 3D hair geometry. Im2Haircut consists of a
prior hair geometry model trained on a mixture of synthetic and real data that is ﬁnetuned using the input image at inference time.

Abstract
We present a novel approach for 3D hair reconstruction from single photographs based on a global hair prior
combined with local optimization. Capturing strand-based
hair geometry from single photographs is challenging due
to the variety and geometric complexity of hairstyles and the
lack of ground truth training data. Classical reconstruction
methods like multi-view stereo only reconstruct the visible
hair strands, missing the inner structure of hairstyles and
hampering realistic hair simulation. To address this, existing methods leverage hairstyle priors trained on synthetic
data. Such data, however, is limited in both quantity and
quality since it requires manual work from skilled artists
to model the 3D hairstyles and create near-photorealistic
renderings. To address this, we propose a novel approach
that uses both, real and synthetic data to learn an effective hairstyle prior. Speciﬁcally, we train a transformerbased prior model on synthetic data to obtain knowledge
of the internal hairstyle geometry and introduce real data

in the learning process to model the outer structure. This
training scheme is able to model the visible hair strands
depicted in an input image, while preserving the general
3D structure of hairstyles. We exploit this prior to create a Gaussian-splatting-based reconstruction method that
creates hairstyles from one or more images. Qualitative
and quantitative comparisons with existing reconstruction
pipelines demonstrate the effectiveness and superior performance of our method for capturing detailed hair orientation, overall silhouette, and backside consistency. For
additional results and code, please refer to https://
im2haircut.is.tue.mpg.de.

10656

1. Introduction
Realistic digital representation of a person’s appearance, including their hair, is essential for creating highly personalized and realistic 3D head avatars. However, capturing a
digital representation of hair is challenging, as hair strands

