This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What Changed and What Could Have Changed? State-Change Counterfactuals
for Procedure-Aware Video Representation Learning
Chi-Hsi Kung∗
Indiana University

Frangil Ramirez∗
Indiana University

Juhyung Ha
Indiana University

kung@iu.edu

fraramir@iu.edu

yuhha@iu.edu

Yi-Ting Chen†
National Yang-Ming Chiao-Tung University

David Crandall†
Indiana University

Yi-Hsuan Tsai†
Atmanity Inc.

ychen@cs.nycu.edu.tw

djcran@iu.edu

wasidennis@gmail.com

Figure 1. Illustration of “what change” (actual action-induced transformations) and “what could have changed” (hypothetical deviations)
for both clip- and video-level procedures. (a) The clip narration “Scoop oatmeal with a spoon and drop it into a bowl of water” changes the
scene’s Before and After states at the short-term clip-level. (b) Illustrates the hypothesized deviation, i.e., State-change Counterfactual, that
could have happened and changed the scene differently at the clip level. (c) Illustrates the counterfactuals for video-level procedures, which
depicts what could happen due to possible previous mistakes, for example, Missing-step Counterfactual and Misordered Counterfactual.

Abstract
Understanding a procedural activity requires modeling
both how action steps transform the scene, and how evolving scene transformations can influence the sequence of action steps, even those that are accidental or erroneous. Existing work has studied procedure-aware video representations by modeling the temporal order of actions, but has
not explicitly learned the state changes (scene transformations). In this work, we study procedure-aware video representation learning by incorporating state-change descriptions generated by Large Language Models (LLMs) as supervision signals for video encoders. Moreover, we gener-

ate state-change counterfactuals that simulate hypothesized
failure outcomes, allowing models to learn by imagining
unseen “What if” scenarios. This counterfactual reasoning facilitates the model’s ability to understand the cause
and effect of each step in an activity. We conduct extensive
experiments on procedure-aware tasks, including temporal
action segmentation, error detection, action phase classification, frame retrieval, multi-instance retrieval, and action recognition. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed state-change descriptions and their counterfactuals, and achieve significant improvements on multiple tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/HCISLab/counterfactual-video-pretrain.

* Equal contribution. †Equal advising.

12294

