This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Geometric Degradation in Fast DownSampling via FastAdapter for
Point Cloud Segmentation
Shuofeng Sun1 , Haibin Yan1 *
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications1
Abstract
Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) is widely used in existing
point-based models because it effectively preserves structural integrity during downsampling. However, it incurs
signiﬁcant computational overhead, severely impacting the
model’s inference efﬁciency. Random sampling or grid sampling is considered faster downsampling methods; however, these fast downsampling methods may lead to the loss
of geometric information during the downsampling process
due to their overly simplistic and ﬁxed rules, which can negatively affect model performance. To address this issue, we
propose FastAdapter, which aggregates local contextual information through a small number of anchor points and facilitates interactions across spatial and layer dimensions,
ultimately feeding this information back into the downsampled point cloud to mitigate the information degradation
caused by fast downsampling methods. In addition to using FastAdapter to enhance model performance in methods
that already employ fast downsampling, we aim to explore a
more challenging yet valuable application scenario. Specifically, we focus on pre-trained models that utilize FPS,
embedding FastAdapter and replacing FPS with random
sampling for lightweight ﬁne-tuning. This approach aims
to signiﬁcantly improve inference speed while maintaining
relatively unchanged performance. Experimental results
on ScanNet, S3DIS, and SemanticKITTI demonstrate that
our method effectively mitigates the geometric information
degradation issues caused by fast downSampling.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of deep learning models and sensor
technology, there is a growing interest among researchers
in using neural networks to recognize point cloud data [7,
8, 25, 26, 31, 32]. One important issue is that some practical 3D applications, such as autonomous driving and augmented reality, demand high inference speeds from neural
networks. However, due to the unordered and irregular na* Corresponding author

25983

Figure 1. Model Comparison by Size, mIoU and Throughput(inference). We visualized the size, mIoU, and throughput of
different models on ScanNet. First, for most point-based models that use FPS, it is evident that FPS generally results in slower
inference speeds. However, while replacing FPS with random
sampling signiﬁcantly improves inference speed, it leads to severe performance degradation. By embedding our FastAdapter
(FA+XXXX), we can effectively mitigate this performance degradation issue. Secondly, incorporating FastAdapter into models that
already utilize the fast downSample (like RandLA with randomsample and PTV3 with gridsample) method results in a signiﬁcant
performance improvement.

ture of point cloud data, point-based models typically use
custom sampling and grouping operators instead of traditional convolutional neural networks to extract local features, which often incurs signiﬁcant computational overhead.
The downsampling method is a part of the computational resource overhead. Farthest point sampling (FPS)
is the most commonly used downsampling method, which
involves selecting the point in the point cloud that is farthest from the already selected points as the new sampling
point. This ensures a relatively regular density distribution and preserves the integrity of local structures during
the down-sampling process. However, the need to compute the distance matrix between points incurs signiﬁcant
computational overhead (O(N 2 )), which results in slow in-

