This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Thermal Polarimetric Multi-view Stereo
Takahiro Kushida Kenichiro Tanaka
Ritsumeikan University
2-150 Iwakura-cho, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan
{tkushida, ken-t}@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel method for detailed 3D shape
reconstruction utilizing thermal polarization cues. Unlike
state-of-the-art methods, the proposed approach is independent of illumination and material properties. In this
paper, we formulate a general theory of polarization observation and show that long-wave infrared (LWIR) polarimetric imaging is free from the ambiguities that affect
visible polarization analyses. Subsequently, we propose a
method for recovering detailed 3D shapes using multi-view
thermal polarimetric images. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach effectively reconstructs fine details
in transparent, translucent, and heterogeneous objects, outperforming existing techniques.

1. Introduction
3D shape reconstruction is a fundamental problem in computer vision, with applications spanning both academia and
industry. Over the years, various 3D reconstruction methods using RGB cameras have been proposed, but many
of these methods rely on strong assumptions about illumination and reflection models. For instance, multi-view
stereo [19, 44, 45, 47] depends on surface texture to find
correspondences, while structured light [16, 43], photometric stereo [10, 20, 41, 50], and shape from polarization [1, 2, 32, 34, 46, 49] require specific lighting conditions
and assume opaque surfaces, limiting their applicability to
a narrow range of materials.
Thermal imaging presents an attractive alternative for 3D
reconstruction in challenging scenarios because it does not
rely on environmental illumination; any object with heat
emits long-wave infrared (LWIR) light, effectively serving as its own light source. Furthermore, most materials,
except for those designed for thermal optics, are opaque
in the LWIR spectrum, eliminating the need for many of
the assumptions required by traditional reflection models.
Building on this concept, several methods, such as thermal multi-view stereo [53] and absorption-based depth es-

27390

timation [9, 14, 24, 35] have been proposed. Although
these methods demonstrate potential applicability, their results also imply the limitation inherent in model-based approaches, especially with regard to accuracy.
Photometric cues in the LWIR spectrum are useful for
recovering the accurate shape, similar to the visible-light
spectrum. For example, thermal photometric stereo [48]
and shape from heat conduction [36] have demonstrated detailed surface reconstruction. However, these methods require active heating and cooling of the object, making them
both time-consuming and impractical. In this paper, we aim
to reconstruct fine 3D shapes in a steady state using polarimetric cues, a type of photometric cue that can be obtained
without monitoring the heating or cooling processes.
Table 1 presents a comparison of various 3D reconstruction approaches. Our approach is illumination-independent,
material-independent, free from heating or cooling process,
and highly accurate. Our contributions are twofold. First,
we establish a unified theoretical framework for LWIR polarization, showing that, unlike visible-light polarization, it
is not affected by specular-diffuse ambiguities. Second, we
show that LWIR polarization serves as a powerful cue for
detailed 3D shape reconstruction. Experimental results confirm that our method outperforms the existing approaches
on heterogeneous materials.

2. Related Work
2.1. Shape from visible polarization
Shape from Polarization (SfP), which recovers surface normals from the polarization state of reflected light, has a
long-standing history in computer vision [1, 2, 32, 34, 46,
49]. Recently, the advent of snapshot polarization cameras
has significantly boosted this area of research [40].
SfP approaches continue to tackle ambiguities in surface
normals that arise from the mixture of specular and diffuse
polarizations [46]. One effective way to resolve these ambiguities is to use multi-view polarization images, which
provide a richer set of constraints on the surface normals
and lead to more accurate and robust surface reconstruc-

