This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayerLock: Non-collapsing Representation Learning with Progressive Freezing
Goker Erdogan†

Nikhil Parthasarathy†

Alexander Lerchner†

Catalin Ionescu†

Drew A. Hudson†

Andrew Zisserman†♢ Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi†
João Carreira†

†

Google DeepMind

♢

University of Oxford

Abstract
We introduce LayerLock, a simple yet effective approach for
self-supervised visual representation learning, that gradually transitions throughout training from predicting shallow
features to deeper ones through progressive layer freezing.
First, we make the observation that during training of video
masked-autoencoding (MAE) models, ViT layers converge
in the order of their depth: shallower layers converge early,
deeper layers converge late. We then show that this observation can be exploited to accelerate standard MAE by progressively freezing the model according to an explicit schedule, throughout training. Furthermore, this same schedule
can be used in a simple and scalable approach to latent prediction that does not suffer from “representation collapse”.
We apply our proposed approach, LayerLock, to both pixel
and latent prediction approaches with large models of up
to 4B parameters and show improvements on both semantic (action classification) and low level (depth estimation)
vision tasks.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. In video masked auto-encoding, network layers converge during training in order of their depth. We measure the
final loss (Lbase ) of a baseline (unfrozen) model after training for
14000 steps. Each point, similarly shows the corresponding final
training loss when freezing the network up to layer L at step T .
We see that shallow layers “converge” faster than deeper layers as
they can be frozen at earlier steps while still being able to minimize the final loss very close to Lbase ). In other words, layer
convergence order is correlated with layer depth, motivating our
proposed LayerLock progressive freezing approach to learning.

The visual world is highly complex and contains regularities across many scales, ranging from low-level spatiotemporal cues about 3D shape and geometry, to highly abstract
semantic information like object categories or actions. Biological systems can learn to extract these wide range of
regularities in the visual stream in a mostly unsupervised
way and hence generalize well to a wide variety of low to
high-level visual tasks. Recent advances in self-supervised
learning from video [5, 10, 16, 21, 32, 45, 50] bring us
closer to building such systems, but still suffer from various
issues of data efficiency and training stability among others. In this paper, we present a new self-supervised learning
technique that progressively predicts higher-level representations of the input, and leads to a more stable and effective
learning that improves performance on a range of low to

high-level visual tasks, ranging from depth prediction to action classification.

19461

One way to categorize self-supervised visual representation learning techniques is to look at whether they make
predictions in pixel space (i.e., reconstruct the input) or
in a learned latent space [5, 21, 26]. Pixel prediction approaches are appealing because reconstruction provides a

