This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CopyrightShield: Enhancing Diffusion Model Security Against Copyright
Infringement Attacks
Zhixiang Guo
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Siyuan Liang*
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

ZHIXIANG004@e.ntu.edu.sg

siyuan.liang@ntu.edu.sg

Aishan Liu
Beihang University
Beijing, China

Dacheng Tao*
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

liuaishan@buaa.edu.cn

dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Diffusion models have attracted significant attention due to
its exceptional data generation capabilities in fields such
as image synthesis. However, recent studies have shown
that diffusion models are vulnerable to copyright infringement attacks, where attackers inject strategically modified
non-infringing images into the training set, inducing the
model to generate infringing content under the prompt of
specific poisoned captions. To address this issue, we first
propose a defense framework, CopyrightShield, to defend
against the above attack. Specifically, we analyze the memorization mechanism of diffusion models and find that attacks exploit the model’s overfitting to specific spatial positions and prompts, causing it to reproduce poisoned samples under backdoor triggers. Based on this, we propose
a poisoned sample detection method using spatial masking
and data attribution to quantify poisoning risk and accurately identify hidden backdoor samples. To further mitigate memorization of poisoned features, we introduce an
adaptive optimization strategy that integrates a dynamic
penalty term into the training loss, reducing reliance on infringing features while preserving generative performance.
Experimental results demonstrate that CopyrightShield significantly improves poisoned sample detection performance
across two attack scenarios, achieving average F1-scores of
0.665, retarding the First-Attack Epoch (FAE) of 115. 2%
and decreasing the Copyright Infringement Rate (CIR) by
56.7%. Compared to the SoTA backdoor defense in diffusion models, the defense effect is improved by about 25%,
showcasing its superiority and practicality in enhancing the
security of diffusion models.

Figure 1. Copyright infringement attacks are caused by the memorization
of poisoned data and prompts. Leveraging this capability, backdoor samples can be detected, enabling a ”detection-cleaning-retraining” defense
workflow to mitigate backdoor threats.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding authors.

Diffusion models [39] have been widely applied in various generative tasks, including high-quality image synthesis, image style transfer, image-to-image translation, and
text-to-image synthesis [8, 33, 34, 43, 49]. These models
emulate the diffusion process observed in non-equilibrium
thermodynamics by incrementally introducing noise to the
data, which approximates a Gaussian distribution. Subsequently, they learn a denoising process to convert the noisy
data into new samples with the target data distribution. Due
to their remarkable data generation capabilities, diffusion
models are employed in diverse fields [26, 31, 35].
However, as commercial text-to-image diffusion models become increasingly prevalent [37, 41], copyright issues have emerged as a significant concern. While the robust memorization and replication abilities of these models
enhance their image generation performance, they also increase the models’ vulnerability to backdoor copyright at-

19417

