This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pinco: Position-induced Consistent Adapter for Diffusion Transformer
in Foreground-conditioned Inpainting
Guangben Lu1,2 * Yuzhen Du1,2 * Yizhe Tang1 Zhimin Sun1,2 Ran Yi1†
Yifan Qi2 Tianyi Wang2 Lizhuang Ma1 Fangyuan Zou2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tencent

Figure 1. Pinco generates high-quality images with rich and diverse backgrounds from given foreground subjects and text descriptions.
The four images on the left are generated by Hunyuan-Pinco and those on the right by Flux-Pinco, exhibiting its outstanding capabilities
in foreground consistency preservation, rational spatial arrangements, and diverse background generation.

Abstract
Foreground-conditioned inpainting aims to seamlessly fill
the background region of an image by utilizing the provided foreground subject and a text description. While existing T2I-based image inpainting methods can be applied
to this task, they suffer from issues of subject shape expansion, distortion, or impaired ability to align with the
text description, resulting in inconsistencies between the visual elements and the text description. To address these
challenges, we propose Pinco, a plug-and-play foregroundconditioned inpainting adapter that generates high-quality
backgrounds with good text alignment while effectively preserving the shape of the foreground subject. Firstly, we
design a Self-Consistent Adapter that integrates the fore-

ground subject features into the layout-related self-attention
layer, which helps to alleviate conflicts between the text and
subject features by ensuring that the model can effectively
consider the foreground subject’s characteristics while processing the overall image layout. Secondly, we design a Decoupled Image Feature Extraction method that employs distinct architectures to extract semantic and spatial features
separately, significantly improving subject feature extraction and ensuring high-quality preservation of the subject’s
shape. Thirdly, to ensure precise utilization of the extracted
features and to focus attention on the subject region, we introduce a Shared Positional Embedding Anchor, greatly improving the model’s understanding of subject features and
boosting training efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance and
efficiency in foreground-conditioned inpainting.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ranyi@sjtu.edu.cn

15266

