This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral Image Tokenizer
Carlos Esteves

Mohammed Suhail

Ameesh Makadia

{machc,suhailmhd,makadia}@google.com

Google Research

Abstract
Image tokenizers map images to sequences of discrete
tokens, and are a crucial component of autoregressive
transformer-based image generation. The tokens are typically associated with spatial locations in the input image,
arranged in raster scan order, which is not ideal for autoregressive modeling. In this paper, we propose to tokenize the
image spectrum instead, obtained from a discrete wavelet
transform (DWT), such that the sequence of tokens represents the image in a coarse-to-fine fashion. Our tokenizer
brings several advantages: 1) it leverages that natural images are more compressible at high frequencies, 2) it can
take and reconstruct images of different resolutions without retraining, 3) it improves the conditioning for next-token
prediction – instead of conditioning on a partial line-by-line
reconstruction of the image, it takes a coarse reconstruction
of the full image, 4) it enables partial decoding where the
first few generated tokens can reconstruct a coarse version
of the image, 5) it enables autoregressive models to be used
for image upsampling. We evaluate the tokenizer reconstruction metrics as well as multiscale image generation,
text-guided image upsampling and editing.

1. Introduction
In natural language processing, tokenization associates sets
of characters to entries in a vocabulary, which is straightforward since language is discrete. The sequence of tokens
is suitably modeled as a categorical distribution with autoregressive (AR) transformers, which is the foundation of
modern large language models (LLMs) [33, 46, 47].
While natural images are represented by discrete pixel
values, they exhibit high dimensionality, redundancies, and
noise so it’s impractical to associate one token per pixel.
This motivated a long line of research of learnable image
tokenizers [15, 37, 37, 51, 57]. While there are successful autoregressive image generation models [15, 57, 58],

17181

images are not sequential like language, which motivated
developing alternatives such as denoising diffusion models [11, 38, 43] and masked transformers [3, 4, 60]. Nevertheless, most of these alternatives also operate on the latent
space of tokenizers like VQGAN [15] instead of raw pixels.
In this work, we revisit AR transformer-based image
generation. Our main contribution is a tokenizer operating on the image spectrum, specifically on DWT coefficients, where the coarse-to-fine representation lends itself
more naturally to a sequential interpretation. Our Spectral
Image Tokenizer (SIT) has several useful properties and enables different applications:
P.1 Since the power spectrum of natural images decreases
with frequency, high frequencies can be more heavily compressed with little effect in visual quality. SIT
leverages this by associating tokens to larger patches at
higher wavelet scales than at lower scales (see Fig. 2).
P.2 SIT is transformer-based [52]; by using an attention
mask where each scale depends on itself and lower
scales (“Scale-Causal attention”), SIT can be trained at
a single resolution and used to tokenize images of multiple resolutions (any number of scales up to the trained
maximum), and detokenize partial token sequences (up
to some scale), reconstructing a coarse image.
P.3 Using SIT, we train an autoregressive generative transformer (AR-SIT) that models images coarse-to-fine.
The next-token prediction is then conditioned on a
coarse reconstruction of the image given by the partial
token sequence, instead of the usual conditioning on the
partial reconstruction of the previous rows of the image.
P.4 AR-SIT can quickly generate only the first few tokens
and reconstruct a coarse version of the image, enabling
applications like quickly showing multiple coarse generations and letting the user select which ones to refine.
P.5 AR-SIT can be used for text-based upsampling of an input low resolution image, by starting the decoding process with the few tokens output by SIT, and generating
the rest of the sequence up to a desired resolution.
P.6 AR-SIT can be used for text-guided image editing, by

