This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stable Diffusion Models are Secretly Good at Visual In-Context Learning
Trevine Oorloff1,2*
Ali Shafahi1
1

Vishwanath Sindagi1
Wele Gedara Chaminda Bandara1
Amin Ghiasi1
Charan Prakash1
Reza Ardekani1

Apple

2

University of Maryland - College Park

Abstract
Large language models (LLM) in natural language processing (NLP) have demonstrated great potential for in-context
learning (ICL) — the ability to leverage a few sets of example prompts to adapt to various tasks without having to
explicitly update the model weights. ICL has recently been
explored for computer vision tasks with promising early
outcomes. These approaches involve specialized training
and/or additional data that complicate the process and limit
its generalizability. In this work, we show that off-the-shelf
Stable Diffusion models can be repurposed for visual incontext learning (V-ICL). Specifically, we formulate an inplace attention re-computation within the self-attention layers of the Stable Diffusion architecture that explicitly incorporates context between the query and example prompts.
Without any additional fine-tuning, we show that this repurposed Stable Diffusion model is able to adapt to six different tasks: foreground segmentation, single object detection, semantic segmentation, keypoint detection, edge detection, and colorization. For example, the proposed approach
improves the mean intersection over union (mIoU) for the
foreground segmentation task on Pascal-5i dataset by 8.9%
and 3.2% over recent methods such as Visual Prompting
and IMProv, respectively. Additionally, we show that the
proposed method is able to effectively leverage multiple
prompts through ensembling to infer the task better and further improve the performance.

1. Introduction
In-context learning (ICL) refers to the paradigm where a
foundation model leverages exemplar source-target pair(s),
known as prompts, to infer the task and perform the inferred
task on an input, known as query. ICL is an emergent property of large language models (LLMs) and has been widely
explored in the natural language processing (NLP) domain
[4, 8, 25, 32]. ICL facilitates a model to adapt to novel or
out-of-domain tasks without the need for fine-tuning which
* This work was completed during internship at Apple

Figure 1. Existing V-ICL methods require specialized training of
foundation models on curated/uncurated data before using them
for novel downstream tasks. In contrast, our approach repurposes
an off-the-shelf Stable Diffusion model without any additional
training or data.

not only eliminates task-specific training but also reduces
dependency on task-specific annotated datasets. Recent research, such as [3, 16, 28–31, 33], have made promising
attempts to harness the potential of in-context learning for
computer vision tasks. These works can be broadly divided
into two categories based on the datasets that are used for
training: (1) uncurated datasets (e.g. CVF [3], S2CV [33])
and (2) curated/annotated task-related datasets (e.g. COCO
[15], NYUDv2 [23]).
The first category of approaches such as Visual Prompting [3] and Improv [33] enable foundation models to perform in-context learning by training with an inpainting loss
on uncurated datasets (e.g. CVF, S2CV). These datasets
consist of images extracted from computer vision papers
and consist of grid-like structures of source-target pairs.
The combination of this structured input and random masking during training allows the model to implicitly learn the
relationships between the source and target images. During inference, when the model is presented with a gridlike canvas of the query image and the example prompt(s)
(source-target pairs) along with the location of the output
for the query image masked-out (see Fig. 2a), the model is
expected to inpaint the prediction.
The second category of approaches [16, 28–31] enable
a foundation model for in-context learning by allowing the
model to train on curated datasets (e.g. COCO, NYUDv2)

23604

