This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIMO: Diverse 3D Motion Generation for Arbitrary Objects
Linzhan Mou1

Jiahui Lei1†
Chen Wang1
Lingjie Liu1
Kostas Daniilidis1,2
1
2
University of Pennsylvania
Archimedes, Athena RC

DIMO

DIMO

DIMO

DIMO

DIMO

DIMO

Motion Latent Space

3D Motion Generation

Key Point Trajectories

Motion Latent Space

3D Motion Generation

Key Point Trajectories

Figure 1. During inference, DIMO can instantly generate diverse 3D motions and high-fidelity 4D contents in a single forward pass from
a single generative model, by sampling from a continuous motion latent space.

Abstract
We present DIMO, a generative approach capable of generating diverse 3D motions for arbitrary objects from a single image. The core idea of our work is to leverage the
rich priors in well-trained video models to extract the common motion patterns and then embed them into a shared
low-dimensional latent space. Specifically, we first generate multiple videos of the same object with diverse motions.
We then embed each motion into a latent vector and train a
shared motion decoder to learn the distribution of motions
represented by a structured and compact motion representation, i.e., neural key point trajectories. The canonical 3D
Gaussians are then driven by these key points and fused to
model the geometry and appearance. During inference time
with learned latent space, we can instantly sample diverse
3D motions in a single-forward pass and support several
interesting applications including 3D motion interpolation
and language-guided motion generation. Our project page
is available at https://linzhanm.github.io/dimo.

motions. This paper takes the first step toward addressing
this challenging problem.
Previously, generating dynamic objects with such rich
motion spaces has only been possible for category-specific
objects, such as humans and animals, using template models
where motion priors are obtained through time-consuming
and labor-intensive motion capture. A successful example
is the SMPL [33, 37] model for humans, whose generative
capabilities are built upon massive pose sequences captured
from real human data. However, this paradigm is not scalable to more general objects in the real world. How can
we build an SMPL-like model that can model and generate
diverse 3D motions for any dynamic object?
On the other hand, previous 4D object generative models [3, 18, 27, 31, 36, 43, 44, 48, 55, 69, 70, 73, 75, 76, 78,
83, 84] can work on general objects, but can only generate one motion per object in each expensive inference pass.
Generating diverse 3D motions of the same object requires
re-running the diffusion model [5, 32, 61, 70] and 4D reconstruction [20, 34] repeatedly, which will easily lose identity
and cost extensive computing. How can we directly output a
4D object with a diverse motion space that can be sampled
instantly during inference?
Our key insight to address these issues is that recent advanced video models [5, 7, 62, 74] already contain rich motion prior knowledge for general objects and can serve the
role of the previous expensive motion capture for category-

1. Introduction
4D generation should be diverse in terms of motion. Our
community desires a generative model capable of producing these dynamic 3D objects, and once generated, with not
just a single motion per object but a space of many possible
† Corresponding Author {leijh@cis.upenn.edu}

14357

