This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Saliency Dataset Bias
Matthias Kümmerer

Harneet Singh Khanuja*

Matthias Bethge

Tübingen AI Center
University of Tübingen
firstname.lastname@bethgelab.org

Abstract
Recent advances in image-based saliency prediction are
approaching gold standard performance levels on existing benchmarks. Despite this success, we show that predicting fixations across multiple saliency datasets remains
challenging due to dataset bias. We find a significant
performance drop (around 40%) when models trained on
one dataset are applied to another. Surprisingly, increasing dataset diversity does not resolve this inter-dataset
gap, with close to 60% attributed to dataset-specific biases. To address this remaining generalization gap, we
propose a novel architecture extending a mostly datasetagnostic encoder-decoder structure with fewer than 20
dataset-specific parameters that govern interpretable mechanisms such as multi-scale structure, center bias, and fixation spread. Adapting only these parameters to new data
accounts for more than 75% of the generalization gap, with
a large fraction of the improvement achieved with as few as
50 samples. Our model sets a new state-of-the-art on all
three datasets of the MIT/Tuebingen Saliency Benchmark
(MIT300, CAT2000, and COCO-Freeview), even when
purely generalizing from unrelated datasets, but with a
substantial boost when adapting to the respective training
datasets. The model also provides valuable insights into
spatial saliency properties, revealing complex multi-scale
effects that combine both absolute and relative sizes.

prediction – the endeavor of predicting where humans look
in images using saliency models – is highly active, with a
plethora of different saliency models being developed.
The standard benchmark in the field is the MIT300
dataset [27] of the MIT/Tuebingen Saliency Benchmark [33]. Recently, the performance on this benchmark
has started to plateau [32], raising questions about whether
the field has reached its limits in spatial saliency prediction [15].
While there is plenty of room for extensions such as incorporating dynamic eye movements [1, 17, 55, 70], stimulus dynamics [15, 40], or more top-down and task-driven
effects [9, 52, 56], spatial saliency remains crucial for many
applications. For concluding that spatial saliency is solved
to an extent that is useful for real-world applications, models would need to perform well beyond datasets seen during
training. To that end, we conduct a systematic study across
five different large saliency datasets and test how well models transfer from one or multiple of these datasets to another.
We find a large generalization gap even when training on
multiple different saliency datasets. This indicates that the
advantages of training on vast amounts of data – the key
behind the success of recent (foundation) models – are outweighed by dataset-specific differences.
To address this issue, we propose a saliency model that
is able to account for dataset biases with less than 20 interpretable parameters. Adapting only the bias parameters
to new data closes about 75% of the generalization gap and
can be done on as little as 50 samples. This allows us to substantially improve the state-of-the-art on the MIT300 [27],
CAT2000 [4] and COCO-Freeview [10] benchmarks in generalization, adaptation and full-training settings. Furthermore, analyzing the learned dataset specific parameters provides valuable insights into the variability of saliency across
datasets. Our main contributions are as follows:

1. Introduction
Understanding and predicting where we look is valuable
for numerous reasons. Scientifically, it provides insights
into visual processing in the retina and the brain, memory,
emotions and cognitive processes and task driven behaviour.
Practically, it enhances applications such as better compression methods, optimized layouts, robotics, and efficient allocation of computational resources. The field of saliency
* Now at Georgia Tech

• We identify and quantify large performance penalties
when transferring predictions from one or many saliency
datasets to an unseen saliency dataset (inter-dataset gap
and generalization gap).

22077

