This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detection, Pose Estimation and Segmentation for Multiple Bodies:
Closing the Virtuous Circle
Miroslav Purkrabek and Jiri Matas
Visual Recognition Group
Czech Technical University in Prague
purkrmir@fel.cvut.cz

···
(A1) Detection

(B1) Pose estimation

(C1) Mask refinement

(D1) Mask-out

(A2) Detection

Output: bboxes, poses, masks

Figure 1. The BBox-Mask-Pose (BMP) method. Steps (A) – (D) repeat until no new detections found in step (A). Here, the background
player is undetected in step (A1). BMP correctly fits the foreground player’s pose (B1) which leads to correction of his segmentation and
bbox (C1). After masking the foreground player (D1), the background player is detected (A2), his body correctly segemented and pose
estimated. Right: the BMP output. Note: the loop can start with a bounding box (A), pose (B), or segmentation mask (C).

1. Introduction

Abstract

Human pose estimation (HPE) plays a crucial role in tasks
such as action detection and gesture recognition. It is a
challenging problem, especially in multi-body scenes where
people overlap, leading to issues such as merged bounding
boxes or collapsed poses. Results on multi-body datasets
are far from saturated, with state-of-the-art below 50% [42].
HPE approaches differ in how they use conditioning to
guide predictions. Top-down methods [15, 38] are conditioned by bounding boxes, estimating poses within image
crops defined by a detector, while single-stage and bottomup methods [7, 33] are not conditioned at all. Pose-refining
methods, such as BUCTD [42], introduce conditioning by
prior pose estimates, iteratively refining predictions to improve accuracy.
Bounding boxes, masks, and poses represent different
aspects of the human body, at different levels of granularity. Bounding boxes are easy to annotate and effective for
detecting small instances but lack detail in crowded scenes.
Segmentation masks are more detailed, but are costly to
annotate and less common than bboxes. Poses provide
anatomical detail, but are less effective for direct detection. Detectors, segmentators, and pose estimators are often trained on different datasets, and their combination increases variance in training data.

Human pose estimation methods work well on isolated people but struggle with multiple-bodies-in-proximity scenarios. Previous work has addressed this problem by conditioning pose estimation by detected bounding boxes or
keypoints, but overlooked instance masks. We propose to
iteratively enforce mutual consistency of bounding boxes,
instance masks, and poses. The introduced BBox-MaskPose (BMP) method uses three specialized models that improve each other’s output in a closed loop. All models
are adapted for mutual conditioning, which improves robustness in multi-body scenes. MaskPose, a new maskconditioned pose estimation model, is the best among topdown approaches on OCHuman. BBox-Mask-Pose pushes
SOTA on OCHuman dataset in all three tasks – detection, instance segmentation, and pose estimation. It also
achieves SOTA performance on COCO pose estimation.
The method is especially good in scenes with large instances overlap, where it improves detection by 39% over
the baseline detector. With small specialized models and
faster runtime, BMP is an effective alternative to large
human-centered foundational models. Code and models are
available on the project website 1 .
1 MiraPurkrabek.github.io/BBox-Mask-Pose/

9004

