This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDFormer: Vision-based 3D Semantic Scene Completion via
SAM-assisted Dual-channel Voxel Transformer
Yujie Xue, Huilong Pi, Jiapeng Zhang, Yunchuan Qin, Zhuo Tang, Kenli Li, Ruihui Li*
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
{xueyj, phl880217, zhangjp, qinyunchuan, ztang, lkl, liruihui}@hnu.edu.cn
6$0
,QSXW

9LHZ
7UDQVIRUP

D
&URVVDWWHQWLRQ

E

2XWSXW

F

%5*6FHQH

*HRPHWULF3ULRULW\

9LHZ
7UDQVIRUP
SURSDJDWLRQ

6$0

,QSXW

6')RUPHU 2XUV

6$0

G 7KHHIIHFWRI6$0PDVNVRQWKHFRQVWUXFWLRQRI6')RUPHU

6HPDQWLF3ULRULW\

Figure 1. (a)(b)Existing vision-based framework (VoxFormer-T[18], BRGScene[12]). (c) Our proposed SAM-assisted dual voxel transformer framework. Compared to previous methods, our method introduces explicit priors from SAM to enhance understanding the geometry and semantics of the scene. (d) Visualizing the effect of SAM mask in prompting SDFormer to produce dual voxel, Clearly observing
the approach allows for more accurate segmentation of vehicles and trees.

Abstract
Vision-based semantic scene completion (SSC) is able to
predict complex scene information from limited 2D images,
which has attracted widespread attention. Currently, SSC
methods typically construct uniﬁed voxel features containing both geometry and semantics, which lead to different depth positions in occluded regions sharing the same
2D semantic information, resulting in ambiguous semantic segmentation. To address this problem, we propose SDFormer, a novel SAM-assisted Dual-channel Voxel Transformer framework for SSC. We uncouple the task based on
its multi-objective nature and construct two parallel subnetworks: a semantic constructor (SC) and a geometric
reﬁner (GR). The SC utilizes the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) to construct dense semantic voxel features from reliable visible semantic information in the image. The GR
accurately predicts depth positions and then further adjusts the semantic output by SAM. Additionally, we design
a Semantic Calibration Afﬁnity to enhance semantic-aware
transformations in SC. Within the GR, Shape Segments In*

Corresponding authors.

teractive and Learnable mask generation module to emphasize the spatial location of semantics to obtain ﬁnegrained voxel information. Extensive qualitative and quantitative results on the SemanticKITTI and SSCBench-KITTI360 datasets show that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Understanding holistic 3D scene is crucial for applications
such as autonomous driving [35, 38], robotic system [11],
and virtual reality, as it underpins downstream tasks like autonomous navigation and map building [31]. However, due
to the real world’s complexity and different sensors’ limitations, accurately estimating complete 3D scene information from partial observations or noisy interference remains
challenging. To address these challenges, 3D SSC [33] has
been proposed as a way to jointly infer complete scene geometry and semantics from limited observations.
Subsequent methods [7, 14, 16] have continued this idea
and have largely relied on the precise depth of LiDAR to
explore SSC. Over time, as the development of autonomous

26837

