This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Pixel Difference Patterns Meet ViT:
PiDiViT for Few-Shot Object Detection
Hongliang Zhou Yongxiang Liu∗ Canyu Mo Weijie Li∗ Bowen Peng Li Liu∗
The College of Electronic Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, China
hongliangz2022@163.com
liweijie@nudt.edu.cn

lyx bible@sina.com

mocanyu@nudt.edu.cn

pbow16@nudt.edu.cn

liuli nudt@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

10shot nAP

37.0

Few-shot object detection aims to detect novel classes with
limited samples. Recent methods have leveraged rich semantic representations of pretrained vision transformer (ViT) to
overcome limitations of model fine-tuning, thereby improving performance on novel classes. However, existing pretrained ViT schemes only perform transformer encoding in
feature dimension, ignoring exploration of pixel-wise differences in low-level features and multiscale variations. The
current challenges lie in: (i) extracted features suffer from
blurred boundary features and smooth transition from center to boundary, leading to insufficient distinction between
objects and backgrounds, and (ii) how to balance extraction
of local details and global contour features under multiscale scenarios. So Pixel Difference Vision Transformer
(PiDiViT) is proposed. Innovations include: (i) difference
convolution fusion module (DCFM), which enhances feature differences from object centers to boundaries and effectively preserves global information by fusing pixel-wise
central difference features with original features through
an attention mechanism, and (ii) multiscale feature fusion
module (MFFM), which adaptively fuses features extracted
by five different scale convolutional kernels using a scale
attention mechanism to generate attention weights, achieving an optimal balance between local detail and global semantic information extraction. PiDiViT achieves SOTA on
the COCO benchmark: surpassing few-shot detection SOTA
by 2.7 nAP50 (10-shot) and 4.0 nAP50 (30-shot) for novel
classes, exceeding one-shot detection SOTA by 4.4 nAP50
and open-vocabulary detection SOTA by 3.7 nAP50. The
code is available at https://github.com/Seaz9/PiDiViT.

27.1

30.4

37.3

30shot nAP

35.9

Split3 nAP50

35.3

50.3
54.0
nAP50

PiDiViT

SOTA

Figure 1. Overall performance. Comparison between PiDiViT
and SOTA on COCO benchmarks (few-shot, one-shot and openvocabulary object detection) shown in the radar chart.

1. Introduction

cus on fine-tuning models with scarce data for novel class
detection [50]. However, the limitation of fine-tuning lies
in insufficient adaptation caused by data limitations, leading to a significant performance gap between the novel and
base classes [18]. Recent studies reveal that ViT [26, 33]
can effectively overcome constraints of fine-tuning through
their pretrained rich semantic representations. For example, DE-ViT [49] employs a projected feature subspace of
ViT features to replace prototype classifier training, avoiding
base class overfitting and model fine-tuning. In our exploration of ViT architectures, we made a significant discovery:
existing pretrained ViT schemes perform transformer encoding in feature dimension, ignoring exploration of pixelwise differences in low-level features and multiscale variations. Current challenges lie in: (i) extracted features suffer
from blurred boundary features and smooth transitions from
object centers to boundaries, leading to insufficient objectbackground distinction, and (ii) balancing extraction of local
details and global contour features under multiscale scenar-

Few-shot object detection aims to recognize novel classes
with limited samples [1, 6]. Existing methods primarily fo∗ Li Liu, Yongxiang Liu and Weijie Li are corresponding authors.

24309

