This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Morph: A Motion-free Physics Optimization Framework
for Human Motion Generation
Zhuo Li* 1 , Mingshuang Luo∗ 2,3,4 , Ruibing Hou† 2 , Xin Zhao5 ,
Hao Liu1 , Hong Chang2,4 , Zimo Liu3 , Chen Li1
1

WeChat, Tencent Inc, 2 State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
3
5

Peng Cheng Laboratory, China, 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

MoE Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Human motion generation has been widely studied due
to its crucial role in areas such as digital humans and
humanoid robot control. However, many current motion
generation approaches disregard physics constraints, frequently resulting in physically implausible motions with
pronounced artifacts such as floating and foot sliding.
Meanwhile, training an effective motion physics optimizer
with noisy motion data remains largely unexplored. In this
paper, we propose Morph, a Motion-Free physics optimization framework, consisting of a Motion Generator and a
Motion Physics Refinement module, for enhancing physical
plausibility without relying on expensive real-world motion
data. Specifically, the motion generator is responsible for
providing large-scale synthetic, noisy motion data, while
the motion physics refinement module utilizes these synthetic data to learn a motion imitator within a physics simulator, enforcing physical constraints to project the noisy
motions into a physically-plausible space. Additionally, we
introduce a prior reward module to enhance the stability
of the physics optimization process and generate smoother
and more stable motions. These physically refined motions are then used to fine-tune the motion generator, further enhancing its capability. This collaborative training
paradigm enables mutual enhancement between the motion generator and the motion physics refinement module,
significantly improving practicality and robustness in realworld applications. Experiments on both text-to-motion
and music-to-dance generation tasks demonstrate that our
framework achieves state-of-the-art motion quality while
improving physical plausibility drastically.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Ground Penetration

Leaning Backward

Interpenetration

Foot Sliding

Floating

Unnatural Rotation

Figure 1. Examples of physical inconsistencies in generations.

1. Introduction
Accurate human motion synthesis plays a crucial role in applications such as robotics, video gaming, and virtual reality [1, 9, 38, 46, 47]. Recent advances in AI have enabled motion generation under various control conditions,
including textual descriptions and music inputs. Current
approaches can be categorized into three main paradigms:
conditional diffusion models [15, 34, 35, 41, 43], conditional autoregressive models [12, 19, 26, 48, 49], and generative masked modeling [8, 27]. These models have significantly improved the quality of generated motion by better capturing the complex multimodal distribution of human
movement.
However, most existing motion generation approaches
overlook a fundamental aspect of human motion: the laws
of physical. Although these generation models excel in capturing statistical distribution of human motions, they lack
explicit mechanisms to enforce physical constrains. As a
result, the generated motions frequently exhibit pronounced
artifacts such as ground penetration, leaning backward, interpenetration, foot sliding, floating and unnatural rotation,
as shown in Fig. 1. Given human sensitivity to even slight
physical inconsistencies, these physically implausible mo-

14580

