This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XTrack: Multimodal Training Boosts RGB-X Video Object Trackers
Yuedong Tan1,2
1

Zongwei Wu1∗ Yuqian Fu2 Zhuyun Zhou1
Chao Ma3 Danda Paudel2 Luc Van Gool2,4
Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Wurzburg
3

AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

4

Guolei Sun4 Eduard Zamfir 1
Radu Timofte1
2

INSAIT, Sofia University

CVL, ETH Zurich

Prior on Input Type

Abstract

Event

Event

Multimodal sensing has proven valuable for visual tracking, as different sensor types offer unique strengths in handling one specific challenging scene where object appearance varies. While a generalist model capable of leveraging all modalities would be ideal, development is hindered
by data sparsity, typically in practice, only one modality
is available at a time. Therefore, it is crucial to ensure
and achieve that knowledge gained from multimodal sensing – such as identifying relevant features and regions –
is effectively shared, even when certain modalities are unavailable at inference. We venture with a simple assumption: similar samples across different modalities have more
knowledge to share than otherwise. To implement this, we
employ a classifier with weak loss tasked with distinguishing between modalities. More specifically, if the classifier
“fails” to accurately identify the modality of the given sample, this signals an opportunity for cross-modal knowledge
sharing. Intuitively, knowledge transfer is facilitated whenever a sample from one modality is sufficiently close and
aligned with another. Technically, we achieve this by routing samples from one modality to the expert of the others,
within a mixture-of-experts framework designed for multimodal video object tracking. During the inference, the expert of the respective modality is chosen, which we show
to benefit from the multimodal knowledge available during training, thanks to the proposed method. Through the
exhaustive experiments that use only paired RGB-E, RGBD, and RGB-T during training, we showcase the benefit
of the proposed method for RGB-X tracker during inference, with an average +3% precision improvement over
the current SOTA. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/supertyd/XTrack.

Appearance

Depth

Class
Thermal

(a) Conventional Single Modal Training for VOT
Experts
Event

Event

Router
Classifier

Depth
Thermal

(b) Ours with Cross Modal Knowledge Sharing

Figure 1. Motivation: (a) Existing tracking methods typically address each modality in isolation, tackling one appearance-related
challenge at a time. This is mainly due to cross-modal domain
gaps and the lack of a comprehensive multimodal dataset. Consequently, only modality-specific branches are activated during inference based on a priori knowledge of the input type, limiting
the potential for cross-modal integration. (b) We leverage Mixture
of Experts to achieve such knowledge sharing. This is made possible by integrating a weak auxiliary classification loss, which is
achieved for the first time for an RGB-X tracker.

able performance [5, 12, 33, 47], they still struggle with
large appearance changes under challenging scenes [11, 20,
38]. Additional sensory input can enhance robustness in
these scenarios, with each sensor addressing a specific challenge — such as Event cameras[46, 58] for motion awareness, depth sensors[68] for occlusion handling, and thermal imaging[28] for illumination variation — leading to increasing interest in multimodal object tracking [30, 53, 66].

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking has made significant progress, driven
by recent advancements in deep learning [4–6]. While
RGB-based trackers have demonstrated strong, generaliz-

However, current advances in multimodal tracking are
*Corresponding

5734

