This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Vision Foundation Models for High-Performance, Training-Free
Open Vocabulary Segmentation
Yuheng Shi
University of Sydney

Minjing Dong
City University of Hong Kong

Chang Xu
University of Sydney

yuhengshi99@gmail.com

minjdong@cityu.edu.hk

c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
While CLIP has advanced open-vocabulary predictions,
its performance on semantic segmentation remains suboptimal. This shortfall primarily stems from its spatialinvariant semantic features and constrained resolution.
While previous adaptations addressed spatial invariance
semantic by modifying the self-attention in CLIP’s image
encoder, the issue of limited resolution remains unexplored.
Different from previous segment-then-splice methods that
segment sub-images via a sliding window and splice the
results, we introduce a splice-then-segment paradigm that
incorporates Segment-Anything Model (SAM) to tackle the
resolution issue since SAM excels at extracting fine-grained
semantic correlations from high-resolution images. Specifically, we introduce Trident, a training-free framework that
first splices features extracted by CLIP and DINO from subimages, then leverages SAM’s encoder to create a correlation matrix for global aggregation, enabling a broadened
receptive field. Besides, we propose a refinement strategy for CLIP’s coarse segmentation outputs by transforming them into prompts for SAM. Trident achieves a significant improvement in the mIoU across eight popular benchmarks compared with the previous SOTA. Furthermore, it
can also be utilized to generate visual prompts that enhance the performance of Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs). Code is available at https://github.com/
YuHengsss/Trident.

tics, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in openvocabulary recognition. As a pioneering and representative
work, CLIP [50] has inspired numerous efforts to leverage
its robust open-vocabulary capabilities for dense prediction
tasks, such as semantic segmentation [37, 62, 77]. However, CLIP only receives image-level supervision without
correlating text and region-level features. It compromises
the semantic integrity of dense feature maps due to spatial
invariance semantic, indicating local features tend to be invariant to their spatial positions [61], which leads to suboptimal performance of segmentation that leverages pixellevel features. In contrast to CLIP, Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) [5, 24, 29] show a close relationship between
feature semantics and their positions, but they lack explicit
understanding. For example, SAM segments visible objects
within an image but fails to give corresponding semantics.

1. Introduction

To migrate the spatial invariance semantic for CLIP,
different adaptations are proposed and these works can
be categorized into three types according to their training
paradigm, i.e., full tuning [13, 37, 52, 62], partial tuning with additional learnable parameters [44, 67, 72, 78],
and training-free paradigm [22, 28, 61, 77]. Compared to
tuning-based methods, training-free paradigm offers an attractive alternative, characterized by its low cost, free of
annotations, and preservation of generalization capabilities.
MaskCLIP [77], a pioneering work in this field, attributes
the spatial invariance semantic of CLIP’s image features to
the self-attention mechanism [60]. It proposes to replace
the QK attention of the last transformer layer in CLIP’s image encoder with a simple convolution, which brings significant improvements. Inspired by this innovation, a series of
studies [35, 55, 67] have proposed more effective aggregation methods. However, these methods are constrained by
CLIP’s inherent limitation of operating at low resolutions.
To address this issue, a sliding window strategy is widely
adopted to split the source image into multiple sub-images,
segment them separately, and then splice the results together, which we denote as Segment-then-Splice. Although
it alleviates this issue to some degree, it is difficult to generalize to scenarios with higher resolutions. As demonstrated

Semantic segmentation is a foundational vision task that
aims to segment images according to different semantics, where deep learning shows impressive performance
[2, 9, 11, 25, 43, 54, 59, 68]. However, these methods are
trained on a close set, limiting their application in openvocabulary scenarios. More recently, Vision Language
Models (VLMs) [12, 32, 33, 39, 50, 58], trained on webscale data to align textual descriptions with image seman-

23487

