This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMatch: A Unified Framework for Event-based Optical Flow and
Stereo Matching

1

Pengjie Zhang1 Lin Zhu1, * Xiao Wang2 Lizhi Wang3 Hua Huang3
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Anhui University 3 Beijing Normal University
{3220231268,linzhu}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

Stereo
Matching

Event cameras have shown promise in vision applications
like optical flow estimation and stereo matching with many
specialized architectures. However, existing works only focus event data within the confines of task-specific domains,
overlooking the correlations between tasks across the temporal and spatial domains. In this paper, we propose a
novel matching-based framework for event cameras to estimate flow and disparity simultaneously in a shared representation space, reformulating them as a unified pixelwise correspondence matching problem. Specifically, our
method utilizes a Temporal Recurrent Network to aggregate asynchronous event features across temporal or spatial domains, and a Spatial Contextual Attention to enhance
knowledge transfer across event flows via temporal or spatial interactions. By utilizing a shared pixel-wise feature
similarities module, our network performs optical flow estimation from temporal event segments and stereo matching from spatial event segments simultaneously. Our unified model inherently supports multi-task unification and
cross-task transfer, which facilitate training and streamline
deployment. Without the need for retraining on specific
tasks, our model can effectively handle both event-based
flow and stereo estimation, achieving state-of-the-art performance on both tasks. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/BIT-Vision/EMatch.

Optical Flow
Estimation

Optical Flow
Estimation

Stereo
Matching

Unified
Framework
t

t
Event Stream
(Left)

Temporal Data

Spatial Data

Matching Data

Event Stream
(Right)

Optical Flow

Stereo Matching

Unified Model

Temporal Domain

Spatial Domain

Mathching Domain

Task.domain
Data.domain
Event Data

Figure 1. Illustration of the unified framework for event-based
flow and stereo. Compared to previous task-specific works, we can
simultaneously estimate flow and disparity from event streams in
the same pipeline. Specifically, we introduce a matching domain,
in which we construct a unified model trained by the diverse data
accumulated from optical flow (within the temporal domain) and
stereo matching (within the spatial domain).

tasks focus on comprehending the structure of 3D objects,
such as stereo matching [31, 41] and depth estimation [33].
To date, most event-based research has concentrated on
only one of these aspects, without seeking to unify temporal and spatial perception. Within task-specific domains,
prior works have developed many specialized frameworks
for efficiently extracting event features. In optical flow estimation, most frameworks derive temporal motion features
either directly from accumulated events [10, 45, 51] or by
constructing event-based cost volumes [14, 21, 24, 27]. In
stereo matching, most frameworks [5, 31, 41, 50] employ a
classic approach to compute spatial matching costs. They
are confined to task-specific domains, overlooking the cor-

1. Introduction
Event cameras are neuromorphic vision sensors that detect
intensity changes at each pixel, offering advantages like low
latency, high temporal resolution, and high dynamic range
[12, 22]. In the context of 3D scene understanding, eventbased vision tasks can be broadly divided into two categories: temporal tasks and spatial tasks. Temporal tasks aim
to understand motion within 3D scenes, such as optical flow
[14, 24, 51, 56] and object tracking [43, 44], while spatial
* Corresponding author.

5845

