This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TOTP: Transferable Online Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction with
Temporal-Adaptive Mamba Latent Diffusion
Ziyang Ren, Ping Wei*, Shangqi Deng, Haowen Tang, Jiapeng Li, Huan Li
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
rzyrzy@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn

(a) Traditional

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is crucial for many intelligent tasks. While existing methods predict future trajectories from ﬁxed-frame historical observations, they are
limited by the observational perspective and the need for
extensive historical information, resulting in prediction delays and inﬂexible generalization in real-time systems. In
this paper, we propose a novel task called Transferable Online Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction (TOTP), which synchronously predicts future trajectories with variable observations and enables effective task transfer under different observation constraints. To advance TOTP modeling, we propose a Temporal-Adaptive Mamba Latent Diffusion (TAMLD) model. It utilizes the Social-Implicit Mamba
Synthesizer to extract motion states with social interaction and reﬁne temporal representations through TemporalAware Distillation. A Trend-Conditional Mamba Decomposer generates the motion latent distribution of the future motion trends and predicts future motion trajectories
through sampling decomposition. We utilize Motion-Latent
Mamba Diffusion to reconstruct the latent space disturbed
by imbalanced temporal noise. Our method achieves stateof-the-art results on multiple datasets and tasks, showcasing temporal adaptability and generalization ability.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory prediction aims to predict the future
spatial positions of movement trajectories with observed
trajectories [37], which is widely applied in autonomous
driving [4, 51], social robots [24], and video surveillance
[46]. Existing pedestrian trajectory prediction tasks can be
broadly categorized into two types: traditional 8-12 protocol [1, 12, 28, 53, 55] and momentary prediction [29, 43].
The traditional 8-12 protocol involves extracting 8-frame
observed trajectories to predict 12-frame future trajectories,
* Corresponding author.

Observed

(b) Momentary

Ground-Truth

(c) Online

Observation Deficiency

Figure 1. Comparison of three trajectory prediction tasks. Existing
tasks (a) and (b) are constrained by the ﬁxed-frame protocol, with
observation omissions and insufﬁciencies in the limited perspective. Our proposed task (c) performs the comprehensive prediction
for all observations in the video.

as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Studies [3, 26, 27, 33, 54] have
achieved signiﬁcant prediction accuracy in the ﬁxed observation duration paradigm. However, due to the spatial constraints of the observation perspective, pedestrians visible
for only a limited number of frames are not suitable for
traditional prediction. This leads to safety risks that are
selectively overlooked in practical applications. The momentary prediction reduces prediction costs and uses only
2-frame observed trajectories for future trajectory prediction, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). The simpliﬁcation of this process leads to performance degradation due to the neglect of
long-term information during prediction.
Although these methods have achieved impressive performance, existing tasks struggle to be applied to real-time
systems due to the following three challenges.
• Observation Constraints. Due to view constraints, ne-

26263

