This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoStoDet-DDPM: Collaborative Training of Stochastic and Deterministic
Models Improves Surgical Workflow Anticipation and Recognition
Kaixiang Yang† , Xin Li† , Qiang Li∗ , Zhiwei Wang∗
Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
†
: Co-first authors, ∗ : Corresponding authors.
{kxyang, lixin2023, liqiang8, zwwang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

Encoder
Encoder

DDPM

Anticipating and recognizing surgical workflows are critical for intelligent surgical assistance systems. However, existing methods rely on deterministic decision-making, struggling to generalize across the large anatomical and procedural variations inherent in real-world surgeries. In this
paper, we introduce an innovative framework that incorporates stochastic modeling through a denoising diffusion
probabilistic model (DDPM) into conventional deterministic learning for surgical workflow analysis. At the heart
of our approach is a collaborative co-training paradigm:
the DDPM branch captures procedural uncertainties to enrich feature representations, while the task branch focuses
on predicting surgical phases and instrument usage. Theoretically, we demonstrate that this mutual refinement mechanism benefits both branches: the DDPM reduces prediction errors in uncertain scenarios, and the task branch directs the DDPM toward clinically meaningful representations. Notably, the DDPM branch is discarded during inference, enabling real-time predictions without sacrificing
accuracy. Experiments on the Cholec80 dataset show that
for the anticipation task, our method achieves a 16% reduction in eMAE compared to state-of-the-art approaches,
and for phase recognition, it improves the Jaccard score
by 1.0%. Additionally, on the AutoLaparo dataset, our
method achieves a 1.5% improvement in the Jaccard score
for phase recognition, while also exhibiting robust generalization to patient-specific variations. Our code and weight
are available at https://github.com/kk42yy/
CoStoDet-DDPM .

Encoder

Temporal

Condition

Temporal

Condition
DDPM
only training

Noised GT

(a) Deterministic

(b) Stochastic

(c) ours

Figure 1. Different paradigms. (a) The deterministic workflow
used in previous methods fails to account for the individual patient
variations. (b) The conditional DDPM used in natural action segmentation is difficult to meet the real-time requirements and, when
applied to clinical settings, lacks clinical consistency. (c) Our proposed co-training approach combines deterministic and stochastic
models, allowing DDPM to be discarded during inference. The
dashed arrows indicate the gradient back-propagation.

1. Introduction

ipation task refers to forecasting the occurrence of surgical instruments and phases before they manifest [10, 47],
while the recognition task [15] involves identifying the
current surgical phase. Accurate anticipation and recognition improve patient safety, reduce surgical errors, and
foster communication and collaboration within the surgical
team [8, 11, 28, 39, 43, 46].
As shown in Figure 1a, current deep learning-based research on anticipation [2, 10, 41, 47, 55, 65, 66, 68, 69]
and recognition [6, 7, 13, 14, 24–26, 34, 35, 42, 48, 53,
61, 62, 64, 67] typically utilizes a frame encoder, such as
ResNet [18] or Transformer [9, 56], to extract embeddings
for each individual frame. These embeddings are then processed by a temporal modeling component, such as Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [21] or Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCN) [30], to make final predictions based
on the spatio-temporal features. However, existing methods
mostly rely on deterministic decision-making, establishing
a fixed mapping from visual inputs to surgical phase or instrument predictions. These approach lead to an inherent
limitation: collapse to dominant patterns, making them vulnerable to anatomical anomalies or procedural deviations.
As a result, they regress toward population-level averages
rather than adapting to case-specific contexts. This is particularly detrimental in surgical workflow analysis, as evi-

Artificial intelligence-assisted surgical workflow analysis is
beneficial for the efficiency and safety of Robotic-Assisted
Surgery (RAS) [40, 66]. Anticipation and recognition are
two of the most critical tasks in this analysis. The antic-

23741

