This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReME: A Data-Centric Framework
for Training-Free Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Xiwei Xuan, Ziquan Deng, and Kwan-Liu Ma
University of California, Davis
{xwxuan, ziqdeng, klma}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Training-free open-vocabulary semantic segmentation
(OVS) aims to segment images given a set of arbitrary textual categories without costly model fine-tuning. Existing
solutions often explore attention mechanisms of pre-trained
models, such as CLIP, or generate synthetic data and design complex retrieval processes to perform OVS. However,
their performance is limited by the capability of reliant
models or the suboptimal quality of reference sets. In this
work, we investigate the largely overlooked data quality
problem for this challenging dense scene understanding
task, and identify that a high-quality reference set can
significantly benefit training-free OVS. With this observation, we introduce a data-quality-oriented framework,
comprising a data pipeline to construct a reference set
with well-paired segment-text embeddings and a simple
similarity-based retrieval to unveil the essential effect of
data. Remarkably, extensive evaluations on ten benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms all
existing training-free OVS approaches, highlighting the
importance of data-centric design for advancing OVS
without training. Our code is available here.

Figure 1. (a) Qualitatively compare ReME with SCLIP [58] (a
representative CLIP-attention-based method) on an example from
ADE20K [81] with 150 classes. Both methods have no mask
post-processing. ReME produces higher-quality masks with a simple segmentation algorithm, yet SCLIP generates noisy masks
paired with many irrelevant classes, such as “curtain” and “microwave”, etc. (b) Performance comparison between SCLIP and
retrieval-based OVS using different reference sets. GT: groundtruth segment-label of COCO Stuff [5]; Syn: synthetic reference
set from FreeDA [3]; Ours: our reference set from real images
with quality refinement.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVS) aims to
segment images according to a set of arbitrary textual categories. While conventional approaches rely on training or fine-tuning large models with segment-text [10, 13,
19, 33, 36, 40, 45, 70] or image-text [8, 9, 59, 64, 67–
69, 77] datasets, these methods incur significant annotation
and computational costs. Recent advancements in visionlanguage models (VLMs), such as CLIP [47], have spurred
interest in training-free OVS methods that leverage these
pre-trained models without additional fine-tuning.
Some approaches assume VLMs have sufficient classification capabilities to recognize semantics, and attempt to
enhance their pixel-level localization by modifying the at-

tention mechanisms [29, 30, 53, 56, 58, 60, 82]. However,
VLMs are trained under weak image-text supervision [32],
and merely tweaking their attention modules post-hoc cannot break through the inherent ceiling imposed by coarse
training signals [21]. As a result, such approaches often
struggle with low-quality segmentation masks and noisy labels. As shown by an example in Fig. 1 (a), methods relying
on CLIP attention often fail to even match the segmentation
quality of an algorithm-based segmenter [17], which, despite being class-agnostic, can propose perceptually meaningful image regions. (Refer to Fig. 5 for more examples).

20954

Confronted with such limitations of VLMs, the retrieval
paradigm offers a key inspiration: correcting the vulnerabilities of VLMs by reference substances in an external knowl-

