This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseRecon: Neural Implicit Surface Reconstruction from Sparse Views with
Feature and Depth Consistencies
Liang Han1 , Xu Zhang3 , Haichuan Song2∗ , Kanle Shi4 , Yu-Shen Liu1 * , Zhizhong Han5
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
China Telecom 4 Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
5
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
hanl23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhangxu@chinatelecom.cn, hcsong@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
shikanle@kuaishou.com, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Surface reconstruction from sparse views aims to reconstruct a 3D shape or scene from few RGB images. The latest methods are either generalization-based or overfittingbased. However, the generalization-based methods do not
generalize well on views that were unseen during training,
while the reconstruction quality of overfitting-based methods is still limited by the limited geometry clues. To address this issue, we propose SparseRecon, a novel neural
implicit reconstruction method for sparse views with volume rendering-based feature consistency and uncertaintyguided depth constraint. Firstly, we introduce a feature consistency loss across views to constrain the neural implicit
field. This design alleviates the ambiguity caused by insufficient consistency information of views and ensures completeness and smoothness in the reconstruction results. Secondly, we employ an uncertainty-guided depth constraint
to back up the feature consistency loss in areas with occlusion and insignificant features, which recovers geometry details for better reconstruction quality. Experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods, which can produce high-quality
geometry with sparse-view input, especially in the scenarios with small overlapping views. Project page: https:
//hanl2010.github.io/SparseRecon/.

Input views

UFORecon

S-VolSDF

NeuSurf

Ours

Figure 1. Given only 3 input images with large view angle change,
our method can reconstruct a smoother surface compared to the
state-of-the-art methods, such as UFORecon [28], S-VolSDF [40]
and NeuSurf [13]. The details of each surface are shown in the
colored boxes.

from point clouds [26, 30, 34, 58, 59] or images [23, 37,
45, 60] becomes a popular research topic. Although recent
multi-view reconstruction methods[5, 37, 38, 41, 45, 53]
have made great progress in terms of the reconstruction
quality and reconstruction speed, they require a large number of dense views as supervision. When limited number of
views are available, current reconstruction methods usually
struggle to reconstruct high-quality surfaces.

1. Introduction

Existing methods for sparse view reconstruction can
be mainly classified into two categories: generalizationbased methods and overfitting-based methods.
The
generalization-based methods [22, 24, 28, 31, 32] emphasize the generalization of sparse-view reconstruction, but
they are mainly effective in scenarios with large view overlaps. In cases with views that were unseen during training,
the quality of the reconstructed surface degenerates significantly, as shown in Figure 1. Meanwhile, it takes a long

As one of the important tasks in computer vision, 3D reconstruction has attracted lots of research attentions in recent
years. With the advancement of deep learning, 3D reconstruction based on neural implicit representations learned
* Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu and Haichuan Song.

28514

