This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DanceEditor: Towards Iterative Editable Music-driven Dance Generation with
Open-Vocabulary Descriptions
Hengyuan Zhang1,∗ , Zhe Li1,∗ , Xingqun Qi2, , Mengze Li2 , Muyi Sun3 , Siye Wang3 ,
Man Zhang3,4 , Sirui Han2,
1
Peking University, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 4 Qinghai Institute of Technology
Multi-Modal
Conditions

Multi-Modal
Conditions

In

prediction

Edit Prompt 1 :

Convert jogging posture into behind side steps, arms extending outward.

editing stage

I

al
nit
Ite

da

rat
i

nc

ita

r at
Ite

ld

ion

anc

e

1

e

on
2

Edit Prompt 2 : Step forward and cross feet, swing arms casually, then kick leg slightly

editing stage
editing stage

Figure 1. Our DanceEditor framework, pre-trained on a large-scale dataset, enables iterative and editable dance generation that is
coherently aligned with the provided music signals. The highlighted texts and avatar shadow effects here speciﬁcally indicate edits related
to body movements.

Abstract
Generating coherent and diverse human dances from music signals has gained tremendous progress in animating virtual avatars. While existing methods support direct dance synthesis, they fail to recognize that enabling
users to edit dance movements is far more practical in
real-world choreography scenarios. Moreover, the lack
of high-quality dance datasets incorporating iterative editing also limits addressing this challenge. To achieve this
goal, we ﬁrst construct DanceRemix, a large-scale multiturn editable dance dataset comprising the prompt featuring over 25.3M dance frames and 84.5K pairs. In addition, we propose a novel framework for iterative and editable dance generation coherently aligned with given music signals, namely DanceEditor. Considering the dance
∗ These authors contribute equally.

Corresponding authors.

12158

motion should be both musical rhythmic and enable iterative editing by user descriptions, our framework is built
upon a prediction-then-editing paradigm unifying multimodal conditions. At the initial prediction stage, our framework improves the authority of generated results by directly
modeling dance movements from tailored, aligned music.
Moreover, at the subsequent iterative editing stages, we incorporate text descriptions as conditioning information to
draw the editable results through a speciﬁcally designed
Cross-modality Editing Module (CEM). Speciﬁcally, CEM
adaptively integrates the initial prediction with music and
text prompts as temporal motion cues to guide the synthesized sequences. Thereby, the results display music harmonics while preserving ﬁne-grained semantic alignment with
text descriptions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art models on our
newly collected DanceRemix dataset. Code is available at
https://lzvsdy.github.io/DanceEditor/.

