This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Liu改成intrinsicHDR的结果
Event-guided
HDRet al.
Reconstruction with Diffusion Priors
写：Dille
Yixin Yang1,2,† Jiawei Zhang3 Yang Zhang1,2
Yunxuan Wei3 Dongqing Zou4 Jimmy S. Ren3,5 Boxin Shi1,2,∗
1
State Key Lab of Multimedia Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Nat’l Eng. Research Ctr. of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
SenseTime Research 4 PBVR 5 Hong Kong Metropolitan University
{yangyixin93, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, Github Page: github.com/YixinYang-00/HDRev-Diff

Abstract
Events provide High Dynamic Range (HDR) intensity
change which can guide Low Dynamic Range (LDR) image for HDR reconstruction. However, events only provide temporal intensity differences and it is still ill-posed
in over-/under-exposed areas due to missing initial reference brightness and color information. With strong generation ability, diffusion models have shown their potential
for tackling ill-posed problems. Therefore, we introduce
conditional diffusion models to hallucinate missing information. Whereas, directly adopting events and LDR image
as conditions is complicated for diffusion models to sufficiently utilize their information. Thus we introduce a pretrained events-image encoder tailored for HDR reconstruction and a pyramid fusion module to provide HDR conditions, which can be efficiently and effectively utilized by the
diffusion model. Moreover, the generation results of diffusion models usually exhibit distortion, particularly for finegrained details. To better preserve fidelity and suppress distortion, we propose a fine-grained detail recovery approach
using a histogram-based structural loss. Experiments on
real and synthetic data show the effectiveness of the proposed method in terms of both detail preservation and information hallucination.

ΔΔ
(a) Dille et. al.

Δ
(b) Events

(c) EventHDR

Fusion

ΔΔΔ
(d) LDR image

ΔΔ
(f) Sagiri

(e) HDRev

ΔΔΔΔ

Δ : Events
Δ : Colorful results
Δ : More realistic
Δ : Less distortion
: CNN models
: Diffusion models

(g) Ours

1. Introduction

Figure 1. HDR image can be recovered by only using a single LDR
image (d) as input (e.g., Dille et al. [4]), which is a difficult problem as shown in (a). With only events (b) as input, event-to-image
reconstruction (e.g., EventHDR [53]) (c) recovers an HDR scene
without color. Event-guided HDR methods (e.g., HDRev [48])
(e) take both events and the LDR image as input, which recovers colorful HDR scenes with moderate details. Diffusion-based
methods (e.g., Sagiri [22]) (f) take the LDR image (and optionally
the text prompt) as input showing visually pleasing results but may
have challenges in maintaining consistent contents with the original scene. The proposed method (g) takes events and the LDR
image as input and leverages the diffusion priors to recover a plausible and realistic HDR image with rich details and less distortion.

Extending the dynamic range of an image (usually with
low dynamic range, LDR) to record the brightness of real
scenes plausibly is particularly useful for daily photography and computer vision tasks. High dynamic range
(HDR) imaging can be, in the most direct way, achieved
by utilizing neural networks to hallucinate missing information in over-/under-exposed areas [4, 5, 22, 24], as shown
in Figure 1 (a), which is challenging to faithfully recover
† This work is done during Yixin’s internship at SenseTime.

scene details without any auxiliary information. Neuromorphic cameras, such as event cameras, are proven to
be helpful in providing additional details for HDR purpose [28, 32, 53]. Event cameras capture intensity changes

∗ Corresponding author.

11787

