This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Latent Space Augmentation for Digital Pathology
⋄

∗

Sofiène Boutaj1 , Marin Scalbert2 , Pierre Marza1 , Florent Couzinie-Devy3 ,
Maria Vakalopoulou1 , Stergios Christodoulidis1
1

MICS, CentraleSupélec – Université Paris-Saclay
2
Bioptimus, Inc. 3 VitaDX International 300
200
100
0

0

0,5

1

5

10

50

100 500 1000

Number of patches (

)

MIL perf. gain: No augmenta on vs HistAug

Abstract
Whole slide image (WSI) analysis in digital pathology
presents unique challenges due to the gigapixel resolution
of WSIs and the scarcity of dense supervision signals. While
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a natural fit for slidelevel tasks, training robust models requires large and diverse datasets. Even though image augmentation techniques could be utilized to increase data variability and
reduce overfitting, implementing them effectively is not a
trivial task. Traditional patch-level augmentation is prohibitively expensive due to the large number of patches extracted from each WSI, and existing feature-level augmentation methods lack control over transformation semantics.
We introduce HistAug, a fast and efficient generative model
for controllable augmentations in the latent space for digital pathology. By conditioning on explicit patch-level transformations (e.g., hue, erosion), HistAug generates realistic augmented embeddings while preserving initial semantic information. Our method allows the processing of a
large number of patches in a single forward pass efficiently,
while at the same time consistently improving MIL model
performance. Experiments across multiple slide-level tasks
and diverse organs show that HistAug outperforms existing methods, particularly in low-data regimes. Ablation
studies confirm the benefits of learned transformations over
noise-based perturbations and highlight the importance
of uniform WSI-wise augmentation. Code is available at
https://github.com/MICS-Lab/HistAug.

+6
+4
+2
+0

Simulated
image aug.

ε

UNI
CONCH

HistAug
KIRC
AugDiﬀ

BLCA

UCEC

BRCA

NSCLC

GPU inference me (s): AugDi vs HistAug

300
300
200
200
100
100
00

Aug. params.
HistAug

ε

HistAug
AugDiﬀ
Patch
PatchAug.
Aug.

00 0,5
0,5 11

300x
55

10
10 50
50 100
100 500
500 1000
1000

3
Number
Numberofofpatches
patches( (× 10 ) )

Latent space

Figure 1. HistAug: We present a controllable and efficient method
to augment WSI patches in the latent space of a vision encoder (E)
for histopathology MIL training. Such latent space augmentation
leads to better downstream performance (gain in low-data shown
here) as WSI datasets often lack data diversity. Our approach is
faster and requires less memory than the state-of-the art diffusion
model AugDiff [6] and vanilla patch augmentation.
f

ti

ti ff

Patch Aug.

1. Introduction

leverage digitized histopathology tissue slides referred to
as whole slide images (WSIs). These high-resolution,
gigapixel-sized images provide details of the tissue microenvironment, enabling precise and comprehensive analysis.
To efficiently process WSIs, a standard multi-step workflow has emerged: detect the tissue on the slide, divide it
into patches, extract features from each patch, and finally
perform a slide-level aggregation of the features and obtain a prediction from the aggregated features. These steps
are often executed sequentially offline and the final model
is trained on the feature space. On these grounds, many
foundation models have been trained with self-supervised
learning [1, 4, 11, 20, 21, 29, 38] to serve as frozen patchlevel feature extractors, removing the need for training taskspecific vision encoders. Furthermore, since annotations are
mainly available at the slide level and not for each patch individually, the aggregation models rely on Multiple Instance
Learning (MIL) approaches [15, 19, 24].
A primary challenge for deep learning models in digital pathology is the limited number of annotated slides for
each specific task. Although patch-level augmentation can

In recent years, several deep learning methods have been
proposed for a growing number of tasks in histopathology,
including sub-typing, time-to-event endpoints, gene marker
prediction, and others [25]. Most of these approaches
⋄ Corresponding email : sofiene.boutaj@centralesupelec.fr
* Work done at CentraleSupélec and VitaDX.

22165

