This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoMatch: Dynamic Covisibility-Aware Transformer for Bilateral Subpixel-Level
Semi-Dense Image Matching
Zizhuo Li Yifan Lu Linfeng Tang Shihua Zhang Jiayi Ma†
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
{zizhuo li, lyf048}@whu.edu.cn, {linfeng0419, suhzhang001, jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
This prospective study proposes CoMatch, a novel semidense image matcher with dynamic covisibility awareness
and bilateral subpixel accuracy. Firstly, observing that
modeling context interaction over the entire coarse feature
map elicits highly redundant computation due to the neighboring representation similarity of tokens, a covisibilityguided token condenser is introduced to adaptively aggregate tokens in light of their covisibility scores that are dynamically estimated, thereby ensuring computational efficiency while improving the representational capacity of aggregated tokens simultaneously. Secondly, considering that
feature interaction with non-covisible areas is distracting,
which may degrade feature distinctiveness, a covisibilityassisted attention mechanism is deployed to selectively suppress irrelevant message broadcast from non-covisible reduced tokens, resulting in robust and compact attention
to relevant rather than all ones. Thirdly, we find that at
the fine-level stage, current methods adjust only the target
view’s keypoints to subpixel level, while those in the source
view remain restricted at the coarse level and thus not informative enough, detrimental to keypoint location-sensitive
usages. A simple yet potent fine correlation module is developed to refine matching candidates in both source and
target views to subpixel level, attaining attractive performance improvement. Thorough experimentation across an
array of public benchmarks affirms CoMatch’s promising
accuracy, efficiency, and generalizability. Code is available
at https://github.com/ZizhuoLi/CoMatch.

Accuracy ↑3.3%

Speedup 6×

RoMa
DKM

CoMatch
ASpanFormer
QuadTree

ELoFTR*

TopicFM

SP+DG

LoFTR

SP+LG

SP+SG

SP+IMP

MatchFormer

Sparse
Semi-Dense
Dense

Figure 1.
Image matching accuracy and efficiency on
MegaDepth. CoMatch achieves remarkably better accuracy than
both sparse ( ) and semi-dense ( ) matchers with a commendable speed. Compared with dense matcher RoMa ( ), our method
is ∼ 6× faster with comparable performance.

1. Introduction

and novel view synthesis [24, 31]. Conventionally, the
pipeline starts with detecting keypoints [38] and constructing their associated visual descriptors [11], so that point-topoint matches can be generated by heuristic tricks [29] or
learning-based matchers [28, 41]. Albeit efficient, detectorbased methods still struggle to robustly detect repeatable
keypoints and effectively eliminate the visual ambiguity of
descriptors across sophisticated scenarios, like poor textures, repetitive patterns, and large displacements.
To cope with this limitation, a line of research [15, 16,
21, 47, 49, 55, 56] resorts to Transformer backbone [13, 53]
to explore the feasibility of directly matching local features
on dense grids rather than sparse locations (i.e., a detectorfree matching paradigm), so that more plentiful context
can be leveraged while the keypoint detection stage can be
eschewed spontaneously. Pioneeringly, LoFTR [47] initially aggregates global intra- and inter-image context at
the coarse level using self- and cross-attention, and then
crops fixed-size feature patches based on coarse matches
for fine-level refinement, achieving encouraging performance. Built on the success of such coarse-to-fine matching

Image matching aims to establish reliable correspondences
between a pair of images depicting the same visual content,
holding a fundamentally special place for numerous 3D visual tasks, such as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) [32, 33], Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [19, 43],
† Corresponding author: Jiayi Ma.

18521

