This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image-Guided Shape-from-Template Using Mesh Inextensibility Constraints
Thuy Tran

Ruochen Chen

Shaifali Parashar

CNRS, École Centrale de Lyon, INSA Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, LIRIS, UMR5205
{dinh-vinh-thuy.tran, ruochen.chen, shaifali.parashar}@liris.cnrs.fr

Abstract

Traditional S T [3]

Shape-from-Template (SfT) refers to the class of methods that reconstruct the 3D shape of a deforming object from images/videos using a 3D template. Traditional
SfT methods require point correspondences between images and the texture of the 3D template in order to reconstruct 3D shapes from images/videos in real time. Their
performance severely degrades when encountered with severe occlusions in the images because of the unavailability of correspondences. In contrast, modern SfT methods use a correspondence-free approach by incorporating deep neural networks to reconstruct 3D objects, thus
requiring huge amounts of data for supervision. Recent
advances use a fully unsupervised or self-supervised approach by combining differentiable physics and graphics
to deform 3D template to match input images. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised SfT which uses only image observations: color features, gradients and silhouettes
along with a mesh inextensibility constraint to reconstruct
at a 400× faster pace than (best-performing) unsupervised
SfT. Moreover, when it comes to generating finer details
and severe occlusions, our method outperforms the existing methodologies by a large margin. Code is available at
https://github.com/dvttran/nsft.

-S T [16] PGS T [47]

Ours

Far

Sequence R3

Near

Sequence R5
f

f

f

Figure 1. Image-guided SfT vs SoTA. Our method recovers finer
details, resolves self-occlusions and handles strong perspectivities
better than existing methods. We evaluated traditional SfT [3] with
correspondences obtained from Cotracker v3 [18].

wise registration between the input image and the texture
map associated with the 3D template. Template-based 3D
reconstruction from images, a.k.a SfT, is therefore proven
to be a well-posed problem with reliable solutions [8] that
can perform real-time 3D reconstructions [9, 32, 47, 50].
[31] extends the traditional SfT to adapt to handle occlusions by interpolating the non-corresponding points on images from the reconstructed 3D points of the relevant neighbors. However, all these methods fail when the deforming object causes large (self-)occlusions, sharp motion, and
high perspectivities in the images, such as in the case of
the deforming cloth shown in Figure 1. This is because a
unique solution of 3D shape is possible only if the point
correspondences between the template texture map and the
input images are known. Such occlusion artifacts appear
quite often while capturing deforming objects; thus the inefficacy of traditional SfT to process them poses a severe
limitation to their applicability. Sharp motions and strong
perspectivities also significantly degrade the reliability of
point correspondences which causes these methods to fail.
To mitigate this issue, several modern SfT methods [10–
12, 25, 37, 48] use deep neural networks (DNN) that can
jointly perform template-image registration and 3D reconstruction. These methods may require a large amount of

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D shapes of objects from monocular RGB images, obtained through a video sequence or wide-baseline
viewpoints, is a key goal in 3D computer vision. Given a
3D template of an object, comprising a known geometric
configuration of the object along with known texture details, [3, 44] established that a unique 3D shape can be recovered from a single image of an object in a configuration
different from the 3D template. It showed that combining
projective geometry of the calibrated images with isometric (or geodesic-preserving) constraints on the 3D template
deformation, the underlying 3D structure of any point in
the image can be uniquely identified merely from the point-

7419

