This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Music Grounding by Short Video
Zijie Xin1✍

Minquan Wang2
1

Jingyu Liu1
Quan Chen2
Xirong Li1✉
2

Renmin University of China

Ye Ma2

Peng Jiang2

Kuaishou Technology

https://github.com/xxayt/MGSV

Figure 1. Music grounding by short video (MGSV), aiming to localize within a music-track collection a music moment that best serves
as background music for the query video. Text in callout boxes to the right of each music moment is for illustrative purposes only.

Abstract

iments on MGSV-EC not only highlight the challenging nature of MGSV but also set MaDe as a strong baseline.

Adding proper background music helps complete a short
video to be shared. Previous work tackles the task by videoto-music retrieval (V2MR), aiming to find the most suitable
music track from a collection to match the content of a given
query video. In practice, however, music tracks are typically
much longer than the query video, necessitating (manual)
trimming of the retrieved music to a shorter segment that
matches the video duration. In order to bridge the gap between the practical need for music moment localization and
V2MR, we propose a new task termed Music Grounding by
Short Video (MGSV). To tackle the new task, we introduce
a new benchmark, MGSV-EC, which comprises a diverse
set of 53k short videos associated with 35k different music moments from 4k unique music tracks. Furthermore,
we develop a new baseline method, MaDe, which performs
both video-to-music matching and music moment detection
within a unified end-to-end deep network. Extensive exper✍ Work performed as an intern at Kuaishou. (xinzijie@ruc.edu.cn)

1. Introduction
Music can name the unnameable and communicate the unknowable1 . Adding appropriate background music (BGM)
helps complete short videos, a dominant form of information dissemination online. To that end, current research focuses on video-to-music retrieval (V2MR), finding amidst a
collection of music tracks the one best matching the content of a given query video [4, 17, 21, 27]. In practice,
music tracks (songs or instrumental music) are typically
much longer than query videos (which usually last around
30 seconds). As a result, the retrieved music needs to be
manually cut to a shorter segment to match the video duration. In order to bridge the gap between the practical need
and V2MR, we introduce in this paper a novel task called
Music Grounding by Short Video (MGSV), aiming to localize within the music-track collection a music moment that

✉ Corresponding author. (xirong@ruc.edu.cn)

1 Leonard Bernstein

22285

