This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Moment Quantization for Video Temporal Grounding
Xiaolong Sun1 Le Wang1 * Sanping Zhou1 Liushuai Shi1
Kun Xia2 Mengnan Liu1 Yabing Wang1 Gang Hua3
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Amazon Alexa AI

Abstract
Video temporal grounding is a critical video understanding
task, which aims to localize moments relevant to a language
description. The challenge of this task lies in distinguishing
relevant and irrelevant moments. Previous methods focused
on learning continuous features exhibit weak differentiation
between foreground and background features. In this paper, we propose a novel Moment-Quantization based Video
Temporal Grounding method (MQVTG), which quantizes
the input video into various discrete vectors to enhance the
discrimination between relevant and irrelevant moments.
Specifically, MQVTG maintains a learnable moment codebook, where each video moment matches a codeword. Considering the visual diversity, i.e., various visual expressions
for the same moment, MQVTG treats moment-codeword
matching as a clustering process without using discrete vectors, avoiding the loss of useful information from direct
hard quantization. Additionally, we employ effective priorinitialization and joint-projection strategies to enhance the
maintained moment codebook. With its simple implementation, the proposed method can be integrated into existing
temporal grounding models as a plug-and-play component.
Extensive experiments on six popular benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of MQVTG,
significantly outperforming state-of-the-art methods. Further qualitative analysis shows that our method effectively
groups relevant features and separates irrelevant ones,
aligning with our goal of enhancing discrimination. Code
is available at https://github.com/TensorsSun/MQVTG.

1. Introduction
The rapid expansion of short-form video content on social
media platforms has made video a highly engaging multi* Corresponding author.

medium format [1, 19]. The significant surge prompts users
to selectively engage with brief moments of interest rather
than passively watch entire videos. This derives the topic
of video temporal grounding (VTG), which aims to ground
video clips based on natural language descriptions. Aside
from the moment retrieval [6, 13, 16], recent works in VTG
have also been interested in highlight detection [15, 35]. As
a multi-modal video understanding task, variable and openvocabulary language descriptions complicate video representation learning in VTG. This makes it difficult to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant moments, posing
significant challenges to the task.
To address this challenge, previous works [11, 34, 36]
learn continuous features with complex modal interactions.
However, videos contain much more redundant information, while VTG aims to separate video clips into foreground and background, focusing on essential discriminative information. As shown in Fig. 1(a), we present an example with multiple non-contiguous foreground moments.
Due to video information redundancy, previous methods
(e.g., TR-DETR [27]) struggle with distinguishing foreground and similar background features (i.e., red and blue
points are close in feature space) and poorly grouping foreground features (i.e., different red points are far apart in feature space). Additionally, the interested foreground can be
described concisely by a discrete language query [32, 33].
For example in Fig. 1(b), we can accurately describe the
video moment of a spoon stirring curry using the discrete
language query. That motivates us to ask: Can we describe
the continuous video moments via discrete vectors to enhance discrimination between relevant and irrelevant moments? Existing works [5, 38, 39] have explored various
patch-level quantization on images, however, moment-level
quantization on videos remains an unexplored area.
To achieve our goal, we propose a Moment-Quantization
based Video Temporal Grounding method (MQVTG),
which quantizes the video moments into discrete vectors.

20137

