This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Amodal3R: Amodal 3D Reconstruction from Occluded 2D Images
Tianhao Wu1∗ , Chuanxia Zheng2† , Frank Guan3 , Andrea Vedaldi2 , Tat-Jen Cham1
∗

S-Lab, 1 Nanyang Technological University, 2 VGG, University of Oxford
3
Singapore Institute of Technology
https://sm0kywu.github.io/Amodal3R/

3D Recast

Input Image

In-the-wild Reconstruction

Stochastic sample 1

Stochastic sample 2

Input Image

Stochastic sample 1

Stochastic sample 2

3D Scene Decomposition

Input Image

Decomposed 3D assets

Figure 1. Example results of Amodal3R. Given partially visible objects within images (occluded regions are shown in black, visible areas
in red outlines), our Amodal3R generates diverse semantically meaningful 3D assets with reasonable geometry and plausible appearance.
We sample multiple times to get diverse results from the same occluded input. Trained on synthetic datasets, it generalizes well to out-ofdomain test examples from real scenes, where most objects are partially visible, and reconstructs reasonable 3D assets.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Most existing image-to-3D models assume that objects
are fully visible, ignoring occlusions that commonly occur in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we introduce
Amodal3R, a conditional image-to-3D model designed to
reconstruct plausible 3D geometry and appearance from
partial observations. We extend a “foundation” 3D generator by introducing a visible mask-weighted attention mechanism and an occlusion-aware attention layer that explicitly
leverage visible and occlusion priors to guide the reconstruction process. We demonstrate that, by training solely
on synthetic data, Amodal3R learns to recover full 3D objects even in the presence of occlusions in real scenes. It
substantially outperforms state-of-the-art methods that independently perform 2D amodal completion followed by 3D
reconstruction, thereby establishing a new benchmark for
occlusion-aware 3D reconstruction.

Humans possess a remarkable ability to infer the complete
3D shape and appearance of objects from single views,
even when those objects are partly hidden behind occluders. This ability, known as amodal completion, is key
to operating in complex real-world environments, where
objects are often partially occluded by surrounding clutter. However, existing image-based 3D reconstruction models [5, 6, 23, 41, 47, 48, 65, 70, 71, 75, 77, 80, 88, 89] fail to
recover full 3D assets when the object is partially occluded.
We thus consider the problem of reconstructing 3D objects
from one or more partially occluded views, a novel task that
we call amodal 3D reconstruction.
Amodal 3D reconstruction is a challenging task that requires reconstructing an object’s photorealistic 3D geometry and appearance, including the occluded regions, which
are inherently ambiguous. Previous approaches [7, 54] typ-

† Project Lead.

9181

