This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Museum Exhibits using Vision-Language Reasoning
Ada-Astrid Balauca1, *, # Sanjana Garai1,3,* Stefan Balauca1 Rasesh Udayakumar Shetty3
Naitik Agrawal3 Dhwanil Subhashbhai Shah3 Yuqian Fu1 Xi Wang1,2
Kristina Toutanova1,4 Danda Pani Paudel1 Luc Van Gool1
1

INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Bulgaria
3
Indian Institute of Technology, Varanasi (IIT BHU)

2
4

ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Google DeepMind

Abstract
1. Introduction
Museums serve as repositories of cultural heritage and historical artifacts from diverse epochs, civilizations, and regions, preserving well-documented collections that encapsulate vast knowledge, which, when systematically structured into large-scale datasets, can train specialized models. Visitors engage with exhibits through curiosity and
questions, making expert domain-specific models essential for interactive query resolution and gaining historical insights. Understanding exhibits from images requires
analyzing visual features and linking them to historical
knowledge to derive meaningful correlations. We facilitate
such reasoning by (a) collecting and curating a large-scale
dataset of 65M images and 200M question-answer pairs
for exhibits from all around the world; (b) training large
vision-language models (VLMs) on the collected dataset;
(c) benchmarking their ability on five visual question answering tasks, specifically designed to reflect real-world inquiries and challenges observed in museum settings. The
complete dataset is labeled by museum experts, ensuring the
quality and the practical significance of the labels. We train
two VLMs from different categories: BLIP [41] with visionlanguage aligned embeddings, but lacking the expressive
power of large language models, and the LLaVA [46]
model, a powerful instruction-tuned LLM enriched with
vision-language reasoning capabilities. Through extensive
experiments, we find that while both model types effectively
answer visually grounded questions, large vision-language
models excel in queries requiring deeper historical context
and reasoning. We further demonstrate the necessity of finetuning models on large-scale domain-specific datasets by
showing that our fine-tuned models significantly outperform
current SOTA VLMs in answering questions related to specific attributes, highlighting their limitations in handling
complex, nuanced queries. Our dataset, benchmarks, and
source code are available at: insait-institute/Museum-65.
* Equal Contribution

We release a high-quality, large-scale dataset and demonstrate through experiments that training large VLMs on it
enables museum artifact understanding, for visually understanding exhibit images through visual question answering.
VLMs like CLIP [64], Gemini [75], and LLaVA [46] have
demonstrated strong capabilities in learning from largescale noisy image-text data, improving visual understanding
through natural language and bridging the gap between textual annotations and images [14, 45, 55, 63, 65, 66, 80, 81,
85]. However, these models [41, 46] struggle in domains
like museums, which require detailed, interdisciplinary
knowledge and structured attribute prediction, such as age,
origin, material, and cultural relevance [7, 54, 60]. While
pre-trained VLMs are effective for tasks like object detection [6, 30, 91] and semantic segmentation [20, 40, 88],
more complex multi-modal tasks demand advanced reasoning across visual and textual domains [34, 59, 66, 77].
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a key multi-modal
task explored in works like [3, 7, 9, 52, 68, 70, 92]. In
the cultural heritage domain, VQA can enhance museum
engagement, but a large-scale dataset covering diverse artifacts with both visual and textual data is lacking. Existing
datasets primarily focus on art [67, 72, 82] and are often
used for image generation and style transfer [19, 27, 38, 65],
failing to capture deeper exhibit-context relationships.
In this work, we collect a novel large-scale multilingual
dataset M USEUM -65 with high-quality images and extensive textual information for a wide range of museum artifacts, totaling 65M images and 200M question-answer
pairs. We curate and use it to fine-tune VLMs, BLIP and
LLaVA, to enable a better understanding of museum exhibits. The textual information of M USEUM -65 reflects
the viewpoint of knowledgeable museum experts, providing
both depth and breadth for effective AI training. We further design 5 real-world tasks: general VQA, category-wise
VQA, MultiAngle – questions using images from different

# astrid.mokanu@gmail.com

2227

