This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianSpeech: Audio-Driven Personalized 3D Gaussian Avatars
Shivangi Aneja1

2

Technical University of Munich

[silence]

MPI-IS, Tübingen

3

Justus Thies2,3

TU Darmstadt
Economic

Catastrophic

[Ca][tas][troph] [ic]

[e-] [co] [no] [mic]

1

Artem Sevastopolsky1
Tobias Kirschstein1
Angela Dai1
Matthias Nießner1

Figure 1. Given input speech signal, GaussianSpeech can synthesize photorealistic 3D-consistent talking human head avatars. Our method
can generate realistic and high-quality animations, including mouth interiors such as teeth, wrinkles, and specularities in the eyes. We
handle diverse facial geometry, including hair buns and mustaches/beards, while effectively synchronizing to the audio signal.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Generating animated sequences of photorealistic 3D head
avatars from spoken audio is important for many graphics applications, including immersive telepresence, movies,
and virtual assistants. In particular, rendering photorealistic
views of such animated avatars from various viewpoints is
crucial for realistic, immersive digital media, for instance,
telepresence to a meeting room requires a photorealistic appearance for all viewpoints of the people in the room, or
AR/VR where users can freely change their viewpoint.

We introduce GaussianSpeech1 , a novel approach that
synthesizes high-fidelity animation sequences of photorealistic, personalized 3D human head avatars from spoken audio. To capture the expressive, detailed nature of
human heads, including skin furrowing and finer-scale facial movements, we propose to couple speech signal with
3D Gaussian splatting to create realistic, temporally coherent motion sequences. We propose a compact and efficient 3DGS-based avatar representation that generates
expression-dependent color and leverages wrinkle- and
perceptually-based losses to synthesize facial details. To
enable sequence modeling of 3D Gaussian splats with audio, we devise an audio-conditioned transformer model capable of extracting lip and expression features directly from
audio input. Due to the absence of high-quality dataset
of talking humans in correspondence with audio, we captured a new large-scale multi-view dataset of audio-visual
sequences of talking humans with native English accents
and diverse facial geometry. GaussianSpeech consistently
achieves state-of-the-art quality with visually natural motion, while encompassing diverse facial expressions and
styles.

Creating such photorealistic animated 3D avatars from
audio remains challenging, as it requires maintaining photorealistic fidelity throughout the animation sequence, as
well as from various viewpoints. Existing work thus focuses on addressing these objectives independently; various works focus on re-enacting videos in the 2D domain
[3, 8, 18, 29, 30, 37, 42, 44, 65, 66, 68], creating frontview video animations, while others focus on animating 3D
face geometry from audio [15, 40, 51, 63]. In contrast, we
aim to create innately 3D audio-driven avatars enabling 3Dconsistent, free-viewpoint photorealistic synthesis needed
for immersive digital communication.

1 Project Page: https : / / shivangi - aneja . github . io /
projects/gaussianspeech

In order to characterize audio-driven 3D animation of a
person from multi-view input, we propose to represent animated head sequences with explicit 3D Gaussian points,
leveraging the detailed and expressive representation space

13065

