This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focal Plane Visual Feature Generation and Matching on a Pixel Processor Array
Hongyi Zhang1 Laurie Bose2 Jianing Chen2 Piotr Dudek2 Walterio Mayol-Cuevas1,3
1
University of Bristol 2 The University of Manchester 3 Amazon
Abstract
Pixel Processor Arrays (PPAs) are vision sensors that embed data and processing into every pixel element. PPAs can
execute visual processing directly at the point of light capture, and output only sparse, high-level information. This
is in sharp contrast with the conventional visual pipeline,
in which whole images must be transferred from sensor to
processor. This sparse data readout also provides several
major benefits such as higher frame rate, lower energy consumption and lower bandwidth requirements. In this work,
we demonstrate generation, matching and storage of binary
descriptors for visual keypoint features, entirely upon PPA
with no need to output images to external processing, making our approach inherently privacy-aware. Our method
spreads descriptors across the memory of multiple pixel
processors, allowing significantly larger descriptors than
prior pixel-processing works. These larger descriptors can
be used for a range of tasks such as place and object recognition. We demonstrate the accuracy of our in-pixel feature matching up to →94.5%, at →210fps, across a range of
datasets, with a greater than 100↑ reduction in data transfer and bandwidth requirements over traditional cameras.

Figure 1. Standard visual pipeline (top) vs our approach (bottom).
Red arrows indicate essential data exchange. Straight black arrows
represent commands sent from the Microcontroller unit (MCU) to
the PPA. The circular black arrow represents the program running
in the MCU. The green arrows represent the output of matchings.
Our system runs the steps in the order shown by the numbers.

1. Introduction

scriptors, ever leaving the sensor’s focal plane. We anticipate such a capability will be vitally important for preserving privacy in a world where camera-equipped, internetconnected devices such as VR/AR headsets and robotic vacuum cleaners are becoming commonplace. These have the
potential to capture live footage of users’ homes, but our approach eliminates this risk by ensuring that such data never
leaves the sensor. Additionally, image transfer off-sensor
is a slow, power-hungry operation, due to the sheer amount
of data movement involved. By avoiding this and utilizing pixel processing, our approach becomes very power
and bandwidth efficient compared to the standard visual
pipeline in which captured images are continuously relayed
from camera to processor. Our contributions are as follows.

The Pixel Processor Array (PPA) is a general-purpose programmable visual sensor. Standard camera sensor pixels can only capture the intensity of incoming light, while
the “pixel processors” of PPAs can also store data in local memory, perform computation, and communicate with
neighbouring processors. This massively parallel array of
pixel processors enables a wide range of visual tasks to be
performed entirely “in-pixel”, promising improved system
power consumption and latency. However, it also requires
new efficient methods to be designed specifically for this
novel sensor architecture [9]. In this paper, we propose
an approach to compute, store, and match long binary feature descriptors entirely in-pixel. We envision such a system could be used in a wide range of applications, such
as SLAM, Localisation and Recognition tasks. Crucially,
our approach can be performed without images, or even de-

29031

1. In-Pixel Descriptor Storage Our approach enables the
use of significantly longer (128 & 256 bit) “in-pixel”
descriptors than have been demonstrated in prior PPAbased works. This is achieved by storing descriptors
across multiple pixel processors to mitigate the reduced
memory available within a single processor.
2. In-Pixel Descriptor Matching We demonstrate matching of descriptors that are stored entirely in-pixel, across

