This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Compositional Video Learning with Coding Rate Reduction
Heeseok Jung1 Jun-Hyeon Bak1 Yujin Jeong2
Gyugeun Lee1 Jinwoo Ahn3 Eun-Sol Kim1,2,3 *
1
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence Application, Hanyang University
{heeseokjung,gillma,itswarm,gglee,jinwooahn,eunsolkim}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel zero-shot compositional
video understanding method inspired by how young children efficiently learn new concepts and flexibly expand their
existing knowledge framework. While recent large-scale visual language models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable
advancements and demonstrated impressive performance
improvements across various tasks, they require massive
amounts of data and computational resources. However,
despite their strong benchmark performance, they often fail
to solve simple zero-shot composition tasks. Moreover,
VLMs designed for video data demand even greater computational resources. We introduce a new video representation
learning method inspired by human compositional learning
to address these challenges. Specifically, we demonstrate
that achieving zero-shot compositional learning requires effective representation learning that disentangles given data
into meaningful semantic units. We propose a novel method
that learns such disentangled representations based on an
information-theoretic measure. By optimizing coding rate
reduction, we successfully learn spatio-temporally disentangled features from videos, one of the most challenging data. Our approach significantly enhances compositional generalizability, demonstrating its effectiveness in
zero-shot learning scenarios. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/heeseokjung/zs-comp-mcr2.

Figure 1. The illustration of compositional generalization problem
in (a) Sth-Com [30] and (b) CATER [11] datasets. The action labels are defined as a composition of primitive spatial and temporal
categories, and the model is required to predict novel action labels
that are unseen during training by recombining learned primitive
concepts.

across various downstream tasks but also for their ability
to generate reasonable answers to unseen (novel) problems
[1, 3, 20, 34, 47]. However, the training of VLMs relies
heavily on tremendous amounts of data and computing resources, and it is not possible to clearly explain the principles of the zero-shot capability.
In contrast, the way humans learn new problems or
concepts can be clearly explained based on compositional
learning. Humans can easily learn new concepts by recombining previously acquired knowledge, efficiently learning

1. Introduction
Recently, various types of large-scale visual language models (VLMs) have been proposed, demonstrating strong performance on various multimodal tasks such as visual question answering [29, 36, 49], image retrieval [47], and image
segmentation [10, 22, 28, 33]. These VLMs have attracted
significant attention not only for their strong performance
* Corresponding author.

20508

