This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Language-Free Visual Representation Learning
David Fan1→ Shengbang Tong1,2→ Jiachen Zhu1,2 Koustuv Sinha1 Zhuang Liu1,3
Xinlei Chen1 Michael Rabbat1 Nicolas Ballas1 Yann LeCun1,2 Amir Bar1† Saining Xie2†
→

1

FAIR, Meta

2

equal contribution

†

equal advising

New York University

Abstract

3

Princeton University

Diameter
1B
7B Params

Visual Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) currently underperforms Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) in
multimodal settings such as Visual Question Answering
(VQA). This multimodal gap is often attributed to the semantics introduced by language supervision, even though
visual SSL and CLIP models are often trained on different
data. In this work, we ask the question: “Do visual selfsupervised approaches lag behind CLIP due to the lack of
language supervision, or differences in the training data?”
We study this question by training both visual SSL and CLIP
models on the same MetaCLIP data, and leveraging VQA
as a diverse testbed for vision encoders. In this controlled
setup, visual SSL models scale better than CLIP models in
terms of data and model capacity, and visual SSL performance does not saturate even after scaling up to 7B parameters. Consequently, we observe visual SSL methods
achieve CLIP-level performance on a wide range of VQA
and classic vision benchmarks. These findings demonstrate
that pure visual SSL can match language-supervised visual
pretraining at scale, opening new opportunities for visioncentric representation learning. Code and models here.

Avg. VQA Accuracy

CLIP
DINOv2
Web-SSL

+0.7%

+4.6%

LVD

(142M samples)

MetaCLIP Web Data
(2B samples)

ImageNet

(1.28M samples)

<1B Data

>1B Data

Figure 1. We compare the scaling behavior of visual SSL and
CLIP on 16 VQA tasks from the Cambrian-1 suite under different
data and model size regimes. Prior visual SSL methods achieved
strong performance on classic vision tasks, but have underperformed as encoders for multimodal instruction-tuned VQA tasks.
Our results show that with appropriate scaling of models and data,
visual SSL can match the performance of language-supervised
models across all evaluated domains—even OCR & Chart.

Beyond methodology differences, these approaches have
also been separated by data scale and distribution (Fig. 1).
CLIP models typically train on billion-scale image-text
pairs from the web [18, 77, 104], while SSL methods use
million-scale datasets such as ImageNet [24] or hundredmillion scale data with ImageNet-like distributions [73, 76].
In this work, we investigate a fundamental question: Is
language supervision necessary to pretrain visual representations for multimodal modeling? Rather than seeking
to replace language-supervised approaches, we aim to understand the intrinsic capabilities and limitations of visual
self-supervision at scale for multimodal applications. To
conduct a fair comparison, we train SSL models on the
same billion-scale web data used for state-of-the-art CLIP
models—specifically the MetaCLIP dataset [104]. This approach controls for data distribution differences when comparing visual SSL and CLIP.

1. Introduction
Visual representation learning has evolved along two distinct paths with different training approaches. Languagesupervised methods such as Contrastive Language-Image
Pretraining (CLIP) [75, 85, 108] use paired image-text
data to learn representations that are enriched with linguistic semantics. Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) methods [14, 44, 55, 73, 109] learn from images alone.
Despite SSL models outperforming language-supervised
models on classic vision tasks such as classification and segmentation [73], they are less commonly adopted in recent
multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 9, 56–
58, 91]. This difference in adoption is partially due to a
performance gap in visual question answering (see Fig. 1),
particularly for OCR & Chart interpretation tasks [78, 91].

370

