This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H YP DAE: Hyperbolic Diffusion Autoencoders for
Hierarchical Few-shot Image Generation
Lingxiao Li1, 2
1

Kaixuan Fan1

Boqing Gong2 * Xiangyu Yue1→

MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2

Boston University

{lxli, bgong}@bu.edu, kxfan127@gmail.com, xyyue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Few-shot image generation aims to generate diverse and
high-quality images for an unseen class given only a few
examples in that class. A key challenge in this task is balancing category consistency and image diversity, which often
compete with each other. Moreover, existing methods offer
limited control over the attributes of newly generated images.
In this work, we propose Hyperbolic Diffusion Autoencoders
(HypDAE), a novel approach that operates in hyperbolic
space to capture hierarchical relationships among images
from seen categories. By leveraging pre-trained foundation
models, HypDAE generates diverse new images for unseen
categories with exceptional quality by varying stochastic
subcodes or semantic codes. Most importantly, the hyperbolic representation introduces an additional degree of control over semantic diversity through the adjustment of radii
within the hyperbolic disk. Extensive experiments and visualizations demonstrate that HypDAE significantly outperforms prior methods by achieving a better balance between
preserving category-relevant features and promoting image
diversity with limited data. Furthermore, HypDAE offers
a highly controllable and interpretable generation process.
Code is available at https://github.com/lingxiao-li/HypDAE.

1. Introduction
Generative models [23, 46, 47, 51] have succeeded in generating high-fidelity and realistic images, partially thanks to a
large volume of high-quality data for model training. However, with the widespread presence of long-tail distributions
and data imbalances across image categories [26], there are
many scenarios in the real world where it is impossible to
collect sufficient samples of certain categories for model
training. It is difficult for generative models trained on wellsampled categories to generate realistic and diverse images
* Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Illustration of hierarchical text-image representation
in hyperbolic space. Hyperbolic space provides a natural and compact encoding for semantic hierarchies in large datasets. Adjusting
high-level, identity-relevant attributes !wr alters an image’s identity, while modifying low-level, identity-irrelevant attributes !wir
produces variations within the same identity.

for a novel category given only a few examples. This challenging task is known as few-shot image generation, which
aims to synthesize images that preserve the category-level
identity of the limited input samples [8, 13, 14, 24–28, 35].
Existing few-shot image generation methods are primarily GAN-based and fall into three categories: transfer-based
approaches [8, 36], which use meta-learning or domain
adaptation for cross-category generalization but often face
limited transferability; fusion-based approaches [2, 19, 25,
26, 56, 60], which fuse features from multiple exemplars
but tend to produce outputs overly similar to the inputs;
and transformation-based approaches [1, 13, 14, 27, 28],
which apply intra-category perturbations without fine-tuning
but often lack diversity. Recent diffusion-based methods [5, 31, 48] for object-level personalization focus on
instance identity, require test-time fine-tuning, and depend
on prompt engineering, making them incompatible with our
category-level setting without textual inputs or model up-

17119

