This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RhythmGuassian: Repurposing Generalizable Gaussian Model For Remote
Physiological Measurement
Hao Lu1,2∗ , Yuting Zhang1,2∗ , Jiaqi Tang2 , Bowen Fu3 , Wenhang Ge1,2 ,
Wei Wei3 , Kaishun Wu1,2 , Yingcong Chen1,2‡
1
The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology (Guangzhou),
2
The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology, 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Introduction 宏观介绍我们的方法
{hlu585,yzhang430}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
yingcongchen@ust.hk
∗
‡
Equal contribution, Corresponding author
Time

Abstract

......

Remote Photoplethysmography (rPPG) enables noncontact extraction of physiological signals, providing significant advantages in medical monitoring, emotion recognition, and face anti-spoofing. However, the extraction of
reliable rPPG signals is hindered by motion variations in
real-world environments, leading to entanglement issue. To
address the challenge, we employ the Generalizable Gaussian Model (GGM) to disentangle geometry and chroma
components with 4D Gaussian representations. Employing
the GGM for robust rPPG estimation is non-trivial. Firstly,
there are no camera parameters in the dataset, resulting in
the inability to render video from 4D Gaussian. The “4D
virtual camera” is proposed to construct extra Gaussian
parameters to describe view and motion changes, giving the
ability to render video with the fixed virtual camera parameters. Further, the chroma component is still not explicitly
decoupled in 4D Gaussian representation. Explicit motion
modeling (EMM) is designed to decouple the motion variation in an unsupervised manner. Explicit chroma modeling
(ECM) is tailored to decouple specular, physiological, and
noise signals, respectively. To validate our approach, we
expand existing rPPG datasets to include various motion
and illumination interference scenarios, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our method in real-world settings. Code
is available at https://github.com/LuPaoPao/
RhythmGuassian.

Generalized Guassian Model
Specular Signal
Motion Noise
e
m
Ti

Physiological
Signal

4D Guassian
Representation

Disentangled Chroma

Figure 1. The main idea of this paper. Based on the input video,
the Generalizable Gaussian Model (GGM) predicts a 4D Gaussian
Spaltting representation. The chroma dimension is decoupled into
specular signals, physiological signals, and motion noises.

1. Introduction

anti-spoofing [64]. Compared to traditional contact-based
methods for physiological signal acquisition, rPPG offers
the advantages of being non-invasive and more convenient.
But, the model cannot accurately track the relative 4D geometric changes of face skin in the real scene, resulting in
motion noise. The relative position between the light source
and the face can also introduce illumination noise. Therefore, addressing the challenges of motion and illumination
interference has become a key focus in current research efforts [26, 28, 63, 65, 68].
Traditional methods primarily rely on Blind Source Separation (BSS) [21, 37] and subspace methods [12, 17, 54,
55]. These methods typically operate under specific assumptions, such as the ability to separate noise and signal
in certain subspaces or assuming that the interference from
motion and lighting is linear. While these assumptions are
effective in some cases, their generalization ability is lim-

Remote Photoplethysmography (rPPG) [11, 17, 49, 54, 55]
is a non-contact technique that utilizes camera devices to
extract physiological signals, such as heart rate, from facial
videos. It has been widely applied in various fields, including medical monitoring, emotion recognition [23], and face

20780

