This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

O-MaMa: Learning Object Mask Matching
between Egocentric and Exocentric Views
Lorenzo Mur-Labadia*

Maria Santos-Villafranca*

Alejandro Perez-Yus

Jesus Bermudez-Cameo

Ruben Martinez-Cantin

Jose J. Guerrero

I3A - University of Zaragoza

Abstract

Source view (Ego)

Understanding the world from multiple perspectives is
essential for intelligent systems operating together, where
segmenting common objects across different views remains
an open problem. We introduce a new approach that redefines cross-image segmentation by treating it as a mask
matching task. Our method consists of: (1) A MaskContext Encoder that pools dense DINOv2 semantic features to obtain discriminative object-level representations
from FastSAM mask candidates, (2) an Ego↔Exo CrossAttention that fuses multi-perspective observations, (3) a
Mask Matching contrastive loss that aligns cross-view features in a shared latent space, and (4) a Hard Negative Adjacent Mining strategy to encourage the model to better differentiate between nearby objects. O-MaMa achieves the
state of the art in the Ego-Exo4D Correspondences benchmark, obtaining relative gains of +22 % and +76 % in the
Ego2Exo and Exo2Ego IoU against the official challenge
baselines, and a +13 % and +6 % compared with the SOTA
with 1 % of the training parameters.

Destination view (Exo)

FastSAM

Source mask

DINOv2

DINOv2

O-MaMa (Object Mask Matching)

Source-Destination Similarity

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed Object Mask Matching
(O-MaMa). Instead of attempting the complex cross-view segmentation task, we obtain a set of mask candidates in the destination view using FastSAM. Through contrastive learning, we select
the mask candidate that best matches the source mask.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, intelligent agents need to collaborate while performing cooperative tasks. This includes applications like
multi-robot manipulation [29, 64], augmented reality assistants [70, 74], and human-robot collaboration [7, 13].
Perception plays a crucial role in this scenario, but each
agent typically has access only to its own sensors or cameras, and each one perceives the environment from a different perspective. Consequently, understanding object corre-

spondences between egocentric (first-person) and exocentric (third-person) views is essential to align multi-agent
perception and establish a shared basis for interaction. Despite the advances in segmentation [40, 43, 47, 77] and object detection [5, 25] from single images, cross-view segmentation between egocentric and exocentric perspectives
remains an open challenge.

* Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors: lmur@unizar.es,
m.santos@unizar.es
Code: https://github.com/Maria-SanVil/O-MaMa

6892

