This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AlignDiff: Learning Physically-Grounded Camera Alignment via Diffusion
Liuyue Xie1 * Jiancong Guo2 Ozan Cakmakci2
László A. Jeni1 Zhiheng Jia2
1

2

Carnegie Mellon University

Google

3

Andre Araujo3

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Accurate camera calibration is a fundamental task for 3D
perception, especially when dealing with real-world, in-thewild environments where complex optical distortions are
common. Existing methods often rely on pre-rectified images or calibration patterns, which limits their applicability and flexibility. In this work, we introduce a novel framework that addresses these challenges by jointly modeling
camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameters using a generic
ray camera model. Unlike previous approaches, AlignDiff
shifts focus from semantic to geometric features, enabling
more accurate modeling of local distortions. We propose
AlignDiff, a diffusion model conditioned on geometric priors, enabling the simultaneous estimation of camera distortions and scene geometry. To enhance distortion prediction,
we incorporate edge-aware attention, focusing the model
on geometric features around image edges, rather than semantic content. Furthermore, to enhance generalizability
to real-world captures, we incorporate a large database of
ray-traced lenses containing over three thousand samples.
This database characterizes the distortion inherent in a diverse variety of lens forms. Our experiments demonstrate
that the proposed method significantly reduces the angular error of estimated ray bundles by ∼ 8.2◦ and overall
calibration accuracy, outperforming existing approaches on
challenging, real-world datasets.

Figure 1. AlignDiff is proposed to address common image geometric aberrations with a unified ray camera representation while
jointly recovering the camera extrinsics. With groundings on physical camera lens designs, as well as the disassociation of geometric
cues from semantic features, it demonstrates an ability to generalize to real video sequences.

1. Introduction

cal aberrations. This separation is fundamentally limiting,
as intrinsic and extrinsic parameters are closely interdependent; inaccuracies in modeling lens distortions propagate
directly to pose estimation errors. Consequently, joint optimization of intrinsic and extrinsic parameters is critical to
ensure reliable calibration under unconstrained conditions.
Recent diffusion-based and transformer-powered models, such as PoseDiffusion [55], RayDiffusion [63], and
DiffusionSfM [1] have improved calibration accuracy and
zero-shot generalizability by conditioning on image features extracted from vision encoders. However, these methods typically focus on high-level, semantic image features
rather than on structural cues critical for modeling optical
aberrations that directly impact geometry. This is particularly limiting because accurate intrinsic calibration is essential for precise extrinsic calibration: aberrations in the
intrinsic parameters can significantly affect the accuracy
of extrinsic parameters, making the two tightly interdependent.
We propose AlignDiff, shown Figure 1, a diffusionbased calibration framework, to learn the fine-grained ray
profile from video sequences in world space, with a conditioning strategy that better captures fine-grained optical
distortions. To shift focus from semantic to structural features, we condition the diffusion model with line embed-

Accurate camera calibration, involving the estimation of intrinsic parameters such as focal length and lens distortions
and extrinsic parameters such as camera pose, is essential
for robust 3D perception in real-world environments. However, prevailing methods typically address these components independently, focusing on either intrinsic calibration
or pose estimation while relying on simplified camera models that are insufficient to capture complex real-world opti* Work done during an internship at Google.

26901

