This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harmonizing Visual Representations for
Unified Multimodal Understanding and Generation
Size Wu1
Wenwei Zhang2
Lumin Xu3
Sheng Jin4
Zhonghua Wu5
5
4
1
Qingyi Tao
Wentao Liu
Wei Li
Chen Change Loy1
1
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Shanghai AI Laboratory Research
3
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 5 SenseTime Research
size001@e.ntu.edu.sg
{wei.l,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1. An overview of image generation and understanding examples. All results are obtained by the proposed Harmon-1.5B, which
uses a shared visual encoder for both tasks.

Abstract
Unifying visual understanding and generation within a single multimodal framework remains a significant challenge,
as the two inherently heterogeneous tasks require representations at different levels of granularity. Current approaches that utilize vector quantization (VQ) or variational autoencoders (VAE) for unified visual representation prioritize intrinsic imagery features over semantics,
compromising understanding performance. In this work,
we take inspiration from masked image modelling (MIM)
that learns rich semantics via a mask-and-reconstruct pretraining and its successful extension to masked autoregressive (MAR) image generation. A preliminary study on the
MAR encoder’s representation reveals exceptional linear
probing accuracy and precise feature response to visual
concepts, which indicates MAR’s potential for visual understanding tasks beyond its original generation role. Based
on these insights, we present Harmon, a unified autoregres-

sive framework that harmonizes understanding and generation tasks with a shared MAR encoder. Through a threestage training procedure that progressively optimizes understanding and generation capabilities, Harmon achieves
state-of-the-art image generation results on the GenEval,
MJHQ30K and WISE benchmarks while matching the performance of methods with dedicated semantic encoders
(e.g., Janus) on image understanding benchmarks. Our
code and models will be available at https://github.
com/wusize/Harmon.

1. Introduction
“What I cannot create, I do not understand.”
— Richard Feynman
Generating images from textual descriptions and understanding images through targeted questions represent
the forefront of AI research. With significant progress in

17739

