This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboTron-Nav: A Unified Framework for Embodied Navigation Integrating
Perception, Planning, and Prediction
Yufeng Zhong†

Chengjian Feng†

Feng Yan

Fanfan Liu

Liming Zheng

Lin Ma‡

Meituan
https://yvfengzhong.github.io/RoboTron-Nav
(1) Navigation

Abstract

Instruction

Image
s

Question

Perception
Planning

Answer

Question

Perception
Planning
Prediction

Action

(2) EQA

In language-guided visual navigation, agents locate target
objects in unseen environments using natural language instructions. For reliable navigation in unfamiliar scenes,
agents should possess strong perception, planning, and prediction capabilities. Additionally, when agents revisit previously explored areas during long-term navigation, they
may retain irrelevant and redundant historical perceptions,
leading to suboptimal results. In this work, we propose
RoboTron-Nav, a unified framework that integrates perception, planning, and prediction capabilities through multitask collaborations on navigation and embodied question answering tasks, thereby enhancing navigation performances. Furthermore, RoboTron-Nav employs an adaptive
3D-aware history sampling strategy to effectively and efficiently utilize historical observations. By leveraging large
language model, RoboTron-Nav comprehends diverse commands and complex visual scenes, resulting in appropriate navigation actions. RoboTron-Nav achieves an 81.1%
success rate in object goal navigation on the CHORES-S
benchmark, setting a new state-of-the-art performance.

(3)Navigation + EQA
Image
s

Prediction

Image
s

Instruction

Action

Answer

Figure 1. Multitask collaboration. In (1) navigation tasks, only
actions are produced, missing the perception and planning found
in (2) EQA tasks. (3) Multitask collaboration unifies perception,
planning, and prediction for a more comprehensive model.

Recently, significant advancements in language-guided
visual navigation have been driven by the robust understanding and generalization capabilities of visual-language
models (VLMs) that seamlessly integrate visual and textual information. For example, in Object Goal Navigation (ObjectNav) [2–5, 7, 11, 24–26, 30, 36, 40], numerous approaches [3, 4, 7, 30, 36, 40] have achieved impressive results by using VLMs to align and integrate textual
and visual inputs, enabling agents to better understand complex environments and navigate to target objects more effectively. Although current navigation models excel at locating target objects, they often struggle to provide efficient
path planning and explain the reasoning behind their path
choices, as shown in the first row of Fig. 1. This challenge
is largely due to traditional navigation datasets focusing primarily on recording coordinate trajectories and neglecting
the hierarchical reasoning process employed by humans.
For instance, humans typically first identify rooms, then locate furniture, and finally search for specific objects.

1. Introduction
Embodied navigation [1] is a key component of embodied
artificial intelligence [12, 18, 19, 31, 38, 39], especially
language-guided visual navigation [2, 5, 11, 16, 17, 24–
26]. Unlike autonomous driving [13], language-guided visual navigation requires agents to comprehend natural language instructions and autonomously explore unseen visual
environments to locate target objects, which presents unique
challenges. Specifically, to reliably navigate in unfamiliar
visual environments, agents must effectively perceive surrounding scenes, plan strategies to achieve their goals, and
predict appropriate navigation actions.

Additionally, we have observed a significant amount of
redundancy in observations during navigation, as agents frequently revisit the same locations multiple times. As illustrated at the top of Fig. 2, the white circle marks areas
that the agent revisits multiple times. At (1) T = 71 and

† Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author.

6416

