This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D-Bench: Benchmarking Multi-modal Large Language Models for 4D Object
Understanding
Wenxuan Zhu1∗ , Bing Li1† *, Cheng Zheng1∗ , Jinjie Mai1 , Jun Chen1 , Letian Jiang1 , Abdullah Hamdi2 ,
Sara Rojas Martinez1 , Chia-Wen Lin3 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1 , Bernard Ghanem1†
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,2 University of Oxford, 3 National Tsing Hua University

Abstract

4D Object

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
demonstrated impressive 2D image/video understanding
capabilities. However, there are no publicly standardized
benchmarks to assess the abilities of MLLMs in understanding the 4D objects (3D objects with temporal evolution over time). In this paper, we introduce 4D-Bench,
the first benchmark to evaluate the capabilities of MLLMs
in 4D object understanding, featuring tasks in 4D object
Question Answering (4D object QA) and 4D object captioning. 4D-Bench provides 4D objects with diverse categories, high-quality annotations, and tasks necessitating
multi-view spatial-temporal understanding, different from
existing 2D image/video-based benchmarks. With 4DBench, we evaluate a wide range of open-source and closedsource MLLMs. The results from the 4D object captioning
experiment indicate that MLLMs generally exhibit weaker
temporal understanding compared to their appearance understanding, notably, while open-source models approach
closed-source performance in appearance understanding,
they show larger performance gaps in temporal understanding. 4D object QA yields surprising findings: even with
simple single-object videos, MLLMs perform poorly, with
state-of-the-art GPT-4o achieving only 63% accuracy compared to the human baseline of 91%. These findings highlight a substantial gap in 4D object understanding and the
need for further advancements in MLLMs. Project page:
https://4dbench.github.io/

time

…...

time

viewpoint

Multiview Videos

Multi-view spatial
understanding

temporal
understanding

Q: What does the robot’s right hand turn into?
(A) Into the leg.

(B) Into the tail.

(C) Into the sword.

(D) Into the wing.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. An example demonstrating the challenges of 4D object understanding involves multi-view spatial-temporal reasoning. Given the 4D object, the robot’s right hand seems ambiguous in some views at first and eventually disappears over time.
Hence, answering the question needs to (1) address multi-view
ambiguity and choose proper views and time that the right hand
is visible, (2) localize the right hand, (3) and track its evolutions
along the time dimension.

Digital 4D (i.e. dynamic 3D) assets have received increasing attention from both academia [8, 44, 51, 76, 100] and
industry [1, 2], as they are important to many real-world
applications such as digital twins, augmented reality, and
gaming. With the increasing demand for dynamic and interactive virtual experiences [38], it is desirable to understand

and interact with 4D assets using language, necessitating
4D-object-language understanding for 4D assets.

* *Equal contribution. †Corresponding authors.

While many efforts [5, 15, 20, 46, 55, 88, 104] have been
devoted to 2D image/video language understanding, 4D object language understanding has been much less underexplored, yet it poses new challenges. First, unlike 2D images,
where parts of an object are occluded or ambiguous, a 4D

21129

