This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mastering Collaborative Multi-modal Data Selection:
A Focus on Informativeness, Uniqueness, and Representativeness
Qifan Yu1 * Zhebei Shen1 * Zhongqi Yue2 * Yang Wu3 Bosheng Qin1 Wenqiao Zhang1
Yunfei Li3 Juncheng Li1B Siliang Tang1 Yueting Zhuang1B
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Ant Group

{yuqifan, shenzhebei, junchengli, siliang, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
nickyuezhongqi@gmail.com, wy306396@antgroup.com

Abstract

DataTailor (15%)

DataTailor (Ours)

DataTailor (7.5%)

Full Data

Instruction tuning fine-tunes pre-trained Multi-modal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) to handle real-world tasks.
However, the rapid expansion of visual instruction datasets
introduces data redundancy, leading to excessive computational costs. We propose a collaborative framework, DataTailor, which leverages three key principles—–
informativeness, uniqueness, and representativeness–—for
effective data selection. We argue that a valuable sample should be informative of the task, non-redundant, and
represent the sample distribution (i.e., not an outlier). We
further propose practical ways to score against each principle, which automatically adapts to a given dataset without tedious hyperparameter tuning. Comprehensive experiments on various benchmarks demonstrate that DataTailor
achieves 101.3% of the performance of full-data fine-tuning
with only 15% of the data, significantly reducing computational costs while maintaining superior results. This exemplifies the “Less is More” philosophy in MLLM development. The code and data is available in this URL.

ICONS

DataTailor (5%)
InsTag

TIVE

COINCIDE
LESS

Random
GradN

DataTailor (2%)

Length

EL2N
IFD

Align2LLaVA
SELF-FILTER

(a) Performance v.s. Selected Data Ratio on LLaVA-mix-665k
Informativeness
IFD (Data-specific )
InsTag (Human Reward)
LESS (Gradient-based)
DataTailor (Ours)

Uniqueness

Representativeness

(b) Metric triangle among informativeness,
uniqueness, and representativeness

(c) MLLM relative performance of DataTailor
compared with other data selection methods

Figure 1. (a) The Performance v.s. Selected Data Ratio on LLaVAmix-665k of DataTailor compared with SOTA data selection methods. (b) Metric triangle among informativeness, uniqueness, and
representativeness when applying IFD [28] (data-specific methods), InsTag [36] (human-reward methods), LESS [51] (gradientbased methods), and DataTailor. (c) The corresponding MLLM
performance on LLaVA-mix-665k [33] of different methods.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of Multi-modal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) has made promising progress on various multi-modal tasks [2, 55, 61]. A typical MLLM is developed through two main training stages: pre-training on
vast image-text pairs and fine-tuning on task-specific multimodal instructions. Notably, the fine-tuning stage is critical for enhancing the instruction-following capabilities of
MLLMs. Yet, this stage can become exceedingly timeconsuming due to the large-scale but low-quality instruction
data. Hence, the community is interested in fine-tuning data

selection methods, such that an MLLM trained on the selected subset yields comparable or even better performance.
Existing MLLM data selection methods [9, 19, 35, 49]
largely follow similar ideas from the NLP community [28,
36, 45, 51, 60]. They can be divided into three main categories: (1) Data-specific methods [6, 10, 28] leverage
vast hand-designed rules to select data in specific datasets,
which are not flexible and robust for diverse tasks. (2)
Human-reward methods [36, 60] utilize human feedback
to select data, which are both time-consuming and expensive. (3) Gradient-based methods [31, 45, 51] select sam-

* Equal contribution.
B Corresponding author.

155

