This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Drawing Developmental Trajectory from Cortical Surface Reconstruction
Wenxuan Wu1,2 Ruowen Qu1 Zhongliang Liu1 Zhuoyan Dai1 Dongzi Shi1 Sijin Yu1
Tong Xiong1 Shiping Liu2 Xiangmin Xu1,3 Xiaofen Xing1,* Xin Zhang1,*
1
South China University of Technology 2 BGI Research, Hangzhou 3 Foshan University
{xfxing, eexinzhang}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

ODE

Diffeomorphic transformation-based cortical surface reconstruction typically involves a series of deformation processes to extract the cerebral cortex from brain magnetic
resonance images (MRI). While most methods are designed
for adult brains using Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODE) with fixed step sizes, the neonatal brain,
which exhibits dramatic changes in cortical folding patterns early in life, requires a more adaptive approach. To
address this, we develop a dual-task framework to directly
characterize the brain development trajectory through processes of cortical surface reconstruction. For white matter (inner surfaces), we employ an Age-Conditioned ODE
with adaptive step sizes. It is initially trained on a limited set of longitudinal paired data to establish a coarse
trajectory, which is then refined through sample training of
single-point data and knowledge distillation. For the pial
surfaces (outer surfaces), we position the midthickness surfaces as intermediates and employ a cycle-consistent semisupervised training strategy to depict a coherent brain development trajectory between the inner and outer surfaces.
Our approach achieves precise developmental prediction
directly on triangular meshes. Furthermore, by enhancing interpretability at each stage of the deformation process, this approach improves the applicability of diffeomorphic transformation-based methods. The proposed method
has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in modeling developmental trajectories and cortical surface reconstruction within the developing Human Connectome Project
dataset (dHCP). The Code will be available at https:
//github.com/SCUT-Xinlab/DDT-from-CSR.

Reconstructed
Surface

ODE Solver
Latent Space

t0

t
T

NM:
ID:

(a) Previous method: ODE-based on fixed steps

SR:

ACDE
Reconstructed
Surface

Proposed Solver
Latent Space

NM:

Brain Development Trajectory
t0

t1

t2

……

tN-2

tN-1

ID:

t

SR:

tN

(b) Our method: adaptive step size age-conditioned ODE
Observed

Hidden

NM: neuro-developmental modeling

Future

Infeasible

ID: intermidiate hidden state

Passable

Good

SR: surface representation

Figure 1. Comparison of our ACDE and traditional ODE

1. Introduction

the elucidation of the fundamental mechanisms and patterns
of brain development. The highly folded nature of the cerebral cortex makes it challenging to accurately represent this
complex structure at the voxel level. Therefore, cortical surface reconstruction is commonly employed to extract the inner (white matter) and outer (pial) surfaces, representing the
cerebral cortex in a precise 3D triangular mesh structure.
Typically, the cortical surfaces are generated through the
neuroimaging processing pipeline [6, 7, 11, 12, 26, 30]
involving skull stripping, tissue segmentation, hemisphere
separation, topology correction, and surface reconstruction.
This multi-step procedure is frequently time-consuming,
thereby posing challenges in processing substantial volumes of clinical data. With the rapid advancement of deep
learning [8, 13, 17, 19, 29], numerous studies [1, 2, 5,
14, 20, 33] have integrated deep neural networks, enabling
precise reconstruction of cortical surfaces within a few
seconds. The diffeomorphic transformation-based method
[18, 21, 22, 25, 34] [18, 22, 25] breaks the traditional twostage pipeline of segmentation followed by reconstruction.
It generates a velocity field from brain MRI scans to directly

In the early stages of fetal or neonatal life, the cerebral cortex undergoes significant morphological changes. With advancements in medical imaging technologies such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), non-invasive methods can
be used clinically to collect more early-life data, aiding in

11026

