This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistency Trajectory Matching for One-Step Generative Super-Resolution
Weiyi You

Mingyang Zhang Leheng Zhang Xingyu Zhou Kexuan Shi
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Shuhang Gu*

{weiyiyou.ywy, shuhanggu}@gmail.com
https://github.com/LabShuHangGU/CTMSR

Abstract

PF-ODE
teacher model

Current diffusion-based super-resolution (SR) approaches
achieve commendable performance at the cost of high inference overhead. Therefore, distillation techniques are utilized
to accelerate the multi-step teacher model into one-step student model. Nevertheless, these methods significantly raise
training costs and constrain the performance of the student
model by the teacher model. To overcome these tough challenges, we propose Consistency Trajectory Matching for
Super-Resolution (CTMSR), a distillation-free strategy that
is able to generate photo-realistic SR results in one step.
Concretely, we first formulate a Probability Flow Ordinary
Differential Equation (PF-ODE) trajectory to establish a
deterministic mapping from low-resolution (LR) images with
noise to high-resolution (HR) images. Then we apply the
Consistency Training (CT) strategy to directly learn the mapping in one step, eliminating the necessity of pre-trained
diffusion model. To further enhance the performance and
better leverage the ground-truth during the training process,
we aim to align the distribution of SR results more closely
with that of the natural images. To this end, we propose to
minimize the discrepancy between their respective PF-ODE
trajectories from the LR image distribution by our meticulously designed Distribution Trajectory Matching (DTM)
loss, resulting in improved realism of our recovered HR images. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed methods can attain comparable or even superior capabilities on both synthetic and real datasets while
maintaining minimal inference latency.

(a) Vanilla distillation. The student model (fθ ) directly learns the
PF-ODE from xT to x0 formed by multi-step teacher model (Fθ′ ).
real ODE

fake ODE

(b) Consistency Trajectory Matching for SR. We first utilize Consistency Training to map any point on the PF-ODE to the final point x0 by
minimizing the distance between model outputs of two adjacent points
on the PF-ODE. Based on the learned ODE, we propose DTM to match
the trajectory of fake ODE with the trajectory of real ODE, making the
SR results better aligned with the distribution of natural images.

Figure 1. An illustrative comparison of vanilla distillation and our
proposed Consistency Trajectory Matching for SR. In contrast to
vanilla distillation, Consistency Training directly learns the deterministic mapping from noisy LR distribution to the natural image
distribution to achieve one-step inference and DTM is proposed to
further enhance the realism of SR results.

1. Introduction

HR counterparts. Early classical SR methods [3, 18, 31, 45]
restore the HR images via optimizing the Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE) loss function in a supervised manner. This
methodology forces the model to learn an expectation of
all possible HR counterparts, which leads to blurry SR results [15]. While generative SR methods aim to generate the
HR estimation that conforms to the natural image distribution, thus producing more photo-realistic HR images. Recently, diffusion models [11, 27] have demonstrated strong
capabilities in modeling complex distributions, e.g., the dis-

Single-image super-resolution (SISR) is a task of generating
a high-resolution (HR) image that is in accordance with the
input low-resolution (LR) image. As is known, SISR is a typical ill-posed problem in the field of low-level vision, since
every LR image could consist with a number of potential
* Corresponding author.

12747

