This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NavQ: Learning a Q-Model for Foresighted Vision-and-Language Navigation
Peiran Xu

xpr820@pku.edu.cn

Xicheng Gong Yadong Mu*
Peking University
Beijing, China

gongxicheng@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

myd@pku.edu.cn

significant progress, existing methods [13, 14, 78, 80, 117]
often rely solely on the information from the visited areas
to make a single-step decision, without considering the potential consequences of the action. As suggested by the A*
algorithm [33], integrating a heuristic metric that evaluates
the future outcome when selecting frontiers to explore may
greatly improve the efficiency of searching. Thus, we hope
to devise a foresighted navigation agent that explicitly reason about the future prospects, in addition to the observation
along the partial trajectory. A motivating example is illustrated in Figure 1.

In this work we concentrate on the task of goal-oriented
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN). Existing methods
often make decisions based on historical information, overlooking the future implications and long-term outcomes of
the actions. In contrast, we aim to develop a foresighted
agent. Specifically, we draw upon Q-learning to train a Qmodel using large-scale unlabeled trajectory data, in order
to learn the general knowledge regarding the layout and
object relations within indoor scenes. This model can generate a Q-feature, analogous to the Q-value in traditional
Q-network, for each candidate action, which describes the
potential future information that may be observed after taking the specific action. Subsequently, a cross-modal future
encoder integrates the task-agnostic Q-feature with navigation instructions to produce a set of action scores reflecting future prospects. These scores, when combined with
the original scores based on history, facilitate an A*-style
searching strategy to effectively explore the regions that are
more likely to lead to the destination. Extensive experiments
conducted on widely used goal-oriented VLN datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Currently, several research efforts have already incorporated future information into the decision-making process, and most of them focus on predicting single-step outcomes [19, 58, 125, 137]. By leveraging the overlapping
fields of view between adjacent viewpoints, these methods
can predict the scenario of the area reached after an action is
taken. However, they focus on imagining the visual observations of neighboring nodes and only consider local hints,
failing to capture long-range, semantic-level future information. On the other hand, [51, 115, 119] learn a world
model to predict future information in a more principled
way. Though these methods can anticipate future states
for any number of steps ahead, they require multi-rounds,
multi-steps expansions through the world model for each
decision. This rollout process is highly time-consuming and
prone to distortions and overfitting, particularly when predictions are made in the RGB space [51, 115].

1. Introduction
The task of Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an agent to reach the target location in a photorealistic environment following language instructions. As
a crucial step towards embodied intelligence, this topic has
recently attracted significant attention, and many related
benchmarks has been published [3, 48, 54, 96, 107, 143].
In particular, REVERIE [96] concentrates on goal-oriented
VLN, in which the instruction contains only the description
of the target object, instead of step-by-step guidance. This
setup is well-suited for the development of practical home
assistants, where humans only need to provide intent-level
cues rather than detailed navigation steps.
From a high-level perspective, goal-oriented VLN can
be viewed as a searching problem in the scene. Despite

To address this dilemma between the horizon and efficiency, we propose NavQ, an agent that predicts the longhorizon future information within a single forward pass. At
its core is a Q-model capable of anticipating the aggregated future outcomes in the latent space. Traditionally,
Q-learning will formulate a Q-function that evaluates the
cumulative reward value of a state-action pair. Here, our Qmodel instead outputs a Q-feature, which encapsulates the
cumulation of future observations following the execution
of an action. Free from reward computation, our Q-model
can be pre-trained on abundant unsupervised trajectory data
to enhance generalizability. Following the Q-model, an ad-

* Corresponding author.

6327

