This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Membership Inference Test (aMINT):
Enhancing Model Auditability with Multi-Task Learning
Daniel DeAlcala, Aythami Morales, Julian Fierrez, Gonzalo Mancera, Ruben Tolosana, Javier Ortega-Garcia
Biometrics and Data Pattern Analytics Lab, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Spain
daniel.dealcala@uam.es aythami.morales@uam.es julian.fierrez@uam.es

Abstract

Passive MINT

Audited Model Layers
Audited Model (Non-Trainable)

Active Membership Inference Test (aMINT) is a method
designed to detect whether given data were used during the
training of machine learning models. In Active MINT, we
propose a novel multitask learning process that involves
training simultaneously two models: the original or Audited
Model, and a secondary model, referred to as the MINT
Model, responsible for identifying the data used for training the Audited Model. This novel multi-task learning approach has been designed to incorporate the auditability
of the model as an optimization objective during the training process of neural networks. The proposed approach
incorporates intermediate activation maps as inputs to the
MINT layers, which are trained to enhance the detection
of training data. We present results using a wide range
of neural networks, from lighter architectures such as MobileNet to more complex ones such as Vision Transformers, evaluated in 5 public benchmarks. Our proposed Active MINT achieves over 80% accuracy in detecting if given
data was used for training, significantly outperforming previous approaches in the literature. Our aMINT and related methodological developments contribute to increasing
transparency in AI models, facilitating stronger safeguards
in AI deployments to achieve proper security, privacy, and
copyright protection1 .

MINT Layers

MINT Model (Trainable)

Query
data

Training Data

Active MINT
Query
data

Enhanced Audited Model
trained with Active MINT
(Fully Trainable)
Output 1 =
Output 2 =

Training Data

Figure 1. Differences between Passive MINT and Active MINT
approaches. The Enhanced Audited model trained with the Active MINT approach (M + ) presents two outputs: 1) the primary
task output y (e.g., image classification label); 2) the MINT output
(probability that data d has been used during the training process
of the model).

ticular, among all regulations, the EU imposes companies
the registration of the trained AI models in an EU-managed
database, allowing for external audits and oversight. This
trend in legislating AI deployments is not only observed at
the EU level. Recently, in October 2024, the White House
raised similar concerns through a memo that underscored
AI as a matter of national security, advocating for stronger
oversight and access to AI technologies to protect citizens
[49]. This initiative emphasizes the need for stronger security measures, allowing supervision to prevent possible
abuses of citizens’ rights.
The Membership Inference Test (MINT) [8] emerged in
2024 as a research area focused on detecting whether specific data were used to train an AI model, with the aim of exposing unauthorized use of sensitive data, such as biometric
information [34]. MINT builds on the field of Membership

1. Introduction
The rapid evolution of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in recent
years has motivated legal frameworks to safeguard citizens’
rights. Institutions like the European Union (EU) have taken
a proactive stance, proposing regulations that establish rules
and responsibilities for AI developers, for example, the AI
Act introduced in June 2024 [50]. These regulations aim to
ensure lawful compliance, protect fundamental rights, and
achieve transparent, fair, and reliable AI technology. In par1 Code available in https://github.com/DanieldeAlcala/
Membership-Inference-Test.git

647

