This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SurfaceSplat: Connecting Surface Reconstruction and Gaussian Splatting
Zihui Gao1,3 ,* Jia-Wang Bian2 ,* Guosheng Lin3 ,
1

Zhejiang University, China

2

*

Voxurf

F1 score: 55.0

3

ByteDance Seed
†

Equal contribution

F1 score : 42.3

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Corresponding author

GOF

PSNR: 17.43

Hao Chen1†, Chunhua Shen1

Ours

PSNR:18.01

F1 score : 62.3

PSNR: 19.21

Figure 1. Sparse view reconstruction and rendering comparison. Left: Qualitative results from 10 images evenly sampled from a
casually captured 360-degree video. Right: Quantitative analysis of 5, 10, and 20 input views, averaged across the selected 9 MobileBrick
test scenes. 3DGS-based methods (e.g., GOF) achieve superior novel view rendering than SDF-based methods (e.g., Voxurf) due to their
sparse representations, which capture fine details. However, SDF-based methods outperform the former in mesh reconstruction, as their
dense representations better preserve global geometry. Our approach combines the strengths of both, achieving optimal performance.

Abstract
Surface reconstruction and novel view rendering from
sparse-view images are challenging. Signed Distance
Function (SDF)-based methods struggle with fine details,
while 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)-based approaches
lack global geometry coherence. We propose a novel hybrid
method that combines the strengths of both approaches:
SDF captures coarse geometry to enhance 3DGS-based
rendering, while newly rendered images from 3DGS refine
the details of SDF for accurate surface reconstruction. As
a result, our method surpasses state-of-the-art approaches
in surface reconstruction and novel view synthesis on the
DTU and MobileBrick datasets. Code will be released at:
https://github.com/aim-uofa/SurfaceSplat.

proaches that leverage generative models [10, 39, 40, 43] or
learn geometry priors through large-scale pretraining [6, 21,
29, 49], we focus on identifying the optimal 3D representations for surface reconstruction and novel view synthesis.
Surface reconstruction methods primarily use the Signed
Distance Function (SDF) or 3DGS-based representations.
Here, SDF-based approaches, such as NeuS [36] and Voxurf [41], model scene geometry continuously with dense
representations and optimize them via differentiable volume rendering [25]. In contrast, 3DGS-based methods like
GOF [53] and 2DGS [15] leverage a pre-computed sparse
point cloud for image rendering and progressively densify and refine it through differentiable rasterization. Due
to their dense representations, SDF-based methods capture
global structures well but lack fine details, while the sparse
nature of 3DGS-based methods enables high-frequency detail preservation but compromises global coherence. As a
result, both approaches struggle with poor reconstruction
quality under sparse-view conditions. Typically, SDF-based
methods outperform 3DGS in surface reconstruction, while
3DGS excels in image rendering, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Recognizing the complementary strengths of SDF-based
(dense) and 3DGS-based (sparse) representations, we propose a novel hybrid approach, SurfaceSplat, as illustrated
in Fig. 2. Our method is built on two key ideas: (i) SDF
for Improved 3DGS: To address the limitation of 3DGS
in learning global geometry, we first fit the global struc-

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from multi-view images is a core problem in computer vision with applications in virtual reality,
robotics, and autonomous driving. Recent advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [17] have significantly advanced the field. However, their performance degrades under sparse-view conditions, a common real-world challenge. This paper tackles
sparse-view reconstruction to bridge this gap. Unlike ap-

28525

