This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SU-RGS: Relightable 3D Gaussian Splatting from Sparse Views under
Unconstrained Illuminations
Qi Zhang, Chi Huang, Qian Zhang, Nan Li, Wei Feng*
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
{qizhang118, 3020244197, qianz, linan94, wfeng}@tju.edu.cn
Sparse Views

SU-RGS Inverse Rendering

SU-RGS Relighting

Comparisons in NeRF OSR Dataset

Figure 1. With inputting sparse views under unconstrained illuminations, SU-RGS can render novel views with RGB color, albedo,
geometry, and materials of the scene, which achieves the state-of-the-art relighting quality with fewer inputs views than baselines (e.g.,
only 25% of the baselines).

Abstract
The latest advancements in scene relighting have been predominantly driven by inverse rendering with 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS). However, existing methods remain overly
reliant on densely sampled images under static illumination
conditions, which is prohibitively expensive and even impractical in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose
a novel learning from Sparse views under Unconstrained
illuminations Relightable 3D Gaussian Splatting (dubbed
SU-RGS), to address this challenge by jointly optimizing
3DGS representations, surface materials, and environment
illuminations (i.e., unknown and various lighting conditions
in training) using only sparse input views. Firstly, SU-RGS
presents a varying appearance rendering strategy, enabling
each 3D Gaussian can perform inconsistent color under
various lightings. Next, SU-RGS establishes the multi-view
semantic consistency by constructing hierarchical semantics pseudo-labels across inter-views, to compensate for extra supervisions and facilitate sparse inverse rendering for
confronting unconstrained illuminations. Additionally, we
introduce an adaptive transient object perception component that integrates the scene geometry and semantics in
a fine-grained manner, to quantify and eliminate the uncertainty of the foreground. Extensive experiments on both

synthetic and real-world challenging datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of SU-RGS, achieving the state-of-the-art
performance for scene inverse rendering by learning 3DGS
from only sparse views under unconstrained illuminations.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Scene relighting is a long-standing problem in computer vision and graphics, where inverse rendering provides a capable pattern for this task. Impressively, neural radiance
fields (NeRF) [1] employ multi-MLP networks to predict
3D physical attributes (e.g., shape and materials) brilliantly
from captured images [2]. Nevertheless, the expensive computation of the neural network holds back its training and
rendering efficiency.
Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) performs realtime rendering for 3D scene representation [3]. Some researchers attempt to tackle the efficient scene inverse rendering by 3DGS [4]. GS-IR incorporates normal reconstruction and illumination modeling to estimate scene geometry and surface material [5]. R3DG proposes a pointbased ray tracing with the bounding volume for physicalbased rendering (PBR) [6]. However, the remarkable performance of 3DGS is heavily contingent on two critical requirements: (1) dense input views and (2) static environ-

26859

