This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

General Compression Framework for Efficient Transformer Object Tracking
Lingyi Hong1 Jinglun Li2 Xinyu Zhou1 Shilin Yan1 Pinxue Guo2 Kaixun Jiang2 Zhaoyu Chen2
Shuyong Gao1 Runze Li3 Xingdong Sheng3 Wei Zhang1 * Hong Lu1 * Wenqiang Zhang1,2 *
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University
2
College of Intelligent Robotics and Advanced Manufacturing, Fudan University
3
Lenovo Research
honglyhly@gmail.com, {weizh, honglu, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous works have attempted to improve tracking efficiency
through lightweight architecture design or knowledge distillation from teacher models to compact student trackers.
However, these solutions often sacrifice accuracy for speed
to a great extent, and also have the problems of complex
training process and structural limitations. Thus, we propose a general model compression framework for efficient
transformer object tracking, named CompressTracker, to reduce model size while preserving tracking accuracy. Our approach features a novel stage division strategy that segments
the transformer layers of the teacher model into distinct
stages to break the limitation of model structure. Additionally, we also design a unique replacement training technique
that randomly substitutes specific stages in the student model
with those from the teacher model, as opposed to training
the student model in isolation. Replacement training enhances the student model’s ability to replicate the teacher
model’s behavior and simplifies the training process. To
further forcing student model to emulate teacher model, we
incorporate prediction guidance and stage-wise feature mimicking to provide additional supervision during the teacher
model’s compression process. CompressTracker is structurally agnostic, making it compatible with any transformer
architecture. We conduct a series of experiment to verify the
effectiveness and generalizability of our CompressTracker.
Our CompressTracker-SUTrack, compressed from SUTrack,
retains about 99% performance on LaSOT (72.2% AUC)
while achieves 2.42× speed up. Code is available at here.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is tasked with continuously localizing a target object across video frames based on the initial
* Corresponding Author

bounding box in the first frame. Transformer-based trackers
have achieved promising performance on well-established
benchmarks, their deployment on resource-restricted device
remains a significant challenge. Developing a strong tracker
with high efficiency is of great significance.
Previous works attempt to reduce model inference cost
through lightweight tracker design or knowledge transfer
from teacher to student models. However, these approaches
face several limitations. (1) Inferior Accuracy. Certain
works propose lightweight tracking models [4, 6, 11, 21, 31]
or employ neural architecture search (NAS) [47] often suffer from underfitting and inferior performance because of
the limited number of parameters. (2) Complex Training.
Some works [15] transfers the knowledge from a teacher
tracker to a student model, while effective, requiring complex multi-stage and time-consuming training procedures
and resulting in suboptimal performance. (3) Structure
Limitation. The model reduction paradigm in [15] severely
restricts the structure of student to be consistent with teacher.
Thus, we introduce CompressTracker, a novel and general model compression framework to enhance the efficiency
of transformer tracking models, which is built upon three
interconnected innovations. First, to address the structure
limitation, we introduce the stage division strategy. Current
dominant trackers are one-stream models [4, 11, 15, 49] with
sequential transformer encoder layers that refine temporal
matching features. Given this layer-wise refinement, it becomes a natural progression to consider the model not as
a single entity but as a series of interconnected stages and
encourage student tracker to align teacher model at each
stage. Stage division partitions the teacher model into distinct stages that correspond to the layers of a simpler student
model. This is achieved by dividing the teacher model into
a number of stages equivalent to the student model’s layers. Each stage in the student modellearns to replicate the
functional behavior of its corresponding teacher stage. This
division is not merely a structural alteration but a strategic

13427

