This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIA: The Adversarial Exposure of Deterministic Inversion in Diffusion Models
Seunghoo Hong1,† Geonho Son2,† Juhun Lee1 Simon S. Woo1,2,⋆
1
Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, 2 Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
{hoo0681, sohn1029, josejhlee, swoo}@g.skku.edu

Difference in CLIP Similarity between Natural Editing

Abstract

I : DDIM
E : MasaCtrl

Diffusion models have shown to be strong representation
learners, showcasing state-of-the-art performance across
multiple domains. Aside from accelerated sampling, DDIM
also enables the inversion of real images back to their latent codes. A direct inheriting application of this inversion operation is real image editing, where the inversion
yields latent trajectories to be utilized during the synthesis
of the edited image. Unfortunately, this practical tool has
enabled malicious users to freely synthesize misinformative
or deepfake contents with greater ease, which promotes the
spread of unethical and abusive, as well as privacy-, and
copyright-infringing contents. While defensive algorithms
such as AdvDM and Photoguard have been shown to disrupt
the diffusion process on these images, the misalignment between their objectives and the iterative denoising trajectory
at test time results in weak disruptive performance. In this
work, we present the DDIM Inversion Attack (DIA) that attacks the integrated DDIM trajectory path. Our results support the effective disruption, surpassing previous defensive
methods across various editing methods. We believe that
our frameworks and results can provide practical defense
methods against the malicious use of AI for both the industry and the research community. Our code is available here:
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/DIA13419/.

I : Inversion
E : Edit Method

2

I : DDIM
E : DDIM

0
-2

I : DDIM
E : P2P

-4
-6

I : Null-text
Inversion
E : Proximal
Guidance

-8
-10
-12

I : Direct
Inversion
E : P2P

I : Null-text
Inversion
E : P2P

I : Negative-prompt
Inversion
E : P2P

I : Negative-prompt
Inversion
E : Proximal Guidance

Natural Editing

I : DDIM
E : PnP

AdvDM

Photoguard

DIA-PT (Ours)

DIA-R (Ours)

Figure 1. CLIP similarity score difference between Natural Editing and disruption methods. Our methods DIA-PT/R
demonstrate good semantic disruption performance across various combinations of Inversions and Edits. Lower scores equate to
stronger disruption.

1. Introduction

of large-scale text-to-image latent diffusion models such
as Stable Diffusion. Equipped with classifier-free guidance,
Stable Diffusion has shown extrapolative image generation
capability for unseen and complex prompting [20, 22].
As research continues to enhance the generalization and
fidelity of diffusion-based models in representing data distributions p(x), various downstream applications, including
real image editing, have benefited from these advances [9].
An adjacent, major application is real image editing. Indeed,
real image editing is a long-standing task, where its fundamental goal is to modify the given image according to an arbitrary editing instruction. While the success of an edit can
be attributed to multiple key factors such as disentanglement, edit locality, and cohesiveness [10], identity preservation is by far the most indispensable. Thankfully, through
the deterministic forward diffusing of Denoising Diffusion
Implicit Models (DDIM) inversion [4, 25], one can gain access to a corresponding latent code of the real image, which

Diffusion models have reshaped the way we generate images over the last few years [7, 26]. The artifact of such impact is both evident in the compounding empirical evidence
of their performance paired with solid rooting from thermodynamics [24]. The joint acceleration in diffusion research
and high-quality dataset curation catalyzed the emergence
† Co-authors with equal contributions
⋆ Corresponding author

17994

