This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M DP 3 : A Training-free Approach for List-wise Frame Selection in Video-LLMs

Hui Sun1,2 , Shiyin Lu3 , Huanyu Wang1,2 , Qing-Guo Chen3 ,
Zhao Xu3 , Weihua Luo3 , Kaifu Zhang3 , Ming Li1,2, *
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{sunh, wanghy, lim}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
{running.lsy, qingguo.cqg, changgong.xz, weihua.luowh, kaifu.zkf}@alibaba-inc.com

LLaVA-OneVision in Video-MME (without subtitle)

Abstract

62.5

Video large language models (Video-LLMs) have made significant progress in understanding videos. However, processing multiple frames leads to lengthy visual token sequences, presenting challenges such as the limited context
length cannot accommodate the entire video, and the inclusion of irrelevant frames hinders visual perception. Hence,
effective frame selection is crucial. This paper emphasizes that frame selection should follow three key principles:
query relevance, list-wise diversity, and sequentiality. Existing methods, such as uniform frame sampling and queryframe matching, do not capture all of these principles.
Thus, we propose Markov decision determinantal point process with dynamic programming (M DP3 ) for frame selection, a training-free and model-agnostic method that can be
seamlessly integrated into existing Video-LLMs at test time.
Our method first estimates frame similarities conditioned
on the query using a conditional Gaussian kernel within the
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). We then apply
the determinantal point process (DPP) to the similarity matrix to capture both query relevance and list-wise diversity.
To incorporate sequentiality, we segment the video and apply DPP within each segment, conditioned on the preceding segment selection, modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP) for allocating selection sizes across segments.
Theoretically, M DP3 provides a (1 − 1/e)-approximate solution to the NP-hard list-wise frame selection problem with
pseudo-polynomial time complexity, demonstrating its efficiency. Empirically, M DP3 significantly outperforms existing methods, verifying its effectiveness and robustness.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable performance across various natural language process* Ming Li is the corresponding author.

Overall Accuracy (%)

60.0 59.2
57.5
55.0

+6.0

+3.7

+2.2

+1.7

+6.5
+9.5

52.5
50.0
47.5

Uniform Sampling
M DP 3
Best of Uniform Sampling

45.0
42.5
2 4

8

16

32

#Frames

64

Figure 1. Overall accuracy (%) on Video-MME (without subtitles)
for LLaVA-OneVision, comparing uniform sampling and M DP3
selected from 128 frame candidates.

ing tasks [2, 12, 43, 65]. Concurrently, transformers for visual tasks (e.g., ViT [10]) and cross-modal visual-language
models (VLMs), such as CLIP [44] and BLIP [23], have
advanced rapidly. Riding the waving of LLMs, multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) are transforming the landscape of computer vision globally [37, 50, 55, 56, 59].
MLLMs typically use the visual encoder from VLMs
and a new-trained projector to extract a long sequence of
visual tokens from images. The combined sequence of visual and text tokens is then fed into LLMs for visual understanding [9, 25, 30]. However, a video contains hundreds or even thousands of frames. Directly concatenating sequences from multiple frames and feeding them into
Video-LLMs poses several challenges: 1) LLMs’ limited
context length can not accommodate excessively long visual
sequences; 2) Redundant and duplicate frames can hinder
visual perception, as irrelevant frames may cause “lost-inthe-middle” issues [33, 70]. 3) Edge-deployed LLMs face
resource constraints when processing overly long input sequence, and 4) Proprietary models charge based on token
usage, making excessive frame input costly.
As shown in the empirical example in Fig. 1, the blue line

24090

