This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ClearSight: Human Vision-Inspired Solutions for Event-Based
Motion Deblurring
Xiaopeng Lin* , Yulong Huang* , Hongwei Ren, Zunchang Liu, Hongxiang Huang,
Yue Zhou, Haotian Fu, Bojun Cheng†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{xlin746, yhuang496, hren066, zliu361, hhuang516, yzhou883, hfu373}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
bocheng@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Motion deblurring addresses the challenge of image blur
caused by camera or scene movement. Event cameras
provide motion information that is encoded in the asynchronous event streams. To efficiently leverage the temporal information of event streams, we employ Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) for motion feature extraction and Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) for color information processing. Due to the non-uniform distribution and inherent
redundancy of event data, existing cross-modal feature fusion methods exhibit certain limitations. Inspired by the visual attention mechanism in the human visual system, this
study introduces a bioinspired dual-drive hybrid network
(BDHNet). Specifically, the Neuron Configurator Module
(NCM) is designed to dynamically adjust neuron configurations based on cross-modal features, thereby focusing the
spikes in blurry regions and adapting to varying blurry scenarios dynamically. Additionally, the Region of Blurry Attention Module (RBAM) is introduced to generate a blurry
mask in an unsupervised manner, effectively extracting motion clues from the event features and guiding more accurate cross-modal feature fusion. Extensive subjective and
objective evaluations demonstrate that our method outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

Figure 1. The working mechanism of human visual system after
receiving visual stimuli and the proposed bioinspired dual-drive
hybrid network. The visual attention in visual cortex consists of
the neuron-based (Pink) and synapse-based attention (Green) [14].
More details are provided in the supplementary material.

for the blur characteristics with enhanced performance, including traditional approaches [2, 10] and learning-based
approaches [6, 8, 30]. However, deblurring methods that
rely solely on conventional frame-based cameras frequently
face performance constraints due to the absence of essential
motion information. These limitations are particularly pronounced under adverse lighting conditions and during the
capture of rapidly moving objects.

1. Introduction

Drawing inspiration from biological systems, eventbased cameras introduce an innovative paradigm for visual
data acquisition [4, 12]. Event camera captures changes in
brightness in high temporal resolution that naturally emphasize high-contrast edges [32, 33]. The explicit contrast edge
information and the implicit temporal correlation among
the event streams help to recover details lost in blurry images [20, 37]. Effective integration of event streams and
frame-based images requires the precise extraction of mo-

Motion blurring primarily occurs due to the movement of
either the camera or the moving objects during the sensor’s
exposure period [17, 18]. Deblurring is a critical task focused on recovering a sharp image with clear details from
the motion-blurred counterpart. Several image-based deblurring approaches have been developed to compensate
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7462

