This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Ensembling Gaussian Splatting for Few-Shot Novel View Synthesis
Chen Zhao1

Xuan Wang2 Tong Zhang14 Saqib Javed1 Mathieu Salzmann13
1
EPFL 2 Ant Group 3 Swiss Data Science Center
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

GT

GS

CoR-GS

SE-GS

Figure 1. Qualitative results of our SE-GS and state-of-the-art approaches. The models are trained on sparse views and the images
rendered from novel views are shown. As highlighted in the zoomed-in patches, our SE-GS captures finer details and produces fewer
artifacts for novel views when trained on few-shot images.

Abstract

Experimental results on the LLFF, Mip-NeRF360, DTU,
and MVImgNet datasets demonstrate that our approach enhances NVS quality under few-shot training conditions, outperforming existing state-of-the-art methods. The code is
released at: https://sailor-z.github.io/projects/SEGS.html.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in novel view synthesis (NVS). However,
3DGS tends to overfit when trained with sparse views, limiting its generalization to novel viewpoints. In this paper, we address this overfitting issue by introducing SelfEnsembling Gaussian Splatting (SE-GS). We achieve selfensembling by incorporating an uncertainty-aware perturbation strategy during training. A ∆-model and a Σ-model
are jointly trained on the available images. The ∆-model
is dynamically perturbed based on rendering uncertainty
across training steps, generating diverse perturbed models
with negligible computational overhead. Discrepancies between the Σ-model and these perturbed models are minimized throughout training, forming a robust ensemble of
3DGS models. This ensemble, represented by the Σ-model,
is then used to generate novel-view images during inference.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) is a critical task [52] in computer vision and graphics, playing a pivotal role in applications such as virtual reality [8], augmented reality [53],
and 3D content generation [15, 44]. The objective of NVS
is to generate photo-realistic images from previously unseen
viewpoints. Typically, NVS starts by constructing a 3D representation [29, 41] from a set of existing 2D observations.
In recent years, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [6, 20, 48]
has emerged as a powerful representation, integrating the

4940

