This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Less is More: Empowering GUI Agent with Context-Aware Simplification
Gongwei Chen1 , Xurui Zhou1 , Rui Shao1†, Yibo Lyu1 , Kaiwen Zhou2 ,
Shuai Wang2 , Wentao Li2 , Yinchuan Li2 , Zhongang Qi2 , Liqiang Nie1†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
chengongwei@hit.edu.cn

shaorui@hit.edu.cn

nieliqiang@gmail.com

Abstract
MLLM

The research focus of GUI agents is shifting from textdependent to pure-vision-based approaches, which, though
promising, prioritize comprehensive pre-training data collection while neglecting contextual modeling challenges.
We probe the characteristics of element and history contextual modeling in GUI agent and summarize: 1) the
high-density and loose-relation of element context highlight the existence of many unrelated elements and their
negative influence; 2) the high redundancy of history context reveals the inefficient history modeling in current GUI
agents. In this work, we propose a context-aware simplification framework for building an efficient and effective GUI Agent, termed SimpAgent. To mitigate potential
interference from numerous unrelated elements, we introduce a masking-based element pruning method that circumvents the intractable relation modeling through an efficient masking mechanism. To reduce the redundancy in
historical information, we devise a consistency-guided history compression module, which enhances implicit LLMbased compression through innovative explicit guidance,
achieving an optimal balance between performance and efficiency. With the above components, SimpAgent reduces
27% FLOPs and achieves superior GUI navigation performances. Comprehensive navigation experiments across
diverse web and mobile environments demonstrate the effectiveness and potential of our agent. Code at https:
//github.com/JiuTian-VL/SimpAgent.

Large Scale
Pre-training Data

Navigation
Data

Action

(a) Existing pure-vision-based agent
Distributions

Sampling

Masking

Navigation
Data

Element Pruning

MLLM
History Current
Consistency + Action

(b) Our SimpAgent
Figure 1. Compared to the large-scale pre-training scheme, we
investigate the contextual modeling and propose an efficient training framework with element and history context simplification and
additional consistency guidance. The resulting SimpAgent can
achieve superior performance with 27% FLOPs reduction.

simply by analyzing the screenshots [11, 45, 53, 55]. These
pure-vision-based GUI agents are implemented through either modular agent frameworks [11, 44, 45, 54] or end-toend agent models [6, 55, 61]. Due to the significant gap
between natural images and GUI screenshots, current purevision-based GUI agents primarily pursue comprehensive,
high-quality pre-training data for improving GUI comprehension ability, which is very valuable but not computationfriendly, as shown in Figure 1.
Despite their advancements, building a powerful GUI
agent still suffers from significant challenges related to contextual modeling. We analyze the characteristics of element
and history contexts to uncover the underlying challenges.
1) The high-density and loose-relation of element context. The statistical results in Figure 2 indicate that the
number of elements per screenshot can reach dozens or even
hundreds. These elements are not tightly integrated [28],
unrelated elements may inadvertently affect each other’s
functionality or appearance, hindering the comprehension
of critical elements, empirically verified in Table 1. 2) The
high redundancy of history context. Introducing historical observations will increase the computational overhead

1. Introduction
Many current GUI agents [2, 7, 22, 32–34, 50, 59] make
decisions on textual representations of the environments,
such as HTML and accessibility trees, which often require
system-level permissions and are often lengthy, noisy, limited scalability [6, 63]. An appealing and promising direction is using Multimodal Large language models (MLLMs)
to develop GUI agents capable of performing complex tasks
† Corresponding authors

5901

