This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Differentiable Wave Optics Model for End-to-End Computational Imaging
System Optimization
Chi-Jui Ho

Yash Belhe

Steve Rotenberg Ravi Ramamoorthi Tzu-Mao Li
University of California, San Diego

Nicholas Antipa

{chh009, ybelhe, srotenberg, ravir, tzli, nantipa}@ucsd.edu

Abstract

Lens Architecture from
End-to-End Optimization

End-to-end optimization, which integrates differentiable optics simulators with computational algorithms, enables the
joint design of hardware and software for data-driven imaging systems. However, existing methods usually compromise physical accuracy by neglecting wave optics or offaxis effects due to the high computational cost of modeling both aberration and diffraction. This limitation raises
concerns about the robustness of optimized designs. In this
paper, we propose a differentiable optics simulator that accurately and efficiently models aberration and diffraction in
compound optics and allows us to analyze the role and impact of diffraction in end-to-end optimization. Experimental results demonstrate that compared with ray-optics-based
optimization, diffraction-aware optimization improves system robustness to diffraction blur. Through accurate wave
optics modeling, we also apply the simulator to optimize
the Fizeau interferometer and freeform optics elements.
These findings underscore the importance of accurate wave
optics modeling in robust end-to-end optimization. Our
code is publicly available at: https://github.com/
JerryHoTaiwan/DeepWaveOptics

Wave-trained
Ray-trained

Reconstruction Results

RMSE
LPIPS

Wave-trained

Ray-trained

0.0697
0.339

0.0811
0.510

Figure 1. End-to-end optimized lens architectures and reconstruction models using ray and wave optics. By taking diffraction into account, our wave-trained model yields sharper reconstruction results than the baseline using ray optics.

1. Introduction

and analyzing how the fidelity of optics simulation impacts
overall system optimization. Realistic modeling requires
accounting for diffraction across the entire sensor, which
is computationally expensive. Thus, many designs neglect
diffraction and adopt ray optics [5, 24, 32]. Some simulators consider simplified diffraction using thin-phase surfaces [22, 29] or shift-invariance [2, 9, 23], limiting applicability to multi-element or compound optics. Although recent frameworks model more realistic wave optics [4, 33],
their accuracy and efficiency in different configurations remain questionable, and the significance of wave optic effects on system optimization remains an open problem.
In this paper, we propose an accurate, efficient, and differentiable optics simulator, which uses ray tracing with the
Rayleigh-Sommerfield integral [7] to model diffraction and
off-axis aberrations in compound optical systems without
thin-phase or paraxial approximations. To effectively model
diffraction in large FoVs, we use an interpolation method to
approximate the measurements with a subset of point spread
functions (PSFs). By providing accurate and efficient wave
optics rendering, the proposed simulator enables us to incorporate diffraction into end-to-end optimization and analyze
its role and impact on imaging system design.
Unlike systems optimized solely under ray optics assumptions, our wave optics model guides the system to a

The interdependence between optics and downstream algorithms is pivotal in imaging system design. To leverage this
interdependence and achieve joint designs, end-to-end differentiable models, which incorporate a differentiable optics simulator and a computer vision algorithm, have been
applied to simultaneously optimize hardware and software
across a range of vision tasks [5, 18, 22–25, 31, 32]. Given
an image, the differentiable simulator models the corresponding measurement taken by the optics system, and the
computer vision algorithm extracts semantic information.
With a differentiable simulator and algorithm, a loss function scores task performance and drives the optimization of
the optics and algorithm parameters via backpropagation.
A notable challenge in end-to-end optimization is incorporating wave optics effects in large field-of-view (FoV)

28042

