This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OuroMamba: A Data-Free Quantization Framework for Vision Mamba
Akshat Ramachandrang∗ , Mingyu Leeg *, Huan Xug , Souvik Kundui , Tushar Krishnag
g
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA i Intel Labs, USA
{akshat.r, mlee864, hxu398}@gatech.edu, tushar@ece.gatech.edu
souvikk.kundu@intel.com
0.0

(a) Input image

1.0

(b) Distribution of normalized
values

(c) Raw-Attention with
original state

(d) Ours: Raw-Attention with
enhanced state

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of VMM implicit attention. (a) Sample input image. (b) Normalized distribution of the input gate values
(∆). Visualization of implicit attention [1] using (c) the original state (h) and (d) the proposed patched state (hp ), which incorporates
spatial dependencies through patched neighborhood interactions.

Abstract

1. Introduction
The sub-quadratic compute alternative of the vision State
space models (SSMs) [9], particularly vision mamba models (VMMs) [49] has made them a promising alternative to
ViTs [8]. Like ViTs, larger VMM variants face deployment
challenges due to high memory and latency constraints [24].
Quantization [5, 34, 36, 46] is a popular method to
tackle the high memory and latency demand by mapping
full-precision (FP) weights and/or activations to lower-bit
representations. In particular, post-training quantization
(PTQ) [21, 34, 37] converts a pre-trained FP model to lowprecision and requires calibration on a small dataset [34]
to recover model performance. However, PTQ’s calibration
data is typically drawn from the original training dataset,
potentially restricting its applicability in situations demanding privacy, security of training set [20, 47].
Consequently, data-free quantization (DFQ), a subset of
post-training quantization (PTQ) has emerged as a promising alternative. DFQ allows calibration via generating synthetic data from Gaussian noise [19, 25, 26, 34] mimicking the distribution of the original train-set. In particular,
DFQ for ViTs primarily rely on the distinctive response of
self-attention to noise and real data to generate synthetic
data [26, 34]. However, despite their significant progress
for ViTs, DFQ techniques for VMM remains largely unexplored. Interestingly, VMM’s recurrent state transition in
the S6 layer [9] lacks an explicit self-attention mechanism
[2, 33], limiting the usage of any attention based patch sim-

We present OuroMamba, the first data-free post-training
quantization (DFQ) method for vision Mamba-based models (VMMs). We identify two key challenges in enabling
DFQ for VMMs, (1) VMM’s recurrent state transitions restricts the capturing of long-range interactions and leads
to semantically weak synthetic data, (2) VMM activations exhibit dynamic outlier variations across time-steps,
rendering existing static PTQ techniques ineffective. To
address these challenges, OuroMamba presents a twostage framework: (1) OuroMamba-Gen to generate semantically rich and meaningful synthetic data. It applies contrastive learning on patch level VMM features
generated through neighborhood interactions in the latent state space, (2) OuroMamba-Quant to employ mixedprecision quantization with lightweight dynamic outlier detection. In specific, we present a thresholding based outlier channel selection strategy for activations that is updated every time-step. Extensive experiments across vision
and generative tasks show that our data-free OuroMamba
surpasses existing data-driven PTQ techniques, achieving
state-of-the-art performance across diverse quantization
settings. Additionally, we implement efficient GPU kernels to achieve practical latency speedup of up to 2.36×.
Code and synthetic dataset are available here: https:
//github.com/georgia- tech- synergy- lab/
ICCV-OuroMamba.
* Equal Contribution Authors

21177

