This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Democratizing Text-to-Image Masked Generative Models with Compact
Text-Aware One-Dimensional Tokens
Dongwon Kim*†1,2 Ju He*1 Qihang Yu*1
Chenglin Yang1 Xiaohui Shen1 Suha Kwak2 Liang-Chieh Chen1
1
2
ByteDance Seed
POSTECH
https://tacju.github.io/projects/maskgen

Abstract
Image tokenizers form the foundation of modern text-toimage generative models but are notoriously difficult to train.
Furthermore, most existing text-to-image models rely on
large-scale, high-quality private datasets, making them challenging to replicate. In this work, we introduce Text-Aware
Transformer-based 1-Dimensional Tokenizer (TA-TiTok), an
efficient and powerful image tokenizer that can utilize either discrete or continuous 1-dimensional tokens. TA-TiTok
uniquely integrates textual information during the tokenizer
decoding stage (i.e., de-tokenization), accelerating convergence and enhancing performance. TA-TiTok also benefits
from a simplified, yet effective, one-stage training process,
eliminating the need for the complex two-stage distillation
used in previous 1-dimensional tokenizers. This design allows for seamless scalability to large datasets. Building
on this, we introduce a family of text-to-image Masked
Generative Models (MaskGen), trained exclusively on open
data while achieving comparable performance to models
trained on private data. We aim to release both the efficient,
strong TA-TiTok tokenizers and the open-data, open-weight
MaskGen models to promote broader access and democratize the field of text-to-image masked generative models.

1. Introduction
In recent years, text-to-image generation has seen remarkable progress across various frameworks, including diffusion models [20, 27, 48–50, 53, 64], autoregressive visual
models [23, 46, 47, 57, 58], and masked generative models [5, 10, 21]. A crucial component of these models is
a robust image tokenizer—either discrete [61] or continuous [33]—which transforms images into tokenized representations. These models then incorporate text conditions with
∗ Equal contribution. † Work done as a research intern at ByteDance.

the tokenized representations using methods such as crossattention [49], concatenation [6], or conditioning embeddings [41], ultimately leveraging the tokenizer to generate
high-quality images aligned with input text prompts.
Despite these advancements, replicating these models remains challenging due to the substantial resources required.
Model sizes have grown from millions to billions of parameters, leading to prohibitively high training and inference
costs. Furthermore, many of these models rely on large-scale,
high-quality proprietary image-text datasets, which are critical for achieving high-fidelity generation but prevent the
research community from fully reproducing results. Given
these obstacles, a pivotal question arises: Can we develop
a text-to-image generative model that is both efficient and
effective using only open data, enabling reproducibility?
In this work, we address this question by building on
the recent concept of compact one-dimensional tokenizers
to facilitate both efficient and high-quality image tokenization. Traditional tokenizers [19, 33, 61] rely on 2D gridbased latent representations, which struggle to handle the
inherent redundancies in images, as neighboring patches often display similarities. Recently, Yu et al. [69] introduced
the Transformer-based 1-Dimensional Tokenizer (TiTok),
which efficiently tokenizes images into compact 1D latent
sequences by removing the fixed correspondence between
latent representation and 2D image patches (i.e., each 1D
token can represent any region in an image, rather than being
tied to a specific patch). This approach results in a highly
efficient tokenizer, significantly improving sampling speed
compared to previous methods [9, 19, 41, 61].
However, extending TiTok to support text-to-image generation presents three main challenges: (1) its reliance on a
complex two-stage training pipeline, which limits scalability
to larger datasets necessary for diverse text-to-image generation beyond ImageNet [15]; (2) its restriction to a VectorQuantized (VQ) variant, leaving unexplored the potential
benefits of a continuous Variational Autoencoder (VAE) representation; and (3) its focus on reconstructing low-level image details, which may lack the high-level semantics needed

18442

