This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable and Expressive One-Shot Video Head Swapping
Chaonan Ji

Jinwei Qi

Peng Zhang Bang Zhang
Alibaba Group

Liefeng Bo

Figure 1. Qualitative results of our method. Given a reference image and video sequence as input, our model can generate high-fidelity
head swapping results that accommodate diverse hairstyles, expressions, and identities.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel diffusion-based multicondition controllable framework for video head swapping,
which seamlessly transplants a human head from a static
image into a dynamic video, while preserving the original
body and background of target video, and further allowing
to tweak head expressions and movements during swapping
as needed. Existing face-swapping methods mainly focus on
localized facial replacement neglecting holistic head morphology, while head-swapping approaches struggling with
hairstyle diversity and complex backgrounds, and none of
these methods allow users to modify the transplanted head’s
expressions after swapping. To tackle these challenges, our
method incorporates several innovative strategies through
a unified latent diffusion paradigm. 1) Identity-preserving

context fusion: We propose a shape-agnostic mask strategy
to explicitly disentangle foreground head identity features
from background/body contexts, combining hair enhancement strategy to achieve robust holistic head identity preservation across diverse hair types and complex backgrounds.
2) Expression-aware landmark retargeting and editing: We
propose a disentangled 3DMM-driven retargeting module
that decouples identity, expression, and head poses, minimizing the impact of original expressions in input images
and supporting expression editing. While a scale-aware
retargeting strategy is further employed to minimize crossidentity expression distortion for higher transfer precision.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method excels in
seamless background integration while preserving the identity of the source portrait, as well as showcasing superior
expression transfer capabilities applicable to both real and

10239

