This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DEPTHOR: Depth Enhancement from a Practical Light-Weight
dToF Sensor and RGB Image
Jijun Xiang1 , Xuan Zhu1 , Xianqi Wang1 ,
Yu Wang2 , Hong Zhang2 , Fei Guo2 , Xin Yang1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Honor Device Co., Ltd
{jijunx, xuanzhu, xianqiw, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn
{wangyu24, zhanghong70, guofei2}@honor.com

Figure 1. Depth predictions based on practical dToF data. The results from left to right are: a lightweight PENet [12], PENet with our
training strategy, and our method. Our training strategy improves the performance of existing methods on real-world data. Our method,
with the proposed training strategy and depth completion network, further refines predictions in challenging regions.

Abstract

dataset, our training strategy significantly enhances depth
completion models, achieving results comparable to depth
super-resolution methods, while our model achieves stateof-the-art results, improving Rel and RMSE by 27% and
18%, respectively. On a more challenging set of dToF samples we collected, our method outperforms SOTA methods
on preliminary stereo-based GT, improving Rel and RMSE
by 23% and 22%, respectively. Our Code is available at
https://github.com/ShadowBbBb/Depthor

Depth enhancement, which uses RGB images as guidance
to convert raw signals from dToF into high-precision, dense
depth maps, is a critical task in computer vision. Although
existing super-resolution-based methods show promising
results on public datasets, they often rely on idealized assumptions like accurate region correspondences and reliable dToF inputs, overlooking calibration errors that cause
misalignment and anomaly signals inherent to dToF imaging, limiting real-world applicability. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel completion-based method,
named DEPTHOR, featuring advances in both the training strategy and model architecture. First, we propose
a method to simulate real-world dToF data from the accurate ground truth in synthetic datasets to enable noiserobust training. Second, we design a novel network that incorporates monocular depth estimation (MDE), leveraging
global depth relationships and contextual information to
improve prediction in challenging regions. On the ZJU-L5

1. Introduction
The direct Time-of-Flight (dToF) sensor is a depth sensor
that measures depth by calculating the time it takes for emitted light pulses to reflect off objects and return to the sensor.
With advantages like miniaturization and low power consumption, dToF sensors are widely deployed on mobile devices for applications like autofocus and obstacle detection
† Corresponding author.

6101

