This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perceive, Understand and Restore: Real-World Image Super-Resolution with
Autoregressive Multimodal Generative Models
Hongyang Wei1,3,∗ , Shuaizheng Liu2,3,∗ , Chun Yuan1,† , Lei Zhang2,3,†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute

1

Abstract
By leveraging the generative priors from pre-trained
text-to-image diffusion models, significant progress has
been made in real-world image super-resolution (RealISR). However, these methods tend to generate inaccurate
and unnatural reconstructions in complex and/or heavily
degraded scenes, primarily due to their limited perception
and understanding capability of the input low-quality image. To address these limitations, we propose, for the first
time to our knowledge, to adapt the pre-trained autoregressive multimodal model such as Lumina-mGPT into a robust Real-ISR model, namely PURE, which Perceives and
Understands the input low-quality image, then REstores its
high-quality counterpart. Specifically, we implement instruction tuning on Lumina-mGPT to perceive degradation
levels and inter-token dependencies, understand content via
semantic description generation, and ultimately restore the
image by generating high-quality image tokens autoregressively with the collected information. In addition, we reveal that the image token entropy reflects the image structure and present a entropy-based Top-k sampling strategy
to optimize the local structure of the image during inference. Experimental results demonstrate that PURE preserves image content while generating realistic details, especially in complex scenes with multiple objects, showcasing the potential of autoregressive multimodal generative
models for robust Real-ISR. The model and code are available at https://github.com/nonwhy/PURE.

1. Introduction
Real-world image super-resolution (Real-ISR) is a challenging task in computer vision, aiming to reconstruct highquality (HQ) images from low-quality (LQ) inputs degraded by complex combinations of factors such as blur,
∗ Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Authors. This work is supported by the PolyU-OPPO
Joint Innovative Research Center.

noise, downsampling, etc. Traditional discriminative image
restoration methods [6, 8, 17, 18, 55] are typically designed
for optimizing image fidelity using L1 or L2 losses, tending
to produce over-smoothed results. While generative adversarial network (GAN [10])-based approaches [14, 37] can
generate more visually appealing details, they suffer from
unstable training and unnatural visual artifacts.
The recently developed large-scale pre-trained text-toimage (T2I) generation models, such as Stable Diffusion
(SD) [1], have enabled more effective modeling of the complex distribution of natural images, and researchers have
proposed to leverage the powerful T2I generative priors
to achieve more perceptually realistic Real-ISR outcomes.
Many SD-based methods [26] adopt a ControlNet [53] architecture, extracting features from the LQ image as control signals to guide the generation of HQ image from random noise. Meanwhile, methods have also been proposed
to extract semantic information, such as tags [45], short captions [49] and long descriptions [50], from the LQ image to
help the SD model synthesizing more visual details. Onestep diffusion-based Real-ISR methods [4, 29, 44] have also
been proposed, which directly take the LQ image as input
and finetune the SD model using LoRA [11] techniques.
Despite the significant progress achieved in SD-based
Real-ISR, the existing models exhibit certain limitations,
particularly in handling complex scenes with multiple objects or severe degradation. First, they may lack global understanding of the image content, leading to the generation
of semantically inaccurate details. As shown in Fig. 1a,
the state-of-the-art models SeeSR [45] and OSEDiff [44]
misidentify buildings as cliffs, leading to incorrect restoration of the scene. Second, existing models lack strong perception of the local structural relationships in natural images, leading to semantically coherent but physically unnatural appearance. As shown in Fig. 1b, SeeSR and OSEDiff
erroneously synthesize the lion’s tongue with fur. These
limitations highlight the need for a new Real-ISR model,
which can simultaneously perceive, understand and restore
the image with complex contents.
The recent advances in autoregressive multimodal large

18640

