This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CVFusion: Cross-View Fusion of 4D Radar and Camera for 3D Object Detection
Hanzhi Zhong Zhiyu Xiang* Ruoyu Xu Jingyun Fu Peng Xu
Shaohong Wang Zhihao Yang Tianyu Pu Eryun Liu
Zhejiang University, China
{zhonghanzhi, xiangzy, xuruoyu, fujingyu, xxxupeng, wangsh0111, 22431145, 3190105835, eryunliu}@zju.edu.cn

4D Radar
BEV Fusion

Image

Point Features

Backbone

4D radar has received significant attention in autonomous
driving thanks to its robustness under adverse weathers.
Due to the sparse points and noisy measurements of the 4D
radar, most of the research perform the 3D object detection task by integrating images from camera and perform
modality fusion in BEV space. However, the potential of the
radar and the fusion mechanism is still largely unexplored,
hindering the performance improvement. In this study, we
propose a cross-view two-stage fusion network called CVFusion. In the first stage, we design a radar guided iterative (RGIter) BEV fusion module to generate high-recall 3D
proposal boxes. In the second stage, we aggregate features
from multiple heterogeneous views including points, image,
and BEV for each proposal. These comprehensive instance
level features greatly help refine the proposals and generate high-quality predictions. Extensive experiments on public datasets show that our method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods by a large margin, with 9.10%
and 3.68% mAP improvements on View-of-Delft (VoD) and
TJ4DRadSet, respectively. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/zhzhzhzhzhz/CVFusion.

(a) Current method

Abstract

Output

FV Features
BEV Features
Proposal Boxes

Stage1

Stage2
RGIter
BEV Fusion

Image

Backbone

(b) Ours

4D Radar

Output

Multiple-View Cross Fusion

Figure 1. Comparison between the current method and our twostage pipeline. We introduce stage2 to aggregate multiple-view
features and refine the proposals. In the stage1, we introduce radar
guided iterative BEV fusion to produce high quality proposals.

1. Introduction

over, radar’s measurements are much noisier than that of
LiDAR due to the multipath effect of the millimeter wave.
Therefore, relying solely on 4D radar for 3D object detection is less satisfactory. Most of the current research focus
on fusing the 4D radar with images from a camera to improve the detection performance.

3D object detection is a vital perception task for autonomous vehicles. In recent years 4D millimeter-wave
radar has received significant attention thanks to its robustness under adverse environments, such as rainy, foggy and
snowy weathers. Comparing with the traditional 3D radar
which only provides azimuthal, range, and Doppler velocity measurements, 4D radar is capable of acquiring an extra valuable elevation measurement, producing similar 3D
point clouds like LiDAR. However, the point cloud of 4D
radar is highly sparse compared to the LiDAR, with point
number of 0.1k∼2k/frame versus 10k∼100k/frame. More-

Current 4D radar and camera fusion works [33, 39] adopt
one-stage pipeline and transform the features of the two
modalities separately into a unified BEV space for fusion,
as shown in Fig. 1(a). Although compact and effective,
this pipeline suffers from the feature misalignment problem.
Due to the depth ambiguity of the monocular images, position drift happens when transforming the front-view (FV)
feature of the image to the BEV view. Meanwhile, unlike
LiDAR, the sparse and noisy radar points are not able to
provide sufficient and precise 3D information for the images. Therefore, directly concatenating BEV features of the
radar and camera will inevitably cause misalignments, especially for small objects, resulting in position drift of the
predictions and false positives.

* Corresponding author.

28188

