This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Amodal Depth Anything: Amodal Depth Estimation in the Wild
Zhenyu Li1 , Mykola Lavreniuk2 , Jian Shi1 , Shariq Farooq Bhat1 , Peter Wonka1
1
KAUST, 2 Space Research Institute NASU-SSAU

Figure 1. Amodal Depth Estimation in the Wild. For each image, we present the amodal depth estimation with the target object outlined
in black. Our model demonstrates strong generalization across diverse scenes, including both indoor and outdoor environments for accurate
depth estimation for occluded parts of objects. Best viewed in color.

Abstract

two complementary frameworks: Amodal-DAV2, a deterministic model based on Depth Anything V2, and AmodalDepthFM, a generative model that integrates conditional
flow matching principles. Our proposed frameworks effectively leverage the capabilities of large pre-trained models
with minimal modifications to achieve high-quality amodal
depth predictions (Fig. 1). Experiments validate our design
choices, demonstrating the flexibility of our models in generating diverse, plausible depth structures for occluded regions. Our method achieves a 50.7% improvement in RMSE
over the previous SoTA on the ADIW dataset.

Amodal depth estimation aims to predict the depth of
occluded (invisible) parts of objects in a scene. This task
addresses the question of whether models can effectively
perceive the geometry of occluded regions based on visible
cues. Prior methods primarily rely on synthetic datasets
and focus on metric depth estimation, limiting their generalization to real-world settings due to domain shifts and
scalability challenges. In this paper, we propose a novel
formulation of amodal depth estimation in the wild, focusing on relative depth prediction to improve model generalization across diverse natural images. We introduce a new
large-scale dataset, Amodal Depth In the Wild (ADIW), created using a scalable pipeline that leverages segmentation
datasets and compositing techniques. Depth maps are generated using large pre-trained depth models, and a scaleand-shift alignment strategy is employed to refine and blend
depth predictions, ensuring consistency in ground-truth annotations. To tackle the amodal depth task, we present

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a foundational task in
computer vision and generative modeling [5, 10, 27] as
it provides depth perception from a single image without stereo cues. However, while recent methods, e.g.
[2, 4, 10, 23, 46], focus solely on estimating depth for visible pixels, humans can intuitively perceive the complete 3D

9673

