This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ULTHO: Ultra-Lightweight yet Efficient Hyperparameter Optimization in
Deep Reinforcement Learning
1

Mingqi Yuan1 , Bo Li1 , Xin Jin2,3 *, Wenjun Zeng2,3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
Ningbo Key Laboratory of Spatial Intelligence and Digital Derivative, Ningbo, China
Abstract

Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is a billion-dollar
problem in machine learning, which significantly impacts
the training efficiency and model performance. However, achieving efficient and robust HPO in deep reinforcement learning (RL) is consistently challenging due to its
high non-stationarity and computational cost. To tackle
this problem, existing approaches attempt to adapt common HPO techniques (e.g., population-based training or
Bayesian optimization) to the RL scenario. However, they
remain sample-inefficient and computationally expensive,
which cannot facilitate a wide range of applications. In
this paper, we propose ULTHO, an ultra-lightweight yet
powerful framework for fast HPO in deep RL within single runs. Specifically, we formulate the HPO process as a
multi-armed bandit with clustered arms (MABC) and link
it directly to long-term return optimization. ULTHO also
provides a quantified and statistical perspective to filter the
HPs efficiently. We test ULTHO on benchmarks including
ALE, Procgen, MiniGrid, and PyBullet. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the ULTHO can achieve superior
performance with a simple architecture, contributing to the
development of advanced and automated RL systems. Our
code is available at the GitHub repository1 .

Figure 1. Aggregated performance comparison on the Procgen benchmark with procedurally-generated environments. The
choice of batch size significantly impacts the agent’s performance.
ULTHO can effectively perform HPO across different tasks and
learning stages, thereby improving the overall performance.

have been devoted to improving the design choices [20, 28–
30] and implementation details [3, 31, 51, 67], RL-specific
hyperparameter optimization (HPO) does not receive sufficient attention in the community. This gap is particularly
notable given the high sensitivity of deep RL algorithms to
HPs, which restricts their broader applications and the development of advanced and automated RL systems [24].
HPO is a fundamental problem in machine learning, with
traditional methods like grid search [64] and random search
[11] being widely used to automate the process. More
advanced techniques, such as Bayesian optimization [56]
and multi-fidelity approaches like Hyperband [39], have
been developed to improve efficiency by leveraging surrogate models and early stopping mechanisms. However,
these methods are primarily designed for static optimization
problems, where the optimal HPs remain fixed throughout
the training process. In contrast, deep RL operates in nonstationary environments where the optimal HPs may vary
across different training stages, especially in dynamic environments such as Procgen [16] and Craftax [44]. This non-

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has propelled significant
advancements across various fields, such as game playing
[46, 55, 60], chip design [25], algorithm innovation [22, 43],
and large language model (LLM) [6, 12, 41, 47]. However,
training deep RL agents involves a number of design decisions and hyperparameter configurations, in which minor
variations can result in substantial effects on learning efficiency and final performance [19]. While many efforts
* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/yuanmingqi/ULTHO

2620

