This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SweetTok: Semantic-Aware Spatial-Temporal Tokenizer for Compact Video
Discretization
Zhentao Tan*, Ben Xue*, Jian Jia, Junhao Wang, Wencai Ye, Shaoyun Shi, Mingjie Sun
Wenjin Wu, Quan Chen†, Peng Jiang
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
{tanzhentao03, xueben, jiajian, wangjunhao05, yewencai, shishaoyun,
sunmingjie, wuwenjin, chenquan06, jiangpeng}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
This paper presents the Semantic-aWarE spatialtEmporal Tokenizer (SweetTok), a novel video tokenizer
to overcome the limitations in current video tokenization
methods for compacted yet effective discretization. Unlike previous approaches that process flattened local visual
patches via direct discretization or adaptive query tokenization, SweetTok proposes a decoupling framework, compressing visual inputs through distinct spatial and temporal queries via Decoupled Query AutoEncoder (DQAE).
This design allows SweetTok to efficiently compress video
token count while achieving superior fidelity by capturing essential information across spatial and temporal dimensions. Furthermore, we design a Motion-enhanced
Language Codebook (MLC) tailored for spatial and temporal compression to address the differences in semantic
representation between appearance and motion information. SweetTok significantly improves video reconstruction
results by 42.8% w.r.t rFVD on UCF-101 dataset. With
a better token compression strategy, it also boosts downstream video generation results by 15.1% w.r.t gFVD. Additionally, the compressed decoupled tokens are imbued with
semantic information, enabling few-shot recognition capabilities powered by LLMs in downstream applications.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of our framework. We build a compact visual latent space by reducing token count in a decoupled style and
leveraging motion-enhanced semantic text embedding. The encoded tokens can be applied to downstream tasks, such as generation and understanding.

Compression ratio and reconstruction fidelity are vital
criteria for evaluating a tokenizer. Recent visual tokenizers, especially video tokenizers [1, 2, 41] typically retain a
low compression ratio. This is because visual tokens are
usually derived from 2D patches [12] or 3D tubes [2, 14]
which preserve location relationships (e.g., each token corresponds to a specific region of input [51]), leading to redundancy in both spatial and temporal dimensions. Most
recent work LARP [3] quantizes the flattened video patches
through adaptive holistic queries to achieve high compression ratio. However, it is observed that directly flattening

Visual tokenizers [1–3, 8, 14, 39, 41, 49] are emerging as essential components in the field of modern computer vision
models, particularly in the generation [1, 14, 46] and understanding [17, 26, 35, 42, 43] of vision data. These tools convert visual inputs into discrete tokens, capturing essential
temporal and spatial features that facilitate advanced analysis by formulating visual-related tasks as a token prediction
process.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

23541

