This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Identiﬁcation of Protein Compositions and Conformations via
Implicit Content-Transformation Disentanglement
Mostofa Raﬁd Uddin

Jana Armouti

Min Xu*

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
mru@andrew.cmu.edu

jarmouti@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

mxu1@cs.cmu.edu

a range of experimental and computational methods separately addressed protein composition and conformation
[24, 29, 38, 46]. Now, with the emerging technology of
cellular cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET), it is, in principle, possible to simultaneously determine diverse protein
compositions and conformations through direct 3D visualization inside cells [50]. In this paper, we pursue the ambitious goal of identifying diverse protein compositions and
conformations from such data using a fully unsupervised,
data-driven approach.

Identifying different protein compositions and conformations from microscopic images of protein mixtures is a challenging open problem. We address this through disentangled representation learning, where separating protein
compositions and conformations in an intermediate latent
space enables accurate identiﬁcation. By modeling compositions and conformations as content and transformation,
the task can be reduced to disentangling content and transformation. The existing disentangling methods require an
explicit parametric form for the transformation, which is
unavailable for conformation, making these methods unsuitable. To overcome this limitation, we propose DualContrast, a novel contrastive learning-based method that
implicitly parameterizes and disentangles both transformation and content. DualContrast achieves this by generating
positive and negative pairs for content and transformation
in both data and latent spaces. We demonstrate that existing
self-supervised approaches fail under similar implicit parameterization, underscoring the necessity of our method.
Through extensive experiments on 3D microscopic images
of protein mixtures and additional shape-focused datasets
beyond microscopy, we validate our claims and demonstrate the ﬁrst in-principle fully unsupervised identiﬁcation
of different protein compositions and conformations in 3D
microscopic images.

Identifying protein composition and conformations from
cellular cryo-ET image datasets requires separating the intrinsic features that deﬁne a protein’s composition from
those that describe its conformation. From an image analysis perspective, protein conformations can be regarded as
data transformations that cause changes in the spatial arrangement of protein shape components (Figure 1b). On the
other hand, protein compositions are regarded as the overall shape of the protein that is unaltered by such transformations (Figure 1a). In such a manner, the structural features can be disentangled into content factors and transformation factors. Changing the transformation factor changes
the conformation of the protein while preserving the protein
identity (i.e., composition). Conversely, changing the content factor is analogous to changing the proteins from one
identity to another through compositional change (Fig. 1).
Thus, disentangling protein composition and conformation
becomes the problem of unsupervised disentanglement of
content and transformation factors in images.

1. Introduction

Currently, a few methods exist for unsupervised disentanglement of semantic content and transformation. Among
them, [47] performed explicit parameterization of the
transformation factor as diffeomorphic transformations and
achieved notable disentanglement of content and transformation in several image datasets. [3] and [51] focus on
representing known transformation types as transformation
codes. [3] performed disentanglement of two-dimensional

Proteins are fundamental building blocks of life, and their
structures and functions have been extensively studied for
decades [18, 42]. A protein’s structure is characterized
by its composition (form of a protein), while its function
is dictated by which conformation (speciﬁc state of the
protein’s form) it adopts within a system. Historically,
* Corresponding author

7483

