This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TOGA: Temporally Grounded Open-Ended Video QA with Weak Supervision
Ayush Gupta1,2 , Anirban Roy1 , Rama Chellappa2 , Nathaniel D. Bastian3 , Alvaro Velasquez4 , Susmit Jha1
1
SRI 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 United States Military Academy 4 University of Colorado Boulder

Figure 1. We present an approach for open-ended grounded video question answering. Given a video and open-ended questions, we
generate open-ended responses with the grounding as Answer [start time, end time]. We consider long videos with multiple
questions and answers per video. The questions refer to the interaction between multiple actors and the temporal ordering of events.

Abstract

1. Introduction
We propose a weakly-supervised framework for grounded
video question answering (videoQA). This framework generates open-ended, free-form sentence answers to videobased questions, providing temporal grounding with start
and end times (as shown in Fig. 1). We achieve this without
relying on expensive temporal annotations.
Grounded video question answering is challenging as, in
addition to generating correct answers, it requires localizing
evidence to support the answer [49]. The challenge is more
prominent in a weakly supervised setup where grounding
annotations are unavailable. Since each video can have
multiple questions with overlapping temporal groundings,
each answer needs to be grounded with a distinct temporal
window. We consider relatively long videos with an average length of 40 seconds consisting of complex causal
and temporal questions [49]. Generating correct answers
to these questions requires understanding the temporal ordering of events and the spatiotemporal interaction between
actors and objects. Further, we consider open-ended evaluation instead of a multiple-choice QA setup like previous
works [54, 56], further enhancing the challenge.
We propose TOGA - a vision-language model (VLM)
for the grounded videoQA task to address these challenges.
TOGA builds a video processing framework and combines that with a large language model (LLM)-based text
processing framework to process questions and generate

We address the problem of video question answering
(video QA) with temporal grounding in a weakly supervised
setup, without any temporal annotations. Given a video and
a question, we generate an open-ended answer grounded
with the start and end time. For this task, we propose
TOGA : a vision-language model for Temporally Grounded
Open-Ended Video QA with Weak Supervision. We instructtune TOGA to jointly generate the answer and the temporal
grounding. We operate in a weakly supervised setup where
the temporal grounding annotations are not available. We
generate pseudo labels for temporal grounding and ensure
the validity of these labels by imposing a consistency constraint between the question of a grounding response and
the response generated by a question referring to the same
temporal segment. We notice that jointly generating the answers with the grounding improves performance on question answering as well as grounding. We evaluate TOGA
on grounded QA and open-ended QA tasks. For grounded
QA, we consider the NExT-GQA benchmark, which is designed to evaluate weakly supervised grounded question answering. For open-ended QA, we consider the MSVD-QA
and ActivityNet-QA benchmarks. We achieve state-of-theart performance for both tasks on these benchmarks.

Work partly done during Ayush Gupta’s internship at SRI.

23593

