This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Knowledge be Transferred from Unimodal to Multimodal? Investigating the
Transitivity of Multimodal Knowledge Editing
Lingyong Fang1,2 *, Xinzhong Wang1,2⇤ , Depeng Wang2 , Zongru Wu1 , Ya Guo2 ,
Huijia Zhu2† , Zhuosheng Zhang1 , Gongshen Liu1,3†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Ant Group, China
3
Inner Mongolia Research Institute of SJTU, China
{fangly, 2046449167, wuzongru, zhangzs, lgshen}@sjtu.edu.cn
{wdp432379, guoya.gy, huijia.zhj}@antgroup.com

Abstract

within the models effectively without requiring retraining
from scratch, while ensuring that other knowledge remains
unaffected.
Previous studies have proposed several knowledge editing methods designed to inject textual knowledge into Large
Language Models (LLMs), such as MEND [15] and ROME
[14]. Inspired by these techniques within LLMs, some papers have introduced these methodologies to MLLMs. The
common thread among these studies is that they all directly
inject knowledge at the multimodal level; in other words,
the data used for editing is inherently multimodal, including both images and text. However, multimodal data is far
less abundant than unimodal data, making knowledge editing with multimodal data resource-intensive. Consequently,
the question of whether unimodal knowledge can be transferred to multimodal scenarios has become significant. This
implies that there is potential to leverage unimodal data for
more cost-effective knowledge editing in multimodal contexts.
To evaluate the effectiveness of knowledge editing methods [14–16, 20], previous works [4, 7, 11] have proposed various unimodal and multimodal knowledge editing benchmarks. However, these efforts are disjointed, implying that the performance of unimodal editing models in
the multimodal context remains unknown. With the prevalence of MLLMs, an increasing number of models deployed
in real-world applications are multimodal rather than unimodal. This suggests that direct knowledge editing on unimodal models is less common. Consequently, investigating the correlation of knowledge editing performance across
different modalities has become increasingly important.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we investigated Transitivity of Multimodal Knowledge Editing
(TMKE). We propose that knowledge editing should transcend the single modality being edited and transmit across
modalities. Figure 1 illustrates an example of TMKE. To in-

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) contain a
substantial amount of factual knowledge, which may become outdated or inaccurate over time. Consequently, various knowledge editing techniques have been proposed to
update the knowledge encoded within these models. Previous approaches maintain modality consistency during both
the editing and testing phases. However, in practical applications, it is desirable for knowledge to be transferable
across different modalities, which can enhance the robustness of knowledge editing and potentially allow for costeffective editing of multimodal knowledge using textual information. To address this, we introduce the concept of
Transitivity of Multimodal Knowledge Editing (TMKE) and
design corresponding evaluation criteria. Subsequently, we
construct a corresponding TMKE Benchmark through an
automated pipeline. We evaluate three MLLMs and five
knowledge editing methods, uncovering limitations in the
current models and methods concerning transitivity. Additionally, we analyze the intrinsic representations of the
model during the editing process based on Knowledge Neurons to interpret the experimental phenomena.

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [3, 10, 12,
22] have achieved remarkable performance across a variety of downstream multimodal tasks. However, the knowledge stored within these models may become outdated or
contain errors, which can impact downstream applications
in both unimodal and multimodal settings. Consequently,
knowledge editing within LLMs has gained increasing attention. The core objective is to modify such information
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

2482

