This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting MLLM Reasoning with Text-Debiased Hint-GRPO
Qihan Huang1,2 , Weilong Dai2 , Jinlong Liu2 , Wanggui He2 , Hao Jiang2 ,
Mingli Song1 , Jingyuan Chen1 , Chang Yao1 , Jie Song1,†
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group
{qh.huang,brooksong,jingyuanchen,changy,sjie}@zju.edu.cn,
{chenlong0104.chen,aoshu.jh}@alibaba-inc.com,
LJLwykqh@126.com,wanggui.hwg@taobao.com

Abstract

C

MLLM reasoning has drawn widespread research for its
excellent problem-solving capability. Current reasoning
methods fall into two types: PRM, which supervises the intermediate reasoning steps, and ORM, which supervises the
final results. Recently, DeepSeek-R1 has challenged the traditional view that PRM outperforms ORM, which demonstrates strong generalization performance using an ORM
method (i.e., GRPO). However, current MLLM’s GRPO algorithms still struggle to handle challenging and complex
multimodal reasoning tasks (e.g., mathematical reasoning).
In this work, we reveal two problems that impede the performance of GRPO on the MLLM: Low data utilization and
Text-bias. Low data utilization refers to that GRPO cannot acquire positive rewards to update the MLLM on difficult samples, and text-bias is a phenomenon that the MLLM
bypasses image condition and solely relies on text condition for generation after GRPO training. To tackle these
problems, this work proposes Hint-GRPO that improves
data utilization by adaptively providing hints for samples
of varying difficulty, and text-bias calibration that mitigates
text-bias by calibrating the token prediction logits with image condition in test-time. Experiment results on three base
MLLMs across eleven datasets demonstrate that our proposed methods advance the reasoning capability of original
MLLM by a large margin, exhibiting superior performance
to existing MLLM reasoning methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/hqhQAQ/Hint-GRPO.

O

Wrong Answer
A

MLLM

B

Wrong Answer

...

Wrong Answer

Figure 1. Low data utilization of GRPO: If all answers are incorrect, the zero loss gradients (∇θ L = 0) will invalidate the sample.
Real Image
Points A, B, and C are on
circle O, ∠AOB = 110°,
then ∠ACB = ().

A
O

C
B

Imagined Image
A
C

O B

Wrong Answer from MLLM: Since the central angle ∠AOB and
the inscribed angle ∠ACB intercept the same arc, ∠ACB = 1/2 *
∠AOB = 1/2 * 110° = 55°.

Figure 2. Text-bias of GRPO, where the MLLM ignores real image and uses its imagined image from text to generate outputs.

types: PRM (Process Reward Method), which supervises
the intermediate reasoning steps, and ORM (Outcome Reward Method), which supervises the final reasoning results.
Previously, most methods [5, 17, 32, 33] consider PRM to
be superior to ORM, leveraging numerous strategies (e.g.,
MCTS [5, 17, 33], DPO [37]) for PRM training.
Recently, DeepSeek-R1 [11] has overturned the conventional belief that PRM is superior to ORM, which employs the GRPO (Group Relative Policy Optimization [25])
reinforcement learning algorithm that calculates rewards
for model predictions solely based on the model’s reasoning results, without supervision of intermediate reasoning steps. DeepSeek-R1 discovers that ORM training can
induce models to engage in self-reflection, extending the
chain of thought to reach correct answers, thereby achieving excellent reasoning performance. After the emergence
of DeepSeek-R1, many researchers explore ORM methods for LLM & MLLM reasoning, with most focusing

1. Introduction
MLLM (Multimodal LLM) reasoning has attracted wide
research interest for its exceptional problem-solving capability, especially after the release of OpenAI’s o1 model.
Existing reasoning methods can be categorized into two
1 † Corresponding author.

4848

