This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is Meta-Learning Out? Rethinking Unsupervised Few-Shot Classiﬁcation with
Limited Entropy
Yunchuan Guan1,2 , Yu Liu1 *, Ke Zhou1 *, Zhiqi Shen2 *, Jenq-Neng Hwang3 , Serge Belongie4 , Lei Li3,4 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
University of Washington 4 University of Copenhagen
Abstract
Meta-learning is a powerful paradigm for tackling few-shot
tasks. However, recent studies indicate that models trained
with the whole-class training strategy can achieve comparable performance to those trained with meta-learning in
few-shot classiﬁcation tasks. To demonstrate the value of
meta-learning, we establish an entropy-limited supervised
setting for fair comparisons. Through both theoretical analysis and experimental validation, we establish that metalearning has a tighter generalization bound compared to
whole-class training. We unravel that meta-learning is more
efﬁcient with limited entropy and is more robust to label noise
and heterogeneous tasks, making it well-suited for unsupervised tasks. Based on these insights, We propose MINO, a
meta-learning framework designed to enhance unsupervised
performance. MINO utilizes the adaptive clustering algorithm DBSCAN with a dynamic head for unsupervised task
construction and a stability-based meta-scaler for robustness against label noise. Extensive experiments conﬁrm its
effectiveness in multiple unsupervised few-shot and zero-shot
tasks.

Figure 1. Unfair comparison under the conventional supervised
setting. The annotation cost varies across different training methods.
H represents the information entropy.

Previous studies attempt to derive a better generalization
error bound [3, 4, 12] or convergence rate [11, 17] to improve
meta-learning itself. However, little is known about why its
theoretical superiority conﬂicts with the aforementioned experimental results. Meanwhile, a theoretical framework for
comparing the meta-learning and the whole-class training
has yet to be explored. Figure 1 shows the unfair comparison
between meta-learning and WCT. It suggests that although
the same dataset is used, WCT requires distinguishing more
categories than meta-training (MT) and consumes more annotation resources. Since the annotation process can be
considered as an entropy-reduced process, we introduce the
entropy-limited supervised setting.
Lemma 1 suggests that the entropy-limited supervised
setting represents an intermediate state. Depending on the
available entropy, it can degrade into either the conventional
supervised or unsupervised setting. Under this setting, we
focus on meta-learning algorithms based on bi-level optimization and discuss three key issues: (1) establishing a theoretical framework for comparing meta-learning and WCT;
(2) explaining why and when meta-learning outperforms
WCT; (3) providing insights that enhance the performance
of meta-learning.
In this paper, (1) we establish a comparison framework
based on the entropy-limited supervised setting and the uniform stability theory [1, 27]. We prove that, for few-shot
classiﬁcation tasks, meta-learning has a tighter generaliza-

1. Introduction
Meta-learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm for learning to adapt to unseen tasks [36], demonstrating better generalization ability in few-shot learning and reinforcement
learning tasks [25]. However, recent studies empirically
demonstrate that a well trained embedding exhibits comparable or even better accuracy on several few-shot classiﬁcation tasks [5, 30, 32, 34, 37]. These methods employ
a vanilla strategy, i.e., whole-class training (WCT), where
each sample is trained within a single-task learning framework. The empirical results suggest that the sophisticated
bi-level optimization and the task organization paradigm of
meta-learning are somewhat redundant.
* Co-corresponding authors. liu yu@hust.edu.cn, zhke@hust.edu.cn,
zqshen@ntu.edu.sg,lenny.lilei.cs@gmail.com

4188

