This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generate, Transduct, Adapt: Iterative Transduction with VLMs
Oindrila Saha

Logan Lawrence
Grant Van Horn
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Subhransu Maji

{osaha, lclawrence, gvanhorn, smaji}@umass.edu

a CLIP

b TransCLIP

“a photo of a
common raven”

“a photo of an
american crow”

text

text

c GTA-CLIP

d Results

C1: Common Raven
C2: American Crow

Iterate T times.

2
C1
C2

3

1

2 Transduct

image

image
image

text
“... common raven”
“... american crow”

LLM

text

“Distinguish C1 from C2”

“long throat
feathers”
“wedge-shaped
fingers”

1

“smooth throat
feathers”
“fan-shaped tail”

image

Cluster embeddings

“splayed wings”

Generate

3

Adapt

Figure 1. Overview of GTA-CLIP. (a) Vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP [36] enable zero-shot classification using similarity
between text embeddings of class prompts and images. (b) Transductive CLIP [61] exploits the structure of the entire image dataset to assign
images to classes improving accuracy. (c) Our approach, GTA-CLIP, iteratively (i) induces structure over the classes in language space
by generating attributes driven by the pairwise confusions, (ii) performing attribute-augmented transductive inference, and (iii) adapting
CLIP encoders using the inferred labels. (d) Across 12 datasets we improve upon CLIP and transductive CLIP by 9.5% and 4.0% using
VIT-B/16, and similarly for other encoders. Significant improvements are also reported in the few-shot setting.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs) have
enabled zero-shot image classification across diverse domains. These models, such as CLIP [36], assign images to
classes based on the similarity between image and text embeddings, forming the basis of various zero-shot approaches
in classification [63, 66, 67], segmentation [20, 21, 37, 54],
and detection [27, 65] (Fig. 1a). However, in many practical scenarios, the images requiring classification are known
in advance. For example, an ecologist might have a large
collection of animal images that need to be categorized by
species. In such cases, transductive inference is more suitable, as it leverages the dataset’s inherent structure to refine
predictions (Fig.1b).

Transductive zero-shot learning with vision-language models leverages image-image similarities within the dataset
to achieve better classification accuracy compared to the
inductive setting. However, there is little work that explores the structure of the language space in this context.
We propose GTA-CLIP, a novel technique that incorporates supervision from language models for joint transduction in language and vision spaces. Our approach is iterative and consists of three steps: (i) incrementally exploring the attribute space by querying language models,
(ii) an attribute-augmented transductive inference procedure, and (iii) fine-tuning the language and vision encoders
based on inferred labels within the dataset. Through experiments with CLIP encoders, we demonstrate that GTACLIP yields an average performance improvement of 9.5%
and 4.0% across 12 datasets and 3 encoders, over CLIP
and transductive CLIP respectively in the zero-shot setting.
We also observe similar improvements in a few-shot setting.
We present ablation studies that demonstrate the value of
each step and visualize how the vision and language spaces
evolve over iterations driven by the transductive learning.

Despite the success of transductive inference with
VLMs, existing approaches often overlook the rich structure of the label space derived from language. For instance,
linking semantically similar descriptions or attributes can
yield more coherent class prototypes, while aligning these
attributes with image features can enable model adaptation
on the specific dataset. This strategy can be advantageous
for zero-shot and few-shot recognition, especially in novel

1369

