This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VSSD: Vision Mamba with Non-Causal State Space Duality
Yuheng Shi1 Mingjia Li3 Minjing Dong2 Chang Xu1
1
University of Sydney, 2 City University of Hong Kong , 3 Tianjin University
yuhengshi99@gmail.com, mingjiali@tju.edu.cn, minjdong@cityu.edu.hk, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

sequences, which limits its broader application.

Vision transformers have significantly advanced the field
of computer vision, offering robust modeling capabilities
and global receptive field. However, their high computational demands limit their applicability in processing long
sequences. To tackle this issue, State Space Models (SSMs)
have gained prominence in vision tasks as they offer linear computational complexity. Recently, State Space Duality (SSD), an improved variant of SSMs, was introduced
in Mamba2 to enhance model performance and efficiency.
However, the inherent causal nature of SSD/SSMs restricts
their applications in non-causal vision tasks. To address
this limitation, we introduce Visual State Space Duality
(VSSD) model, which has a non-causal format of SSD.
Specifically, we propose to discard the magnitude of interactions between the hidden state and tokens while preserving their relative weights, which relieves the dependencies
of token contribution on previous tokens. Together with
the involvement of multi-scan strategies, we show that the
scanning results can be integrated to achieve non-causality,
which not only improves the performance of SSD in vision
tasks but also enhances its efficiency. We conduct extensive
experiments on various benchmarks including image classification, detection, and segmentation, where VSSD surpasses existing SOTA SSM-based models. Code is available
at https://github.com/YuHengsss/VSSD.

1. Introduction
In recent years, vision transformers [8, 9, 18, 21, 35, 36, 48,
51], pioneered by the Vision Transformer (ViT) [9], have
achieved tremendous success in the field of computer vision. Thanks to the global receptive field and the robust
information modeling capabilities of the attention mechanism, models [3, 35, 64] based on vision transformers have
advanced significantly in various tasks such as classification [7], detection [31], and segmentation [65], surpassing
classic CNN-based models [22, 25, 26, 44]. However, the
quadratic computational complexity of the attention mechanism makes it resource-intensive for tasks involving long

10819

Recently, State Space Models (SSMs) [15–17, 45], exemplified by Mamba [14], have garnered considerable attention from researchers. The S6 block, in particular, offers a global receptive field and exhibits linear complexity with respect to sequence length, presenting an efficient alternative. Pioneering vision mamba models such as
Vim [67] and VMamba [34] have been developed to apply
SSMs to vision tasks. Afterward, many variants were proposed [27, 43, 47, 59], which flatten 2D feature maps into
1D sequences using different scanning routes, model them
with the S6 block, and subsequently integrate the results
in multiple scanning routes. These multi-scan approaches
improve the performance of SSMs in vision tasks, achieving results competitive with those of both CNN-based and
ViT-based methods. More recently, Mamba2 [6] has introduced further enhancements to the S6 block, proposing the
concept of State Space Duality (SSD). Mamba2 treats the
state space transition matrix as a scalar and expands the state
space dimension, thereby enhancing model performance as
well as training and inference efficiency.
SSD/SSMs inherently possess causal properties, meaning that the prediction for a given token depends solely on
the preceding tokens in the input sequence. However, a
major concern arises when applying SSD/SSMs to vision
tasks, as image data is naturally non-causal. While another
concern is flattening 2D feature maps into 1D sequences
disrupts the inherent structural relationships among patches.
We provide an illustration in Fig. 1a to facilitate a more intuitive understanding of these two concerns. In this example, the central token within the flattened 1D sequences is
restricted to accessing only previous tokens, unable to integrate information from subsequent tokens. Additionally,
the token 1, which is adjacent to the central token in the
2D space, becomes distantly positioned in the 1D sequence,
disrupting the natural structural relationships. A common
practice in previous solutions [27, 34] is to increase the
scanning routes on non-causal visual features, which alleviates these two concerns to some extent. Given these observations, an important question emerges: Is there a more
effective and efficient way to apply SSD to non-causal vi-

