This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowDPS : Flow-Driven Posterior Sampling for Inverse Problems
Jeongsol Kim∗

Bryan Sangwoo Kim∗
KAIST

Jong Chul Ye

{jeongsol, bryanswkim, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
∗

Equal contribution

Figure 1. (Top) Super-resolution and deblurring results for linear inverse problems before and after FlowDPS. (Bottom) Results for motion
deblurring on a high-resolution image.

Abstract
Flow matching is a recent state-of-the-art framework for
generative modeling based on ordinary differential equations (ODEs). While closely related to diffusion models,
it provides a more general perspective on generative modeling. Although inverse problem solving has been extensively explored using diffusion models, it has not been rigorously examined within the broader context of flow models. Therefore, here we extend the diffusion inverse solvers
(DIS) — which perform posterior sampling by combining
a denoising diffusion prior with an likelihood gradient —
into the flow framework. Specifically, by driving the flowversion of Tweedie’s formula, we decompose the flow ODE
into two components: one for clean image estimation and

the other for noise estimation. By integrating the likelihood gradient and stochastic noise into each component,
respectively, we demonstrate that posterior sampling for
inverse problem solving can be effectively achieved using
flows. Our proposed solver, Flow-Driven Posterior Sampling (FlowDPS), can also be seamlessly integrated into a
latent flow model with a transformer architecture. Across
four linear inverse problems, we confirm that FlowDPS outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives, all without requiring
additional training. Code : https://github.com/
FlowDPS-Inverse/FlowDPS

1. Introduction

12328

The goal of inverse problems is to recover the true signal
x0 from measurements y, which are generated through a

