This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Online Dense Point Tracking with Streaming Memory
Qiaole Dong and Yanwei FuB
School of Data Science, Fudan University
{qldong18, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

frame 𝒕

frame 𝟏

…

…

…
time

Dense point tracking is a challenging task requiring the
continuous tracking of every point in the initial frame
throughout a substantial portion of a video, even in the
presence of occlusions. Traditional methods use optical
flow models to directly estimate long-range motion, but
they often suffer from appearance drifting without considering temporal consistency. Recent point tracking algorithms usually depend on sliding windows for indirect information propagation from the first frame to the current
one, which is slow and less effective for long-range tracking. To account for temporal consistency and enable efficient information propagation, we present a lightweight
and fast model with Streaming memory for dense POint
Tracking and online video processing. The SPOT framework features three core components: a customized memory
reading module for feature enhancement, a sensory memory
for short-term motion dynamics modeling, and a visibilityguided splatting module for accurate information propagation. This combination enables SPOT to perform dense
point tracking with state-of-the-art accuracy on the CVO
benchmark, as well as comparable or superior performance
to offline models on sparse tracking benchmarks such as
TAP-Vid and RoboTAP. Notably, SPOT with 10× smaller
parameter numbers operates at least 2× faster than previous state-of-the-art models while maintaining the best performance on CVO. We will release the models and codes at:
https://dqiaole.github.io/SPOT/.

frame 𝟏

direct regression

frame 𝒕

𝒇𝒍𝒐𝒘𝟏→𝒕
𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤1→𝑡

(a) direct regression-based methods
frame 𝒕

…

…

regression

𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤1→𝑡

sliding window

(b) sliding windows-based methods
memory
bank

splatting

frame 𝟏

reading

frame 𝒕

regression

𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤1→𝑡

enhanced with memory

(c) Our SPOT
Figure 1. Main frameworks for dense and long-range correspondence estimation. (a) Classical methods employ optical flow models for direct regression of long-range optical flow. (b) Recent
sparse point tracking methods rely on sliding windows for information propagation and require offline processing. (c) Our SPOT
introduces a fast streaming memory that stores information of first
frame and enhances the current frame for better regression.

is essentially the same task as long-range optical flow over
many frames, and will use these terms interchangeably.
Classical methods typically utilize the optical flow [17,
30, 47, 50] models, originally trained on adjacent frames,
for direct regression of long-range flow as depicted in Fig. 1.
Recent work like TAP-Net [13] and MFT [39] has bridged
the gap by training on long-range frame pairs and chaining reliable short-range flows respectively. However, they
still suffer from appearance drifting and struggle with occlusions without considering the temporal consistency.
As the appearance information of physical points within
the first frame needs to be propagated and compared to the
one in the target frame, recent point tracking [22, 32, 54]
methods typically employ sliding windows with offline processing, i.e., necessitating future frames for improving the
accuracy. Despite the super performance of these models,
they require a huge amount of time to track every pixel.

1. Introduction
A fine-grained and long-term analysis of motion, like what
we experience in human vision, has been a long-standing
goal in computer vision. This problem has typically been
approached through optical flow [17, 30, 47, 50] and point
tracking [13, 14, 22, 32]. While each type of motion facilitates various real-world applications [7, 19, 20, 48, 51],
neither can fully capture dense, long-range motion in real
time and on a frame-by-frame basis for streaming motion
perception. Here, we consider dense point tracking, which

8710

