This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuromanifold-Regularized KANs
for Shape-fair Feature Representations

1

Mazlum Ferhat Arslan1,2 Weihong Guo1 Shuo Li2,3 *
Dept. of Mathematics, Applied Mathematics and Statistics 2 Dept. of Biomedical Engineering
3
Dept. of Computer and Data Sciences
Case Western Reserve University
{mxa1328,wx49,shuo.li11}@case.edu

Abstract
Traditional deep networks struggle to acquire shape-fair
representations due to their high expressivity. KolmogorovArnold Networks (KANs) are promising candidates as they
learn nonlinearities directly, a property that makes them
more adaptive. However, KANs perform suboptimally in
terms of shape-fairness because of unconstrained nonlinearities, a limitation we demonstrate for the first time. On
the other hand, shape-fair networks reside on a neuromanifold of low-degree. Motivated by this, we investigate neuromanifold regularization of KANs to enable learning of
shape-fair feature representations. The proposed method,
NeuroManifold Regularized-KANs, is a novel regularization that addresses failure modes during the acquisition of
local and global shape cues, separately. This is done by
constraining the degree of the neuromanifolds of two jointly
trained feature extractors. Additionally, we propose a novel
Style Decorrelation Loss that promotes decorrelation of intermediate representations. Our experiments demonstrate
that NMR-KAN improves shape bias over baseline convolutional KANs by 14.8% while also providing robustness
under image corruptions and adversarial attacks. Code is
avaliable at: http://www.github.com/kaptres/NMR-KAN/.

1. Introduction
Image shape extraction is the process of identifying structural object features —such as contours, boundaries, and
part relationships—while minimizing reliance on fine-scale
texture details that can mislead recognition systems. It
is typically modelled as a two-stage nonlinear process
[3, 26, 36, 43]. Local shape cues, such as contours and
object parts, are first extracted. These are then aggregated
* Corresponding author: shuo.li11@case.edu

Figure 1. NMR-KAN employs two KAN feature extractors with
constrained adaptive nonlinearities at different stages. The feature
extractors lie in a lower degree neuromanifold, leading to better
shape-models due to the emphasis on learning simpler functions
in the extraction of both local and global cues.

into structured global representations. Given the domaininvariance of object shapes, correct shape processing potentially implies robustness of the networks under image-space
corruptions and adversarial attacks, and generalizability of
the networks to domains unseen during training [20, 44].
Existing image processing methods (Figure 1, top) struggle to acquire shape-fair representations. High expressivity
in traditional networks enables the capture of complex features but also leads to learning non-generalizable, datasetspecific details [1, 21, 49]. In computer vision, this often results in texture-biased representations, where models
rely on high-frequency details rather than structural form
[3, 14, 19]. Data augmentation techniques mitigate this to
some extent, but they do not address the root cause: unconstrained network expressivity. This leads to overly complex models that fall short of robustness expectations [39].
Other approaches, such as sparsity-based methods [31], require large datasets, making them impractical in low-data

12790

