This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMGDiff: Soccer Motion Generation using diffusion probabilistic models
Hongdi Yang 1* Chengyang Li 1* Zhenxuan Wu 1 Gaozheng Li 1
Jingya Wang 1 Jingyi Yu 1 Zhuo Su 2 Lan Xu 1†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 ByteDance

Figure 1. Our method, SMGDiff, enables users to control soccer motions based on character direction, speed and soccer skill, simulating an
interactive gameplay experience. It can generate a diverse range of high-quality soccer motions while ensuring real-time performance.

Abstract
Soccer is a globally renowned sport with significant applications in video games and VR/AR. However, generating
realistic soccer motions remains challenging due to the intricate interactions between the player and the ball. In
this paper, we introduce SMGDiff, a novel two-stage framework for generating real-time and user-controllable soccer
motions. Our key idea is to integrate real-time character
animation with a powerful diffusion-based generative model.
Specifically, we first map coarse user control to intricate
character trajectories. Then, we employ a transformerbased autoregressive diffusion model to generate soccer
motions based on trajectory conditioning. To further enhance physical realism, we integrate a contact guidance
module during inference to refine precise ball-foot interactions. Additionally, we contribute a large-scale soccer
motion dataset consisting of over 1.08 million frames of diverse soccer motions. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our SMGDiff significantly outperforms existing methods
in terms of motion quality and condition alignment. Project
page: https://geekyoung.red/SMGDiff/

cations. However, real-time generation of realistic soccer
motion in a highly controllable manner remains challenging.
This challenge primarily stems from the complex interactions between the player and the ball, especially for the intricate character motion trajectories and the precise ball-foot
contacts.
Soccer motion has been extensively studied in both
industry and academia. Popular soccer games like EA
SPORTS FC series [10] feature impressive soccer animations with interactive and real-time character control. Yet,
they heavily rely on example-based motion matching techniques, leading to visual artifacts. In academia, various
approaches [24, 39, 50, 52] leverage reinforcement learning
in physical simulations to learn soccer motions, enhancing
the physical realism of the generated actions. Yet, these
methods are restricted to specific skills of soccer motion.
For example, Hong et al. [24] performed physical-based control for dribbling and shooting, while Xie et al. [69] utilized
a layer-wise structure only for soccer juggling. Nevertheless,
a generalizable soccer motion generation framework should
be capable of generating a diverse spectrum of soccer motions. Our method encompasses all common football actions
and seamlessly transitions between them.
Recent advancements in motion diffusion probabilistic
models [14, 37, 65, 67, 80] have brought significant potential for capturing complex data distribution and generating diverse motions. Some very recent variants [5, 81, 85]
further accelerate the diffusion models for efficient on-the-

1. Introduction
Soccer is widely recognized as the most popular sport globally, leading to a growing emphasis on generating and controlling soccer motions in various games and VR/AR appli-

11807

