This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adding Additional Control to
One-Step Diffusion with Joint Distribution Matching
Yihong Luo 1
Jiacheng Sun 2
1

Control Signal

HKUST

ControlNet
50 NFE

2

Tianyang Hu 2
Zhenguo Li 2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

DI + ControlNet
1 NFE

JDM (Ours)
1 NFE

Yifan Song 3
Jing Tang 3,1 *
3

HKUST(GZ)

Performance and Efficiency Comparison
Time↓

Fidelity↓

NFE↓

Controllability↓

Figure 1. Visual comparison of different strategies of adding controls. The compared baselines include 1) the diffusion with integrated
standard ControlNet (denoted as ControlNet), and 2) the integration of pre-trained standard ControlNet with Diff-Instruct’s pre-trained
one-step generator (denoted as DI + ControlNet). Notably, our method not only maintains computational efficiency but also surpasses the
visual quality achieved by the standard ControlNet approach. While the standard ControlNet approach relies heavily on high ClassifierFree Guidance (CFG) to achieve high-quality generation, this dependency might introduce unwanted artifacts in the final samples.

Abstract

trols unknown to the teacher model and facilitates improved
classifier-free guidance (CFG) usage and seamless integration of human feedback learning (HFL). Experimental
results demonstrate that JDM surpasses baseline methods
such as multi-step ControlNet [45] by mere one-step in
most cases, while achieving state-of-the-art performance in
one-step text-to-image synthesis through improved usage of
CFG or HFL integration.

While diffusion distillation has enabled one-step generation through methods like Diff-Instruct [17] and Variational
Score Distillation [34], adapting distilled models to emerging new controls – such as novel structural constraints or
latest user preferences – remains challenging. Conventional approaches typically require modifying the base diffusion model and redistilling it – a process that is both
computationally intensive and time-consuming. To address
these challenges, we introduce Joint Distribution Matching
(JDM), a novel approach that minimizes the reverse KL divergence between image-condition joint distributions. By
deriving a tractable upper bound, JDM decouples fidelity
learning from condition learning. This asymmetric distillation scheme enables our one-step student to handle con-

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) [9, 31] have significantly advanced
generative modeling, particularly in text-to-image synthesis, by producing high-quality and diverse images in a controllable manner [45]. However, their practical deployment is often hindered by the inefficiency of the sampling
process, which usually takes tens to hundreds of Network
Function Evaluations (NFEs). Thanks to the recent progress
in diffusion distillation, the sampling efficiency has been

* Corresponding Author: Jing Tang, jingtang@ust.hk.

4009

