This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GRAB: A Challenging GRaph Analysis Benchmark for Large Multimodal Models
Jonathan Roberts1 , Kai Han2 , Samuel Albanie
1
University of Cambridge, 2 The University of Hong Kong
jdr53@cam.ac.uk, kaihanx@hku.hk, samuel.albanie.academic@gmail.com
https://grab-benchmark.github.io

Abstract
Large multimodal models (LMMs) have exhibited proficiencies across many visual tasks. Although numerous wellknown benchmarks exist to evaluate model performance,
they increasingly have insufficient headroom. As such, there
is a pressing need for a new generation of benchmarks challenging enough for the next generation of LMMs. One area
that LMMs show potential is graph analysis, specifically, the
tasks an analyst might typically perform when interpreting
figures such as estimating the mean, intercepts or correlations of functions and data series. In this work, we introduce
GRAB, a graph analysis benchmark, fit for current and future
frontier LMMs. Our benchmark is predominantly synthetic,
ensuring high-quality, noise-free questions. GRAB is comprised of 3284 questions, covering five tasks and 23 graph
properties. We evaluate 20 LMMs on GRAB, finding it to be
a challenging benchmark, with the highest performing model
attaining a score of just 21.0%. Finally, we conduct various ablations to investigate where the models succeed and
struggle. We release GRAB and a lightweight GRAB-Lite to
encourage progress in this important, growing domain.

Figure 1. Overall performance on GRAB. Our benchmark proves
challenging for frontier LMMs. The highest performing LMM
attains an accuracy of just 21.0% on GRAB.

room for improvement. Moreover, label inaccuracies are
reportedly pervasive [29] even in the most used benchmarks,
further reducing possible headroom.
One particular task of interest and importance is the interpretation of scientific and mathematical figures and charts,
which is central to many analytical endeavours. Specifically,
we target use cases where the underlying data of a figure
is not accessible, for example in documents, sketches, or
other image types, and quantities can only be deduced from
visual interpretation. Given their prevalence, the insights
gained from understanding and reasoning over these types of
figures make this task an important and valuable capability
for LMMs. Various forms of chart evaluation have been
present in machine learning literature for quite some time
through established benchmarks [18, 28] and more recent
works [45, 52]. However, these benchmarks need an uplift
for the current and future generations of frontier models.
To this end, we introduce GRaph Analysis Benchmark
(GRAB), consisting of 3284 questions. Almost all figures
in GRAB are generated synthetically using the Matplotlib
library [16]. Although some realism might be lost when

1. Introduction
Driven by the union of increased compute resources, a
rapidly growing research community, and competition fuelled by burgeoning commercial opportunities, the capabilities of frontier large multimodal models are swiftly improving and expanding. Furthermore, the timelines for advances,
especially among closed-source models, appear to be shortening, with the time between model releases diminishing.
This has important implications for evaluation and benchmarking, which are critical to gauge the relative strengths
and weaknesses of models. In particular, as performance
increases, common benchmarks become saturated and stale –
for example, GPT-4o [31] scores 90.5%, 90.2%, and 88.7%
on the widely used MGSM, HumanEval, MMLU benchmarks, respectively. The usefulness of a benchmark in distinguishing model capability diminishes when there is little

1644

