This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense Policy: Bidirectional Autoregressive Learning of Actions
Yue Su∗1,2‡ , Xinyu Zhan∗1 , Hongjie Fang1 , Han Xue1 ,
Hao-Shu Fang1 , Yong-Lu Li1,3 , Cewu Lu1,3 , and Lixin Yang1†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Xidian University 3 Shanghai Innovation Institute

 

 

 







1



 

Figure 1. Dense Policy: a robot policy model that generates raw robot actions in an autoregressive manner. During inference, Dense
Policy performs bidirectional expansion on the current level of sparse action keyframes to obtain a denser action sequence.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Imitation Learning (IL) has become a prominent focus
in robotic manipulation for its capability in robot learning. Its effectiveness is demonstrated both in downstream
policies [5, 44, 47, 51, 53] tailored to specific tasks, and
in Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [2, 20, 29] designed for general-purpose scenarios. Among those IL
methods, holistic generative policies [5, 44, 51, 53] prevail
as the dominant approach in manipulation for their precise
predictions within continuous action spaces.

Mainstream visuomotor policies predominantly rely on generative models for holistic action prediction, while current
autoregressive policies, predicting the next token or chunk,
have shown suboptimal results. This motivates a search
for more effective learning methods to unleash the potential
of autoregressive policies for robotic manipulation. This
paper introduces a bidirectionally expanded learning approach, termed Dense Policy, to establish a new paradigm
for autoregressive policies in action prediction. It employs a lightweight encoder-only architecture to iteratively
unfold the action sequence from an initial single frame
into the target sequence in a coarse-to-fine manner with
logarithmic-time inference. Extensive experiments validate
that our dense policy has superior autoregressive learning capabilities and can surpass existing holistic generative policies. Our model, data, and code are available at:
https://selen-suyue.github.io/DspNet/.

∗ Equal contribution.

Recent research has sought to enhance imitation learning by introducing autoregressive paradigm [8, 32, 42] for
its powerful sequence modeling capabilities and impressive performance under scaling [19]. While effective in
language and vision, this paradigm faces significant challenges in action prediction. Actions represent a more complex search space [26] with sparser data [4, 7, 54], making it
difficult to achieve precise predictions. The traditional nexttoken prediction approach [42], commonly used in autoregressive models, is limited in capturing long-term dependencies within action sequences, leading to suboptimal performance [17, 25] than holistic generative policies [5, 53].
Recent efforts [12] address this limitation by introducing
multi-scale prediction inspired by Visual Autoregressive

† Lixin Yang is the corresponding author, affiliated with the School of
Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
‡ This work was conducted during Yue Su’s research internship at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

14486

