This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Retrieval-Augmented Adaptation for Vision-Language Models
Xinqi Fan1 , Xueli Chen2 , Luoxiao Yang3 , Chuin Hong Yap1 , Rizwan Qureshi4 ,
Qi Dou5 , Moi Hoon Yap1 , Mubarak Shah4
1
Manchester Metropolitan University 2 Hong Kong Metropolitan University
3
Xi’an University of Technology 4 University of Central Florida 5 Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract

Image

Vision-language models (VLMs) have shown promise in
test-time adaptation tasks due to their remarkable capabilities in understanding and reasoning about visual content through natural language descriptions. However, training VLMs typically demands substantial computational resources, and they often struggle to adapt efficiently to new
domains or tasks. Additionally, dynamically estimating the
test distribution from streaming data at test time remains
a significant challenge. In this work, we propose a novel
test-time retrieval-augmented adaptation (TT-RAA) method
that enables VLMs to maintain high performance across
diverse visual recognition tasks without the need for taskspecific training or large computational overhead. During
inference, TT-RAA employs a streaming mixture of Gaussian database (SMGD) to continuously estimate test distributions, requiring minimal storage. Then, TT-RAA retrieves
the most relevant information from the SMGD, enhancing
the original VLM outputs. A key limitation of CLIP-based
VLMs is their inter-modal vision-language optimization,
which does not optimize vision-space similarity, leading to
larger intra-modal variance. To address this, we propose a
multimodal retrieval augmentation module that transforms
the SMGD into a unified multimodal space, enabling retrieval that aligns both vision and language modalities.
Extensive experiments across both cross-domain and outof-distribution benchmarks comprising fourteen datasets
demonstrate TT-RAA’s superior performance compared to
state-of-the-art methods. Ablation studies and hyperparameter analyses further validate the effectiveness of the proposed modules. The source code of our work is available
at https://github.com/xinqi-fan/TT-RAA.

Image
Encoder

Retrieval
Database Centers

Test Image
An image
of {}.
Lily
Rose
Iris
Tulip
Prompt

w/o TT-RAA
Text
Encoder
w/ TT-RAA

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed test time retrieval augmented
adaptation (TT-RAA). Without TT-RAA, the CLIP prediction will
be the final prediction. With TT-RAA, the image feature will be
used to retrieve the most similar database centers which will be
used to improve the final prediction in a training-free manner.

mains. This foundational work has catalyzed a wave of architectural innovations, including domain-specific variants
and architectural enhancements that build upon CLIP’s core
principles [52]. Some variants have focused on scaling up
capacities, learning from noisy text supervision, and finegrained alignment [16, 50]. However, these models consistently encounter challenges when deployed in specialized
domains, where the distribution of images often differs substantially from their web-scale training data [11, 33]. This
challenge has become even more prominent with the recent introduction of more sophisticated large VLMs such as
GPT-4V [31], LLaVA [25], and Llama 3.2 Vision [1]. While
these advanced models excel at integrating visual and textual data, the high computational cost of fine-tuning them
for domain-specific tasks poses a major challenge, especially in specialized visual domains that differ significantly
from general web images.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) has emerged as a promising solution that enables models to adapt to new domains without accessing source domain training data [23].
Traditional TTA approaches include self-training-based
methods that leverage pseudo-labels [22, 41, 49], selfsupervised learning-based methods that incorporate aux-

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) have significantly advanced visual understanding by leveraging natural language
supervision with contrastive language-image pre-training
(CLIP) notably pioneering this field [34]. The zero-shot
capability enables this model to be deployed in various do-

8810

