This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bias-Resilient Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation Using Normalizing
Flows

1

Xianglin Qiu1,2,3 Xiaoyang Wang4 Zhen Zhang3 Jimin Xiao1 *
XJTLU 2 University of Liverpool 3 iHorry 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) aims to
generate dense labels using sparse annotations, such as
image-level labels. Existing class activation map (CAM)
generation methods have been able to locate rough objects.
However, due to the limited information provided by image
level labels, the bias activation problem, including overactivation, becomes another key obstacle in WSSS. To rectify such bias activation, we attempt to mine pixel level class
feature distribution information from the entire dataset.
Specifically, we propose to use normalizing flow to model
the class feature distribution of all pixels across the entire
dataset and design a Bias-Resilient WSSS framework based
on Normalizing Flow (BRNF). Normalizing flow has the
ability to map complex distributions to normal distributions.
Building upon it, we designed an additional Gaussian mixture classifier which classifies pixels from the perspective
of feature distributions, providing supplementary information to the conventional MLP based classifier. In addition,
we use this distribution to sample low bias features as positive anchors for contrastive learning, thereby encouraging
feature optimization toward the correct low-bias direction.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms existing baselines, achieving state-ofthe-art performance on WSSS benchmarks. Code will be
available at https://github.com/DpDark/BRNF.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) reduces the need for extensive dense annotations by using
only image-level labels, significantly lowering annotation
costs [6, 13, 37, 39, 40]. However, generating accurate pixel
annotations from these image-level labels is challenging.
Current WSSS methods typically use class activation maps
(CAMs) to create initial coarse localization map, which is
then refined and extended to fully cover the target object.
The CAMs obtained from classification network can
* Corresponding author

only active the most discriminative region of image which
may only cover limited parts of objects. Thus, current
mainstream WSSS methods mainly focus on the problem
of under-activation, among which the class prototype based
method has made significant progress. For instance, SIPE
[3] captures the semantic correlation of pixels within an image to generate image specific prototypes for complete activation, while LPCAM [4] uses the pixel feature clustering
center of each class in image as prototype to generate CAM.
RCA [46] generates class prototypes which contain rich
contextual information by performing contrastive learning
on region features of different classes across the dataset.
The aforementioned methods have successfully generated more complete CAMs by leveraging informative prototypes. However, over-activation problems are still widely
prevailed and are rarely addressed. We argue that the current methods, no matter how they generate CAM, still rely
on the initial coarse image-level supervision. They have no
choice but to trust the information provided by classification
model, which is sometimes incorrect, resulting in semantic
bias. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), such bias is incorporated
into class prototypes, causing features to drift from their
true class feature space toward incorrect ones. Worse still,
without explicit intervention, this biased semantic information may persist throughout the entire training process, as
these inherent errors are difficult to correct on their own.
Some works have attempted to correct these biases by
incorporating external information, such as re-annotating
background labels [2] or using vision-language models
[35]. However, we argue that even without such external
information, it is possible to rectify bias by leveraging their
own information. We believe that by explicitly modeling
distribution of all pixel features across entire dataset, richer
and more reliable information can be harnessed to counter
bias. Although modeling large-scale, high-dimensional
pixel data is challenging, especially when the data distribution is constantly changing, the normalizing flow model
[7, 15] is well-suited for this task. It can map complex pixel
feature distributions onto simpler ones in an online learning
manner. Based on this insight, we propose a Bias-Resilient
WSSS framework using Normalizing Flow (BRNF).

21321

