This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-scenario Overlapping Text Segmentation with Depth Awareness
Yang Liu1∗ , Xudong Xie1∗ , Yuliang Liu1† , Xiang Bai1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yangliu1213,xdxie,ylliu,xbai}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Overlapping text poses significant challenges for textrelated perception tasks, particularly in open scenes characterized by diverse fonts and visual effects. While existing research has primarily addressed the overlapping problem in documents, its applicability to other scenes remains
limited. To bridge this gap, we propose a new task of
multi-scenario overlapping text segmentation and introduce
a corresponding real dataset in both English and Chinese,
spanning various contexts such as printed text, bills, artistic designs, and house numbers. To further enhance the
generalization of overlapping text segmentation models, we
propose a hierarchical training data synthesis strategy that
simulates diverse overlapping patterns across different scenarios. Furthermore, we found that depth maps can provide
clear relative position relationships in three-dimensional
space, assisting the model in capturing complex overlapping relationships between text instances. Building on this
insight, we present a depth-guided decoder that seamlessly
integrates image and depth features to capture overlapping
interactions. Our proposed model achieves a 5.3% improvement in text mIoU and a 6.4% improvement in overall
mIoU compared to existing SOTA methods on our benchmark and SignaTR6k datasets, respectively. Our code and
dataset will be released at https://github.com/
willpat1213/MOTS.

(a) SignaTR6K

(b) MOT (ours)

Figure 1. The overlapping text examples of SignaTR6K and
MOT (ours).

1. Introduction

image. Overlapping text can be categorized into two types
based on the degree of overlap: “text-in-text,” where the
texts significantly overlap, and “sticky text,” where only the
edges of the texts intersect. As shown in Fig. 1(b), these
phenomena frequently occur in various everyday scenarios, such as invoices, receipts, educational documents, advertisements, slogans, artistic designs, house numbers, and
other intricate outdoor settings.
Previous studies [11, 14, 30] have recognized the critical need for tackling overlapping text in real-world applications. These works employ various segmentation models to deconstruct overlapping text into regular text. However, these studies have primarily concentrated on addressing overlapping patterns in document-specific scenarios, as
illustrated in Fig. 1(a), without extending their focus to
multi-scenario text overlap challenges. This paper aims to
bridge this research gap by proposing a novel segmentation
framework specifically designed for comprehensive overlapping text analysis across diverse real-world scenarios.
Unlike document scenario overlapping text segmentation, multi-scenario overlapping text segmentation presents
two unique challenges, as outlined below: (1) Lack of overlapping text data in multiple scenarios. Previous overlapping text datasets primarily focus on specific documentbased contexts, such as educational papers, historical
archives and legal documents. These scenarios typically
display similar overlapping patterns, which can be handled

In the field of OCR research, deep learning-based text
recognition has made remarkable progress, offering effective solutions to challenges such as variations in lighting
and shadow effects, blurriness in document images [9, 29],
and text distortion caused by bending or tilting in complex scenes [19, 24, 27]. However, current state-of-theart (SOTA) text recognition methods encounter significant
challenges when dealing with overlapping text, where one
piece of text partially or fully obscures another within an
∗ Co-first authors; † Corresponding author

17454

