This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Precise Affordances from Egocentric Videos for Robotic Manipulation
Gen Li1

Nikolaos Tsagkas1
1

Jifei Song2 Ruaridh Mon-Williams1
Kun Shao2 * Laura Sevilla-Lara1 *
2

University of Edinburgh

Sethu Vijayakumar1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract

Affordance Data Collection

Affordance, defined as the potential actions that an object
offers, is crucial for embodied AI agents. For example, such
knowledge directs an agent to grasp a knife by the handle
for cutting or by the blade for safe handover. While existing approaches have made notable progress, affordance
research still faces three key challenges: data scarcity, poor
generalization, and real-world deployment. Specifically,
there is a lack of large-scale affordance datasets with precise segmentation maps, existing models struggle to generalize across different domains or novel object and affordance classes, and little work demonstrates deployability in
real-world scenarios. In this work, we address these issues
by proposing a complete affordance learning system that (1)
takes in egocentric videos and outputs precise affordance
annotations without human labeling, (2) leverages geometric information and vision foundation models to improve
generalization, and (3) introduces a framework that facilitates affordance-oriented robotic manipulation such as tool
grasping and robot-to-human tool handover. Experimental
results show that our model surpasses the state-of-the-art
by 13.8% in mIoU, and the framework achieves 77.1% successful grasping among 179 trials, including evaluations on
seen, unseen classes, and cluttered scenes. Project page:
https://reagan1311.github.io/affgrasp.

…

Robot Deployment

Cut
Grasp

Grasp

(a) Existing work

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of affordance data collection and robot deployment. Existing work [2, 19, 27, 28] collects the graspable affordance as Gaussian heatmaps, whereas we extract both graspable
and functional affordances with precise segmentation masks, enabling tool grasping, tool-object interaction, and robot-to-human
tool handover.

1. Introduction

as they require detailed annotations of object parts, which
are small, low-resolution, and often occluded. For example,
accurately segmenting the handle of a spoon for holding is
challenging due to its thin structure and potential occlusions
in cluttered scenes. Second, current models often struggle
to generalize to diverse new objects, affordances, or environments, as they are typically trained from scratch on a
limited set of data. Finally, few affordance studies deploy
methods in real robots, where the models need to be robust
to noise, novel scenes, and other real-world factors. These
three challenges are in fact deeply interconnected: a lack
of large-scale and diverse data limits model generalization,
which is essential for reliable real-world deployment.
To tackle each of these challenges, we propose a comprehensive affordance learning system that encompasses data
collection, model learning, and robot deployment. The system starts with an automatic pipeline for collecting training
data from egocentric videos, which are rich in human-object
interactions. While a number of studies [2, 19, 28, 36] have
explored extracting affordances from egocentric videos, two
limitations persist in their pipeline as illustrated in Fig. 1:
(1) The focus is primarily on how humans grasp objects

Understanding affordances of an object means knowing the
possible actions it enables as well as locating specific object parts for those actions. This knowledge serves as a
key link between perception and action, enabling an intelligent system to transition from observing how an object
is used to actually performing the action itself. Despite its
importance and recent progress, current affordance-related
research often suffers from three major challenges: data
scarcity, poor generalization, and real-world deployment.
First, affordance datasets are scarce and expensive to create,
* Corresponding authors

10581

