This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MikuDance: Animating Character Art with Mixed Motion Dynamics
Xianfang Zeng2†
Xin Chen3
Wei Zuo2
Gang Yu2‡
1
2
3
Wuhan University
StepFun
ByteDance

Zhigang Tu1‡

Control Net-1

Control Net-n

…

Fusion Module
Simple Character image

Denoising UNet

Char.
Motion

We propose MikuDance, a diffusion-based pipeline incorporating mixed motion dynamics to animate stylized character art. MikuDance consists of two key techniques: Mixed
Motion Modeling and Mixed-Control Diffusion, to address the challenges of high-dynamic motion and referenceguidance misalignment in character art animation. Specifically, a Scene Motion Tracking strategy is presented to explicitly model the dynamic camera in pixel-wise space, enabling unified character-scene motion modeling. Building
on this, the Mixed-Control Diffusion implicitly aligns the
scale and body shape of diverse characters with motion
guidance, allowing flexible control of local character motion. Subsequently, a Motion-Adaptive Normalization module is incorporated to effectively inject global scene motion,
paving the way for comprehensive character art animation.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of MikuDance across various
character art and motion guidance, consistently producing
high-quality animations with remarkable motion dynamics.

Scene
Motion

Abstract

Reference Net

https://kebii.github.io/MikuDance

Previous Methods

Project page:

MikuDance (Ours)

Jiaxu Zhang1,2

Human
Pose

Low-dynamic motion

Mixed Motion
Modeling

Driving Video

Mixed-Control
Diffusion
Complex Character art

High-dynamic motion

Figure 1. We propose MikuDance, a Diffusion-based pipeline for
animating complex and stylized character art with high-dynamic
motion guidance. The core insight of MikuDance lies in its Mixed
Motion Modeling and Mixed-Control Diffusion capabilities.

1. Introduction

foreground and background, making unified control and
consistently temporal maintaining difficult. For instance, in
the second drawing shown in Figure 1, the girl is portrayed
in an elegant dress against an artistic background, driven
by large-scale dance motion and camera movements. Existing image animation methods, such as Animate Anyone
[14] and DISCO [36], are primarily limited to animating
humans with a static camera and a clean background. In
contrast, animating character art requires the model to handle large-scale motion within complex scenes. As a result,
simultaneously modeling the high-dynamic motion of both
characters and the backgrounds becomes a critical task.
The second challenge in animating character art stems
from the unique body shapes and diverse scales of characters, which often misalign with motion guidance. For
example, anime characters exhibit a large head-to-body ratio, exaggerated poses, and varied artistic styles. As shown
in Figure 1, previous methods employ separate networks to
process the reference image and motion guidance, oversimplifying the task by assuming a pre-aligned human body
[30, 51], or performing alignment through pre-processing
[37], which often leads to unnecessarily complex motion
control architectures. However, since art images feature
distinct characters, explicit alignment becomes impractical.
Thus, implicitly aligning the reference and guidance within
a unified structure presents a significant task.

Character art plays a crucial role in the film, game, and
digital design industries. Animating character art, which
brings static character images to life, has been an increasingly prominent challenge in computer vision and graphics. Traditional animation software, such as MMD [11],
and Live2D [22], requires professional skills, posing significant barriers for non-experts. Recently, image-to-video
generation methods [7, 19, 21, 40, 50] have emerged as a
promising solution for animation. However, these methods
are primarily designed for animating real-world humans and
cannot be directly applied to character art due to the following two key challenges.
The first challenge in animating character art arises from
the high-dynamic motion guidance for both the complex
† Xianfang Zeng is the project leader.
‡ Corresponding authors: skicy@outlook.com, tuzhigang@whu.edu.cn

19689

