This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scendi Score: Prompt-Aware Diversity Evaluation via
Schur Complement of CLIP Embeddings
Azim Ospanov*

Mohammad Jalali*

Farzan Farnia*

aospanov9@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

mjalali24@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Diversity due to Image Generator

Diversity due to Text Prompt Variety

cat and dog read a
book about animals

cat and dog read with
paws resting on a book

cat and dog read a
book about history

cat and dog read with
a cup of warm milk

cat and dog chase a
blowing feather

cat and a dog curl up
on a picnic blanket

cat and a dog dig up
an old bone

cat and a dog spy
on birds

cat and dog explore a
picture book together

cat and dog read the
same page at once

cat and dog read a
book about explorers

cat and dog read
about great inventors

cat and dog run
through daisies

cat and a dog leap
from rock to rock

cat and dog sniff a
flower in the garden

cat and dog balance
on a wooden fence

Vendi = 20.5

RKE = 4.2

Scendi = 2.7

Vendi = 37.1

RKE = 6.4

Scendi = 1.7

Figure 1. Comparison of model-driven diversity (left) and prompt-driven diversity (right) in 200 images generated for similar ”cat and dog”
prompts (left) vs. 200 images generated for diverse ”cat and dog” prompts (right). The diversity metrics for unconditional generation, Vendi
and RKE, favor the right-side case, but the Scendi score captures intrinsic model diversity, suggesting the left side has higher diversity.

Abstract
The use of CLIP embeddings to assess the fidelity of
samples produced by text-to-image generative models has
been extensively explored in the literature. While the widely
adopted CLIPScore, derived from the cosine similarity
of text and image embeddings, effectively measures the
alignment of a generated image, it does not quantify the
diversity of images generated by a text-to-image model. In
this work, we extend the application of CLIP embeddings
to quantify and interpret the intrinsic diversity of textto-image models, which are responsible for generating
diverse images from similar text prompts, which we refer
to as prompt-aware diversity. To achieve this, we propose
a decomposition of the CLIP-based kernel covariance
matrix of image data into text-based and non-text-based
components. Using the Schur complement of the joint
image-text kernel covariance matrix, we perform this

decomposition and define the matrix-based entropy of the
decomposed component as the Schur Complement ENtopy
DIversity (Scendi) score, as a measure of the promptaware diversity for prompt-guided generative models.
Additionally, we discuss the application of the Schur
complement-based decomposition to nullify the influence
of a given prompt on the CLIP embedding of an image,
enabling focus or defocus of the embedded vectors on
specific objects. We present several numerical results
that apply our proposed Scendi score to evaluate textto-image and LLM (text-to-text) models. Our numerical
results indicate the success of the Scendi score in capturing
the intrinsic diversity of prompt-guided generative models.
The codebase is available at https://github.com/
aziksh-ospanov/scendi-score.

1. Introduction
Prompt-guided generative models, which generate data
guided by an input text prompt, have gained significant

* The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Department of Computer
Science & Engineering

16927

