This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicCity: Geometry-Aware 3D City Generation from Satellite Imagery with
Multi-View Consistency
Xingbo Yao1,∗

Xuanmin Wang3,∗ Hao Wu1,2,∗ Chengliang Ping1 Doudou Zhang1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Tianjin University

MAGIC CITY

(a) Multiview images with city-level consistency

(c) Diverse style

(d) Consistent Geometry

Hui Xiong1,2,†

(b) 3D Reconstruction

(e) Broad application scenarios

Figure 1. Overview of MagicCity. Given satellite input, MagicCity generates (a) multi-view images with city-level consistency. (b) These
images are then fed into a robust reconstruction pipeline to generate a 3D city. Our approach achieves (c) diverse style generation while
maintaining (d) geometric consistency across views. (e) The proposed method has broad application scenarios, including 3D modeling
assets for games, urban simulation, and more.

Abstract
Directly generating 3D cities from satellite imagery opens
up new possibilities for gaming and mapping services.
However, this task remains challenging due to the limited
information in satellite views, making it difficult for existing methods to achieve both photorealistic textures and geometric accuracy. To address these challenges, we propose
MagicCity, a novel large-scale generative model for photorealistic 3D city generation with geometric consistency.
Given a satellite image, our framework first extracts 3D
geometric information and encodes it alongside textural
features using a dual encoder. These features then guide
a multi-branch diffusion model to generate city-scale, geometrically consistent multi-view images. To further enhance texture consistency across different viewpoints, we
propose an Inter-Frame Cross Attention mechanism that
enables feature sharing across different frames. Additionally, we incorporate a Hierarchical Geometric-Aware Module and a Consistency Evaluator to improve overall scene
consistency. Finally, the generated images are fed into our
robust 3D reconstruction pipeline to produce high-visual

quality and geometrically consistent 3D cities. Moreover,
we contribute CityVista, a high-quality dataset comprising 500 3D city scenes along with corresponding multiview images and satellite imagery to advance research in
3D city generation. Experimental results demonstrate that
MagicCity surpasses state-of-the-art methods in both geometric consistency and visual quality. Our project page:
https://github.com/YaoXingbo/MagicCity

1. Introduction
3D city generation is driving innovation in gaming [16, 45],
urban simulation [32, 33], and mapping services [14, 46].
Directly generating 3D cities from satellite imagery offers
an efficient way to transform real-world environments into
detailed digital twins. This approach not only frees designers from tedious manual tasks but also preserves the authenticity of the real city. However, the generated 3D cities often
suffer from low texture quality or geometric inconsistencies. Satellite imagery offers only a top-down view and is
missing crucial details such as building facades, street-level

25325

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

