This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FiffDepth: Feed-forward Transformation of Diffusion-Based Generators for
Detailed Depth Estimation
Yunpeng Bai
Qixing Huang
The University of Texas at Austin

Input Image

FiffDepth

Depth Anything v2

Depth Pro

Figure 1. Compared to other methods, our model achieves more accurate details and better generalization in depth estimation. The final
row shows the point cloud generated from the estimated depth results, and the corresponding depth map can be referenced in Figure 5.

Abstract

accuracy, stability, and fine-grained detail, offering significant improvements in MDE performance against state-ofthe-art MDE approaches. The paper’s source code is available here: https://yunpeng1998.github.io/
FiffDepth/

Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) is a fundamental
3D vision problem with numerous applications such as 3D
scene reconstruction, autonomous navigation, and AI content creation. However, robust and generalizable MDE remains challenging due to limited real-world labeled data
and distribution gaps between synthetic datasets and real
data. Existing methods often struggle with real-world test
data with low efficiency, reduced accuracy, and lack of detail. To address these issues, we propose an efficient MDE
approach named FiffDepth. The key feature of FiffDepth
is its use of diffusion priors. It transforms diffusion-based
image generators into a feed-forward architecture for detailed depth estimation. FiffDepth preserves key generative
features and integrates the strong generalization capabilities of models like DINOv2. Through benchmark evaluations, we demonstrate that FiffDepth achieves exceptional

1. Introduction
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) is a fundamental 3D
vision problem with numerous applications in 3D scene reconstruction [46], autonomous navigation [47], and more
recently in generating AI-based content [2, 41]. MDE
has made significant progress in the era of deep learning [21, 34, 35, 52]. Neural networks trained from paired
datasets of images and pixel depth exhibit encouraging results and often outperform non-deep learning based counterparts that build on monocular depth cues. Despite significant progress, fundamental challenges remain in efficiency,

6023

