This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Image Fusion for Multi-Illuminant White-Balance Correction
David Serrano-Lozano1,2 Aditya Arora3,4,5 Luis Herranz6 Konstantinos G. Derpanis3,4
Michael S. Brown3 Javier Vazquez-Corral1,2
1

2
Computer Vision Center
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 3 York University
4
Vector Institute 5 TU Darmstadt 6 Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
{dserrano, javier.vazquez}@cvc.uab.cat
luis.herranz@uam.es
{adityac8, kosta, mbrown}@yorku.ca

߂‫ ܧ‬ൌ ͳͲǤͻͺ

(a) Daylight (5500K)

߂‫ ܧ‬ൌ ͳͲǤͶͷ

(b) Cloudy (6500K)

߂‫ ܧ‬ൌ ͸ǤͲͳ

(c) DeepWB [2]

߂‫ ܧ‬ൌ ͻǤͶͳ

(d) MixedWB [6]

߂‫ ܧ‬ൌ ͳǤͻ͸

(e) Ours

(f) White-balanced

Figure 1. Camera presets (a-b) fail to correct color casts. DeepWB [2] (c) struggles under multiple illuminants. MixedWB [6] (d) linearly
blends different WB settings but also fails on complex cases (e.g., the white wall). Our transformer-based method (e) effectively blends
ﬁve WB presets, achieving better correction. ΔE2000 values (lower is better) are shown in the bottom-right corner of each image.

Abstract

Conventional AWB techniques [8, 12, 21, 26, 48] assume
that a single light source illuminates a scene. Typical AWB
methods operate on the RAW sensor image to ﬁrst estimate
the color cast in the image in the form of a sensor-speciﬁc
R,G,B vector. Subsequently, the illumination’s color cast is
removed by scaling each color channel of the RAW image
such that the estimated illumination becomes achromatic
(i.e., R=G=B). The white-balanced RAW image is then
rendered through the camera’s image signal processor (ISP)
to render the ﬁnal image in a standard RGB (sRGB) space.

White balance (WB) correction under multiple illuminants
is a persistent challenge in computer vision. Recent methods explored fusion-based approaches, where a neural network linearly blends multiple sRGB versions of an input image, each processed with predeﬁned WB presets.
However, we demonstrate that these methods are suboptimal. Additionally, existing fusion-based methods rely on
sRGB WB datasets that lack proper multi-illuminant training data. To address these challenges, we introduce two key
contributions. First, we propose an efﬁcient transformerbased model that effectively captures spatial dependencies
across sRGB WB presets, substantially improving upon linear fusion techniques. Second, we introduce a large-scale
multi-illuminant dataset comprising over 16,000 sRGB images rendered with ﬁve different WB settings, along with
WB-corrected images. Our method achieves up to 100%
improvement over existing techniques on our new multiilluminant image fusion dataset.
https://revisitingmiwb.github.io

1. Introduction

While the single-illuminant assumption works reasonably well for many scenes, it fails on common scenes with
multiple illuminants, such as indoor scenes with illumination from indoor and outdoor lighting (e.g., via a window).
Prior work examined ways to correct such multiple illuminations [43, 49, 50]. These methods typically follow a
two-step process that ﬁrst estimates the constituent scene illuminants, followed by spatially varying WB correction in
the RAW sensor image based on the estimates. The need
for both estimation and correction makes this a challenging
problem. Another bottleneck for multi-illuminant learning
methods is the difﬁculty in preparing per-pixel annotated
RAW image datasets for training and testing.

Auto-white-balance (AWB) correction is a crucial step applied onboard cameras to remove the color cast caused by
the light conditions in the imaged scene. Proper whitebalance correction is needed to produce visually pleasing
images and to assist downstream computer vision tasks [4].

Aﬁﬁ et al. [6] introduced MixedWB, a multi-illuminant
WB correction approach that leverages pre-deﬁned WB values for common scene illuminations (i.e., the camera settings for manual WB mode rather than AWB). The sensor’s
R,G,B response to several common scene illuminations can

8275

