This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Oriented Human Grasp Synthesis via Context- and Task-Aware Diffusers
An-Lun Liu1
1

Yu-Wei Chao2

Yi-Ting Chen1 *

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

2

NVIDIA

Abstract
In this paper, we study task-oriented human grasp synthesis,
a new grasp synthesis task that demands both task and context awareness. At the core of our method is the task-aware
contact maps. Unlike traditional contact maps that only
reason about the manipulated object and its relation with
the hand, our enhanced maps take into account scene and
task information. This comprehensive map is critical for
hand-object interaction, enabling accurate grasping poses
that align with the task. We propose a two-stage pipeline
that first constructs a task-aware contact map informed by
the scene and task. In the subsequent stage, we use this
contact map to synthesize task-oriented human grasps. We
introduce a new dataset and a metric for the proposed task
to evaluate our approach. Our experiments validate the
importance of modeling both scene and task, demonstrating significant improvements over existing methods in both
grasp quality and task performance. See our project page
for more details: https://hcis-lab.github.io/TOHGS/

1. Introduction
Hand-object interaction has been a pivotal topic in computer vision research. We have seen diverse efforts, spanning from hand-object pose estimation [19, 30], 3D handobject reconstruction [7, 11, 20, 54], human grasp synthesis [15, 24, 25, 28, 32, 42, 45, 49], affordance modeling [18, 28, 32, 39, 55], hand-object interaction dataset [3,
4, 9, 15, 17, 19, 20, 23, 42, 53], to hand motion trajectory [31, 44]. Predicting realistic and viable hand-object
interactions opens up new applications in augmented reality [41], robotics [1, 2, 27, 29, 33, 36, 48, 49, 51, 52, 59],
and human-robot interactions [10, 14, 50].
Despite significant progress in hand-object interaction,
limited attention has been given to grasp motion synthesis
that both aligns with task objectives and incorporates scene
contextual information. Recent notable work [5, 13, 43, 56–
58] focus on generating plausible human grasp motions
for a variety of objects, typically with a single objective,
* Corresponding Author

(a)

Initial scene

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Task-oriented human grasp synthesis aims to synthesize
collision-free and task-aware human grasps from initial and goal
scene point clouds. Rows (a) and (b) show failures due to a lack of
context or task awareness, causing collisions and penetrations. In
contrast, (c) demonstrates a successful task-oriented synthesis that
considers both scene context and intended task objective.

such as moving the object to a desired location [5, 13, 58].
GraspXL [56] highlights the importance of incorporating
multiple motion objectives, such as the desired heading directions and wrist rotations, while ensuring physical plausibility of the motion. ArtiGrasp [57] extends this by considering desired states of objects, such as opening a cabinet
door to a target articulation angle or keeping its base steady
in its initial pose. While these approaches show promise
in synthesizing grasp motions for specific objectives, they
do not consider environmental contexts, such as grasping in
a cluttered space for an object relocation task. This limits
their applicability to object-singulated manipulation tasks
in less complex environments.
To bridge this gap, we study task-oriented human grasp
synthesis, a new endeavor that seeks to generate human
grasps informed by both scene context and task objectives.
Fig. 1 illustrates a relocation task, constituting of grasping a
target object and relocating it to a designated location. The
task presents two unique challenges. First, a model needs
to possess scene context awareness to ensure that the syn-

10375

