This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AV-Flow: Transforming Text to Audio-Visual Human-like Interactions
Aggelina Chatziagapi
Stony Brook University

Louis-Philippe Morency
Meta AI

Hongyu Gong
Meta AI

aggelina@cs.stonybrook.edu

lpmorency@meta.com

hygong@meta.com

Michael Zollhöfer
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta

Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University

Alexander Richard
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta

zollhoefer@meta.com

samaras@cs.stonybrook.edu

richardalex@meta.com

Figure 1. We present AV-Flow, a novel method for joint audio-visual generation of 4D talking avatars, given text input only (e.g. obtained
from an LLM). Inter-connected diffusion transformers ensure cross-modal communication, synthesizing synchronized speech, facial motion, and head motion, based on the flow matching objective. AV-Flow enables empathetic dyadic interactions, by animating an always-on
avatar that actively listens and reacts to the audio-visual input of a user.

Abstract
We introduce AV-Flow, an audio-visual generative model
that animates photo-realistic 4D talking avatars given only
text input. In contrast to prior work that assumes an existing speech signal, we synthesize speech and vision jointly.
We demonstrate human-like speech synthesis, synchronized
lip motion, lively facial expressions and head pose; all generated from just text characters. The core premise of our
approach lies in the architecture of our two parallel diffusion transformers. Intermediate highway connections ensure communication between the audio and visual modalities, and thus, synchronized speech intonation and facial
dynamics (e.g., eyebrow motion). Our model is trained
with flow matching, leading to expressive results and fast
inference. In case of dyadic conversations, AV-Flow produces an always-on avatar, that actively listens and reacts
to the audio-visual input of a user. Through extensive experiments, we show that our method outperforms prior work,
synthesizing natural-looking 4D talking avatars.

communicate and interact with artificial intelligence and
knowledge-based systems using human language. However, such communication is currently largely limited to text
only, with some speech-based exceptions like GPT-4o. As
beings with spatial audio-visual sensing, humans evolved
to communicate best through speech and facial expressions.
An immersive and natural interaction between a human and
an AI system, therefore, requires more than just text.
In this work, we aim to get one step closer to closing this
gap. We demonstrate a method that synthesizes a photorealistic 4D avatar, based on text input only, and generates
speech, facial expressions, head motion, and lip sync simultaneously. Since listening and reactive expressions are
just as much part of a communication as speaking, we further show that we can learn active listening behavior – like
back-channeling of expressions – from the audio-visual input from a user. Overall, our approach allows to animate an
always-on 4D avatar by transforming text (e.g., as obtained
from an LLM) into expressive speech and facial motion, and
exhibits active listening and expressive reactions, leading to
empathetic dyadic interactions.
Our work is closely related to talking face generation, which has been a topic of research exploration for
many years. Early works learn phoneme-to-viseme mappings [6, 7]. More recent approaches model talking faces

1. Introduction
With the rise of large language models (LLMs), such as
ChatGPT or Llama, we have entered an era where we can

14270

