This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IMoRe: Implicit Program-Guided Reasoning for Human Motion Q&A
Yeo Keat Ee1
Eric Peh1
Hao Zhang1
Chinthani Sugandhika1,2 *
Hong Yang1
Deepu Rajan2
Basura Fernando1,2
1
Institute of High-Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Chen Li1 *

Abstract
Existing human motion Q&A methods rely on explicit program execution, where the requirement for manually defined
functional modules may limit the scalability and adaptability.
To overcome this, we propose an implicit program-guided
motion reasoning (IMoRe) framework that unifies reasoning across multiple query types without manually designed
modules. Unlike existing implicit reasoning approaches that
infer reasoning operations from question words, our model
directly conditions on structured program functions, ensuring a more precise execution of reasoning steps. Additionally,
we introduce a program-guided reading mechanism, which
dynamically selects multi-level motion representations from
a pretrained motion Vision Transformer (ViT), capturing
both high-level semantics and fine-grained motion cues. The
reasoning module iteratively refines memory representations,
leveraging structured program functions to extract relevant
information for different query types. Our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance on Babel-QA and generalizes
to a newly constructed motion Q&A dataset based on HuMMan, demonstrating its adaptability across different motion reasoning datasets. Code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/LUNAProject22/IMoRe.

Figure 1. Illustration of the Program-Guided Reasoning Process
for Human Motion Q&A. Given a motion sequence and a natural
language question, our model executes a structured reasoning process using a program-guided reasoning module.

and the difficulty of modeling spatiotemporal dependencies
at a fine-grained level. Recently, the human motion Q&A
task has been introduced in [11] to address complex and
fine-grained human motion understanding. Given a motion
sequence and a corresponding question in natural language,
this task requires multistep reasoning to predict various attributes of the motion sequence.

1. Introduction

Existing approaches [11] to human motion questionanswering (Q&A) rely on predefined functional modules
that explicitly perform reasoning steps such as filtering, relational inference, and querying. The advantage of explicit
program-based reasoning compared to previous end-to-end
approaches [33] lies in its interpretability, as it provides access to all intermediate execution results, and in its data
efficiency, since each functional module is designed with
a small set of parameters. Despite the advantages, these
explicit program execution-based methods suffer from limitations in scalability and adaptability due to their reliance
on manually defined functional modules. To overcome these
constraints, we propose a novel implicit program-guided
motion reasoning (IMoRe) framework that uses a unified
reasoning module across multiple types of queries. Instead
of leveraging separate handcrafted functional modules, our

Understanding human motion has been a crucial challenge in
computer vision, with wide applications in human-computer
interaction and embodied AI. Significant progress has been
made in human motion understanding, especially in action
recognition and motion forecasting, while fine-grained human motion understanding and reasoning over subtle motions have been overlooked. Identifying body parts or the
direction of movement involved in an action remains challenging due to the lack of high-quality annotated datasets,
occlusions, motion ambiguities, variability in human poses,
* Equal contribution.

12987

