This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SteerX: Creating Any Camera-Free 3D and 4D Scenes with Geometric Steering
Byeongjun Park1,2 *
1

Hyojun Go2 *
Hyungjin Chung2†

KAIST

2

Hyelin Nam2
Byung-Hoon Kim2,3
Changick Kim1†
3

EverEx

Yonsei University

https://byeongjun-park.github.io/SteerX/
Text-to-4D

Text-to-3D

A pink bicycle leaning against a fence

A carpet covers the living room floor, and a puppy is lying on it
playing with a kitten. To the right of the carpet, there is a toy ball.

Image-to-4D

A pair of sneakers

Image-to-3D

Figure 1. SteerX is a zero-shot inference-time steering approach that seamlessly integrates video generative models [24, 35, 59, 62, 80]
and feed-forward scene reconstruction models [24, 61, 86], enabling any 3D and 4D scene generation without explicit camera conditions.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Generating 3D and 4D scenes from images or text prompts
has attracted significant attention due to its potential applications in AR/VR and robotics [10, 63, 76]. This progress
is largely driven by the advancement of generative models [7, 25, 35, 62, 80] and neural scene representations [33,
46, 73]. Generative models learn the underlying distribution
of large-scale and high-quality video data, leveraging their
scalability without imposing explicit physical constraints.
In contrast, neural scene representations lift these distributions into structured 3D or 4D spaces, enforcing physical
consistency and enabling more faithful scene modeling.
In this context, recent efforts [2, 3, 23, 27, 59, 71, 75, 87]
have focused on producing geometrically consistent images
by fine-tuning generative models with camera pose parameters, where the generation process follows user-defined or
pre-defined camera trajectories. This facilitates seamless 3D

Recent progress in 3D/4D scene generation emphasizes
the importance of physical alignment throughout video generation and scene reconstruction. However, existing methods improve the alignment separately at each stage, making
it difficult to manage subtle misalignments arising from another stage. Here, we present SteerX, a zero-shot inferencetime steering method that unifies scene reconstruction into
the generation process, tilting data distributions toward better geometric alignment. To this end, we introduce two geometric reward functions for 3D/4D scene generation by
using pose-free feed-forward scene reconstruction models.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of SteerX in improving 3D/4D scene generation.
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

27326

