This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAViS: Text-bridged Audio-Visual Segmentation with Foundation Models
Ziyang Luo1 Nian Liu2,∗ Xuguang Yang1 Salman Khan2 Rao Muhammad Anwer2
Hisham Cholakkal2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan2 Junwei Han1,3
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

(a) Previous Model

Baby laughing

(b) TAViS
Audio
foundation
model

Class Name

or
Visual
foundation
model

Baby playing with dog

Audio

Input Frames

Baby babbling

Project to
common space

Baby chasing dog

Segmentation

Baby playing with dog

Segmentation

Baby climbing

Segmentation

GroundTruth

w/o text bridged

w/ text bridged

Text Space

Segmentation

Visual
foundation
model
Image

(c) Comparison results

Baby

Baby laughing

Baby
ImageBind

Baby crying

Audio1

ImageBind

Audio2

off-the-shelf combine

Audio Space

Prompt

Visual Space

SAM2

Figure 1. Illustration of TAViS compared with previous methods. (1) Previous methods often rely on single-modality foundation models
(top) or combine the visual foundation model with ImageBind in an off-the-shelf manner (bottom), which limits their ability to address the
misalignment of audio-visual information with significant intra-class diversity. (2) We propose TAViS, a novel framework that leverages two
foundation models: ImageBind and SAM2. The text-bridged alignment between visual and audio modalities serves as both prompts and
supervision signals for TAViS. (3) We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through comparative experiments with and without the
text-bridged mechanism.

Abstract
Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS) faces a fundamental challenge of effectively aligning audio and visual modalities.
While recent approaches leverage foundation models to address data scarcity, they often rely on single-modality knowledge or combine foundation models in an off-the-shelf manner, failing to address the cross-modal alignment challenge.
In this paper, we present TAViS, a novel framework that
couples the knowledge of multimodal foundation models
(ImageBind) for cross-modal alignment and a segmentation
foundation model (SAM2) for precise segmentation. However, effectively combining these models poses two key challenges: the difficulty in transferring the knowledge between
SAM2 and ImageBind due to their different feature spaces,
and the insufficiency of using only segmentation loss for
supervision. To address these challenges, we introduce a
text-bridged design with two key components: (1) a textbridged hybrid prompting mechanism where pseudo text provides class prototype information while retaining modality* Corresponding author: Nian Liu (liunian228@gmail.com)

specific details from both audio and visual inputs, and (2)
an alignment supervision strategy that leverages text as a
bridge to align shared semantic concepts within audio-visual
modalities. Our approach achieves superior performance on
single-source, multi-source, semantic datasets, and excels
in zero-shot settings. Source code has been available at
https://github.com/Sssssuperior/TAViS

1. Introduction
Audio-visual joint perception ability is crucial for our understanding of the surrounding environment. Various audiovisual collaboration tasks have emerged in recent years, including audio-visual sound separation [8, 38], visual sound
source localization [4, 14, 15, 35], and audio-visual video
understanding [16, 19, 23]. Distinct from these tasks, audiovisual segmentation (AVS) [46, 47] aims to generate pixelwise segmentation maps of sounding objects within a scene,
which has garnered increasing attention from the research
community.
The primary challenge in AVS lies in effectively align-

24014

