This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

π-AVAS: Can Physics-Integrated Audio-Visual Modeling
Boost Neural Acoustic Synthesis?
Susan Liang, Chao Huang, Yunlong Tang, Zeliang Zhang, Chenliang Xu
University of Rochester

Abstract

Geometry-Based
Audio Simulation

The Audio-Visual Acoustic Synthesis (AVAS) task aims to
model realistic audio propagation behavior within a specific visual scene. Prior works often rely on sparse image representations to guide acoustic synthesis. However,
we argue that this approach is insufficient to capture the
intricate physical properties of the environment and may
struggle with generalization across diverse scenes. In this
work, we review the limitations of existing pipelines and
address the research question: Can we leverage physical audio-visual associations to enhance neural acoustic
synthesis? We introduce Physics-Integrated Audio-Visual
Acoustic Synthesis (PI-AVAS or π-AVAS), a novel framework designed with two key objectives. i) Generalization:
We develop a vision-guided audio simulation framework
that leverages physics-based sound propagation. By explicitly modeling vision-grounded geometry and sound rays,
our approach achieves robust performance across diverse
visual environments. ii) Realism: While simulation-based
approaches offer generalizability, they often compromise on
realism. To mitigate this, we incorporate a second stage for
data-centric refinement, where we propose a flow matchingbased audio refinement model to narrow the gap between
simulation and real-world audio-visual scenes. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of
our method. We achieve state-of-the-art performance on the
RWAVS-Gen, RWAVS, and RAF datasets. Additionally, we
show that our approach can be seamlessly integrated with
existing methods to significantly improve their performance.

Vision-Informed
Neural Rendering

Ours (two stages)

IMG
Pose

…
Refinement

Realism:

Realism:

Realism:

Generalization:

Generalization:

Generalization:

Figure 1. An intuitive comparison between audio simulation approaches, neural rendering approaches, and our π-AVAS. Physicsbased approaches generalize well but lack realism, while neural
rendering produces high-quality results but struggles with novel
sound sources. Our two-stage method achieves both realism and
generalization using the physics-based sound simulation and audio refinement model.

1. Introduction

ing a local feature grid and an implicit decoder. INRAS
[43] divides sound modeling into a three-stage implicit neural field. Chen et al. [6] present a vision-conditioned audio
transformation network to synthesize audio for new listening positions. Liang et al. [21] design a NeRF-like system
to jointly render audio and visual content.
While these methods produce plausible results for fixed
sound sources, they struggle to generalize to novel sound
sources due to inadequate modeling of sound propagation.
Sound propagation is influenced by various environmental
factors, including the positions of the sound emitter and receiver, the room geometry, and the material properties of
surfaces. The complex interactions among these physical
properties impact the propagation behavior in a given environment. To address these factors, existing methods typically learn from sparse images implicitly within neural networks. Although this implicit modeling of visual information can support audio synthesis, it falls short of accurately capturing the necessary physical properties that govern sound propagation. In other words, the limited imageaudio pairs do not provide sufficient information to infer the

The audio-visual acoustic synthesis task, as introduced by
Chen et al. [6] and Liang et al. [21], aims to generate realistic binaural audio for new speaking and listening positions based on vision data. This task presents unique challenges, including synthesizing realistic binaural audio and
achieving novel-view synthesis. Various approaches have
been proposed to address this problem [6, 9, 21, 22, 26, 43].
NAF [26] simulates sound propagation within a scene us-

13942

