This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Dense Feature Matching via Lifting Single 2D Image to 3D Space
Yingping Liang1 Yutao Hu2 Wenqi Shao3 Ying Fu1†
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
3
Shanghai Al Laboratory
{liangyingping,fuying}@bit.edu.cn

huyutao@seu.edu.cn

Traditional Practice
Non-Robust
Matching

shaowenqi@pjlab.org.cn

Our Proposed Two-stage Framework
Large-scale and Diverse
Single-view Images

Lifting 2D Image
to 3D Space

Stage Ⅰ
3D-aware
Encoder

Multi-view Image Collection
n Less than 1,000 Scene
n Hard to Collect
n Clean & Static

Feature
Decoder

2D Features

Frozen 2D
Encoder

3D Feature
Gaussians

3D-aware
Encoder

Depth
Estimation
Single view

Render / Pose Estimate

Multi-view Images &
2D Features

n Various Scene, Weather,
Lighting, and Content
n More than 5 Million
n Easy to Collect
n Noisy & Dynamic

Monocular
Depth

Virtual
Camera

Novel Views

Feature
Decoder

3D-aware Features

Stage Ⅱ

Figure 1. Traditional methods rely on multi-view image collections, which are hard to collect and offer limited diversity. Also, encoders are
mainly pre-trained on single 2D images and are difficult to capture 3D correspondences in feature matching. One the contrary, our method
utilizes large-scale single-view 2D images via lifting them to 3D space and multi-view rendering, providing both 3D-aware encoder trained
from 3DGS and robust feature decoder for dense feature matching.

Abstract

sive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves superior generalization across zero-shot evaluation benchmarks, highlighting the effectiveness of the proposed framework for robust feature matching. Code is available at
https://github.com/Sharpiless/L2M .

Feature matching plays a fundamental role in many computer vision tasks, yet existing methods rely on scarce and
clean multi-view image collections, which constrains their
generalization to diverse and challenging scenarios. Moreover, conventional feature encoders are typically trained on
single-view 2D images, limiting their capacity to capture
3D-aware correspondences. In this paper, we propose a
novel two-stage framework that lifts 2D images to 3D space,
named as Lift to Match (L2M), taking full advantage of
large-scale and diverse single-view images. To be specific,
in the first stage, we learn a 3D-aware feature encoder using a combination of multi-view image synthesis and 3D
feature Gaussian representation, which injects 3D geometry
knowledge into the encoder. In the second stage, a novelview rendering strategy, combined with large-scale synthetic data generation from single-view images, is employed
to learn a feature decoder for robust feature matching, thus
achieving generalization across diverse domains. Exten-

1. Introduction
Feature matching is a critical task in computer vision, enabling a wide array of applications, including 3D reconstruction [15, 31, 51], visual localization [39, 46, 47], and
robotics [7, 48, 57]. Traditional feature matching methodes,
such as SIFT [30], SURF [2], and ORB [38], primarily rely
on hand-crafted descriptors. In recent years, deep learning techniques have significantly advanced feature matching [32]. Models such as SuperPoint [11] and DKM [13],
have outperformed traditional methods, showing superior to
real-world conditions and achieving state-of-the-art results.
However, as shown in Figure 1, current learning-based
methods continue to depend heavily on large, annotated 2D
image collections [23, 58], typically collected from multi-

† Corresponding author.

6621

