This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G EN F LOW RL: Shaping Rewards with Generative Object-Centric Flow
in Visual Reinforcement Learning
Kelin Yu∗

Sheng Zhang∗

Harshit Soora Furong Huang Heng Huang
University of Maryland, College Park

Pratap Tokekar

Ruohan Gao

{kyu85, shengz, hsoora, furongh, heng, tokekar, rhgao}@umd.edu

Figure 1. Illustration of our G EN F LOW RL framework, which guides visuomotor RL policy by taking the generative object-centric
flow as task motion prior (Right). In our proposed hybrid reward model, dense flow matching between online trajectories and flow prior,
synergizing with sparse state-aware reward, facilitates efficient, robust, and generalizable policy learning. Our extensive evaluation includes
10 challenging simulation manipulation tasks (Fig. a) and real-world cross-embodiment reward matchness probing experiments (Fig. b).

Abstract
Recent advances have shown that video generation models can enhance robot learning by deriving effective robot
actions through inverse dynamics. However, these methods
heavily depend on the quality of generated data and struggle with fine-grained manipulation due to the lack of environment feedback. While video-based reinforcement learning improves policy robustness, it remains constrained by
the uncertainty of video generation and the challenges of
collecting large-scale robot datasets for training diffusion
models. To address these limitations, we propose G EN F LOW RL, which derives shaped rewards from generated
∗ Equal contribution.

flow trained from diverse cross-embodiment datasets. This
enables learning generalizable and robust policies from diverse demonstrations using low-dimensional, object-centric
features. Experiments on 10 manipulation tasks, both in
simulation and real-world cross-embodiment evaluations,
demonstrate that G EN F LOW RL effectively leverages manipulation features extracted from generated object-centric
flow, consistently achieving superior performance across
diverse and challenging scenarios. Our Project Page:
https://colinyu1.github.io/genflowrl/.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in robot learning have demonstrated the
potential of video generative foundation models in deriv-

13183

