This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLaVA-PruMerge: Adaptive Token Reduction for Efficient Large Multimodal
Models
Yuzhang Shang1,2, * Mu Cai2,∗ Bingxin Xu3,∗ Yong Jae Lee2,†
1
UCF 2 UW-Madison 3 Illinois Tech 4 UIC
PruMerge

Abstract

Yan Yan4,†

Language Response 𝒀𝒂

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have shown significant
visual reasoning capabilities by connecting a visual encoder and a large language model. LMMs typically take in
a fixed and large amount of visual tokens, such as the penultimate layer features in the CLIP visual encoder, as the prefix content. Recent LMMs incorporate more complex visual
inputs, such as high-resolution images and videos, which
further increases the number of visual tokens significantly.
However, due to the inherent design of the Transformer architecture, the computational costs of these models tend to
increase quadratically with the number of input tokens. To
tackle this problem, we explore a token reduction mechanism that identifies significant spatial redundancy among
visual tokens. In response, we propose PruMerge, a novel
adaptive visual token reduction strategy that significantly
reduces the number of visual tokens without compromising the performance of LMMs. Specifically, to metric the
importance of each token, we exploit the sparsity observed
in the visual encoder, characterized by the sparse distribution of attention scores between the class token and visual
tokens. This sparsity enables us to dynamically select the
most crucial visual tokens to retain. Subsequently, we cluster the selected (unpruned) tokens based on their key similarity and merge them with the unpruned tokens, effectively
supplementing and enhancing their informational content.
Empirically, when applied to LLaVA-1.5 [28] and VideoLLaVA [26], our approach can reduce the number of visual tokens by 4 times, and achieve comparable or better
performance across diverse visual question-answering and
reasoning tasks.

Language Model 𝒇𝜽
𝑯𝒗

𝑯𝒒

Tokenizer

Projector 𝑾

Language Instruction 𝑿𝒒

𝒁′𝒗

Token PruMerge
𝒁𝒗

Vision Encoder
Vision Input 𝑿𝒗

PruMerged Token Visualization

Figure 1. Main idea of PruMerge: We prune and merge visual
tokens produced by the vision encoder, while keeping all other
procedures of the LMM the same. By reducing the number of
visual tokens, PruMerge, significantly reduces the computation
cost for text generation in LMMs (around 4-10 times in FLOPs
for LMM prefill), while can maintain comparable performance. A
visualization of the selected tokens: PruMerge can adaptively
select visual tokens based on the information density of the visual
input, enabling the LLM to perceive visual input effectively and
efficiently. More attentive tokens are sampled in complex images
such as ones with text, while fewer are sampled on simpler images.
Attentive tokens are located at the regions with dense information.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) [21, 34, 42, 43] have
shown strong reasoning abilities. LLMs are usually highcapacity Transformers [44] pretrained with a large-scale
* Equal First Author. † Equal Advising Author. Work done during
Yuzhang’s visit to UW-Madison.

22857

text corpus. Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), inherit
LLMs for text generation, while also leveraging a visual encoder such as CLIP-ViT [37] to embed image patches into
visual tokens as the prefix visual context.
LMMs need substantial computation for inference. The
LLM is the primary factor for the high computation cost,
since the visual encoder is usually quite small relative to the
LLM. For example, the commonly used CLIP visual encoder only has 0.3B parameters, while the corresponding
LLM such as LLaMA [43], Vicuna [45], DeepSeek [27],
and Qwen [3] can have 7B, 13B, or even 70B+ parameters.
Therefore, reducing the LLM’s inference cost is the key to
achieving low LMM inference cost.
Prior works [8, 9, 49] mainly focus on replacing the LLM

