This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Monocular 4D Scene Reconstruction for Egocentric Videos
Chengbo Yuan1,2 , Geng Chen2,3† , Li Yi1,2 , Yang Gao1,2‡
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 3 UC San Diego
ycb24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

gec001@ucsd.edu

{ericyi, gaoyangiiis}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Fast, Dense & Generalizable

Egocentric videos provide valuable insights into human interactions with the physical world, which has sparked growing interest in the computer vision and robotics communities. A critical challenge in fully understanding the geometry and dynamics of egocentric videos is dense scene
reconstruction. However, the lack of high-quality labeled
datasets in this field has hindered the effectiveness of current supervised learning methods. In this work, we aim to
address this issue by exploring an self-supervised dynamic
scene reconstruction approach. We introduce EgoMono4D,
a novel model that unifies the estimation of multiple variables necessary for Egocentric Monocular 4D reconstruction, including camera intrinsic, camera poses, and video
depth, all within a fast feed-forward framework. Starting
from pretrained single-frame depth and intrinsic estimation model, we extend it with camera poses estimation and
align multi-frame results on large-scale unlabeled egocentric videos. We evaluate EgoMono4D in both in-domain
and zero-shot generalization settings, achieving superior
performance in dense pointclouds sequence reconstruction
compared to all baselines. EgoMono4D represents the first
attempt to apply self-supervised learning for pointclouds
sequence reconstruction to the label-scarce egocentric field,
enabling fast, dense, and generalizable reconstruction. The
interactable visualization, code and trained models are released https://egomono4d.github.io/.

Intrinsic

Video Depth

Egocentric Video

EgoMono4D

4D Reconstruction

Label-Free Self-Supervised Training
Camera Poses

Figure 1. We propose EgoMono4D, a model that unifies the estimation of camera intrinsic, camera poses, and video depth for fast
and dense 4D reconstruction of egocentric scenes. EgoMono4D is
trained solely on large-scale unlabeled videos in an self-supervised
learning framework.

terest from both the research community (e.g., computer vision [50, 88] and robotics [43, 84]) and industry (e.g., virtual reality [46]).
To better understand the geometry and dynamics in
these activities, a crucial task is the dense 4D reconstruction from internet-scale egocentric video datasets [14, 19].
Here, dense 4D reconstruction is represented as a pointclouds sequence which captures the 3D position of every pixel in each frame within a global coordinate system [38, 73, 75, 87], preserving maximal geometry details.
This task requires: (1) dense per-pixel reconstruction, (2)
the ability to handle dynamic motions in egocentric videos.
To facilitate large-scale usage [14, 79, 84], (3) strong generalization and fast processing speeds are also needed to adapt
to large-scale unseen egocentric scenes.
However, current methods fail to meet these demands.
Traditional methods [56, 66], such as Structure-fromMotion (SfM) or SLAM system combined with dense depth
estimation [48, 83], face significant challenges in reconstructing dynamic scenes. These multi-step approaches also

1. Introduction
Egocentric videos, especially Hand Object Interaction
(HOI) videos, capture a vast amount of knowledge about
human interaction with the physical world, particularly in
tool usage. Due to this rich source of interaction knowledge, egocentric human videos have gained increasing in† Work done during the internship at Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. ‡ The
corresponding author.

8863

