This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-Guided Diffusion for Training-Free Text-Driven Image Translation
Zheng Gao1,2* , Jifei Song2 , Zhensong Zhang2 , Jiankang Deng3 , Ioannis Patras1
1

Queen Mary University of London, 2 Huawei London Research Center, 3 Imperial College London

Abstract

Source image

Current training-free text-driven image translation primarily uses diffusion features (convolution and attention) of pre-trained model as guidance to preserve the
style/structure of source image in translated image. However, the coarse guidance at feature level struggles with
style (e.g., visual patterns) and structure (e.g., edges) alignment with the source. Based on the observation that the
low-/high-frequency components retain style/structure information of image, in this work, we propose training-free
Frequency-Guided Diffusion (FGD), which tailors low/high-frequency guidance for style- and structure-guided
translation, respectively. For low-frequency guidance
(style-guided), we substitute the low-frequency components
of diffusion latents from sampling process with those from
inversion of source and normalize the obtained latent with
composited spectrum to enforce color alignment. For highfrequency guidance (structure-guided), we propose highfrequency alignment and high-frequency injection that compensate each other. High-frequency alignment preserves
edges and contour by adjusting the predicted noise with
guidance function that aligns high-frequency image regions
between sampling and source image. High-frequency injection facilitates layout preservation by injecting highfrequency components of diffusion convolution features
(from inversion) to sampling process. Qualitative and quantitative results verify the superiority of our method on styleand structure-guided translation tasks.

FBSDiff (86s)

“a painting of a cat”
Source image

“a sketch of a
woman”

Ours (12s)

Source image

FBSDiff (86s)

“... panda”
“a sketch of a cat”
Low frequency (style-guided translation)

FBSDiff (86s)

Ours (25s)

Source image

“... Doberman”

FBSDiff (86s)

“… oil painting ...”
“a sketch of a cat”
High frequency (structure-guided translation)

Ours (12s)

Ours (25s)

“… watercolor
painting ...”

Figure 1. Applications of our method FGD, Frequency-Guided
Diffusion for training-free text-driven image translation. Running
time on one NVIDIA 3090 GPU is reported. Given a source image
and its text description (left), the translated image (right) is produced via a text-to-image (T2I) process, where the target prompt
(right) is text conditioning and source image’s frequency is guidance. “cat” → “panda” indicates style-guided translation as the
style of watercolor painting is retained. “a sketch of a cat” →
“a watercolor painting of a cat” indicates structure-guided translation as the contour of cat is retained.

1. Introduction

modules [4, 25, 32, 51–53], which is expensive. Trainingfree methods, which are most relevant to our work, commonly use diffusion features (convolution and attention)
of pre-trained diffusion model (from inversion of source
image) as guidance to control the sampling process [16,
29, 30, 33, 43]. However, the coarse guidance at feature level faces challenges in preserving style (e.g., visual
patterns) and structure (e.g., edges) of the source. Intuitively, as shown in Fig. 3b, the low-/high-frequency components retain the style (e.g., global characteristics and patterns)/structure (e.g., edges) of image, respectively. Therefore, we use the frequency of source image as training-free
guidance for two types of tasks: style- and structure-guided
translation. As shown in Fig. 1, low frequency can be used
for style-guided translation: translation to a semantically related class with the pattern retained (e.g., “cat” → “panda”).
High frequency can be used for structure-guided translation:
translation to a different style with the edges retained (e.g.,
“sketch of a cat” → “watercolor painting of a cat”).
Several attempts on frequency analysis have been made
for text-driven image translation [12, 13]. FCDDiff [13]

Image translation maps a source image from source domain
to a target domain [5, 8, 22]. With the success of large-scale
text-to-image (T2I) diffusion [36], recent works use source
image as control signal for T2I diffusion to enable textdriven translation [12, 30, 33, 43]. A target prompt is used
as conditioning text for T2I to specify the style/structure to
be produced. The source image is used as control signal to
guide T2I by specifying the style/structure to be preserved.
Training-based methods inject control signal by finetuning the pre-trained diffusion model or training auxiliary

19195

