This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Know Your Attention Maps: Class-specific Token Masking for
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Joëlle Hanna Damian Borth
University of St.Gallen, Switzerland
{joelle.hanna, damian.borth}@unisg.ch

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) is a
challenging problem that has been extensively studied in recent years. Traditional approaches often rely on external
modules like Class Activation Maps [36] to highlight regions of interest and generate pseudo segmentation masks.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end method that directly utilizes the attention maps learned by a Vision Transformer (ViT) [7] for WSSS. We propose training a sparse
ViT with multiple [CLS] tokens (one for each class), using a random masking strategy to promote [CLS] token
- class assignment. At inference time, we aggregate the
different self-attention maps of each [CLS] token corresponding to the predicted labels to generate pseudo segmentation masks1 . Our proposed approach enhances the
interpretability of self-attention maps and ensures accurate
class assignments. Extensive experiments on two standard
benchmarks and three specialized datasets demonstrate that
our method generates accurate pseudo-masks, outperforming related works. Those pseudo-masks can be used to train
a segmentation model which achieves results comparable to
fully-supervised models, significantly reducing the need for
fine-grained labeled data.

Figure 1. Our method uses multiple [CLS] tokens in ViTs to
encourage class-specific self-attention maps. By aggregating these
maps, we generate a pseudo-mask (bottom left) comparable to the
ground truth (bottom right), without ever using the fine-grained
segmentation labels.

1. Introduction

To address these challenges, weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) has emerged as a promising
alternative. WSSS leverages weaker forms of supervision,
such as image-level labels, to reduce the burden of detailed
annotations. A common approach in WSSS involves the
use of Class Activation Maps [35], which highlight the
most discriminative regions of an image for a particular
class. Despite their effectiveness, CAMs suffer from
limitations such as coarse localization and an inability
to capture fine details, as they only emphasize the most
prominent features. Moreover, generating CAMs requires
an additional module on top of the existing model, adding
complexity to process.
Given these limitations, an alternative approach is to
leverage the self-attention maps of Vision Transformers
(ViTs,[7]). Unlike CAMs, which rely on additional modules, the attention mechanism in ViTs inherently provides
interpretability by capturing spatial dependencies across the

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer
vision, aiming to assign a class label to each pixel in an
image. This fine-grained understanding of visual data is
essential for various domain-specific applications, such
as medical imaging, autonomous driving, and remote
sensing. Traditionally, achieving high performance in
semantic segmentation has relied heavily on the availability
of large annotated datasets. However, acquiring such
fine-grained labels is often labor-intensive, expensive or
even impractical, especially in specialized domains where
expert knowledge is required.
1 Code is available at github.com/HSG-AIML/TokenMasking-WSSS

23763

