This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynamicFace: High-Quality and Consistent Face Swapping for Image and Video
using Composable 3D Facial Priors
Runqi Wang1,2† Yang Chen1 Sijie Xu1 Tianyao He1,3 Wei Zhu1 Dejia Song1
Nemo Chen1 Xu Tang1 Yao Hu1
1
Xiaohongshu Inc. 2 ShanghaiTech University 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Figure 1. Video face swapping. We adopt precise conditions and motion module for better temporal consistency. Given source face image
and target face frames, DynamicFace can generate faces with high identity consistency and motion accuracy.

Abstract
Face swapping transfers the identity of a source face
to a target face while retaining the attributes like expression, pose, hair, and background of the target face. Advanced face swapping methods have achieved attractive results. However, these methods often inadvertently transfer identity information from the target face, compromising expression-related details and accurate identity. We
propose a novel method DynamicFace that leverages the
power of diffusion models and plug-and-play adaptive attention layers for image and video face swapping. First,
we introduce four fine-grained facial conditions using 3D
facial priors. All conditions are designed to be disentangled from each other for precise and unique control. Then,
we adopt Face Former and ReferenceNet for high-level and

detailed identity injection. Through experiments on the
FF++ dataset, we demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art results in face swapping, showcasing superior image quality, identity preservation, and expression accuracy. Our framework seamlessly adapts to both image
and video domains. Please visit our project webpage at:
https://dynamic-face.github.io/.

1. Introduction

† Corrosponding author: elliotqii@gmail.com

Face swapping has attracted many interests because of its
wide applications, such as portrait reenactment, film production, and virtual reality. But there are still two pivotal
challenges: 1) balance identity from source face and motion from target face. 2) give precise non-identity motion
guidance to maintain temporal consistency.
Recent works [4, 18, 25] have made great efforts to

13438

