This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RobustSplat: Decoupling Densification and Dynamics for Transient-Free 3DGS
Chuanyu Fu1

Yuqi Zhang2,3
Chuan Huang3,2

Kunbin Yao1 Guanying Chen1,4 * Yuan Xiong1,4
Shuguang Cui3,2 Xiaochun Cao1,4 *

1

Sun Yat-sen University 2 FNii-Shenzhen 3 SSE, CUHKSZ
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology

Sampled Inputs

Test View GT

Ours

SpotLessSplats

WildGaussians

PSNR=25.43
SSIM=0.890

PSNR=22.16
SSIM=0.782

PSNR=24.39
SSIM=0.847

PSNR=20.08
SSIM=0.691

PSNR=18.96
SSIM= 0.602

PSNR=17.93
SSIM=0.597

Figure 1. We propose a robust solution, RobustSplat, to handle 3DGS optimization in in-the-wild scenes. Compared with existing approaches, our method significantly reduces artifacts and delivers superior performance, yielding cleaner and more reliable results.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has gained significant attention for its real-time, photo-realistic rendering in novelview synthesis and 3D modeling. However, existing methods struggle with accurately modeling scenes affected by
transient objects, leading to artifacts in the rendered images. We identify that the Gaussian densification process,
while enhancing scene detail capture, unintentionally contributes to these artifacts by growing additional Gaussians
that model transient disturbances. To address this, we propose RobustSplat, a robust solution based on two critical
designs. First, we introduce a delayed Gaussian growth
strategy that prioritizes optimizing static scene structure before allowing Gaussian splitting/cloning, mitigating overfitting to transient objects in early optimization. Second, we
design a scale-cascaded mask bootstrapping approach that
first leverages lower-resolution feature similarity supervision for reliable initial transient mask estimation, taking
advantage of its stronger semantic consistency and robustness to noise, and then progresses to high-resolution supervision to achieve more precise mask prediction. Extensive

experiments on multiple challenging datasets show that our
method outperforms existing methods, clearly demonstrating the robustness and effectiveness of our method. Our
project page is https://fcyycf.github.io/RobustSplat/.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Significant advancements have been made recently in
novel-view synthesis and 3D reconstruction from multiview images [25, 38, 46]. Among these, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) stands out as an effective approach, enabling
real-time and realistic rendering [16]. The optimization of
3DGS starts from a sparse set of points obtained through
Structure-from-Motion (SfM), and adaptively controls the
number and density of Gaussians to create an accurate 3D
representation. To capture fine details, the Gaussians will be
split or cloned when the accumulated gradient magnitude of
their centered position exceeds a predefined thresholds,
However, existing methods often assume static scene
conditions, an assumption frequently violated in real-world
scenarios containing transient objects. This mismatch
breaks the multi-view consistency requirement, leading to
severe artifacts and degraded reconstruction quality [18].

27126

