This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Space Weather Model:
Long-Range Solar Flare Prediction from Multi-Wavelength Images
Shunya Nagashima
Komei Sugiura
Keio University, Japan
{ng sh, komei.sugiura}@keio.jp

Abstract
Accurate, reliable solar flare prediction is crucial for
mitigating potential disruptions to critical infrastructure,
while predicting solar flares remains a significant challenge. Existing methods based on heuristic physical features often lack representation learning from solar images.
On the other hand, end-to-end learning approaches struggle to model long-range temporal dependencies in solar images. In this study, we propose Deep Space Weather Model
(Deep SWM), which is based on multiple deep state space
models for handling both ten-channel solar images and
long-range spatio-temporal dependencies. Deep SWM also
features a sparse masked autoencoder, a novel pretraining
strategy that employs a two-phase masking approach to preserve crucial regions such as sunspots while compressing
spatial information. Furthermore, we built FlareBench, a
new public benchmark for solar flare prediction covering
a full 11-year solar activity cycle, to validate our method.
Our method outperformed baseline methods and even human expert performance on standard metrics in terms of
performance and reliability. The project page can be found
at https://keio-smilab25.github.io/DeepSWM.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method, Deep SWM. The
input is a sequence of multi-channel solar images (top). These
images are processed by the Solar Spatial Encoder. Concurrently,
the images are used for pretraining with a Sparse Masked Autoencoder, and the resulting representations are passed to the Longrange Temporal State Space Model. The outputs of these two modules are combined to output a predicted probability corresponding
to one of the four solar flare classes (X, M, C, and O) (bottom).

a Gandin-Murphy-Gerrity score (GMGS) [17] and a Brier
skill score (BSS M ) [48] of 0.48 and 0.16 [37], whereas a
perfect forecast would achieve a 1.0 on each metric.
Existing approaches often face challenges in representation learning and temporal modeling. Typical approaches
based on heuristic physical features, such as Spaceweather
HMI Active Region Patch (SHARP) parameters [8, 30, 38],
often fail to capture the finer details preceding solar flare
eruptions [6, 41, 65] because of the lack of direct representation learning from the images. By contrast, end-toend approaches [2, 50] (although they learn representations)
sometimes fail to adequately model the long-range temporal
dependencies critical for accurate prediction.
To address these limitations, we propose Deep Space
Weather Model (Deep SWM), an end-to-end solar flare prediction model that (1) learns representations from a time

1. Introduction
Solar flares are intense bursts of electromagnetic radiation
that can significantly impact critical infrastructure including GPS systems, communication networks, spacecraft, and
power grids [7, 13]. The potential economic damage from a
major solar flare is estimated to be 0.6 to 2.6 trillion US
dollars [43]. Accurate and reliable solar flare prediction
is therefore crucial for mitigating these potential risks by,
for example, rerouting flights, preparing satellites for safemode operations, and bolstering power grid resilience.
In this study, we focus on predicting the class of the
largest solar flare occurring within 24 hours, formulated
as a multi-class classification problem. Despite decades
of research, accurate and reliable solar flare prediction remains a significant challenge, even for skilled human experts [37, 46]. Human expert performance is quantified by

9396

