This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correspondence as Video: Test-Time Adaption on SAM2
for Reference Segmentation in the Wild
Haoran Wang1 Zekun Li1 Jian Zhang1 Lei Qi2 Yinghuan Shi1 *
1
Nanjing University 2 Southeast University

Abstract

Correspondence via Meta Learning (FSS)
Segmentation Model

Large vision models like the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) exhibit significant limitations when applied to downstream tasks in the wild. Consequently, reference segmentation, which leverages reference images and their corresponding masks to impart novel knowledge to the model,
emerges as a promising new direction for adapting large
vision models. However, existing reference segmentation
approaches predominantly rely on meta-learning, which
still necessitates an extensive meta-training process and
brings massive data and computational cost. In this study,
we propose a novel approach by representing the inherent correspondence between reference-target image pairs
as a pseudo video. This perspective allows the latest version of SAM, known as SAM2, which is equipped with interactive video object segmentation (iVOS) capabilities, to
be adapted to downstream tasks in a lightweight manner.
We term this approach Correspondence As Video for SAM
(CAV-SAM). CAV-SAM comprises two key modules: the
Diffusion-Based Semantic Transition (DBST) module employs a diffusion model to construct a semantic transformation sequence, while the Test-Time Geometric Alignment
(TTGA) module aligns the geometric changes within this
sequence through test-time fine-tuning. We evaluated CAVSAM on widely-used datasets, achieving segmentation performance improvements exceeding 5% over SOTA methods.
Our implementation is available at https://github.
com/wanghr64/cav-sam.

Meta-training

...

Meta-testing

...

Correspondence as Video (Ours)
Diffusion Model
Pseudo Video

Prompting &
Adapting

Training

iVOS Model

Frozen
Lightweight
Fine-tuning

Figure 1. Different approaches for reference segmentation in
the wild. Traditional methods like FSS rely on extensive metatraining, incurring significant data and computational burdens. In
contrast, we embody the correspondence between images as a generated video and perform segmentation using an iVOS model with
only lightweight fine-tuning throughout the process.

formance and generalization abilities. However, for various
segmentation tasks in the wild, the domain gap and class
novelty between downstream datasets and SAM’s training
datasets frequently result in decreased segmentation accuracy [24, 47]. To overcome these challenges, reference segmentation emerges as a promising approach. Reference segmentation employs a small set of annotated images from
downstream tasks as the reference images, enabling the
model to understand the novel domain and class characteristics, facilitating the segmentation of the target images accordingly. Few-shot segmentation (FSS) [4, 18, 22, 29, 41]
and cross-domain few-shot segmentation (CD-FSS) [10, 11,

1. Introduction
Recent large vision models, e.g., the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) [16], exhibit impressive segmentation per* Corresponding author: Yinghuan Shi. This work is supported by
NSFC Project (62192783, 62206052, 62222604), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2024M750424), Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities (020214380120, 020214380128), State Key Laboratory Fund (ZZKT2024A14, ZZKT2025B05), Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of CPSF (GZC20240252), Jiangsu Funding Program for Excellent
Postdoctoral Talent (2024ZB242) and Jiangsu Science and Technology
Major Project (BG2024031).

8177

