This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dataset Distillation as Data Compression: A Rate-Utility Perspective
Youneng Bao1,3, ,* Yiping Liu1, ,* Zhuo Chen2 , Yongsheng Liang1 , Mu Li1,†, Kede Ma3,†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 City University of Hong Kong
younebao@cityu.edu.hk, yipingliu@stu.hit.edu.cn, chenzh08@pcl.ac.cn
{liangys,limu2022}@hit.edu.cn, kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk
https://nouise.github.io/DD-RUO

Abstract
Driven by the “scale-is-everything” paradigm, modern machine learning increasingly demands ever-larger
datasets and models, yielding prohibitive computational
and storage requirements. Dataset distillation mitigates
this by compressing an original dataset into a small set
of synthetic samples, while preserving its full utility. Yet,
existing methods either maximize performance under fixed
storage budgets or pursue suitable synthetic data representations for redundancy removal, without jointly optimizing
both objectives. In this work, we propose a joint rate-utility
optimization method for dataset distillation. We parameterize synthetic samples as optimizable latent codes decoded by extremely lightweight networks. We estimate the
Shannon entropy of quantized latents as the rate measure
and plug any existing distillation loss as the utility measure, trading them off via a Lagrange multiplier. To enable
fair, cross-method comparisons, we introduce bits per class
(bpc), a precise storage metric that accounts for sample,
label, and decoder parameter costs. On CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet-128, our method achieves up to 170×
greater compression than standard distillation at comparable accuracy. Across diverse bpc budgets, distillation
losses, and backbone architectures, our approach consistently establishes better rate-utility trade-offs.

Figure 1. Comparison of the rate-utility curves on the Nette subset of ImageNet, with the rate axis displayed on a logarithmic
scale. The proposed TM-RUO that integrates the trajectory matching loss [9] consistently achieves superior accuracy across a wide
range of storage budgets, as measured in bits per class (bpc).

Dataset distillation (DD) [49] addresses these challenges by
learning a small, synthetic dataset that enables rapid model
prototyping, accelerated model training, and efficient hyperparameter tuning, while lowering compute, storage, and
energy requirements [31, 33].
Initially, DD is formulated as a bilevel optimization problem [49], necessitating computationally intensive,
memory-hungry backpropagation through time (BPTT),
which is also prone to gradient instability [51]. To alleviate this, meta-gradient computation has been pursued or bypassed through a variety of techniques, including truncated
BPTT [18], closed-form kernel ridge regression [38], gradient and distribution matching [60, 61], and implicit differentiation [35]. Meanwhile, representation-based methods [10, 27, 43, 50, 54, 58] mitigate redundancy in synthetic
data by parameterizing it as low-dimensional latent codes,
which can be reconstructed into full-sized images via struc-

1. Introduction
The rapid advances in machine learning have been driven by
the “scale-is-everything” paradigm [23, 25], in which everlarger models trained on ever-more data yield progressively
better performance across various computational prediction
tasks [8, 16]. However, this scaling trend incurs steep computational, storage, and environmental costs, posing a barrier to sustainable and accessible research and deployment.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

519

