This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Inversion-based Measure of Memorization for Diffusion Models
Zhe Ma, Qingming Li, Xuhong Zhang, Tianyu Du, Ruixiao Lin,
Zonghui Wang*, Shouling Ji, Wenzhi Chen*
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{mz.rs,liqm,zhangxuhong,zjradty,linruixiao,zhwang,sji,chenwz}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Noise Distribution
𝝐0

The past few years have witnessed substantial advances in
image generation powered by diffusion models. However,
it was shown that diffusion models are susceptible to training data memorization, raising significant concerns regarding copyright infringement and privacy invasion. This study
delves into a rigorous analysis of memorization in diffusion
models. We introduce InvMM1 , an inversion-based measure of memorization, which is based on inverting a sensitive latent noise distribution accounting for the replication
of an image. For accurate estimation of the measure, we
propose an adaptive algorithm that balances the normality and sensitivity of the noise distribution. Comprehensive
experiments across four datasets, conducted on both unconditional and text-guided diffusion models, demonstrate that
InvMM provides a reliable and complete quantification of
memorization. Notably, InvMM is commensurable between
samples, reveals the true extent of memorization from an adversarial standpoint and implies how memorization differs
from membership. In practice, it serves as an auditing tool
for developers to reliably assess the risk of memorization,
thereby contributing to the enhancement of trustworthiness
and privacy-preserving capabilities of diffusion models.

𝒙𝟎

Diffusion
Model
Condition Distribution

𝑮(𝝐𝟎 )

Inversion
Generation

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of diffusion model inversion, optionally with conditions.

1. Introduction

However, large-scale datasets used to train the prevalent DMs, e.g., the open-source image-caption dataset
LAION [47], are widely acknowledged to contain content that will raise concerns regarding copyright infringement and privacy invasion. For instance, recent reports
revealed that LAION could refer to photographers’ works
without authorization [18] and include private medical photographs [2]. With the uncurated data for training, diffusion
models are likely to generate content that infringes the creators’ rights or exposes private information [9, 48]. In this
work, we focus on memorization in DMs, one of the most
critical issues related to training data misuse.

Diffusion Models (DMs) [22, 50] have shown impressive
capabilities in the generation of images [41, 43], videos [6],
3D point cloud [35], etc. These techniques lay the foundation for commercial systems or communities such as Stable
Diffusion [43], Midjourney [1], DALL·E [3, 41] and Imagen [44], which have attracted millions of active users. The
popularity of diffusion models stems from their hierarchical denoising process, which offers high stability for training on billions of data [47] and scalability for multimodal
conditional generation [41, 44].

Memorization usually manifests itself at sampling time,
when a model generates images closely resembling training images. It can turn into a problem both technically and
practically. Technically, heavy memorization indicates failure of generalization to some degree because a probabilistic
generative model is supposed to produce novel and diversified images rather than frequently replicate those in the
training set. Practically, memorization might also raise ethical and legal concerns. First, even the model developers are
authorized to train their model with protected images, the
image owners will never expect their works to be exposed
to arbitrary users due to memorization as this would cause
indisciplinable dissemination, violating the contextual integrity [37]. Second, in past years, text-to-image models

* Corresponding authors
1 https://github.com/Maryeon/InvMM

16959

