This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free-MoRef: Instantly Multiplexing Context Perception Capabilities of
Video-MLLMs within Single Inference
Kuo Wang1,2,4 * Quanlong Zheng3∗ Junlin Xie5 Yanhao Zhang3† Jinguo Luo6 Haonan Lu3
Liang Lin1,2,8 Fan Zhou1,4,7 Guanbin Li1,2,4,8‡
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 OPPO AI Center, OPPO Inc., China
4
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
6
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
7
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Digital Living Network and Content Service
8
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
wangk229@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {zhengquanlong,zhangyanhao,luhaonan}@oppo.com
junlinxie@link.cuhk.edu.cn, 23s153135@stu.hit.edu.cn
linliang@ieee.org, {isszf,liguanbin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video Multimodal Large Language Models (Video-MLLM)
have achieved remarkable advancements in video understanding tasks. However, constrained by the context length
limitation in the underlying LLMs, existing Video-MLLMs
typically exhibit suboptimal performance on long video scenarios. To understand extended input frames, common solutions span token compression and streaming inference techniques, which sacrifice feature granularity or inference efficiency. Differently, to efficiently achieve comprehensive
understanding of longer frame inputs, we draw ideas from
MoE and propose a training-free approach Free-MoRef,
which instantly multiplexes the context perception capabilities of Video-MLLMs within one inference pass. Specifically, Free-MoRef reconstructs the vision tokens into several short sequences as multi-references. Subsequently,
we introduce MoRef-attention, which gathers clues from
the multi-reference chunks in parallel to summarize unified
query activations. After the shadow layers in LLMs, a reference fusion step is derived to compose a final mixed reasoning sequence with key tokens from parallel chunks, which
compensates the cross-reference vision interactions that are
neglected in MoRef-attention. By splitting and fusing the
long vision token sequences, Free-MoRef achieves improved
performance under much lower computing costs in reasoning multiplexed context length, demonstrating strong

efficiency and effectiveness. Experiments on VideoMME,
MLVU, LongVideoBench show that Free-MoRef achieves
full perception of 2× to 8× longer input frames without compression on a single A100 GPU while keeping instant responses, thereby bringing significant performance
gains, even surpassing dedicatedly trained long-videoMLLMs. Codes are available at https://github.
com/wkfdb/Free-MoRef

* Equally-contributed authors.
† Project Leader.
‡ Corresponding author.

22499

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 31, 40]have emerged
as a revolutionary force towards general intelligence,
marked by their universal capabilities in various language
tasks. Through instruction tuning [20], Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) further extend their exceptional reasoning ability to other modalities such as vision [14, 30, 32] and audio [24]. In recent studies, MLLMs
have been extensively applied to the comprehension of
video content [5, 16, 23, 34]. Notwithstanding the remarkable advances in video understanding, the context length
restriction inherent in LLMs has emerged as a critical bottleneck, especially for long video understanding, where the
abundant visual tokens readily surpass the threshold that ensures stability and consequently resulting in a decline in the
effectiveness of these models.
To prevent over-length sequences that violate the context
constraints of the reasoning LLM, existing MLLMs [30, 32,
43] typically impose a maximum limit on the length of vision tokens to maintain stable performance. (e.g. 64 frames

