This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LightCity: An Urban Dataset for Outdoor Inverse Rendering and Reconstruction
under Multi-illumination Conditions
Jingjing Wang1

Qirui Hu1

Chong Bao1

Yuke Zhu1

Hujun Bao1 Zhaopeng Cui1 Guofeng Zhang 1
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Figure 1. We present a novel high-quality synthetic urban dataset, named LightCity. Our dataset features complicated urban illumination
conditions, including varied illumination, realistic indirect lighting and shadow effects, realistic indirect light and shadow effects, and
varying scales with street and aerial image capture.

Abstract
Inverse rendering in urban scenes is pivotal for applications
like autonomous driving and digital twins. Yet, it faces significant challenges due to complex illumination conditions,
including multi-illumination and indirect light and shadow
effects. However, the effects of these challenges on intrinsic decomposition and 3D reconstruction have not been explored due to the lack of appropriate datasets. In this paper,
we present LightCity, a novel high-quality synthetic urban
dataset featuring diverse illumination conditions with realistic indirect light and shadow effects. LightCity encompasses over 300 sky maps with highly controllable illumination, varying scales with street-level and aerial perspectives over 50K images, and rich properties such as depth,
normal, material components, light and indirect light, etc.
Besides, we leverage LightCity to benchmark three fundamental tasks in the urban environments and conduct a comprehensive analysis of these benchmarks, laying a robust
foundation for advancing related research. Project page:
https://zju3dv.github.io/lightcity/.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering in urban scenes [48, 56] has become increasingly important for various applications including auindicates equal contribution.
indicates corresponding author.

tonomous driving, digital twin, and urban planning. However, the complex illumination conditions in urban scenes
make this problem particularly challenging. Two primary
challenges stand out: 1) Multi-illumination: Illumination
is an unconstrained component in the urban scene due to
its uncontrollability and rapid change over time. In everyday scenarios, urban scenes are subject to diverse illumination conditions influenced by factors such as solar position
(e.g., sunrise and sunset), weather variations, and seasonal
changes. 2) Indirect light and shadow: The complicated
spatial layout between buildings in the urban scene creates
pronounced indirect illumination and shadow effects that
significantly impact the scene’s appearance.
Addressing these challenges requires algorithms that exhibit robust tolerance to such complex illumination effects.
We outline three key functional requirements: 1) The intrinsic decomposition of the urban scene is robust to illumination change. For example, the decomposed reflectance
should be the same across varying illumination conditions
of a given scene. 2) The complicated indirect light and
shadow effects should be accurately decomposed in the urban scene for inverse rendering. For example, the indirect
light and shadow should be included in the shading component and isolated from the reflectance. 3) Urban scene
reconstruction should yield accurate and multi-view consistent results under complicated illumination challenges.
However, these functionalities remain largely unexplored in urban scene analysis due to the lack of appropriate

26477

