This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Transformer meets Multi-level Wavelet Spectrum
for Single Image Super-Resolution
Peng Du1 , Hui Li1 *, Han Xu1 , Paul Barom Jeon2 , Dongwook Lee2 , Daehyun Ji2 ,
Ran Yang1 , Feng Zhu1
1
Samsung R&D Institute China Xi’an (SRCX)
2
Samsung Electronics Co., LTD., South Korea
peng03.du, hui01.li, han.xu, paul.barom.jeon, dw23.lee, derek.ji,
ran01.yang, f15.zhu@samsung.com

Abstract
MDWT

...

Transformer

...

Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) has been widely explored to enhance the performance of image superresolution (SR). Despite some DWT-based methods improving SR by capturing fine-grained frequency signals, most
existing approaches neglect the interrelations among multiscale frequency sub-bands, resulting in inconsistencies and
unnatural artifacts in the reconstructed images. To address this challenge, we propose a Diffusion Transformer
model based on image Wavelet spectra for SR (DTWSR).
DTWSR incorporates the superiority of diffusion models
and transformers to capture the interrelations among multiscale frequency sub-bands, leading to a more consistence
and realistic SR image. Specifically, we use a Multi-level
Discrete Wavelet Transform (MDWT) to decompose images
into wavelet spectra. A pyramid tokenization method is proposed which embeds the spectra into a sequence of tokens
for transformer model, facilitating to capture features from
both spatial and frequency domain. A dual-decoder is designed elaborately to handle the distinct variances in lowfrequency (LF) and high-frequency (HF) sub-bands, without omitting their alignment in image generation. Extensive
experiments on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method, with high performance on
both perception quality and fidelity.

...

(a) The pixel image is represented by multi-level wavelet spectra. Transform is explored to model the complex relations among the multi-scale
frequencies.

(b) SR result w/o (c) Ours (with multimulti-scale frequency scale frequency interinterrelations
relations considered)

(d) Ground truth

Figure 1. A transformer model based on multi-level wavelet spectra is explored for SR, enabling the learning of multi-scale frequency relationships to enhance SR results. Comparing (b) and
(c), the proposed method produces more natural textures.

1. Introduction

establish the mapping from LR to HR images in image
pixel domain. To capture the fine-grained frequency details
critical for SR, some approaches use the Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT) to convert images into the frequency domain. DWT depicts an image by a series of frequency
sub-bands. The low-frequency (LF) sub-band reflects image global topology and affects objective fidelity, while the
high-frequency (HF) sub-bands represent image textural details and affect perceptual quality significantly [11, 30]. As
indicated in [21], SISR can be formulated as a wavelet coefficients prediction task. With correct predicting of wavelet
coefficients based on LR input, the HR image can be reconstructed via inverse DWT (IDWT). Explicit optimization of wavelet coefficients in the frequency domain shows

Single-Image Super-Resolution (SISR) has gained growing
attention for decades because of its broad application. It
restores high-resolution (HR) images from the given lowresolution (LR) inputs, aiming at high performance on both
objective fidelity and perceptual quality. Most methods
* Corresponding author.

19700

