This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAPNext: Tracking Any Point (TAP) as Next Token Prediction
Artem Zholus*2,4,5
Xu Owen He†8
1

Google DeepMind
5

Carl Doersch1
Yi Yang1
Skanda Koppula1,3
Viorica Patraucean1
Ignacio Rocco1
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi1
Sarath Chandar2,4,5,6
1,4,7
Ross Goroshin
2

Chandar Research Lab

Polytechnique Montreal

6

3

University College London

Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract

7

4

Mila - Quebec AI Institute

Université de Montréal

8

MakerMaker AI

three years since TAP’s inception it has already been applied
to robotics [5, 6, 36, 53, 56, 60], action recognition [31], 3D
(dynamic) reconstruction [54, 55, 58], (controllable) video
generation and editing [12, 37, 57, 59, 62], zoology [38],
and medicine [43].
Real-world training data for TAP is scarce [4, 11, 30, 39,
53], so prior works have trained models mainly on synthetic
data [18, 61]. These works have argued that complex inductive biases and custom architectures are required to bridge
the sim-to-real gap. However, making architectures too restrictive can limit scalability. In this work, we ask what architectural (e.g. cost-volume) and algorithmic (e.g. iterative
refinement) design decisions can be relaxed in order to build
a more scalable, simpler, yet performant model. Our key
finding is that only two ingredients are necessary to achieve
good TAP performance: 1) a shared, spatio-temporal bank
of input tokens, where some tokens encode image patches
and others encode trajectories, all processed jointly by a
unified model, and 2) a simple recurrence across time, in the
form of a real-valued State-Space Model (SSM) [48], and
3) an output encoding that represents distributions instead
of point estimates. Specifically, given our input encoding,
we find that TRecViT [40]–which simply interleaves (spatial)
transformer layers and (temporal) SSM layers can be used
off-the-shelf to predict point tracks. In fact, when fine-tuned
on real data using a previously published procedure [13], this
architecture achieves state-of-the-art performance without
any complex post-processing or iterative-inference. This
stands in stark contrast to all other SoTA TAP methods
which use windowed inference, iterative refinement, and
temporal smoothness priors. The architecture consists of
interleaved layers of 1) temporally-recurrent computations
processing “temporal tubes” [32] which are sequences of
individual image and point tokens, and 2) transformer layers
which process spatial information by attending across image
& point tokens, per-frame.
Our contributions include:
1. We propose TAPNext, a new point tracking model, which

Tracking Any Point (TAP) in a video is a challenging computer vision problem with many demonstrated applications
in robotics, video editing, and 3D reconstruction. Existing
methods for TAP rely heavily on complex tracking-specific
inductive biases and heuristics, limiting their generality
and potential for scaling. To address these challenges, we
present TAPNext, a new approach that casts TAP as sequential masked token decoding. Our model is causal, tracks
in a purely online fashion, and removes tracking-specific
inductive biases. This enables TAPNext to run with minimal
latency, and removes the temporal windowing required by
many existing state of art trackers. Despite its simplicity,
TAPNext achieves a new state-of-the-art tracking performance among both online and offline trackers. Finally, we
present evidence that many widely used tracking heuristics
emerge naturally in TAPNext through end-to-end training.

1. Introduction
“Correspondence, correspondence, and correspondence!”
was Takeo Kanade’s answer when asked for the three most
fundamental problems in computer vision. In early research,
image-level correspondence was pivotal for understanding
motion [25], estimating depth [22] or performing 3D reconstruction from photo collections [47]. Today, correspondence has experienced a resurgence as Tracking Any Point
(TAP) in video: outputs are dense like optical flow, but also
provide long-range correspondence as in keypoint detection.
In TAP a model is tasked to track a large number of query
points, which correspond to surfaces on solid objects, over
the course of a video (Figure 1). Because point tracking is
such a generic task, yielding highly detailed spatiotemporal
information, point trackers are potentially useful in almost
any downstream computer vision application. Indeed, the
* Work done duing internship at Google DeepMind
† Work done while at Google DeepMind

9693

