This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WarpHE4D: Dense 4D Head Map toward Full Head Reconstruction
Jongseob Yun1,2 Yong-Hoon Kwon2,3 Min-Gyu Park2,3 Ju-Mi Kang2,3
Min-Ho Lee2,3 Inho Chang2,3 Ju Hong Yoon2,3 Kuk-Jin Yoon1,†
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) 2 Polygom
3
Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI)
{jseob.y,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr, {yhkwon,mpark,amino7,yypeip,damonchang23,jhyoon}@keti.re.kr

Figure 1. WarpHE4D jointly predicts pixel-aligned depth and UV coordinates, enabling the reconstruction of a colored pointcloud with
UV mapping. This representation is well-suited for downstream tasks such as template mesh registration and texture map optimization.

Abstract
We address the 3D head reconstruction problem and the
facial correspondence search problem in a unified framework, named as WarpHE4D. The underlying idea is to establish correspondences between the facial image and the
fixed UV texture map by exploiting powerful self-supervised
visual representations, i.e., DINOv2. In other words, we
predict UV coordinates for each pixel that maps the pixel
to a point in the UV map. At the same time, we predict the nose-centered depth map leveraged by the facial
correspondences. Note that our framework does not require fitting a template model, e.g., 3DMM, to the image, which directly regresses 4D vectors for each pixel.
The experimental results show that our approach not only
improves the accuracy of head geometry but also significantly improves the robustness under pose or viewpoint
variations, particularly when the head is rotated more than
90 degrees. We believe our method can be a groundwork for photorealistic head avatar generation, even in
uncalibrated camera settings. The code is available at
github.com/jseobyun/WarpHE4D.

attributes, semantic labels and UV coordinates, have gained
significance in enabling advanced representations [36, 46]
and manipulations [31]. Notably, 3DMM [18, 27] has been
widely used as a geometric prior. However, we claim existing approaches still have two major challenges. First,
statistical head models oversimplify non-facial regions, i.e.,
hairs, because of their diversity. Second, post-processing
is often necessary to align resulting geometry with image
pixels, relying on additional guides such as 2D facial landmarks or head pose. The alignment error introduced in this
process restricts the utilization of geometry under perspective projection, especially in multi-view settings.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we revisit 3D head geometry reconstruction
as a per-pixel regression problem to alleviate the aforementioned issues. Specifically, we define the human head as a
4D vector map representation, defined as the 4D head map,
where each pixel in an image retains the UV coordinates
along with nose-centered depth and confidence. Notably,
this simple transition not only enables seamless integration of multiple images under perspective projection without alignment but also avoids cumbersome post-processing
procedures. For example, by merging multi-view outputs
with camera parameters, a full head point cloud can be generated. Since each point retains the UV coordinates of the
3DMM, it can be converted into a topology-unified mesh,
as illustrated in Figure 1. Unlike previous method [39] that
relies on parametric fitting, our approach enables non-rigid

The reconstruction of 3D human head geometry serves as
the groundwork for follow-up research such as facial animation and AI-driven content generation. Recently, high-level

11480

