This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoFormer: Geometry Point Encoder for 3D Object Detection with
Graph-based Transformer
Xin Jin♠1,3♡
1

Haisheng Su♠2,3
Cong Ma♠3 Kai Liu3 Wei Wu3 Fei Hui1
Junchi Yan2
2
3
Chang’an University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, SenseAuto Research
{suhaisheng,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, {jinxin,feihui}@chd.edu.cn

Abstract
FC

Mean Pooling

1. Introduction
LiDAR sensors have been widely used in the field of Autonomous Driving (AD), and high-precision 3D object detection has received a great deal of attention [36, 37, 42].
In contrast to image-based 2D object detection, point cloud
data encompasses a larger spatial range and is disordered
yet sparse. Therefore, how to effectively extract the patterns and rules constructed by the 3D point cloud from it
has been the key to studying the 3D perception task.
♠ Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors.
♡ Work done during an internship at SenseAuto Research.

[1,3]

[1,C]
Voxel Feature

Voxelize

(a) Voxel Feature Encoder

{

Lidar-based 3D detection is one of the most popular research fields in autonomous driving. 3D detectors typically
detect specific targets in a scene according to the pattern
formed by the spatial distribution of point clouds. However, existing voxel-based methods usually adopt MLP and
global pooling (e.g., PointNet, CenterPoint) as voxel feature encoder, which makes it less effective to extract detailed
spatial structure information from raw points, leading to information loss and inferior performance. In this paper, we
propose a novel graph-based transformer to encode voxel
features by condensing the full and detailed point’s geometry, termed as GeoFormer. We first represent points within
a voxel as a graph, based on relative distances to capture
its spatial geometry. Then, We introduce a geometry-guided
transformer architecture to encode voxel features, where the
adjacent geometric clues are used to re-weight point feature
similarities, enabling more effective extraction of geometric
relationships between point pairs at varying distances. We
highlight that GeoFormer is a plug-and-play module which
can be seamlessly integrated to enhance the performance of
existing voxel-based detectors. Extensive experiments conducted on three popular outdoor datasets demonstrate that
our GeoFormer achieves the start-of-the-art performance
on both effectiveness and robustness comparisons.

[ ,3]

Voxel

FC

Voxelize

Pillar

[ ,3]

[1,C]

Point Feature

Pillar Feature

(b) Pillar Feature Encoder

FC

[ ,3]
Voxelize

Max Pooling
[ ,C]

Pillar

Point Feature

Graph
Construction

Geometry

Geometry Point
Encoder

[1,C]
Geometry
Feature

(c) Geometry Feature Encoder

Figure 1. (a) Voxel Feature Encoder [34]: average pooling then MLP encoding (for smaller voxels); (b) Pillar Feature Encoder [21]: maximum pooling after MLP encoding (for
larger voxels); (c) Geometry Feature Encoder (pillar version):
geometric-guided feature extraction of spatial structure.

Existing methods can generally be classified into two
mainstreams, the first one represents point-based methods [4, 30, 31, 33, 50], which employ PointNet [30, 31] to
directly process the raw point clouds in the down-sampled
set. The other stream of voxel-based methods [5–7, 24, 32]
usually grid the point cloud space to directly apply convolution for feature extraction. Point-based methods require
a massive number of point set abstraction operations in 3D
space, leading to difficulties in meeting the demands of outdoor detection tasks in real-time. And voxel-based methods
are widely used due to their computational efficiency.
Current voxel-based approaches mainly focus on how to
effectively utilize voxel features and various architectural
innovations have been made at the 3D Backbone, including
CNN [53], Transformer [43], and RNN [26, 54]. However,
how to encoding voxel features effectively is also a crucial
task that should not be neglected [19, 22, 25], as it directly
handles the structural information of raw point clouds. Most
of existing methods either adopt global pooling or utilizes a

26879

