This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breaking Rectangular Shackles: Cross-View Object Segmentation for
Fine-Grained Object Geo-Localization
Qingwang Zhang, Yingying Zhu
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
zhangqingwang2022@email.szu.edu.cn, zhuyy@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper addresses the limitations of existing cross-view
object geo-localization schemes, which rely on rectangular proposals to localize irregular objects in satellite imagery. These “rectangular shackles” inherently struggle
to precisely deﬁne objects with complex geometries, leading to incomplete coverage or erroneous localization. We
propose a novel scheme, cross-view object segmentation
(CVOS), which achieves ﬁne-grained geo-localization by
predicting pixel-level segmentation masks of query objects.
CVOS enables accurate extraction of object shapes, sizes,
and areas—critical for applications like urban planning
and agricultural monitoring. We introduce the CVOGLSeg dataset speciﬁcally to support and evaluate the new
CVOS scheme. To tackle CVOS challenges, we propose
Transformer Object Geo-localization (TROGeo), a twostage framework. First, the Heterogeneous Task Training Stage (HTTS) employs a single transformer encoder
with a Cross-View Object Perception Module (CVOPM)
and is trained by learning a heterogeneous task. Second,
the SAM Prompt Stage (SPS) utilizes SAM’s zero-shot segmentation capability, guided by HTTS outputs, to generate precise masks. Extensive experiments on both CVOGL
and CVOGL-Seg datasets demonstrate that our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance, effectively breaking
the rectangular shackles and unlocking new possibilities
for ﬁne-grained object geo-localization. Our project page:
https://zqwlearning.github.io/CVOS.

Reference Image

Query Image and Object Click Point

Satellite-view Image

Ground-view Image

Drone-view Image

or

GPS: (35.9519°, -83.9322°)
Coverage Area: 300×300 m²

Click Point: (323, 116)

Click Point: (141, 166)

(a) Cross-View Object Geo-Localization Task

Retrieval-based

Detection-based

Segmentation-based (Ours)

(b) Comparison of the Proposed Scheme with Existing Schemes

Figure 1. Illustration of the cross-view object geo-localization task
and comparison of different schemes. (a) The reference image is
typically a satellite image with geographic information (e.g., GPS
coordinate and coverage area), while the query image is captured
from a ground or drone view, with a click point (red dot) indicating
the query object. Cross-view object geo-localization aims to ﬁnd
the geographic location of a speciﬁc object in the query image by
matching it to the reference image with attached geographic information. (b) The retrieval-based scheme divides the satellite image into uniformly-sized patches to construct a reference database
and attempts to retrieve the patch that is most semantically similar
to the query object as a location proposal. The detection-based
scheme ﬁnds the best bounding box containing the query object in
satellite images as a location proposal. Our segmentation-based
scheme attempts to obtain a segmentation mask of the query object
as a location proposal. Clearly, the segmentation mask proposal
expresses the location of the irregular object more accurately.

1. Introduction

ment [3, 17], and disaster monitoring [14, 45], etc. An intuitive scheme is to try to imitate cross-view image geolocalization [2, 6, 11, 18, 23, 26, 28, 35, 43, 46–49], i.e.,
retrieval-based scheme. First, the satellite image is divided
into uniform-sized patches, and then the patch most semantically similar to the query object is retrieved as the
object’s geographic location. However, due to the different shapes, sizes, and locations of the objects, it is difﬁ-

Consider Figure 1 (a), given a reference (satellite-view) image with geographic information, how can we obtain ﬁnegrained geographic information of the query object in the
image if an image taken from the ground or drone view
in the area is provided? The above process is the core issue of the cross-view object geo-localization, which can
be applied to object localization [42], smart city manage-

8197

