This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Signs as Tokens: A Retrieval-Enhanced Multilingual Sign Language Generator
Ronglai Zuo, Rolandos Alexandros Potamias, Evangelos Ververas, Jiankang Deng, Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London
https://2000zrl.github.io/soke/

Signs as Tokens (SOKE)
There’s a customer service hotline.

椅子上的衣服是谁的？

An der nordsee auch gewitter.

(Whose clothes are on the chair?)

(Thunderstorms also at the North Sea.)

Figure 1. We propose Signs as Tokens (SOKE), a unified sign language generator that can produce multilingual signs from text inputs.
(Left: American sign language; Middle: Chinese sign language; Right: German sign language.)

Abstract

1. Introduction

Sign language is a visual language that encompasses all
linguistic features of natural languages and serves as the
primary communication method for the deaf and hard-ofhearing communities. Although many studies have successfully adapted pretrained language models (LMs) for sign
language translation (sign-to-text), the reverse task—sign
language generation (text-to-sign)—remains largely unexplored. In this work, we introduce a multilingual sign language model, Signs as Tokens (SOKE), which can generate 3D sign avatars autoregressively from text inputs using
a pretrained LM. To align sign language with the LM, we
leverage a decoupled tokenizer that discretizes continuous
signs into token sequences representing various body parts.
During decoding, unlike existing approaches that flatten all
part-wise tokens into a single sequence and predict one token at a time, we propose a multi-head decoding method
capable of predicting multiple tokens simultaneously. This
approach improves inference efficiency while maintaining
effective information fusion across different body parts. To
further ease the generation process, we propose a retrievalenhanced SLG approach, which incorporates external sign
dictionaries to provide accurate word-level signs as auxiliary conditions, significantly improving the precision of
generated signs. Extensive qualitative and quantitative
evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of SOKE.

Sign language is the primary communication method utilized by the deaf and hard-of-hearing communities, embodying all linguistic properties found in spoken languages,
such as discrete semantic units and grammatical structure
[16, 71]. As an attempt to mitigate the barrier between sign
and spoken languages, several methods have been developed to tackle sign language processing by unfolding the
task into two research problems: sign language translation
(SLT, sign-to-text) [20, 33, 56, 64, 67, 69, 80, 83] and sign
language generation (SLG, text-to-sign) [2, 47, 53, 72, 88].
In contrast with SLT, the usage of language models
(LMs) in SLG remains relatively unexplored. Most existing
methods approach SLG as a visual content generation task
(e.g., video, keypoint, or motion), using GANs [50, 53] or
diffusion models [2, 12, 44, 58, 59]. However, these works
neglect the linguistic nature of sign languages, leading to
suboptimal performance and missing benefits of pretrained
LMs such as generalizability and scalability [18, 29, 60].
In particular, sign languages share the fundamental linguistic properties and the discrete structure of spoken languages
[16, 71], which necessitates processing using autoregressive
language modeling techniques [70].
To formulate SLG in the framework of language modeling, a crucial step is mapping signs into discrete tokens. A
common approach to discretizing sign languages involves

23806

