This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ask and Remember: A Questions-Only Replay Strategy for Continual Visual
Question Answering
Imad Eddine Marouf1
1
2

Enzo Tartaglione1
Joost van de Weijer3

Stéphane Lathuilière1,2

LTCI, Télécom-Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France

Inria, LJK, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France, 3 Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona, Spain

Abstract

Memory-free

Memory-Rehearsal VQACL-QR (Ours)

Continual Learning in Visual Question Answering
(VQACL) requires models to acquire new visual-linguistic
skills (plasticity) while preserving previously learned
knowledge (stability).
The inherent multimodality of
VQACL exacerbates this challenge, as models must balance stability across visual and textual domains while
adapting to novel objects and reasoning tasks. Existing
methods, primarily designed for unimodal settings, often
fall short in addressing this dual requirement. In this work,
we present QUestion-only replay with Attention Distillation
(QUAD), a novel approach for VQACL that leverages
only past task questions for regularization. By eliminating
the need to store visual data, QUAD not only reduces
memory overhead, but also alleviates privacy concerns.
Our method introduces a Question-only Replay mechanism
that selectively reuses prior task questions to counteract
overfitting to the answer space of the current task, addressing the problem out of answer set. Complementing this, we
propose Attention Consistency Distillation to enforce both
intra-modal and inter-modal attention consistency across
tasks, preserving essential visual-linguistic associations.
Extensive experiments on VQAv2 and NExT-QA demonstrate that QUAD significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, achieving robust performance in continual VQA.
Code is available at: https://github.com/IemProg/QUAD. 1

Storage
Forgetting

High

Low

Low

Privacy
Training

How many persons What color is
are there?
the car?

Four

Count

...

How many persons are there?

Answers:
Without replay: Blue
QUAD (Ours): Three

...
Answer:

Test: Out-of-answer-set problem

Answer:
Blue

Color

Tasks

Figure 1. Comparison of continual learning methods for Visual
Question Answering (VQA) in terms of storage, forgetting, and
privacy. Memory-free methods ensure privacy but suffer from
high forgetting. Memory-rehearsal methods reduce forgetting
but raise privacy concerns by storing sensitive images (e.g. people’s identities, car plates). Our approach QUAD, only stores
questions and avoids image storage, preserving privacy while
achieving low forgetting by leveraging question-based regularisation to effectively solve the out-of-answer set problem.

1. Introduction

viously acquired knowledge [95]. Despite significant advances in CL, most research has focused on unimodal tasks
(e.g. image classification) [26, 38, 56, 80, 81, 97]. However,
real-world applications often require multimodal learning
that integrates complex visual and textual reasoning. Visual Question Answering (VQA) stands as a representative
multimodal task, requiring models to jointly interpret visual content and natural language. For instance, answering
questions like “What color is the car on the left?” or “How
many trucks are visible?” requires robust object recognition and a nuanced grasp of the linguistic query structure [10, 70, 83, 88, 95].

Continual learning (CL) allows models to lean new skills
while retaining prior knowledge, effectively mitigating
catastrophic forgetting (CF) [57, 58]. This capability is essential in dynamic real-world settings, where models must
continuously adapt to evolving data while preserving pre1 Work done during an internship at Computer Vision Center (CVC),
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona.

The emerging field of Visual Question Answering Continual Learning (VQACL) [95] focuses on enabling models
to improve VQA performance iteratively by learning from
a sequence of tasks without catastrophic forgetting. Un-

18078

