This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wavelet Policy: Lifting Scheme for Policy Learning in Long-Horizon Tasks
Hao Huang* 1,3 , Shuaihang Yuan∗1,2,3 , Geeta Chandra Raju Bethala1,3 , Congcong Wen1,3
Anthony Tzes2,3 , Yi Fang † 1,2,3
1

2

Embodied AI and Robotics (AIR) Lab, NYUAD
NYUAD Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIR)
3
New York University Abu Dhabi

Abstract

Policy learning in embodied artificial intelligence aims to
generate optimal actions for an agent to achieve specific
goals based on the observed states. This field has evolved
from foundational methods such as behavior cloning [22,
53] and reinforcement learning [27, 40] to more complex
approaches like hierarchical reinforcement learning [18, 30]
and inverse reinforcement learning [19, 50]. Recent trends
* Equal contribution: hh1811,sy2366@nyu.edu.
† Corresponding author: yfang@nyu.edu.

Fre
qu
en
cy

Value

1. Introduction

Value

Policy learning focuses on devising strategies for agents in
embodied artificial intelligence systems to perform optimal
actions based on their perceived states. One of the key challenges in policy learning involves handling complex, longhorizon tasks that require managing extensive sequences
of actions and observations with multiple modes. Wavelet
analysis offers significant advantages in signal processing,
notably in decomposing signals at multiple scales to capture
both global trends and fine-grained details. In this work, we
introduce a novel wavelet policy learning framework that
utilizes wavelet transformations to enhance policy learning. Our approach leverages learnable multi-scale wavelet
decomposition to facilitate detailed observation analysis
and robust action planning over extended sequences. We
detail the design and implementation of our wavelet policy, which incorporates lifting schemes for effective multiresolution analysis and action generation. This framework
is evaluated across multiple complex scenarios, including
robotic manipulation, self-driving, and multi-robot collaboration, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method in
improving the precision and reliability of the learned policy. Our project is available at https://hhuangcode.github.io/wavelet_policy/.

e
Tim

Fre
qu
en
cy

e
Tim

Figure 1. A kitchen robot arm (left) conducts a series of actions,
and we decompose the action sequences (blue) of the arm’s 8th
(middle) and 9th (right) joints into four frequencies (f -1 to f -4,
red to orange) using Haar wavelet. Here f -1 represents highfrequency components of the original actions, while f -4 represents
the low-frequency components of the actions. The action modes
(trends) become clear in the low-frequency components without
fluctuations (noises).

in policy learning emphasize handling complex, multi-stage
tasks that require high-precision operation and long-term
decision-making in environments with multi-modal action
distributions and high-dimensional action spaces [7, 16,
47]. Techniques such as implicit policy learning [15] which
generates agent behavior through an implicit energy-based
model [29] and hierarchical visual policy learning [57] tailored for long-horizon tasks in cluttered scenes, have illustrated the breadth of policy learning being developed.
Despite the advances mentioned above, policy learning
for embodied agents still faces significant challenges, particularly when dealing with complex, long-horizon tasks
that require handling long observation and action sequences [6, 46]. In long-horizon scenarios, an agent must
maintain consistent behavior across multiple steps, effectively managing dependencies over time, which can lead
to an accumulation of errors if not properly handled. Furthermore, many real-world tasks exhibit multi-modal action patterns, i.e., there are often multiple valid action sequences to achieve the same goal [33, 47]. This diversity in
valid actions creates more difficulties for the learning pro-

12349

