This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ETCH: Generalizing Body Fitting to Clothed Humans via Equivariant Tightness
Boqian Li1
1

Haiwen Feng2,3∗

Westlake University

2

Zeyu Cai1

Michael J. Black2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

{liboqian, caizeyu, xiuyuliang}@westlake.edu.cn

Yuliang Xiu1,2†
3

UC Berkeley

{haiwen.feng, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

boqian-li.github.io/ETCH

Figure 1. Body Fitting on Clothed Humans. Given 3D clothed humans in any pose and clothing, ETCH accurately fits the body underneath. Our key
novelty is modeling cloth-to-body SE(3)-equivariant tightness vectors for clothed humans, abbreviated as ETCH, which resembles “etching” from the outer
clothing down to the inner body. The ground-truth body is shown in blue, our fitted body in green, and ground-truth markers as .

Abstract

rigid dynamics. We will release the code and models soon for
research purposes at boqian-li.github.io/ETCH.

Fitting a body to a 3D clothed human point cloud is a common yet challenging task. Traditional optimization-based
approaches use multi-stage pipelines that are sensitive to
pose initialization, while recent learning-based methods often struggle with generalization across diverse poses and
garment types. We propose Equivariant Tightness Fitting for
Clothed Humans, or ETCH, a novel pipeline that estimates
cloth-to-body surface mapping through locally approximate
SE(3) equivariance, encoding tightness as displacement vectors from the cloth surface to the underlying body. Following this mapping, pose-invariant body features regress
sparse body markers, simplifying clothed human fitting into
an inner-body marker fitting task. Extensive experiments
on CAPE and 4D-Dress show that ETCH significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods – both tightness-agnostic
and tightness-aware – in body fitting accuracy on loose
clothing (16.7% ∼ 69.5%) and shape accuracy (average
49.9%). Our equivariant tightness design can even reduce
directional errors by (67.2% ∼ 89.8%) in one-shot (or outof-distribution) settings (≈ 1% data). Qualitative results
demonstrate strong generalization of ETCH, regardless of
challenging poses, unseen shapes, loose clothing, and non-

1. Introduction
Fitting a template body mesh to a 3D clothed human point
cloud is a long-standing challenge, which is vital for shape
matching, motion capture, and animation, while enabling
numerous applications like virtual try-on and immersive teleportation. It also supports the development of parametric
human body models such as SMPL [37] and GHUM [64].
Aligning a template body mesh with raw human scans, i.e.,
unordered point clouds, provides a common topology supporting statistical modeling of body shape and deformation.
Traditional optimization-based fitting pipelines (details
in Sec. 2.1) are complex, depending on many ad-hoc rules to
address corner cases, such as inconsistent 2D keypoints and
additional skin-clothing separation. A path forward would
leverage 3D scans paired with accurate underlying bodies
to train a data-driven 3D pose regressor. However, despite
advances in point-based neural networks, like PointNet [51]
and PointNet++ [52], they still struggle with fitting tasks,
particularly in achieving robust generalization under the
complexity of varied human poses and shapes, various clothing styles, and non-rigid dynamics.
In recent works on fitting a parametric body model to

* Project Lead
† Corresponding Author

8264

