This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Zoo
Tomasz Niewiadomski1
1

Anastasios Yiannakidis1 Hanz Cuevas-Velasquez1
Michael J. Black1 Silvia Zuffi2 Peter Kulits1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

Soubhik Sanyal1

IMATI-CNR, Milan, Italy

{tomasz,ayiannakidis,hcuevas,ssanyal,black,kulits}@tue.mpg.de,

silvia.zuffi@cnr.it

Figure 1. We propose a pipeline for the scalable generation of realistic 3D animal pose and shape estimation training data. Training solely
on samples produced using our pipeline (see pairs above), we achieve state-of-the-art performance on a real-world multi-species benchmark.

Abstract

propose an alternative approach to synthetic-data generation: rendering with a conditional image-generation model.
We introduce a pipeline that samples a diverse set of poses
and shapes for a variety of mammalian quadrupeds and
generates realistic images with corresponding ground-truth
pose and shape parameters. To demonstrate the scalability
of our approach, we introduce GenZoo, a synthetic dataset
containing one million images of distinct subjects. We train
a 3D pose and shape regressor on GenZoo, which achieves
state-of-the-art performance on a real-world multi-species
3D animal pose and shape estimation benchmark, despite
being trained solely on synthetic data. We release our data
and pipeline at https://genzoo.is.tue.mpg.de.

The model-based estimation of 3D animal pose and shape
from images enables computational modeling of animal behavior. Training models for this purpose requires large
amounts of labeled image data with precise pose and shape
annotations. However, capturing such data requires the
use of multi-view or marker-based motion-capture systems,
which are impractical to adapt to wild animals in situ and
impossible to scale across a comprehensive set of animal
species. Some have attempted to address the challenge of
procuring training data by pseudo-labeling individual realworld images through manual 2D annotation, followed by
3D-parameter optimization to those labels. While this approach may produce silhouette-aligned samples, the obtained pose and shape parameters are often implausible
due to the ill-posed nature of the monocular fitting problem. Sidestepping real-world ambiguity, others have designed complex synthetic-data-generation pipelines leveraging game engines and collections of artist-designed 3D
assets. Such engines yield perfect ground-truth labels but
are often lacking in visual realism and require considerable
manual effort to adapt to new species or environments. We

1. Introduction
The estimation of animal pose from images enables the
computational modeling of animal behavior [1]. In quantifying behavior, pose offers a low-dimensional representation amenable to analysis [39]. From pose, actions can be
segmented [34] or individual health can be monitored [8].

8492

