This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical-aware Orthogonal Disentanglement Framework for Fine-grained
Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Haochen Chang1 , Pengfei Ren2 *, Haoyang Zhang3,4,5 , Liang Xie3,4,5 , Hongbo Chen1 *, Erwei Yin3,4,5
1
School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Defense Innovation Institute, Academy of Military Sciences
4
Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory 5 Tianjin Artificial Intelligence Innovation Center
changhch5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, rpf@bupt.edu.cn, haoyang@tju.edu.cn
{xielnudt,yinerwei1985}@gmail.com, chenhongbo@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Explicit hierarchical discovery

Abstract
In recent years, skeleton-based action recognition has
gained significant attention due to its robustness in varying environmental conditions. However, most existing methods struggle to distinguish fine-grained actions due to subtle motion features, minimal inter-class variation, and they
often fail to consider the underlying similarity relationships between action classes. To address these limitations, we propose a Hierarchical-aware Orthogonal Disentanglement framework (HiOD). We disentangle coarsegrained and fine-grained features by employing independent spatial-temporal granularity-aware bases, which encode semantic representations at varying levels of granularity. Additionally, we design a cross-granularity feature
interaction mechanism that leverages complementary information between coarse-grained and fine-grained features.
We further enhance the learning process through hierarchical prototype contrastive learning, which utilizes the parent
class hierarchy to guide the learning of coarse-grained features while ensuring the distinguishability of fine-grained
features within child classes. Extensive experiments on
FineGYM, FSD-10, NTU RGB+D, and NTU RGB+D 120
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method in finegrained action recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
Due to advancements in pose estimation algorithms [1,
10, 24, 26, 30, 37], action recognition has seen widespread
application in human–computer interaction in recent years
[13, 17, 25, 27]. Skeleton data has garnered significant
* Corresponding Author.

Writing

Writing

Coarse-grained
space

Reading

Reading

Play with phone

Sitting down

Play with phone

HiOD

Sitting down
Play with phone

Reading

High-level parent class
Low-level child class

Sitting down

Fine-grained
space
Writing

Implicit facilitation

Figure 1. HiOD uses fine-grained feature clustering to establish
explicit parent-child hierarchies, guiding coarse-grained feature
learning and aiding in finding parent class boundaries. Parent class
classification priors provide implicit disambiguation cues for finegrained features via shared bases, refining child class distinctions.

attention from researchers due to its robustness to variations in viewpoint and illumination. Early skeleton-based
action recognition approaches primarily utilized RNNs
[31, 34, 44] and CNNs [15] to process skeleton data as
pseudo-images or feature sequences, which overlooked the
inherent correlations between joints. Recent approaches
[5, 7, 14, 22, 28, 33, 35, 38, 41] employ Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to model the skeleton as a graph,
leveraging the topological structure of the skeletons to enhance recognition accuracy.
However, most existing methods struggle to identify
fine-grained actions due to subtle motion features, minimal
inter-class variation, and large intra-class variability. Recently, some methods extract local detailed features through
multi-level feature aggregation [23], attention mechanisms
[4, 11, 19], or carefully designed loss functions [3, 21, 42].
Nevertheless, these methods overlook the interference that
coarse-grained features can have on fine-grained feature
learning. Specifically, in action recognition tasks, most

11252

