This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Function-centric Bayesian Network for Zero-Shot Object Goal Navigation
Sixian Zhang1,2 , Xinyao Yu1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 , Yiyao Wang1,2 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2,3
1

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
2
3

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing

Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou

{sixian.zhang, xinyao.yu, xinhang.song, yiyao.wang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Object goal navigation requires an agent to navigate to a
speciﬁed target in unseen environments without an explicit
map, which demands an understanding of object-scene context to infer the target’s location based on partial observations. The function of an object plays a crucial role in
its categorization and naming. Analyzing an object’s functional role within a given scene enhances the understanding of its contextual relationships, thereby aiding in goal
inference. In this paper, we propose the Function-centric
Bayesian Network (FBN) for the zero-shot ObjectNav task.
FBN is designed to uncover the functions that observed objects afford individually or collaboratively with other objects, as well as the functional semantics contained within
the observed scenes. The probabilistic directed edges in
FBN describe the object-function and scene-function relationships, which are derived by prompting LLMs with the
proposed CounterfactCoT. Leveraging FBN with Bayesian
inference, the probability of each function group and probability map of goal occurrence are computed. Then the waypoint is selected based on obtained probability map. Experiments on MP3D and HM3D demonstrate that FBN effectively captures object-scene-function relationships and improves zero-shot ObjectNav performance.

1. Introduction
Autonomously navigating [33–35, 46] to a speciﬁed target without an explicit map is a prerequisite for embodied
agents to interact with the physical world. The Object Goal
Navigation (ObjectNav) task involves placing an agent in
an unseen environment and requiring it to navigate toward
a user-speciﬁed target object (e.g., a chair). Since the environment is unseen and the target is initially out of sight, the
agent needs to learn knowledge about the scene and objects
to infer the likely location of the target. Previous ObjectNav
methods have attempted to construct such knowledge by
learning scene representations[41, 49], potential functions

Figure 1. Compared with previous LLM-based methods that use
text-based environment representation and rely solely on LLMs
for decision-making, our method constructs a function-centric
bayesian network (FBN) to represent the environment by capturing the relationships between observed objects, scenes, and their
associated functions. Then a probability map of goal occurrence is
computed based on Bayesian inference with FBN. The probability
map is utilized to predict the waypoint for the next step.

[28], waypoint prediction [6], and unexplored area prediction [12, 52]. However, these methods demand extensive
training data for learning object-scene knowledge and are
conﬁned to a closed set of target categories, thereby limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios.
Zero-shot methods offer a ﬂexible alternative, allowing targets to be freely speciﬁed without additional training. Previous attempts for zero-shot ObjectNav primarily
leverage vision-language models (VLMs) or large language
models (LLMs) as a training-free knowledge to infer the potential location of targets. VLM-based methods [11, 14, 44]
compute relevance scores between the features of visual observations and target semantics encoded by VLMs [17, 27],

19535

