This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Solver of Dichromatic Reflection Model for Specular Highlight Removal
Gang Fu
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Shenzhen University, China
xyzgfu@gmail.com

Abstract

phy. We in this paper focus on handling specular highlight
removal for single images.

The Dichromatic Reflection Model (DRM), a widely used
physical image formation model, has been extensively applied to specular highlight removal. However, traditional
DRM solvers fail to effectively recover the missing content
underneath specular highlights and are prone to producing
visual artifacts. Additionally, existing deep learning-based
methods do not fully exploit the full set of the DRM variables. Instead, they typically learn to translate an input
image into its diffuse image (and specular residue image).
As a result, their performance remains somewhat limited.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a neural DRM
solver for specular highlight removal. Our pipeline consists of three networks: Highlight Detection Network (HDNet), Alpha-Chrom Estimation Network (ACENet), and Refinement Network (RNet). Specifically, HDNet is first used
to detect specular highlights. Meanwhile, guided by multilevel contextual contrasted features from HDNet, ACENet
estimates the DRM variables. These estimated variables
are then used by our reconstruction models to generate the
specular-free and specular residue images. Finally, we introduce RNet, a model-free network, to further refine the
results. Extensive experiments on existing datasets and our
collected images demonstrate that our neural solver is superior to previous methods.

Early researchers proposed various DRM solvers based
on chromaticity analysis [30, 36, 37] and energy function
optimization [19, 21, 29]. These traditional solvers fail
to capture high-level semantic information about specular
highlights. Thus, they fail to effectively disambiguate them
from achromatic surfaces such as white texts and papers,
producing visual artifacts such as color tone distortion and
black color blocks. Also, we note that their performance on
benchmark datasets is unsatisfactory or even poor. With the
advent of the deep learning era, researchers proposed various deep learning-based methods [10, 11, 13]. Generally
speaking, these methods usually perform learning from an
input image to its specular-free image (and specular residue
image). Thus, their performance is limited to some extent,
since they do not fully utilize the full set of the DRM variables to construct the networks.
To address the above issues, we propose a neural DRM
solver for specular highlight removal. Its pipeline consists
of three networks: Highlight Detection Network (HDNet),
Alpha-Chrom Estimation Network (ACENet), and Refinement Network (RNet). For the DRM variables, we observe that the diffuse chromaticity and diffuse intensity ratio
maps are piecewise smooth, while the specular chromaticity map is both piecewise smooth and sparse in distribution.
In other words, they are less textured. By leveraging these
physical properties, we design HDNet and ACENet to operate in low-resolution space, while RNet operates in highresolution space. Specifically, given an input image, we first
extract its shuffle-down features and feed them into HDNet
to detect specular highlights and into ACENet to estimate
the underlying DRM variables. Meanwhile, we employ the
Contextual Contrasted Features Guidance Block (CCFGB)
to provide the multi-level location information of specular
highlights from HDNet to ACENet, facilitating more accurate estimations. Then, we estimate the diffuse and specular
residue images using our reconstruction models. Unlike the
original reconstruction models in DRM, our models incorporate additional upsampling and convolution operations.

1. Introduction
Specular highlights reduce the visibility and corrupt the important information in images. This severely degrades the
performance of many computer vision algorithms such as
intrinsic decomposition [4, 5, 41] and illumination harmonization [3, 14, 18]. These tasks play crucial roles in enhancing the visual quality, realism, and immersion of virtual
reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) experiences. Thus,
it is essential to remove specular highlights for images in order to make the VR and AR systems more compelling and
enjoyable for users. Additionally, a clean image without
specular highlight corruption is often desired in photogra-

7241

