This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-Unlearning on Diffusion Models: Preventing Relearning Unlearned Concepts
Hongcheng Gao∗1,2 , Tianyu Pang∗†1 , Chao Du1 , Taihang Hu4 , Zhijie Deng†3 , Min Lin1
1
Sea AI Lab, Singapore 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Nankai University
{gaohc, tianyupang, duchao, linmin}@sea.com; zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

While unlearning methods designed for DMs are promising, recent studies reveal that unlearned models may be
maliciously ﬁnetuned to relearn the unlearned concepts,
even when the ﬁnetuning is performed on unrelated benign
data [24, 29, 33, 36]. Although these studies focus primarily on language models, we observe similar phenomena on
DMs as shown in Fig. 4. This partly occurs because certain benign concepts (e.g., “skin” in the retain set) related
to unlearned ones (e.g., “nudity” in the forget set) are still
retained in DMs, easing their relearning during ﬁnetuning.
To tackle this challenge, we draw inspiration from metalearning [2] and propose the meta-unlearning framework.
This framework comprises two key components: (1) a standard unlearning objective to ensure the model effectively
forgets speciﬁed data before public release, while preserving performance on benign data; and (2) a meta objective
designed to slow down the relearning process if the model
is maliciously ﬁnetuned on the forget set. Additionally, it
induces the benign knowledge related to the forget set to
self-destruct, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Our meta-unlearning framework is compatible with most
existing unlearning methods for DMs, requiring only the
addition of a simple-to-implement meta objective, as outlined in Algorithm 1. This meta objective can be efﬁciently
optimized by automatic differentiation [23]. We conduct
extensive experiments on SD models (SD-v1-4 and SDXL)
to validate the effectiveness of various instantiations of our
meta-unlearning approach.

With the rapid progress of diffusion models (DMs), significant efforts are being made to unlearn harmful or copyrighted concepts from pretrained DMs to prevent potential
model misuse. However, it is observed that even when DMs
are properly unlearned before release, malicious ﬁnetuning can compromise this process, causing DMs to relearn
the unlearned concepts. This occurs partly because certain benign concepts (e.g., “skin”) retained in DMs are
related to the unlearned ones (e.g., “nudity”), facilitating
their relearning via ﬁnetuning. To address this, we propose
meta-unlearning on DMs. Intuitively, a meta-unlearned
DM should behave like an unlearned DM when used as
is; moreover, if the meta-unlearned DM undergoes malicious ﬁnetuning on unlearned concepts, the related benign
concepts retained within it will be triggered to self-destruct,
hindering the relearning of unlearned concepts. Our metaunlearning framework is compatible with most existing unlearning methods, requiring only the addition of an easyto-implement meta objective. We validate our approach
through empirical experiments on meta-unlearning concepts from Stable Diffusion models (SD-v1-4 and SDXL),
supported by extensive ablation studies.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) have achieved remarkable success
in generative tasks [11, 35], leading to the emergence of
large-scale models like Stable Diffusion (SD) for text-toimage generation [31]. However, training these models often requires vast datasets that may inadvertently contain private or copyrighted content, as well as harmful concepts
that are not safe for work (NSFW) [32]. These challenges
have sparked interest in machine unlearning algorithms for
DMs [3, 4, 15, 16], which modify pretrained models to forget speciﬁc inappropriate data (forget set) while retaining
performance on the remaining benign data (retain set).

2. Related work
Recent studies have shown that DMs can be misused to generate unsafe content, such as images depicting sexual acts,
harassment, or illegal activities [5, 30, 32]. To mitigate this
issue, early-stage DMs are equipped with NSFW ﬁlters designed to block the generation of inappropriate images [30].
However, this approach does not prevent the model from
generating harmful imagery at its core, and these ﬁlters can
be bypassed, exposing security vulnerabilities [1, 31].
Machine unlearning on DMs. Several methods have
been proposed to unlearn or erase harmful, private, or copy-

∗ Equal contribution. Work done during Hongcheng’s internship at Sea.
† Correspondence to Tianyu Pang and Zhijie Deng.

2131

