This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global-Aware Monocular Semantic Scene Completion with State Space Models
Shijie Li ♢ Zhongyao Cheng ♢ Rong Li □
Shuai Li △
Juergen Gall △ ♣ Xun Xu♢ Xulei Yang ♢,B
♢ 2
I R, A*STAR □ HKUST(GZ) △ University of Bonn ♣ Lamarr Institute*
B
Corresponding author

Abstract
Monocular Semantic Scene Completion (MonoSSC) reconstructs and interprets 3D environments from a single image,
enabling diverse real-world applications. However, existing methods are often constrained by the local receptive
field of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), making it
challenging to handle the non-uniform distribution of projected points and effectively reconstruct missing information caused by the 3D-to-2D projection. In this work, we introduce GA-MonoSSC, a hybrid architecture for MonoSSC
that effectively captures global context in both the 2D image
domain and 3D space. Specifically, we propose a DualHead Multi-Modality Encoder, which leverages a Transformer architecture to capture spatial relationships across
all features in the 2D image domain, enabling more comprehensive 2D feature extraction. Additionally, we introduce the Frustum Mamba Decoder, built on the State Space
Model (SSM), to efficiently capture long-range dependencies in 3D space. Furthermore, we propose a frustum reordering strategy within the Frustum Mamba Decoder to
mitigate feature discontinuities in the reordered voxel sequence, ensuring better alignment with the scan mechanism
of the State Space Model (SSM) for improved 3D representation learning. We conduct extensive experiments on the
widely used Occ-ScanNet and NYUv2 datasets, demonstrating that our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance, validating its effectiveness. The code is available
here.

Figure 1. Perspective projection results in an imbalanced distribution of projected points, where nearby points are more widely
scattered while distant points are more densely packed. The real
projection map is shown on the right.

1. Introduction

taneously detecting the relevant semantic information.
This work focuses on Monocular Semantic Scene Completion (MonoSSC) specifically tailored for indoor environments. Many recent SSC studies [11–13] focus on autonomous driving scenarios[14–16], aiming to complete incomplete 3D scenes using multi-view images or 3D LiDAR
point clouds as input. However, such rich sensory data is often unavailable in indoor environments where usually only
a monocular camera is available. Thus MonoSSC is proposed, which can infer 3D geometry and semantic information from a single image. Compared to SSC in autonomous
driving scenarios, indoor MonoSSC is typically more challenging due to less informative sensory data and increased
complexity of indoor environments with intricate structures.
The capability of current MonoSSC solutions is often
constrained by the inherent limitations of CNN architectures. These methods typically start by extracting 2D features using 2D Convolutional Neural Networks (2D CNNs).
Each 3D voxel is then projected onto the 2D feature map
to retrieve the corresponding features. Subsequently, 3D
Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs) refine these 3D
voxel features and generate the final prediction. As shown
in Fig. 1, the projected 3D voxel centers are unevenly distributed on the 2D image plane due to perspective projection. Specifically, the projections of 3D points closer to
the camera are more widely scattered, while those of farther points are more densely packed. CNN architectures

Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) plays a crucial role in
various 3D Vision related applications, such as robotic navigation [1–4], augmented reality [5–7], and autonomous
driving [8–10]. Its goal is to complete incomplete 3D
scenes, typically represented as a voxel grid, while simul* Lamarr Institute is Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence.

25550

