This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLABench: A Large-Scale Benchmark for Language-Conditioned Robotics
Manipulation with Long-Horizon Reasoning Tasks
Shiduo Zhang1 , Zhe Xu1 , Peiju Liu1 *, Xiaopeng Yu1 *, Yuan Li1 , Qinghui Gao1 ,
Zhaoye Fei1 , Zhangyue Yin1 , Zuxuan Wu1 , Yu-Gang Jiang1 , Xipeng Qiu1†
1

Skill Learning Ability
Place

Pick
Insert

Hang

Tool Use

Twist

Open

Close

Fudan University

Generalization Ability
Knowledge

Transfer

Diverse
Vision

Task-Related Comprehensive Ability

Semantic
Language

Mesh & Texture
Understanding

Spatial
Understanding

Task
Planning

Similar but
Unseen Task

Spatial
Layout

Evaluate

VLA
Bench

Semantic Conversion
Cognition

Common Sense & World Knowledge
Application

Physical Laws
Understanding

Long Horizon
Reasoning

Promote

VLA Architecture

Robotic Pretraining

Long Memory

··
·

··
·
Data Automation Scaling

Figure 1. Overview of VLABench. VLABench is a large-scale language-conditioned manipulation benchmark to evaluate the comprehensive skill learning and generalization ability of action policies especially pre-trained vision-language-action models.

Abstract
General-purposed embodied agents are designed to understand the users’ natural instructions or intentions and act
precisely to complete universal tasks. Recently, methods
based on foundation models especially Vision-LanguageAction models (VLAs) have shown a substantial potential
to solve language-conditioned manipulation (LCM) tasks
well. However, existing benchmarks do not adequately meet
the needs of VLAs and relative algorithms. To better define such general-purpose tasks in the context of LLMs and
advance the research in VLAs, we present VLABench, an
open-source benchmark for evaluating universal LCM task
learning. VLABench provides 100 carefully designed categories of tasks, with strong randomization in each category of task and a total of 2000+ objects. VLABench stands
out from previous benchmarks in four key aspects: 1) tasks

requiring world knowledge and common sense transfer, 2)
natural language instructions with implicit human intentions rather than templates, 3) long-horizon tasks demanding multi-step reasoning, and 4) evaluation of both action
policies and language model capabilities. The benchmark
assesses multiple competencies including understanding of
mesh&texture, spatial relationship, semantic instruction,
physical laws, knowledge transfer and reasoning, etc. To
support the downstream finetuning, we provide high-quality
training data collected via an automated framework incorporating heuristic skills and prior information. The experimental results indicate that both the current state-of-theart pretrained VLAs and the workflow based on VLMs face
challenges in our tasks. 12 .

11142

1 Codes and more videos are available at https://vlabench.github.io/
2 Corresponding to: sdzhang23@m.fudan.edu.cn, xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn

