This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedDifRC: Unlocking the Potential of Text-to-Image Diffusion Models in
Heterogeneous Federated Learning
Huan Wang1,* , Haoran Li1,3,* , Huaming Chen2 , Jun Yan1 , Jiahua Shi3 , Jun Shen1,†
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
3
QLD Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
1

hw226@uowmail.edu.au

*

Equal Contribution

†

Corresponding Author

Abstract
Federated learning aims at training models collaboratively
across participants while protecting privacy. However, one
major challenge for this paradigm is the data heterogeneity
issue, where biased data preferences across multiple clients,
harming the model’s convergence and performance. In this
paper, we first introduce powerful diffusion models into the
federated learning paradigm and show that diffusion representations are effective steers during federated training. To
explore the possibility of using diffusion representations in
handling data heterogeneity, we propose a novel diffusioninspired Federated paradigm with Diffusion Representation
Collaboration, termed FedDifRC, leveraging meaningful
guidance of diffusion models to mitigate data heterogeneity.
The key idea is to construct text-driven diffusion contrasting
and noise-driven diffusion regularization, aiming to provide
abundant class-related semantic information and consistent
convergence signals. On the one hand, we exploit the conditional feedback from the diffusion model for different text
prompts to build a text-driven contrastive learning strategy.
On the other hand, we introduce a noise-driven consistency
regularization to align local instances with diffusion denoising representations, constraining the optimization region in
the feature space. In addition, FedDifRC can be extended
to a self-supervised scheme without relying on any labeled
data. We also provide a theoretical analysis for FedDifRC
to ensure convergence under non-convex objectives. The experiments on different scenarios validate the effectiveness of
FedDifRC and the efficiency of crucial components. Code
is available at https://github.com/hwang52/FedDifRC.

Figure 1. The main idea of FedDifRC with two key modules
TDCL and NDCR. (a) We leverage conditional generative feedback of the pre-trained diffusion model on various text prompts to
devise a text-driven contrastive learning strategy, where the input
embedding is injected as a condition. (b) We extract the diffusion
denoising feature maps of intermediate layers from the pre-trained
diffusion model at a specific time step t during the diffusion backward process to construct a noise-driven regularization.

private dataset [16, 28] (i.e., training client models locally
and aggregating them globally [29]). One major challenge
faced in FL is the potential discrepancies in the local data
distributions across distributed clients, which is known as
the data heterogeneity issue [32, 35, 44]. Specifically, the
private data is collected from different sources with diverse
preferences and presents non-independent and identically
distributed (non-iid) distribution [27, 75]. Such non-iid data

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [34] has become increasingly popular as a decentralized training paradigm, with multiple distributed clients train their local models without sharing their

3726

