This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ESCNet:Edge-Semantic Collaborative Network for Camouflaged Object
Detection
Sheng Ye
Xin Chen
Yan Zhang
Xianming Lin*
Liujuan Cao
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
https://github.com/suy9/ESCNet

Abstract
Camouflaged object detection (COD) faces unique challenges where target boundaries are intrinsically ambiguous due to their textural similarity to backgrounds. Existing methods relying on single-modality features often produce fragmented predictions due to insufficient boundary
constraints.To address this, we propose ESCNet with dynamically coupled edge-texture perception. Our framework
introduces three core innovations that work in concert:1)
Adaptive Edge-Texture Perceptor (AETP), which creates an
edge prediction behaviour where edge and texture information are mutually reinforcing based on the multi-scale
features of the image integrated with the global semantic
context of the Transformer;2) Dual-Stream Feature Augmentor (DSFA), which dynamically adjusts the kernel sampling position according to the local texture complexity
and edge orientation, thus accurately enhancing the feature
information at fractal boundaries and amorphous texture
locations;3) Multi-Feature Modulation Module (MFMM),
which establishes incremental fine-grained improvements
for feature calibration and model prediction through enhanced characterisation of edge perception and hierarchical integration of multiple textures. This interconnected system forms a feedback loop where enhanced representations
of edge perception enhance model texture prediction and
vice versa. Our ESCNet demonstrates significant performance advantages on all three authoritative datasets.

Images

GT

Ours

CamoFormer

FEDER

FSPNet

Figure 1. Our approach outperforms existing methods, including
CamoFormer [53], FEDER [19], and FSPNet [23], by achieving
more precise segmentation of camouflaged objects, particularly in
regions with complex backgrounds (highlighted in red boxes

1. Introduction

present significant detection challenges. Typically, such objects exhibit blurred boundaries, low contrast, and deceptive
textures.
The importance of COD extends across multiple domains. In medical imaging [13, 14, 60], for instance, COD
techniques are instrumental in the early detection of tumors, while in wildlife conservation, they aid in tracking
and studying camouflaged species [40]. Additionally, in
industrial settings, COD methods are applied for detecting
subtle defects during manufacturing processes. Enhancing
detection accuracy in these areas not only advances the respective fields of healthcare, environmental protection, and
security but also contributes to overall societal well-being.
However, traditional segmentation methods, which rely
on color [1, 42] and texture contrast [16], fail in complex camouflage scenarios. Existing Deep learning methods [12, 19, 47], methods relying on isolated edge detection
or unimodal texture analysis often produce fragmented predictions due to three fundamental limitations: 1) Fixed geometric priors in conventional convolutions fail to adapt to irregular boundaries and stochastic textures; 2) Separate pro-

Camouflage represents a crucial defensive mechanism in
nature, enabling certain organisms to seamlessly blend into
their surrounding environment and thereby evade potential predators. The task of camouflaged object detection
(COD) [12] is to accurately locate these objects, which,
due to their high similarity with the background [12, 41],
* Corresponding author

20053

