This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MPG-SAM 2: Adapting SAM 2 with Mask Priors and Global Context for
Referring Video Object Segmentation
Fu Rong1 , Meng Lan2 , Qian Zhang3 , Lefei Zhang1 *
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Horizon Robotics
1

Abstract
Online Decoding

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) aims to segment objects in a video according to textual descriptions,
which requires the integration of multimodal information
and temporal dynamics perception. The Segment Anything
Model 2 (SAM 2) has shown great effectiveness across various video segmentation tasks. However, its application to
offline RVOS is challenged by the translation of the text
into effective prompts and a lack of global context awareness. In this paper, we propose a novel RVOS framework,
termed MPG-SAM 2, to address these challenges. Specifically, MPG-SAM 2 employs a multimodal encoder to jointly
encode video and textual features, generating semantically
aligned video and text embeddings along with multimodal
class tokens. A mask prior generator is devised to utilize the
video embeddings and class tokens to create pseudo masks
of target objects and global context. These masks are fed
into the prompt encoder as dense prompts, along with multimodal class tokens as sparse prompts to generate accurate prompts for SAM 2. To provide the online SAM 2 with
a global view, we propose a hierarchical global-historical
aggregator, which allows SAM 2 to aggregate global and
historical information of target objects at both pixel and
object levels, enhancing the target representation and temporal consistency. Extensive experiments on several RVOS
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of MPG-SAM 2
and the effectiveness of the proposed modules. The code
is available at https://github.com/rongfu-dsb/MPG-SAM2.

SAM 2
How to prompt?
Text Encoder

Online Decoding
SAM 2
GlobalHistorical
Aggregation

Dense
Prompts

Mask Prior
Generation

Sparse
Prompts

Joint Encoding
the white sheep is
in the middle and
back part of the
circle moving to
the right

the white sheep is
in the middle and
back part of the
circle moving to
the right

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison of two SAM 2 adaptations for RVOS. (a)
vanilla SAM 2, (b) our MPG-SAM 2.

1. Introduction

tion propagation, as in traditional video object segmentation
(VOS) [1, 6, 34], but also a robust understanding of the textual reference within the broader video context. The core
challenges of RVOS thus lie in efficiently aligning multimodal information and maintaining temporal consistency.
Recently, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [19] and
its variants [17, 49, 57] have demonstrated significant improvements in efficiency and accuracy for promptable segmentation in images, leveraging robust segmentation abilities and interactive prompts. SAM 2 [38] extends promptable segmentation from the image to the video domain by
introducing a memory mechanism to enhance temporal consistency, achieving remarkable performance in VOS. However, its application to RVOS presents several challenges.
First, the inherent absence of textual prompts in SAM
2’s architecture hinders the delivery of accurate prompts
that align with the provided textual descriptions, as shown
in Fig. 1 (a). Although some efforts have explored this area,
further improvement is still needed. For instance, RefSAM
[25] projects text embedding into sparse and dense prompts
for SAM, but the independently encoded text prompts may

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) [23, 29, 32,
47] aims to segment the target objects in a video according
to textual descriptions. This task, combining video segmentation [21] and language comprehension, necessitates not
only proficiency in segmentation and inter-frame informa* Corresponding author

23979

