This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiP-AD: Hierarchical and Multi-Granularity Planning with Deformable Attention
for Autonomous Driving in a Single Decoder
Yingqi Tang

Zhuoran Xu

Zhaotie Meng

Erkang Cheng

Nullmax
{tangyingqi, xuzhuoran, mengzhaotie, chengerkang}@nullmax.ai

https://github.com/nullmax-vision/HiP-AD

Abstract
Although end-to-end autonomous driving (E2E-AD) technologies have made signiﬁcant progress in recent years,
there remains an unsatisfactory performance on closed-loop
evaluation. The potential of leveraging planning in query
design and interaction has not yet been fully explored. In
this paper, we introduce a multi-granularity planning query
representation that integrates heterogeneous waypoints, including spatial, temporal, and driving-style waypoints across
various sampling patterns. It provides additional supervision
for trajectory prediction, enhancing precise closed-loop control for the ego vehicle. Additionally, we explicitly utilize the
geometric properties of planning trajectories to effectively
retrieve relevant image features based on physical locations
using deformable attention. By combining these strategies,
we propose a novel end-to-end autonomous driving framework, termed HiP-AD, which simultaneously performs perception, prediction, and planning within a uniﬁed decoder.
HiP-AD enables comprehensive interaction by allowing planning queries to iteratively interact with perception queries in
the BEV space while dynamically extracting image features
from perspective views. Experiments demonstrate that HiPAD outperforms all existing end-to-end autonomous driving
methods on the closed-loop benchmark Bench2Drive and
achieves competitive performance on the real-world dataset
nuScenes.

1. Introduction
Recently, great progress has been achieved in end-to-end
autonomous driving (E2E-AD), which directly predicts planning trajectory from raw sensor data. One of the mainstream
methods is to integrate all tasks (e.g., perception, prediction,
and planning) into a single model within a fully differentiable manner [6, 16, 23, 54]. Compared to the traditional
standalone or multi-task paradigm [11, 40, 51], it greatly alleviates the accumulative errors and enables all task modules
 Equal contribution;  Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of existing state-of-art works on open-loop
metric of Collision Rate on nuScenes dataset and closed-loop metric
of Success Rate on Bench2Drive dataset, where top left is better.
The legend indicates different planning interaction methods.

work collaboratively, which exhibits promising performance
under the effect of large-scale data.
Despite these advances, a signiﬁcant performance gap
persists between open-loop and closed-loop evaluations, primarily attributable to differences in motivation. Open-loop
methods focus on the displacement error in the planning
trajectory compared to the ground truth, while closed-loop
methods prioritize safe driving performance. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, previous E2E-AD methods [16, 23, 48, 49, 59]
demonstrate strong performance in terms of Collision Rate
(lower is better) in the open-loop benchmark nuScenes [2]
with some methods achieving as low as 0.1%. However,
these methods show unsatisfactory performance in terms of
Success Rate on the comprehensive closed-loop evaluation
dataset, Bench2Drive [21], where the Success Rate remains
below 35%. Even when focusing solely on emergency braking, the Success Rate is still inadequate, below 55% (as
shown in Tab. 2), despite achieving an open-loop Collision
Rate as low as 0.1%.

25605

