This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DC-AE 1.5: Accelerating Diffusion Model Convergence
with Structured Latent Space
Junyu Chen†

Dongyun Zou

Wenkun He

Junsong Chen Enze Xie Song Han
NVIDIA
https://github.com/dc-ai-projects/DC-Gen

Abstract
We present DC-AE 1.5, a new family of deep compression
autoencoders for high-resolution diffusion models. Increasing the autoencoder’s latent channel number is a highly
effective approach for improving its reconstruction quality. However, it results in slow convergence for diffusion
models, leading to poorer generation quality despite better reconstruction quality. This issue limits the quality upper bound of latent diffusion models and hinders the employment of autoencoders with higher spatial compression
ratios. We introduce two key innovations to address this
challenge: i) Structured Latent Space, a training-based
approach to impose a desired channel-wise structure on
the latent space with front latent channels capturing object structures and latter latent channels capturing image
details; ii) Augmented Diffusion Training, an augmented
diffusion training strategy with additional diffusion training
objectives on object latent channels to accelerate convergence. With these techniques, DC-AE 1.5 delivers faster
convergence and better diffusion scaling results than DCAE. On ImageNet 512×512, DC-AE-1.5-f64c128 delivers
better image generation quality than DC-AE-f32c32 while
being 4× faster.

1. Introduction
Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) [25] has established itself
as a dominant paradigm in high-resolution image synthesis [12, 19, 21, 32]. It leverages an autoencoder to project
images of size H × W × 3 into compressed latent represenW
1
tations of shape H
f × f × c , reducing the computational
cost of the diffusion model. The diffusion model’s outputs
are fed to the autoencoder at inference time to reconstruct
images from the latent representations. In LDM, the autoencoder reconstruction quality is critical, as it sets a quality
†

Han Cai†

upper bound for the whole image synthesis pipeline.
A common approach to improve the quality of autoencoder reconstruction is to increase its latent channel number
[10, 12, 19]. For example, Figure 1 (b) shows the autoencoder’s rFID (reconstruction FID, the lower the better) results with different latent channel numbers. We can see that
the rFID consistently improves as the latent channel number
increases, decreasing from 1.60 to 0.26 if switching from
c16 to c128.
Expanding the latent channel number is especially critical for deep compression autoencoders [7], which accelerate latent diffusion models by increasing the autoencoder’s
spatial compression ratio (Figure 1a). Under a high spatial compression ratio (e.g., f64), deep compression autoencoders must use a large latent channel number (e.g., c128)
to maintain a satisfactory reconstruction quality.
However, using a large latent channel number signiﬁcantly slows the diffusion model’s convergence, leading to
worse gFID (generation FID, the lower the better) results.
For example, Figure 1 (b) demonstrates DiT-XL’s [24] gFID
results with different latent channel numbers. Although the
autoencoder’s rFID keeps improving, the gFID keeps deteriorating. This issue not only limits LDM’s quality upper bound but also bounds its efﬁciency as it hinders the
employment of autoencoders with high spatial compression
ratios (e.g., f64).
This work presents DC-AE 1.5, which introduces two
key innovations to tackle the aforementioned challenge.
First, we analyze the autoencoder’s latent space under different latent channel numbers (Section 3.1). We ﬁnd that the
latent space has a sparsity issue when using a large number
of latent channels (Figure 2a). It allocates most of the latent
channels for capturing image details while the latent channels for capturing object structure become sparse among the
whole latent space2 . This sparsity issue makes it more difﬁcult for diffusion models to learn object structure, leading
to the slow convergence issue. As shown in Figure 2 (b),
the image details remain good when we increase the latent

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Han Cai (hcai@nvidia.com).

1 ‘f’ denotes the autoencoder’s spatial compression ratio. ‘c’ represents

2 We refer to them as detail latent channels and object latent channels,
respectively.

the latent channel number of the autoencoder.

19628

