This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenVision: A Fully-Open, Cost-Effective Family of Advanced Vision
Encoders for Multimodal Learning
Xianhang Li* Yanqing Liu* Haoqin Tu Cihang Xie
University of California, Santa Cruz
Project Page: https://ucsc-vlaa.github.io/OpenVision
Model Training: https://github.com/UCSC-VLAA/OpenVision
Model Zoo: click me

Model

Abstract
OpenAI’s CLIP, released in early 2021, have long been
the go-to choice of vision encoder for building multimodal
foundation models. Although recent alternatives such as
SigLIP have begun to challenge this status quo, to our
knowledge none are fully open: their training data remains proprietary and/or their training recipes are not released. This paper fills this gap with OpenVision, a fullyopen, cost-effective family of vision encoders that match
or surpass the performance of OpenAI’s CLIP when integrated into multimodal frameworks like LLaVA. OpenVision builds on existing works—e.g., CLIPS for training
framework and Recap-DataComp-1B for training data—
while revealing multiple key insights in enhancing encoder
quality and showcasing practical benefits in advancing multimodal models. By releasing vision encoders spanning
from 5.9M to 632.1M parameters, OpenVision offers practitioners a flexible trade-off between capacity and efficiency
in building multimodal models: larger models deliver enhanced multimodal performance, while smaller versions enable lightweight, edge-ready multimodal deployments.

Data

Training Evalua>on Model Num. Training Time

OpenAI’s CLIP Closed

Closed

Open

4

Google’s SigLIP Closed

Open

Open

10

OpenVision

Open

Open

>25

Open

Short

Long

Figure 1. The top table compares our OpenVision series to OpenAI’s CLIP and Google’s SigLIP. The bottom figure showcases
that OpenVision attain competitive or even superior multimodal
performance than OpenAI’s CLIP and Google’s SigLIP.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in multimodal foundation models rely almost exclusively on the same visual backbone: OpenAI’s
CLIP encoders [38]. From early open-source efforts such
as LLaVA [28] and Mini-GPT-4 [54], to the most recent advanced models such as Falcon2 VLM [34] and Eagle [40],
OpenAI’s CLIP-L/336 has consistently been the default
choice, even as the language components have evolved
rapidly. This dependence, however, imposes several issues.
First, OpenAI CLIP’s training data and detailed framework
remain undisclosed, limiting transparency and reproducibil-

ity. Moreover, OpenAI’s CLIP is available only in two parameter scales—Base and Large—hindering both the deployment of lightweight models on edge devices and the
exploration of higher-capacity encoders for complex tasks.
Finally, OpenAI’s CLIP suffers from documented weaknesses, including poor spatial-relation understanding and
object-counting hallucinations [43–45]. These shortcomings call for a vision encoder whose architecture, data, and
training recipe are fully open.
In response, the open-source community has mounted

* Equal contribution.

3977

