This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DC-TTA: Divide-and-Conquer Framework
for Test-Time Adaptation of Interactive Segmentation
Jihun Kim*
KAIST

Hoyong Kwon*
KAIST

Hyeokjun Kweon*
Chung-Ang University

jihun1998@kaist.ac.kr

kwonhoyong3@kaist.ac.kr

hyeokjunkweon@cau.ac.kr

Wooseong Jeong
KAIST

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST

stk14570@kaist.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Interactive segmentation (IS) allows users to iteratively refine object boundaries with minimal cues, such as positive
and negative clicks. While the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) has garnered attention in the IS community for its
promptable segmentation capabilities, it often struggles in
specialized domains or when handling complex scenarios
(e.g., camouflaged or multi-part objects). To overcome
these challenges, we propose DC-TTA, a novel test-time
adaptation (TTA) framework that adapts SAM on a persample basis by leveraging user interactions as supervision. Instead of forcing a single model to incorporate
all user clicks at once, DC-TTA partitions the clicks into
more coherent subsets, each processed independently via
TTA with a separated model. This Divide-and-Conquer
strategy reduces conflicts among diverse cues and enables
more localized updates. Finally, we merge the adapted
models to form a unified predictor that integrates the specialized knowledge from each subset. Experimental results across various benchmarks demonstrate that DC-TTA
significantly outperforms SAM’s zero-shot results and conventional TTA methods, effectively handling complex tasks
such as camouflaged object segmentation with fewer interactions and improved accuracy. The code is available at
https://github.com/jihun1998/DCTTA.

Figure 1. Motivation of Our DC-TTA. (a) Naı̈ve SAM struggles
with complex cases. (b) Standard TTA for SAM fails to fully leverage user clicks, as it processes all clicks at once in a monolithic
manner. (c) Our DC-TTA adopts a Divide-and-Conquer strategy,
effectively handling clicks by updating specialized units for coherent click sets before merging them into a unified segmentation.

1. Introduction

Meanwhile, Segment Anything Model (SAM) [19] recently has shown remarkable zero-shot segmentation capability. Given that SAM is inherently designed to take advantage of user-provided prompts, there has been a growing interest in exploiting SAM’s capabilities for IS applications [4, 15, 41, 59]. However, while SAM performs
well in straightforward cases, its effectiveness diminishes
when dealing with complex structures (e.g., camouflaged or
multi-part) as in Fig. 1a. In these challenging scenarios, often the important use cases of IS, the zero-shot performance

Interactive segmentation (IS) has emerged as a powerful approach for delineating objects in images with minimal user
effort. Unlike fully automated methods, IS allows users to
iteratively refine segmentation by providing positive or negative clicks, guiding the model toward better results.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

23279

