This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MatchDiffusion: Training-free Generation of Match-Cuts
Alejandro Pardo∗1 Fabio Pizzati∗2,3 Tong Zhang1 Alexander Pondaven3
Philip Torr3 Juan Camilo Perez1† Bernard Ghanem1
1

KAUST

2

MBZUAI

3

University of Oxford

†

*Equal contribution. Work done while at KAUST, now at Meta.

https://matchdiffusion.github.io
Training free

Text-based automatic Match-Cut generation
Driftwood tumbling in river

Sand dunes shifting in desert

Molten lava glowing on volcano

Honey spreading smoothly on wood

Wind sweeping through wildflowers

Ripples distorting pond reflection

MatchDiffusion

Joint + disjoint diffusion
“2001: A Space Odyssey” Match-Cut
Stanley Kubrick

Our reproduction of Kubrick’s Match-cut

Figure 1. Automatic match-cut generation with MatchDiffusion. In the history of cinema, there is prevalent use of match-cut transitions,
i.e. semantic shifts in the content of two scenes that share the same structure, as exemplified by Stanley Kubrick’s iconic transition from
a bone to a spaceship (bottom left). However, obtaining visually appealing match-cuts requires sophisticated planning and multiple shots,
due to the complexity of the transition. Our proposed MatchDiffusion approach is able to automatically generate match-cuts following
textual prompts (right), thanks to a training-free inference technique composed of Joint and Disjoint Diffusion mechanisms (top left).

Abstract
Match-cuts are powerful cinematic tools that create seamless transitions between scenes, delivering strong visual and
metaphorical connections. However, crafting match-cuts is
a challenging, resource-intensive process requiring deliberate artistic planning. In MatchDiffusion, we present the first
training-free method for match-cut generation using textto-video diffusion models. MatchDiffusion leverages a key
property of diffusion models: early denoising steps define
the scene’s broad structure, while later steps add details.
Guided by this insight, MatchDiffusion employs “Joint Diffusion” to initialize generation for two prompts from shared

noise, aligning structure and motion. It then applies “Disjoint Diffusion”, allowing the videos to diverge and introduce unique details. This approach produces visually coherent videos suited for match-cuts. User studies and metrics demonstrate MatchDiffusion’s effectiveness and potential to democratize match-cut creation. Visit our website for
video results. Our code is open source.

1. Introduction

14973

“The art challenges the technology,
and the technology inspires the art.”
– John Lasseter

