This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Large Vision and Language Models by Learning
from a Panel of Peers
Jefferson Hernandez1 *, Jing Shi2 , Simon Jenni2 , Vicente Ordonez1 , Kushal Kafle2
1
Rice University, 2 Adobe Research
jefehern@rice.edu, {jingshi, jenni, kkafle}@adobe.com, vicenteor@rice.edu

Abstract
Traditional alignment methods for Large Vision and Language Models (LVLMs) primarily rely on human-curated
preference data. Human-generated preference data is costly;
machine-generated preference data is limited in quality; and
self-supervised preference data often introduces hallucinations. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel
Panel-of-Peers learning framework inspired by collaborative
learning among humans. This approach leverages a panel of
LVLMs, each evaluating and learning from their collective
outputs through an iterative self-improvement process. By
simulating a peer review system, our models generate, assess,
and refine outputs in response to a curated set of prompts,
mimicking a classroom learning environment. We demonstrate that this methodology enhances model performance
without requiring extensive human-labeled datasets. Our
experiments show significant improvement across multiple
benchmarks, demonstrating the potential of peer evaluations
as a scalable alternative to self-supervised alignment. Notably, we show that Panel-of-Peers increases the average
score on fifteen benchmarks from 48% to 57%.

1. Introduction
Large Vision and Language Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities that require a diverse set
of skills such as compositional reasoning (e.g. [22, 24]),
use of general knowledge (e.g. [1, 42]), pictorial reasoning
about abstract figures (e.g. [37]), and character recognition
(e.g. [58]). Learning a generalist model that can tackle all
these tasks at once has been a challenge, as different LVLMs
might feature complementary strengths depending on the
richness of their training datasets. A successful approach
for improving both Large Language Models (LLMs) and
LVLMs has been to further refine them by relying on human
preference data to ensure that their outputs are more aligned
with the expectations of human users [36, 38].
* Work done while interning at Adobe Research.

[...] the total
cost would be
€15.80

I am getting one
funghi pizza and one
prosciutto pizza. How
much should I pay in
total?

[...] So, the total cost for
one Funghi pizza and one
Prosciutto pizza should be
14,80€.

[...] So, the total
cost for one
Funghi pizza and
one Prosciutto
pizza should be
14,80€.

[...] the total
cost is 15.90.

LLaVA-LLaMA3
LLaVA-Vicuna
LLaVA-Mistral

Response
Generation

Panel-ofPeers

Response Selection

LLaVA-LLaMA3
LLaVA-Vicuna
LLaVA-Mistral

Response
Evaluation

Figure 1. A Panel-of-Peers (PoP) generates candidate responses
from multiple LVLMs. The panel’s scoring of these responses is
used to build a preference set, which is used to tune one or all the
members of the panel, improving their accuracy individually. PoP
significantly outperforms other forms of reaching consensus across
many benchmarks.

The training process for LVLMs has largely converged
into three stages: 1) unimodal pretraining, where the vision encoder [34, 37, 61] and the LLM [2, 7, 15] are independently trained on a large corpus of data; 2) multimodal pretraining, where the unimodal models are combined
and trained on a large corpus of image-text data [35, 39],
sometimes augmented with extra knowledge (e.g., OCR, or
grounding data); and 3) a supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [22,
23] stage, where the model is trained on domain-specific data
to enhance its performance on various downstream tasks.
Despite extensive research into this three-stage pipeline,
LVLMs continue to face challenges, including hallucination issues, misalignment between visual and textual representations, and persistent knowledge gaps. These limitations
underscore the need to further refine our approach to enhance

1402

