This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intra-modal and Cross-modal Synchronization for Audio-visual Deepfake
Detection and Temporal Localization
Ashutosh Anshul, Shreyas Gopal, Deepu Rajan, and Eng Siong Chng
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{ashutosh007, shreyas011}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {asdrajan, aseschng}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent deepfake detection algorithms focus solely on
uni-modal or cross-modal inconsistencies. While the former disregards audio-visual correspondence entirely rendering them less effective against multimodal attacks, the
latter overlooks inconsistencies in a particular modality.
Moreover, many models are single-stage supervised frameworks, effective on specific training data but less generalizable to new manipulations. To address these gaps, we
propose a two-stage multimodal framework that first learns
intra-modal and cross-modal temporal synchronization on
real videos, capturing audio-visual correspondences crucial for deepfake detection and localization. We introduce
a Gaussian-targeted loss in our pretraining model to focus
on learning relative synchronization patterns across multimodal pairs. Using pretrained features, our approach not
only enables classification on fully manipulated videos but
also supports a localization module for partial deepfakes
with only specific segments spoofed. Moreover, the pretraining stage does not require fine-tuning, thus reducing complexity. Our model, tested on various benchmark datasets,
demonstrates strong generalization and precise temporal
localization.1

nipulations of either or both audio and visual content are
gaining traction [19, 28, 40]. It is also possible that only a
specific section or non-contiguous parts of a video or audio
are manipulated [7–9, 14]. In this case, the task requires
precise localization of the manipulations as opposed to a
simple detection, which is a binary classification problem.
In this work, we present a multimodal approach for deepfake detection and temporal localization. Previous works
on learning joint audio-visual cues for multimodal deepfake detection use early or intermediate fusion [2, 53, 59] or
late fusion [29, 47, 60] of audio and visual features. Some
studies have incorporated contrastive loss to enhance the
learning of audio-visual correspondence, highlighting differences between real audio-video pairs and deepfakes [37,
53]. Most of these models are single-stage supervised models trained directly on a specific deepfake dataset such as
Fake AVCeleb [28]. While such models achieve promising performance, [40] asserts that a single-stage supervised
training may limit the model’s ability to explore audiovisual consistencies thoroughly and could lead to the learning of features that are too specific to the training dataset,
impairing generalization to unseen manipulations and data
distributions. On the other hand, the cross-generalization
performance of some recent works [19, 24, 40] suggest
that pretraining the model on real samples using multimodal learning may enhance the identification of intuitive
audio-visual inconsistencies, which can then be leveraged
for more effective deepfake detection.
In this work, we propose a two-stage training framework
that first learns intra-modal and cross-modal temporal synchronization in real videos and then uses the inferred features from the pretraining stage for deepfake classification
or localization. Intra-modal temporal synchronization of a
segment in a video or audio refers to the continuity of visual or audio frames, which should be highest with that
of its previous or the next segment. Cross-modal temporal synchronization aims to predict how likely a segment
of video aligns temporally with an audio segment. While
the classification and localization models are two different
architectures, they both use features learned by the same

1. Introduction
Advancements in generative modeling have led to the creation of highly realistic images, videos, and audio. While
such generated content has applications in fields like entertainment and education, they are more often used maliciously to commit fraud and spread misinformation. Deepfake detection models are being developed, especially those
that can generalize over unseen manipulations and diverse
data distributions. While many of these deepfake detectors focus on a single modality such as image, video, or
audio [23, 24, 43], multimodal approaches that detect ma1 Code - https://github.com/AshutoshAnshul/ics-avdeepfake

13826

