This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Always Skip Attention
Yiping Ji1,2 , Hemanth Saratchandran1 , Peyman Moghadam2,3 , Simon Lucey1
1
Adelaide University, 2 CSIRO, 3 Queensland University of Technology
{yiping.ji, hemanth.saratchandran, simon.lucy}@adelaide.edu.au,
{yiping.ji, peyman.moghadam}@csiro.au

FFN

③

+

④

MLP
Norm
SAB

①

+

②

Self
Attention
Norm
Embedded
Patches

(a) Architecture

(b) FFN and SAB output embedding condition
number using different configurations

(c) Performance after removing skip connections

Figure 1. Removing skip connections from the Self-Attention Block (SAB) versus the Feedforward Network (FFN) in Vision Transformer
(ViT) models results in different performance drop. (a) Model architecture of ViT consisting of a SAB, and a FFN in each layer. ①
represents the output of the self-attention transformation, while ③ represents the output of the MLP transformation. ② and ④ represent
identity mappings, referred to as skip connections, in the SAB and FFN, respectively. (b) The condition number of the different output
embeddings for each hidden layer. A ViT-Tiny model is trained in a typical manner with skip connections on both SAB and FFN blocks
(i.e., ① + ② + ③ + ④). It shows that the SAB output embedding without skip connection is poorly conditioned (①), with a condition number
significantly higher than that of the other three configurations involving ViT blocks. (c) Classification results on three different datasets
using the ViT-Tiny model under three different architectures at train time. The result shows the effects of removing skip connections at
train time on the SAB and FFN blocks (either ② or ④) in all layers of ViT-Tiny. We observe that removing ② results in a catastrophic
performance drop, whereas removing ④ (as predicted) has a modest impact on performance. This difference becomes more pronounced as
the scale of the dataset increases.

Abstract
We highlight a curious empirical result within modern Vision Transformers (ViTs). Specifically, self-attention
catastrophically fails to train unless it is used in conjunction
with a skip connection. This is in contrast to other elements
of a ViT that continue to exhibit good performance (albeit suboptimal) when skip connections are removed. Further, we show that this critical dependence on skip connections is a relatively new phenomenon, with previous deep
architectures (e.g., CNNs) exhibiting good performance in
their absence. In this paper, we theoretically characterize that the self-attention mechanism is fundamentally ill-

23115

conditioned and is, therefore, uniquely dependent on skip
connections for regularization. Additionally, we propose
Token Graying (TG), a simple yet effective complement (to
skip connections) that further improves the condition of input tokens. We validate our approach in both supervised
and self-supervised training methods.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have demonstrated impressive
performance on various computer vision and robotic tasks,
such as object detection, semantic segmentation, video
understanding, visual-language learning, and many oth-

