This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROADWork: A Dataset and Benchmark for Learning to
Recognize, Observe, Analyze and Drive Through Work Zones
Anurag Ghosh Shen Zheng
Hailiang Zhu∗ Michael Cardei∗

Robert Tamburo Khiem Vuong Juan Alvarez-Padilla
Nicholas Dunn∗ Christoph Mertz Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜roadwork/

Abstract
T = 0 sec

Perceiving and autonomously navigating through work
zones is a challenging and underexplored problem. Open
datasets for this long-tailed scenario are scarce. We propose the ROADWork dataset to learn to recognize, observe,
analyze, and drive through work zones. State-of-the-art
foundation models fail when applied to work zones. Finetuning models on our dataset significantly improves perception and navigation in work zones. With ROADWork ,
we discover new work zone images with higher precision
(+32.5%) at a much higher rate (12.8×) around the world.
Open-vocabulary methods fail too, whereas fine-tuned detectors improve performance (+32.2 AP). Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) struggle to describe work zones, but finetuning substantially improves performance (+36.7 SPICE).
Beyond fine-tuning, we show the value of simple techniques. Video label propagation provides additional gains
(+2.6 AP) for instance segmentation. While reading work
zone signs, composing a detector and text spotter via cropscaling improves performance (+14.2% 1-NED). Composing work zone detections to provide context further reduces
hallucinations (+3.9 SPICE) in VLMs. We predict navigational goals and compute drivable paths from work zone
videos. Incorporating road work semantics ensures 53.6%
goals have angular error (AE) < 0.5◦ (+9.9 %) and 75.3%
pathways have AE < 0.5◦ (+8.1 %).

T = 3 sec

Unsafe Path
Safe Path

T = 6 sec

Figure 1. Autonomous Driving In Work Zones. Work zone objects block the road (in red), making some road regions unsafe (red
arrows), necessitating the development of forecasting traversable
paths from driven paths (green dots). Prior datasets do not comprehensively address this long-tailed challenge. Foundation models
struggle with recognizing and interpreting work zone objects and
signs, discovering new work zones, and analyzing work zones. We
additionally formulate work zone navigation as a learnable task.
The ROADWork dataset and benchmark highlight key challenges
in work zone perception and navigation, and we demonstrate simple techniques that improve performance on these tasks.

zones are relatively rare, learning to navigate them is essential for full vehicular autonomy.
Despite the research potential, few studies focus on this
domain. Work zones fall into the long-tail of scene distributions for vehicular autonomy. Mining data for such long-tail
situations is expensive, difficult, and labor-intensive [35].
Even large data sources contain few informative and diverse
long-tailed samples. Thus, such data and methods are often
trade secrets [18, 66]. For perspective, in this work, we
semi-automatically filtered only 5078 keyframes (less than
0.01%) from nearly 45 million frames in one data source.
Both common [8, 49, 69] and long-tailed datasets [33,
70, 71] contain few work zones. Among common datasets,
our analysis estimates that BDD100K [69] and Mapil-

1. Introduction
Navigating safely through work zones is a significant challenge for both autonomous and human-driven vehicles. In
recent years, several reports suggest that self-driving cars
are stumped by the simplest work zones [10, 11, 29, 41, 42,
44, 47, 75, 76]. In fact, even humans find driving through
work zones challenging [46, 62, 64]. Since 2010, more than
700 people have died every year in the United States in accidents involving work zones [48, 63]. Although road work
∗ Equal contribution.Work done at CMU.

6132

