This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free-Form Motion Control: Controlling the 6D Poses of Camera
and Objects in Video Generation
Xincheng Shuai1 Henghui Ding1
Zhenyuan Qin1 Hao Luo2,3 Xingjun Ma1 Dacheng Tao4
1
Fudan University, China 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba group 3 Hupan Lab
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
henghui.ding@gmail.com

dacheng.tao@gmail.com

https://henghuiding.com/SynFMC/
(1) Selection of Assets

(2) Selection of Motion Types
Camera Motion
Object Motion
Tracking Target:
Horizontal Line
Viewpoint Type: Left-to-Back
Horizontal Curve
Distance Type: Zoom Out
Stationary Point
Height Type: Static

Objects

Environment
(3) Animation Sequence

With meadow in the background, Mario
is running and bomb character stands still
in place. Then a moving brown monster
enters the field of view.
Rendered Video

6D Poses

Content Description

Segmentation Mask

Figure 1. The rule-based generation pipeline of videos in the proposed Synthetic Dataset for Free-Form Motion Control (SynFMC). This
example generates synthetic video with three objects: (1) The environment asset and it’s matching object assets are selected as the scene
elements. (2) The motion types of objects and camera are randomly selected for trajectory generation. (3) The center region shows the
resulting 3D animation sequence used for rendering. The rendered video and annotations are demonstrated in the last row.

Abstract
Controlling the movements of dynamic objects and the camera within generated videos is a meaningful yet challenging
task. Due to the lack of datasets with comprehensive 6D
pose annotations, existing text-to-video methods can not
simultaneously control the motions of both camera and
Henghui Ding (henghui.ding@gmail.com) is the corresponding
author with the Institute of Big Data, College of Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

objects in 3D-aware manner, resulting in limited controllability over generated contents. To address this issue and
facilitate the research in this field, we introduce a Synthetic
Dataset for Free-Form Motion Control (SynFMC). The
proposed SynFMC dataset includes diverse object and environment categories and covers various motion patterns according to specific rules, simulating common and complex
real-world scenarios. The complete 6D pose information
facilitates models learning to disentangle the motion effects
from objects and the camera in a video. To provide precise

12449

