This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chimera: Improving Generalist Model with Domain-Specific Experts
Tianshuo Peng1,2,∗ , Mingsheng Li3,∗ , Jiakang Yuan3 , Hongbin Zhou2 , Renqiu Xia2,4 , Renrui Zhang1
Lei Bai2 , Song Mao2 , Bin Wang2 , Aojun Zhou1 , Botian Shi2
Tao Chen3,5 , Bo Zhang2,‡,B , Xiangyu Yue1,6B
1
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
College of Future Information Technology, Fudan University, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
Shanghai Innovation Institute, 6 CPII under InnoHK
* Equal Contribution, B Corresponding Authors, ‡ Project Lead

Abstract
Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs), trained on webscale datasets predominantly composed of natural images,
have demonstrated remarkable performance on general
tasks. However, these models often exhibit limited specialized capabilities for domain-specific tasks that require extensive domain prior knowledge. An intuitive solution is
to post-train LMMs on a specific domain, but often suffers
from the labor-intensive annotating process and the inaccessibility of private training data. Directly integrating expert models tailored for those tasks is also challenging due
to representational gaps and imbalanced optimization. To
address these challenges, we introduce Chimera, a scalable and low-cost multi-modal pipeline designed to boost
the ability of existing LMMs with domain-specific experts.
Specifically, we design a progressive training strategy to
integrate features from expert models into the input of a
generalist LMM. To address the imbalanced optimization
caused by the well-aligned general visual encoder, we introduce a novel Generalist-Specialist Collaboration Masking
(GSCM) mechanism. This results in a versatile model that
excels across the chart, table, math, and document domains,
achieving state-of-the-art performance on multi-modal reasoning and visual content extraction tasks, both of which
are challenging tasks for assessing existing LMMs. We will
release model weights, along with the data used for training
and evaluation, to facilitate future research on LMMs.

Figure 1. Performance comparison of different models on multimodal reasoning (MathVista, MathVerse) and visual structural extraction (ChartQA-SE, Table-SE) tasks.

1. Introduction

pathway towards a general-purpose AI assistant. Although
proficient in a wide range of tasks, their performance still
lags behind that of models fine-tuned with target-domain
data, especially in specialized tasks such as multi-modal
reasoning and visual content extraction. As depicted in
Fig. 1, state-of-the-art general-purpose LMMs demonstrate
significant limitations in addressing these tasks, highlighting the necessity for further research to bridge this gap.

The past year has witnessed the remarkable success of
Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) in handling a variety
of general domain tasks, such as image captioning [7, 11,
24], visual dialog [3, 8, 9, 36, 51], and cross-modal retrieval [6, 57], demonstrating their potential as a technical

Current research on LMMs [7, 9, 23, 36, 37, 39, 58] has
extensively invested in scaling up by collecting web-scale
image-text pairs and employing multi-task instruction tuning to develop generalist models, following a “One for All”
paradigms [9, 50]. However, the pursuit of generality often

3011

