This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Multi-Layer Null Space Projection for Vision-Language
Continual Learning
Borui Kang 1 , Lei Wang 2 , Zhiping Wu 1 , Tao Feng 3 , Yawen Li 4 , Yang Gao 1,5 , Wenbin Li1 *
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
University of Wollongong, Australia 3 Tsinghua University, China
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
5
Yili Normal University, Xinjiang, China

Task 1

Task 2

Task N

(a) Vision-Language CL

(d)

Task 1

Task 2

(b) Adapter-based VLM CL

Task 1

Fine-tuning
Task 2

Text

Encoder

Image

Text

Task N

Encoder

Fine-tuning

DMNSP
Encoder

Image

Encoder

Full-tuning

Adapter
Text

Addtional
components

Encoder

Image

Vision-Language Models (VLM) have emerged as a highly
promising approach for Continual Learning (CL) due to
their powerful generalizable features. While adapter-based
VLM can exploit both task-specific and task-agnostic features, current CL methods have largely overlooked the distinct and evolving parameter distributions in visual and language modalities, which are found crucial for effectively
mitigating catastrophic forgetting. In this study, we find that
the visual modality experiences a broader parameter distribution and greater variance during class increments than
the textual modality, leading to higher vulnerability to forgetting. Consequently, we handle the branches of the two
modalities asymmetrically. Specifically, we propose a Dynamic Multi-layer Null Space Projection (DMNSP) strategy
and apply it only to the visual modality branch, while optimizing the language branch according to the original optimizer. DMNSP can restrict the update of visual parameters
within the common subspace of multiple null spaces, further limiting the impact of non-zero residual terms. Simultaneously, combined with a dynamic projection coefficient,
we can precisely control the magnitude of gradient projection to the null space, endowing the model with a good
balance of stability and plasticity. Extensive experiments
on TinyImageNet, CIFAR100 and ImageNet-R demonstrate
that our method outperforms current approaches in accuracy and knowledge retention, setting a new standard for
state-of-the-art performance in class incremental learning.
Our code is available at https://github.com/RLVIG/DMNSP.

Encoder

Abstract

Task N

(c) Ours

(e)

Figure 1. (a) VLM-based CL methods that require full finetuning. (b) Adapter-based VLM CL methods requiring fine-tuning
of adapter layers. (c) Adapter-based VLM CL methods with
DMNSP in visual branch. (d) Variances of visual and language
parameters in adapter-based CLIP within CL. (e) Forgetting rate
of adapter-based CLIP before and after the integration of DMNSP.

over time while effectively preventing catastrophic forgetting [8, 9, 32]. However, traditional training-from-scratch
models [18, 20] can only obtain the feature representations specific to the current task, and they do not demonstrate good generalization ability when used for continual learning. Hence, in recent years, CL has gradually
tended to adopt methods based on Vision-Language Models (VLM), such as the Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) model [27]. The studies in [5, 33] show
that CLIP, trained with a large number of image-text pairs
through contrastive learning, inherently has a strong continual learning ability, which significantly contributes to the
development of CL. Subsequently, several improved methods have been developed. As depicted in Figure 1(a), ZSCL
[42] and Mod-X [25] utilize additional components, such as
specific datasets and specially-constructed loss functions, to
conduct full-tuning of CLIP for CL. To some extent, this
affects the expression of the generalizable features of CLIP
itself. In contrast, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)
techniques [1, 13, 14], such as the adapter-based method, effectively integrate task-specific features obtained from finetuning and the task-agnostic generalizable features of VLM.

1. Introduction
The primary objective of Continual Learning (CL) is to
enable models to learn from a sequence of data or tasks
* Corresponding Author

2077

