This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynTag: Enhancing the Geometric Robustness of Inversion-based Generative
Image Watermarking
Han Fang1 Kejiang Chen2,* Zehua Ma2 Jiajun Deng1
Yicong Li1 Weiming Zhang2 Ee-Chien Chang1, *
1
National University of Singapore 2 University of Science and Technology of China
{fanghan, dcscec}@nus.edu.sg

chenkj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Robustness is significant for generative image watermarking, typically achieved by injecting distortioninvariant watermark features. The leading paradigm, i.e.,
inversion-based framework, excels against non-geometric
distortions but struggles with geometric ones. To address this, we propose SynTag, a synchronization tag
injection-based method that enhances geometric robustness
in inversion-based schemes. Due to the complexity of geometric distortions, finding universally geometric-invariant
features is challenging, and it is not clear whether such invariant representation exists. Therefore, instead of seeking invariant representations, we embed a sensitive template feature alongside the watermarking features. This
template evolves with geometric distortions, allowing us to
reconstruct the distortion trajectory for correction before
extraction. Focusing on latent diffusion models, we finetune the VAE decoder to inject the invisible SynTag feature, pairing it with a prediction network for extraction and
correction. Additionally, we introduce a dither compensation mechanism to further improve correction accuracy.
SynTag is highly compatible with existing inversion-based
methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate a significant
boost in geometric distortion robustness while maintaining
resilience against non-geometric distortions.

Figure 1. An intuitive performance comparison between our proposed SynTag and state-of-the-art methods from three typical paradigms, illustrating
extraction accuracy under non-geometric and geometric distortions.

1. Introduction

erative model, the identification of generated images and
their uses are achieved. For generative image watermarking, robustness is a key property, ensuring that watermarks
remain extractable even if the image undergoes distortions.
Common generative image watermarking frameworks
include the posthoc-based framework [6], fine-tune-based
framework [13] and the inversion-based framework [31].
Among them, the inversion-based scheme demonstrates the
strongest robustness to non-geometric distortions, such as
JPEG, Gaussian noise, etc. However, we find that such kind
of framework struggles with geometric distortions (e.g., rotation, scaling), as indicated in Fig. 1. Considering geometric distortions are common in practical applications, ensuring geometric robustness is a significant step to push the
technique from lab research to practical application.
Traditionally, robustness is achieved by constructing
distortion-invariant features for watermark embedding.
Empirical evidence suggests that invariant features can
be effectively trained or engineered to withstand nongeometric distortions, which primarily affect pixel-level details [13, 25, 31, 34]. However, geometric distortions introduce structural transformations that cause pixel misalignment and desynchronization effects, making it challenging

The powerful generative capability of latent diffusion models (LDMs) [26] presents potential disinformation risks,
as malicious users could misuse them to create realistic
yet misleading images, spreading false information. This
makes the detectability and traceability of generated images a pressing priority. Generative image watermarking
[13, 25, 31, 33, 34] is a crucial technique to address this
need. By proactively watermarking every output of the gen* Corresponding author.

15416

