This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IntroStyle: Training-Free Introspective Style Attribution
using Diffusion Features
Anand Kumar, Jiteng Mu, Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego
{ank029, jmu, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) models have recently gained
widespread adoption. This has spurred concerns about
safeguarding intellectual property rights and an increasing
demand for mechanisms that prevent the generation of
speciﬁc artistic styles. Existing methods for style extraction
typically necessitate the collection of custom datasets
and the training of specialized models. This, however, is
resource-intensive, time-consuming, and often impractical
for real-time applications. We present a novel, training-free
framework to solve the style attribution problem, using
the features produced by a diffusion model alone, without
any external modules or retraining. This is denoted as
Introspective Style attribution (IntroStyle) and is
shown to have superior performance to state-of-the-art
models for style attribution. We also introduce a synthetic
dataset of Artistic Style Split (ArtSplit) to isolate
artistic style and evaluate ﬁne-grained style attribution performance. Our experimental results on WikiArt
and DomainNet datasets show that IntroStyle is
robust to the dynamic nature of artistic styles, outperforming existing methods by a wide margin. Website:
https://anandk27.github.io/IntroStyle

Figure 1. Introspective Style Attribution (IntroStyle). Top two rows:
comparison of style attribution by IntroStyle and a SOTA method
(CSD). A query image, the top-3 retrieval results of IntroStyle, and
the top-2 retrieval results of CSD are shown from left to right. Green colors indicate correct and red incorrect retrievals. First row: WikiArt [34]
dataset. Second row: proposed synthetic Artistic Style Split (ArtSplit)
dataset. While the SOTA style attributions are biased by image semantics,
failing to retrieve images on the style of the query, IntroStyle retrieves
images of the correct style. Bottom: retrieval scores of IntroStyle for
ArtSplit synthetic images generated to have the semantic of the query
(“Starry Night”) but different styles, demonstrating the effectiveness of
IntroStyle as a metric for style measurement.

ment. For effective performance, the models require largescale pre-training on diverse datasets [35]. Since these
datasets are collected automatically and dominantly from
the web, it is difﬁcult to control image provenance and avoid
the collection of copyrighted imagery. This problem is compounded by the tendency of diffusion models to replicate elements from their training data [2]. The legal implications
of training models on copyrighted images have become a
subject of recent debate and litigation, with artists arguing that the unauthorized use of their works for AI training [6, 9, 11] constitutes copyright infringement [15, 30].

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have signiﬁcantly advanced image synthesis by applying iterative denoising processes guided by
input prompts. Models like Stable Diffusion [31], DALLE 3 [1], and Imagen [33] have emerged as a powerful
paradigm for T2I synthesis, demonstrating remarkable capabilities in generating high-quality images from textual
descriptions. The success of diffusion-based approaches
has led to their application in various domains, including layout-to-image generation, text-guided image generation, and even video synthesis. However, the widespread
adoption and impressive performance of T2I modelss have
also raised concerns about problems like copyright infringe-

Current mitigation approaches include “unlearning”
techniques to remove speciﬁc styles from AI models [44],
though these require costly model retraining and may not
fully address indirect style replication through alternative
prompts [25]. Style “cloaking” methods [36] offer artists
some protection but compromise the authentic viewing ex-

14909

