This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Learning of High-Value Regions for Semi-Supervised
Medical Image Segmentation
Tao Lei1∗ , Ziyao Yang1 , Xingwu Wang2 , Yi Wang1 , Xuan Wang3 , Feiman Sun4 , Asoke K. Nandi5
1
Shaanxi University of Science and Technology, China
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
4
Southwest Jiaotong University, China 5 Brunel University of London, UK
∗

Corresponding author:leitao@sust.edu.cn

Abstract

Region1

Existing semi-supervised learning methods typically mitigate the impact of unreliable predictions by suppressing
low-confidence regions. However, these methods fail to explore which regions hold higher learning value and how
to design adaptive learning strategies for these regions. To
address these issues, we propose a novel adaptive learning
of high-value regions (ALHVR) framework. By exploiting
the diversity of predictions from dual-branch networks, the
prediction regions are classified into three groups: reliable
stable region, reliable unstable region, and unreliable stable region. For high-value regions (reliable unstable region
and unreliable stable region), different training strategies
are designed. Specifically, for reliable unstable region, we
propose a confidence-guided cross-prototype consistency
learning (CG-CPCL) module, which enforces prototype
consistency constraints in the feature space. By leveraging confidence information, the high-confidence predictions
from one network selectively supervise the low-confidence
predictions from the other, thus helping the model learn
inter-class discrimination more stably. Additionally, for unreliable stable region, we design a dynamic teacher competition teaching (DTCT) module, which dynamically selects
the most reliable pixels as teachers by evaluating the unperturbed predictions from both networks. These selected pixels are then used to supervise perturbed predictions, thereby
enhancing the model’s learning capability in unreliable region. Experimental results show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on three public datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/ziziyao/ALHVR.

Image

Label

Region2

Prediction1

Region3

Prediction2

Figure 1. Training on the Brats dataset using the CPS framework,
where the predictions of a given sample are classified based on a
confidence threshold. Region 1 represents the reliable stable region, Region 2 represents the reliable unstable region, and Region
3 represents the unreliable stable region.
Dataset

Region 1

Region 2

Region 3

Dice

✓
✓

✓

✓

85.34
87.13
88.46
88.20
87.41
82.51
88.58

✓
✓

ACDC
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

Table 1. Experimental results of training on the ACDC dataset
with 10% labeled data using the CPS framework under different
masked region settings.

1. Introduction

aries between target regions and surrounding tissues. This
issue increases the segmentation difficulty for the model at
boundary regions. Some semi-supervised methods [23, 34]
estimate confidence based on predictions from a single
network to distinguish between high-confidence and lowconfidence pixels. These methods guide the model to
focus on high-confidence predictions by discarding lowconfidence pixels. However, predictions from a single network are biased, leading to inaccurate pixel classification.
Therefore, some approaches evaluate pixel reliability based
on dual-network predictions. For instance, MCF [27] treats
inconsistent predictions between networks as errors and attempts to correct them, but it fails to handle cases where
both predictions are incorrect. MLRP [24] employs a pixelwise comparison strategy to select relatively reliable predic-

Medical images contain various types of tissues with complex anatomical structures, leading to ambiguous bound-

21450

