This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EvolvingGrasp: Evolutionary Grasp Generation via
Efficient Preference Alignment
Yufei Zhu1,∗ , Yiming Zhong1,∗ , Zemin Yang1 , Peishan Cong1 ,
Jingyi Yu1 , Xinge Zhu2,† , Yuexin Ma1,†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://evolvinggrasp.github.io/

Learning from Feedback
Object Input

Evolving

Efficiency

Evolving
Grasp

>

Ours

👍

Hand Pose

Evolving

Evolving

Figure 1. The left part illustrates EvolvingGrasp, an approach akin to evolution, where it enables the model to learn from
experience and iteratively refine its grasping strategy. The right part demonstrates its efficiency and effectiveness.

Abstract
Dexterous robotic hands often struggle to generalize effectively in complex environments due to models trained on
low-diversity data. However, the real world presents an
inherently unbounded range of scenarios. A natural solution is to enable robots learning from experience in complex environments—an approach akin to evolution, where
systems improve through learning from both failures and
successes. Motivated by this, we propose EvolvingGrasp,
an evolutionary grasp generation method that continuously
enhances grasping performance through efficient preference alignment. Specifically, we introduce Handpose-wise

Preference Optimization (HPO), which allows the model to
continuously align with preferences from both positive and
negative feedback while progressively refining its grasping
strategies. To further enhance efficiency and reliability during online adjustments, we incorporate a Physics-aware
Consistency Model within HPO, which accelerates inference, reduces the number of timesteps needed for preference
fine-tuning, and ensures physical plausibility throughout the
process. Our results validate that EvolvingGrasp enables
evolutionary grasp generation, ensuring robust, physically
feasible, and preference-aligned grasping in both simulation and real scenarios.

1∗ Equal contribution.

1. Introduction

2†

Corresponding author. This work was supported by NSFC
(No.62206173), Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered
Artificial Intelligence (ShangHAI), MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Human-Machine Collaboration (KLIP-HuMaCo).

11665

Dexterous robotic grasping has made significant strides in
embodied manipulation, enabling more adaptive and pre-

