This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ORION: A Holistic End-to-End Autonomous Driving Framework by
Vision-Language Instructed Action Generation
Haoyu Fu1∗ , Diankun Zhang2∗ , Zongchuang Zhao1∗ , Jianfeng Cui2 , Dingkang Liang1† ,
Chong Zhang2 , Dingyuan Zhang1 , Hongwei Xie2† , Bing Wang2 , Xiang Bai1
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Xiaomi EV
{hyfu, zcuangzhao, dkliang}@hust.edu.cn
https://xiaomi-mlab.github.io/Orion/

Abstract
End-to-end (E2E) autonomous driving methods still struggle to make correct decisions in interactive closed-loop
evaluation due to limited causal reasoning capability. Current methods attempt to leverage the powerful understanding and reasoning abilities of Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) to resolve this dilemma. However, the problem is
still open that few VLMs for E2E methods perform well
in the closed-loop evaluation due to the gap between the
semantic reasoning space and the purely numerical trajectory output in the action space. To tackle this issue,
we propose ORION, a hOlistic E2E autonomous dRiving
framework by vIsion-language instructed actiON generation. ORION uniquely combines a QT-Former to aggregate
long-term history context, a Large Language Model (LLM)
for driving scenario reasoning, and a generative planner for
precision trajectory prediction. ORION further aligns the
reasoning space and the action space to implement a uniﬁed
E2E optimization for both visual question-answering (VQA)
and planning tasks. Our method achieves an impressive
closed-loop performance of 77.74 Driving Score (DS) and
54.62% Success Rate (SR) on the challenge Bench2Drive
datasets, which outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods by a large margin of 14.28 DS and 19.61% SR.

1. Introduction
End-to-end (E2E) autonomous driving has witnessed signiﬁcant advancements in recent years. Classic E2E methods [9, 19, 26, 69, 72] integrate perception [28, 44, 68], prediction [8, 16, 51], and planning [18, 45] modules through
multi-task learning, as shown in Fig. 1(a). These methods optimize driving trajectories by imitating expert demon* Equal contribution. † Project leader.  Corresponding author. Work
done when Haoyu Fu and Zhongchuang Zhao were interns at Xiaomi EV.

Image

Perception

Motion
Prediction

Planning

(a) Classic E2E methods
Image

Text

VLM

(b) VLM-Based E2E methods
Image

VLM

Interfaces

Classic
E2E Method

(c) VLM-Assisted Classic E2E methods
Instructed

Image

VLM

:Information flow

:Backpropagation

Generative
Planner

(d) ORION
:Hinder

: Multi-modal Trajectory

Figure 1. The comparison of different E2E paradigms. Our
ORION framework establishes the differentiable connection between reasoning and action space via the generative planner.

strations, achieving promising performance in the openloop evaluation [7, 55]. Nevertheless, these methods lack
the common sense to complete complex causal reasoning.
As a result, they struggle with comprehensive closed-loop
benchmarks [24] that require autonomous decision-making
and dynamic environmental interactions. Recently, VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) [1, 11, 40, 59] have accumulated
rich world knowledge and aligned vision-language space
between the vision encoder [46, 67] and Large-Language
Models (LLMs) through the large-scale data training, providing new insight for achieving E2E autonomous driving.
Leveraging VLMs for E2E autonomous driving is not
trivial since VLM’s ability exists in the reasoning space,
while E2E methods only need the numerical planning results in the action space. Although some convenient methods [20, 75] leverage VLM output trajectories by ﬁne-

24823

