This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Does Your Vision-Language Model Get Lost in the Long Video Sampling
Dilemma?
Tianyuan Qu1 ,* Longxiang Tang2∗ , Bohao Peng1 , Senqiao Yang1 , Bei Yu1 , Jiaya Jia2
1

CUHK

2

HKUST

1 MIN

0:00:00

1:00:00

Global sparse uniform sampling

VLM

Question 1 (Low Necessary Sampling Density):
What is the journey of the camera wearer in the video?
A. Took a bus to a restaurant for a meal, then walk to a nearby
supermarket for groceries, and finally took a bus back home.
B. Took a bus to a cafe for a drink, then took a bus to a bakery
to buy some bread, and finally took a bus back home.
C. Took a bus to a restaurant for a meal, then took a bus to a
supermarket for groceries, and finally took a bus back home.
D. Took a bus to a supermarket for groceries, then took a bus
to a restaurant for a meal, and finally took a bus back home.

0:00:00

Too few visual cues!

Global dense uniform sampling

At least 1 key frame per minute to answer

VLM

1:00:00

1 SEC

Too much redundancy! Too slow!
Question 2 (High Necessary Sampling Density):
What is the sequence of the camera wearer's actions when
bagging items at the supermarket checkout before paying
with their phone?
A. First bag the chicken wings, followed by the beef,
minced meat, and finally the potatoes and ham.
B. First bag the ham and potatoes, followed by the chicken
wings, minced meat, and finally the beef.
C. First bag the minced meat, followed by the ham,
potatoes, beef, and finally the chicken wings.
D. First bag the chicken wings, followed by the beef,
potatoes, and finally the yogurt and banana.

Sampling

At least 1 key frame per second to answer

Q1

Q2

Computation
Cost

Global Sparse
1 Frame / min

60 Frames

Global Dense
1 Frame / sec

3600 Frames

Local Dense
1 Frame / sec

60 Frames

Figure 1. Illustration of the Sampling Dilemma in Long Video Analysis: (Left) In Q1, identifying a camera wearer’s visited locations
requires analyzing the entire video. However, key frames are sparse, so sampling one frame per minute often provides enough information.
In contrast, Q2 examines the packing order during checkout, requiring high-resolution sampling to capture rapid actions. (Right) Sampling
Dilemma emerges in tasks like Q2: a low sampling density fails to provide sufficient visual cues for accurate answers, while a high
sampling density results in redundant frames, significantly slowing inference speed. This challenge underscores the need for adaptive
sampling strategies, especially for tasks with high necessary sampling density.

Abstract
The rise of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) has
significantly advanced video understanding. However, efficiently processing long videos remains a challenge due
to the “Sampling Dilemma”: low-density sampling risks
missing critical information, while high-density sampling
introduces redundancy. To address this issue, we introduce LSDBench, the first benchmark designed to evaluate
LVLMs on long-video tasks by constructing high Necessary
Sampling Density (NSD) questions—where NSD represents
the minimum sampling density required to accurately answer a given question. LSDBench focuses on dense, shortduration actions to rigorously assess the sampling strate-

gies employed by LVLMs. To tackle the challenges posed by
high-NSD questions, we propose a novel Reasoning-Driven
Hierarchical Sampling (RHS) framework, which combines
global localization of question-relevant cues with local
dense sampling for precise inference. Additionally, we develop a lightweight Semantic-Guided Frame Selector to prioritize informative frames, enabling RHS to achieve comparable or superior performance with significantly fewer
sampled frames. Together, our LSDBench and RHS framework address the unique challenges of high-NSD long-video
tasks, setting a new standard for evaluating and improving LVLMs in this domain. Our benchmark and evaluation codes has been released at: https://github.com/dvlabresearch/LSDBench

* Equal contribution.

20889

