This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Chronicles:
Using Multimodal LLMs to Analyze Massive Collections of Images
Boyang Deng1
Songyou Peng2,∗
Kyle Genova2,∗
1
2
Gordon Wetzstein
Noah Snavely
Leonidas Guibas1,2
Thomas Funkhouser2
1

2

Stanford University

Google DeepMind

Mar. 2021

Jun. 2021

Massive Collections of Images

(20M)

Visual Chronicles Using MLLMs

Apr. 2022

… added outdoor dining. (seen 1482 times in

)

… overpass painted blue. (seen 481 times in

)

Nov.
May 2022
2018

Figure 1. Visual Trend Discovery from Massive-Scale Collections of Images. We introduce Visual Chronicles, a novel approach that uses
Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) to make discoveries from massive collections of images over time. We analyze millions of images collected
over more than 10 years by Google Street View. As seen above, our method discovers both expected and surprising visual trends in San
Francisco—e.g. outdoor dining areas were added to many storefronts, and miles of overpass was painted blue, both with visual evidence.

Abstract

trends from images captured in large cities (e.g., “addition
of outdoor dining,”, “overpass was painted blue,” etc.).

We present a system using Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) to
analyze a large database with tens of millions of images captured at different times, with the aim of discovering patterns
in temporal changes. Specifically, we aim to capture frequent co-occurring changes (“trends”) across a city over a
certain period. Unlike previous visual analyses, our analysis
answers open-ended queries (e.g., “what are the frequent
types of changes in the city?”) without any predetermined
target subjects or training labels. These properties cast
prior learning-based or unsupervised visual analysis tools
unsuitable. We identify MLLMs as a novel tool for their
open-ended semantic understanding capabilities. Yet, our
datasets are four orders of magnitude too large for an MLLM
to ingest as context. So we introduce a bottom-up procedure
that decomposes the massive visual analysis problem into
more tractable sub-problems. We carefully design MLLMbased solutions to each sub-problem. During experiments
and ablation studies with our system, we find it significantly
outperforms baselines and is able to discover interesting

1. Introduction
Searching for semantic patterns and correlations in image
databases is a long-standing problem in computer vision
with applications in urban planning, visual analytics, and
other fields. Classical research on this problem includes
tracking changes in images within specific domains over
time (e.g., “A Century of Portraits” [15]) and finding salient
patterns of objects in images (e.g., estimating demographics
from vehicle sightings [14]). However, these methods have
only been demonstrated for predetermined specific target
subjects (e.g., faces [15] or cars [14]); and often require
labeled training data (e.g., labeled car attributes [14]).
In this paper, we study how to make open-ended discoveries about frequently occurring changes (“trends”) across

12769

Visit our project page for more results and interactive demos.
* Equal contributions. Ordered decided by a random number generator.

