This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SILO: Solving Inverse Problems with Latent Operators
Ron Raphaeli, Sean Man, Michael Elad
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{ronraphaeli,sean.man,elad}@cs.technion.ac.il

Inpaint

ReSample

Low Res.

SILO

GML-DPS

Low Res.

SILO

PSLD

Inpaint

SILO

LDPS

SILO

Figure 1. SILO [project page] – a plug-and-play image restoration method that operates entirely in the latent space of diffusion priors. By
emulating pixel-space degradations using latent-space operators, SILO achieves superior restoration quality while significantly reducing
runtime compared to prior plug-and-play methods that require repeated transitions between pixel and latent spaces.

Abstract
Plug-and-play methods for solving inverse problems have
continuously improved over the years by incorporating
more advanced image priors. Latent diffusion models are
among the most powerful priors, making them a natural
choice for solving inverse problems. However, existing approaches require multiple applications of an Autoencoder to
transition between pixel and latent spaces during restoration, leading to high computational costs and degraded
restoration quality. In this work, we introduce a new plugand-play paradigm that operates entirely in the latent space
of diffusion models. By emulating pixel-space degradations directly in the latent space through a short learning
phase, we eliminate the need for the Autoencoder during
restoration, enabling faster inference and improved restoration fidelity. We validate our method across various image restoration tasks and datasets, achieving significantly
higher perceptual quality than previous methods while being 2.6 10⇥ faster in inference and 1.7 7⇥ faster when
accounting for the learning phase of the latent operator.

Figure 2. Improved perception, distortion and runtime. By
operating solely in the latent-space, SILO achieves superior performance compared to previous plug-and-play methods that leverage latent diffusion priors. Particularly, as seen in the plot for the
noisy ( y =0.03) SR⇥8 case, SILO is 2.6 10⇥ times faster while
achieving better LPIPS distortion and FID measure.

1. Introduction

per we consider a noisy and degraded measurement y which
was created from a clean and unknown image x. Over the
past several decades, countless techniques have been developed to tackle such inverse problems, adopting various directions. Owing to these methods, it is possible to sharpen
and denoise images [4, 7, 12, 13, 16, 17], accelerate CT
scans [14, 51], and get information on the atmosphere’s

Methods for solving inverse problems aim to recover an unknown signal from its degraded measurements. In this pa-

10570

