This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDMatte: Grafting Diffusion Models for Interactive Matting
Longfei Huang1,2 * Yu Liang2 * Hao Zhang2 Jinwei Chen2 Wei Dong2
Lunde Chen1 Wanyu Liu1 Bo Li2 Peng-Tao Jiang2†
1
Shanghai University 2 vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd.
2946399650fly@shu.edu.cn

pt.jiang@vivo.com

Figure 1. Interactive image matting results of our SDMatte with box prompts. SDMatte leverages strong diffusion priors, ensuring
robust generalization. Meanwhile, it transforms the text-driven image generation capability of Stable Diffusion into a visual prompt-driven
interactive capability, enabling precise alpha matte prediction based on simple user-provided visual prompts (points, boxes, masks).

Abstract
Recent interactive matting methods have shown satisfactory performance in capturing the primary regions of objects, but they fall short in extracting fine-grained details in
edge regions. Diffusion models trained on billions of imagetext pairs, demonstrate exceptional capability in modeling
highly complex data distributions and synthesizing realistic texture details, while exhibiting robust text-driven interaction capabilities, making them an attractive solution for
interactive matting. To this end, we propose SDMatte, a
diffusion-driven interactive matting model, with three key
contributions. First, we exploit the powerful priors of dif-

fusion models and transform the text-driven interaction capability into visual prompt-driven interaction capability to
enable interactive matting. Second, we integrate coordinate embeddings of visual prompts and opacity embeddings
of target objects into U-Net, enhancing SDMatte’s sensitivity to spatial position information and opacity information. Third, we propose a masked self-attention mechanism
that enables the model to focus on areas specified by visual
prompts, leading to better performance. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our method, validating its effectiveness in interactive matting. Our code and model are available at
https://github.com/vivoCameraResearch/SDMatte.

* Equal contribution. Intern at vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd.
† Peng-Tao Jiang is the corresponding author.

15229

