This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Failure Cases Are Better Learned But Boundary Says Sorry: Facilitating Smooth
Perception Change for Accuracy-Robustness Trade-Off in Adversarial Training
Yanyun Wang

Li Liu*

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Abstract
Adversarial Training (AT) is one of the most effective methods to train robust Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). However, AT creates an inherent trade-off between clean accuracy and adversarial robustness, which is commonly attributed to the more complicated decision boundary caused
by the insufficient learning of hard adversarial samples. In
this work, we reveal a counterintuitive fact for the first time:
From the perspective of perception consistency, hard adversarial samples that can still attack the robust model after AT are already learned better than those successfully
defended. Thus, different from previous views, we argue
that it is rather the over-sufficient learning of hard adversarial samples that degrades the decision boundary and
contributes to the trade-off problem. Specifically, the excessive pursuit of perception consistency would force the
model to view the perturbations as noise and ignore the
information within them, which should have been utilized
to induce a smoother perception transition towards the decision boundary to support its establishment to an appropriate location. In response, we define a new AT objective named Robust Perception, encouraging the model
perception to change smoothly with input perturbations,
based on which we propose a novel Robust Perception
Adversarial Training (RPAT) method, effectively mitigating
the current accuracy-robustness trade-off. Experiments on
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet with ResNet-18,
PreActResNet-18, and WideResNet-34-10 demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method beyond four common baselines
and 12 state-of-the-art (SOTA) works. The code is available
at https://github.com/FlaAI/RPAT.

Figure 1. Success and failure cases of AT defense from the perspectives of prediction and perception, respectively. (a) and (b):
AT works through building a robust ball with radius d such that
the model prediction remain unchanged within it. Then if the robust d-ball fails to contain the ϵ-ball, there would still be failure
cases beating the robust model under perturbation δ within the ϵball. (c) and (d): In this work, we reveal that the smaller d-ball in
the failure cases is not a result of more vulnerable model perception as previous intuition. In fact, as demonstrated by the contour
line, which shows the perturbation ball to the same degree of perception change, the failure cases already achieve less perception
change under similar δ within the ϵ-ball. This implies that the
issue of these failure cases is not failing to learn perception consistency following the current AT objective, but failing to support
the establishment of decision boundary to an appropriate location.

1. Introduction

tible perturbations to inputs can cause substantial changes
in the outputs [12, 17]. As this problem raises significant
security concerns [45], previously, several defense strategies, such as Defense Distillation [32], Feature Squeezing [52], Randomization [51], and Input Denoising [14, 25],
have been proposed to improve the adversarial robustness
of DNNs. However, most of these approaches have proven

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated impressive performance across various real-world applications [24, 26, 60]. However, they are inherently vulnerable
to adversarial attacks [4, 39]. Specifically, even impercep* Corresponding Author: avrillliu@hkust-gz.edu.cn

4691

