This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring The Visual Feature Space for Multimodal Neural Decoding
Weihao Xia

Cengiz Oztireli

University of Cambridge
https://weihaox.github.io/VINDEX

Abstract

brain recording, then train a model to decode these pseudoannotations from brain signals. However, this practice is
computationally inefficient and may introduce bias or errors,
making it impractical for generalizable brain decoding. The
other key issue is the evaluation of brain-decoded detailed
captions, which can be hundreds of words long, rendering
conventional metrics unsuitable. Specifically, traditional captioning metrics [4, 36, 51] which mostly rely on n-gram
matching between candidate and reference captions, are
highly sensitive to stylistic variations, leading to inconsistent
evaluations. Model-based metrics either use outdated text
encoders [3] or struggle with long text due to token length
limitations [15, 38]. While concurrent studies [43] attempt
to generate detailed captions for visual decoding, they lack
reliable evaluations of caption quality and accuracy.
In this paper, we address the two critical issues. For
the method, we investigate the exploitation of various feature spaces from the visual components within MLLMs to
enable fine-grained multimodal explanations from neural
activations. We present VINDEX (VIsual experts for multimodal Neural DEcoding eXploration), which leverages
diverse feature spaces for multimodal neural decoding. We
further introduce a denoiser-based alignment strategy that
efficiently maps brain tokens to image tokens, allowing for
integration into pre-trained MLLMs. This approach facilitates decoding across multiple levels of granularities without the need for additional textual or spatial annotations.
For evaluation, we propose the Multi-Granularity Brain Detail Understanding Benchmark (MG-BrainDub) to discern
a model’s ability to decode fine-grained details from brain
signals. MG-BrainDub consists of two key tasks: detailed
descriptions and salient question-answering, with metrics focusing on key visual elements, including objects, attributes,
and relationships, derived from both candidate and ground
truth captions. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• Through systematic analysis, we exploit representative
feature spaces of visual components within MLLMs for
brain signal alignment and multimodal brain interaction.
• We introduce a zero-shot multimodal brain decoding
method for multi-granular decoding without the need for
additional textual or spatial annotations during training.
• We construct a benchmark with metrics for fine-grained

The intrication of brain signals drives research that leverages multimodal AI to align brain modalities with visual and
textual data for explainable descriptions. However, most
existing studies are limited to coarse interpretations, lacking
essential details on object descriptions, locations, attributes,
and their relationships. This leads to imprecise and ambiguous reconstructions when using such cues for visual
decoding. To address this, we analyze different choices of
vision feature spaces from pre-trained visual components
within Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) and introduce a zero-shot multimodal brain decoding method that
interacts with these models to decode across multiple levels
of granularities. To assess a model’s ability to decode fine
details from brain signals, we propose the Multi-Granularity
Brain Detail Understanding Benchmark (MG-BrainDub).
This benchmark includes two key tasks: detailed descriptions
and salient question-answering, with metrics highlighting
key visual elements like objects, attributes, and relationships.
Our approach enhances neural decoding precision and supports more accurate neuro-decoding applications. Code is
available at https://github.com/weihaox/VINDEX .

1. Introduction
Human brain signals are inherently complex and not directly
interpretable, posing a significant challenge for decoding
brain activity. To address this, recent studies have focused
on translating brain signals associated visual stimuli into multimodal explanations, such as textual descriptions [13, 42],
depth information [54], bounding boxes [53], or direct image reconstruction [35, 41, 42]. Although these efforts have
made notable strides, achieving a fine-grained understanding
of brain modalities remains an unresolved challenge.
One line of research [42, 49, 53] has attempted to translate brain activations from visual stimuli into textual captions.
However, existing methods typically generate one-sentence
descriptions with limited details, failing to capture the full
spectrum of visual perception. The most straightforward
approach [43] is to use off-the-shelf MLLMs [25, 29] to
generate detailed descriptions from paired images for each

4370

