This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianOcc: Fully Self-supervised and Efficient 3D Occupancy Estimation with
Gaussian Splatting
Wanshui Gan 1,2,∗
1
4

Fang Liu 1,∗

Hongbin Xu 3

Ningkai Mo 4

Naoto Yokoya 1,2,

†

The University of Tokyo,2 RIKEN, 3 South China University of Technology
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
∗
Equal contribution, † Corresponding author
{wanshuigan, fangliu2896, hongbinxu1013, nk.mo19941001}@gmail.com
yokoya@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We introduce GaussianOcc, a systematic method that investigates Gaussian splatting for fully self-supervised and
efficient 3D occupancy estimation in surround views. First,
traditional methods for self-supervised 3D occupancy estimation still require ground truth 6D ego pose from sensors during training. To address this limitation, we propose
Gaussian Splatting for Projection (GSP) module to provide
accurate scale information for fully self-supervised training from adjacent view projection. Additionally, existing
methods rely on volume rendering for final 3D voxel representation learning using 2D signals (depth maps and semantic maps), which is time-consuming and less effective.
We propose Gaussian Splatting from Voxel space (GSV) to
leverage the fast rendering properties of Gaussian splatting. As a result, the proposed GaussianOcc method enables fully self-supervised (no ground truth ego pose) 3D
occupancy estimation in competitive performance with low
computational cost (2.7 times faster in training and 5 times
faster in rendering). The relevant code is available in
https://github.com/GANWANSHUI/GaussianOcc.git.

Figure 1. Problem setting of GaussianOcc. Given a surround
image sequence, the spatial camera extrinsic and its corresponding 2D semantic annotation, GaussianOcc is able to perform 3D
occupancy estimation without the need for ground truth occupancy
label and ground truth 6D ego pose for training.

1. Introduction
Surround view 3D occupancy estimation [30, 33, 38, 44,
47, 50, 55] has emerged as a core perception task and a
promising alternative to bird’s-eye view (BEV) methods
[9, 27, 28]. To facilitate 3D occupancy estimation, several
benchmarks have been developed for supervised training
[40–42, 44], though these require substantial effort in 3D
annotation. To reduce the burden of 3D annotation, selfsupervised [5, 11, 16, 21, 53] and weakly-supervised [36]
learning approaches based on volume rendering have been

proposed [10, 34, 45]. Volume rendering allows 3D representation learning using 2D supervision signals, such as
2D semantic maps and depth maps, thereby eliminating the
need for extensive 3D annotation.

28980

Existing methods [21, 53] achieve self-supervised learning through volume rendering, where the 2D semantic map
supervision is derived from open-vocabulary semantic segmentation [54], and the depth map supervision is obtained

