This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnimalClue: Recognizing Animals by their Traces
Risa Shinoda1,2,4 , Nakamasa Inoue3,4 , Iro Laina5 , Christian Rupprecht5 , Hirokatsu Kataoka4,5
1
The University of Osaka 2 Kyoto University 3 Institute of Science Tokyo
4
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
5
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

Figure 1. Example images of AnimalClue. We present AnimalClue, a dataset designed for identifying animal species based on their
traces. Our dataset includes footprints, feces, eggs, bones, and feathers, totaling 159,605 bounding boxes from 968 animal species. We also
annotate 22 traits such as habitat, diet, and activity pattern. We establish four benchmarks for evaluating models: classification, detection,
instance segmentation, and traits classification. AnimalClue has the potential to advance research in animal tracking, an area that remains
underexplored due to the limited availability of publicly accessible datasets.

Abstract
Wildlife observation plays an important role in biodiversity conservation, necessitating robust methodologies for
monitoring wildlife populations and interspecies interactions. Recent advances in computer vision have significantly contributed to automating fundamental wildlife observation tasks, such as animal detection and species identification. However, accurately identifying species from indirect evidence like footprints and feces remains relatively
underexplored, despite its importance in contributing to
wildlife monitoring. To bridge this gap, we introduce AnimalClue, the first large-scale dataset for species identification from images of indirect evidence. Our dataset consists of 159,605 bounding boxes encompassing five categories of indirect clues: footprints, feces, eggs, bones, and
feathers. It covers 968 species, 200 families, and 65 orders.
Each image is annotated with species-level labels, bounding boxes or segmentation masks, and fine-grained trait information, including activity patterns and habitat preferences. Unlike existing datasets primarily focused on di-

rect visual features (e.g., animal appearances), AnimalClue
presents unique challenges for classification, detection, and
instance segmentation tasks due to the need for recognizing more detailed and subtle visual features. In our experiments, we extensively evaluate representative vision models and identify key challenges in animal identification from
their traces. Our dataset and code are available at https:
//dahlian00.github.io/AnimalCluePage/

1. Introduction

14776

Conserving wildlife is essential for sustaining ecological
balance and maintaining healthy ecosystems. However, numerous human activities, such as habitat destruction, chemical pollution, and the depletion of food resources, pose severe threats to wildlife species. To mitigate these impacts,
computer vision technologies are increasingly expected to
play a significant role by automating comprehensive and
continuous observation of wildlife populations. For example, animal detection models implemented with unobtrusive

