This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShortV: Efficient Multimodal Large Language Models by Freezing Visual
Tokens in Ineffective Layers
Qianhao Yuan1,2 , Qingyu Zhang1,2 , Yanjiang Liu1,2 , Jiawei Chen1,2 ,
Yaojie Lu1, ,* Hongyu Lin1 , Jia Zheng1,∗ , Xianpei Han1 , Le Sun1
1
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yuanqianhao2024,zhangqingyu2024,liuyanjiang2021,chenjiawei2024,
luyaojie,hongyu,zhengjia,xianpei,sunle}@iscas.ac.cn
Text Tokens

Abstract

ShortV Layer

ShortV Layer

Dense Layer

ShortV Layer

Dense Layer

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) suffer
from high computational costs due to their massive size and
the large number of visual tokens. In this paper, we investigate layer-wise redundancy in MLLMs by introducing
a novel metric, Layer Contribution (LC), which quantifies
the impact of a layer’s transformations on visual and text
tokens, respectively. The calculation of LC involves measuring the divergence in model output that results from removing the layer’s transformations on the specified tokens.
Our pilot experiment reveals that many layers of MLLMs
exhibit minimal contribution during the processing of visual
tokens. Motivated by this observation, we propose ShortV,
a training-free method that leverages LC to identify ineffective layers, and freezes visual token updates in these layers. Experiments show that ShortV can freeze visual token in approximately 60% of the MLLM layers, thereby
dramatically reducing computational costs related to updating visual tokens. For example, it achieves a 50% reduction in FLOPs on LLaVA-NeXT-13B while maintaining
superior performance. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/icip-cas/ShortV.

Visual Tokens

(a) ShortV

Average Performance

60.0
57.5
55.0
52.5

Model
LLaVA-1.5-13B (40 layers)
LLaVA-1.5-7B (32 layers)

50.0
47.5

0

5

10

15

20

# ShortV Layers

25

30

35

(b) Performance vs. the Number of ShortV Layers

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of ShortV. We identify ineffective layers for visual tokens and replace these layers with sparse ShortV
layers. In ShortV layers, we freeze visual tokens, and eliminate
computations related to updating them. ShortV improves MLLM
efficiency in a training-free manner and involves no parameter updates. Notably, ShortV is compatible with token pruning methods,
e.g. FastV. (b) Performance vs. the number of ShortV layers.
Average Performance means a normalized average score on multiple benchmarks. ShortV can freeze visual tokens in approximately
60% of the MLLM layers with nearly no performance degradation.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable
performance in natural language tasks [1, 12, 37, 47, 49].
Building upon LLMs, Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [31, 32, 38, 39] take a significant step towards
understanding the real physical world by incorporating visual information into their processes. Typically, an MLLM
consists of a visual encoder, a projector, and an LLM backbone. Most of them preprocess visual information through

a visual encoder, e.g. a CLIP-ViT [14, 41], and project the
patch-level visual features into visual tokens through a projector. Then they concatenate visual and text tokens and
feed them into the LLM backbone.
However, MLLMs face a substantial increase in compu-

* Corresponding authors.

329

