This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LUSD: Localized Update Score Distillation for Text-Guided Image Editing
Worameth Chinchuthakun* † 1,2
Pitchaporn Rewatbowornwong 1
1

2

VISTEC

3

Siam Commercial Bank

Ours

DDS (Best config)

Nontawat Tritrong 1
Supasorn Suwajanakorn 1

Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital

Supervised
(Best config)

4

Pixiv

Abstract

+ a sunglasses

Input

Tossaporn Saengja* † 1,3
Pramook Khungurn 4

+ a minion

food ՜
wagyu steak

a dog ՜ a boss
in Dark Souls

+ a drawing of
a coffee cup

While diffusion models show promising results in image
editing given a target prompt, achieving both prompt ﬁdelity and background preservation remains difﬁcult. Recent works have introduced score distillation techniques
that leverage the rich generative prior of text-to-image diffusion models to solve this task without additional ﬁnetuning. However, these methods often struggle with tasks
such as object insertion. Our investigation of these failures
reveals signiﬁcant variations in gradient magnitude and
spatial distribution, making hyperparameter tuning highly
input-speciﬁc or unsuccessful. To address this, we propose two simple yet effective modiﬁcations: attention-based
spatial regularization and gradient ﬁltering-normalization,
both aimed at reducing these variations during gradient updates. Experimental results show our method outperforms
state-of-the-art score distillation techniques in prompt ﬁdelity, improving successful edits while preserving the background. Users also preferred our method over state-of-theart techniques across three metrics, and by 58-64% overall.
lr = 0.25

lr = 0.5

߱ூ ൌ ͲǤͺ

߱ூ ൌ ͳǤͲ

߱ூ ൌ ͳǤʹ

߱ூ ൌ ͳǤͷ

1. Introduction

்߱ ൌ ͵

lr = 0.1

߱ ൌ ͵Ͳ

்߱ ൌ ͳͷ

߱ ൌ ͳͷ

்߱ ൌ ͳͲ

߱ ൌ ͹Ǥͷ

்߱ ൌ ͹Ǥͷ

߱ൌ͵

lr = 0.05

DDS grid

InstructPix2Pix grid

Figure 1. We propose a novel score distillation technique for
object insertion and image editing tasks. Compared to existing
score distillation methods, (e.g., DDS [16]) and supervised methods (e.g., InstructPix2Pix [6]), our LUSD achieves a higher success rate with superior background preservation. We compare the
best results (prioritizing object appearance) from state-of-the-art
methods, optimized through hyperparameter tuning (highlighted
by red boxes), with our results all generated using a single conﬁguration. Hypertuning grids for other images are in Appendix 12.

In the problem of text-guided image editing, we are given
an image and a text prompt, and the goal is to modify the
image to match the prompt. Unlike image generation, editing requires preserving elements of the input image, such as
a fox’s face when adding sunglasses, a cat’s outline when
changing its color, and the overall structure of an outdoor
scene when transitioning it from summer to winter.
Recent approaches leverage large-scale text-to-image
diffusion models [18, 40], such as Stable Diffusion [37], to
tackle the task. Supervised methods [7, 39, 51] ﬁne-tune or
train diffusion models on large-scale synthetic datasets conditioned on edit instructions, enabling intuitive user interaction via natural language prompts. For example, a user may
provide an image and ask the system to “add a cat on the
sofa”. In contrast, zero-shot methods [5, 13, 15, 27, 34] at-

15298

* Authors contributed equally to this work.
† Work done during research assistantships at VISTEC.

