This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Interpretation of Training-Time Out-of-Distribution Detection
Xu Cheng, Xin Jiang, Zechao Li*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{xcheng8, xinjiang, zechao.li}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

scores between ID and OOD samples, while T2FNorm [25]
performed feature normalization to improve OOD detection. Some methods [33, 35] added distributionally-shifted
augmentations into training to enhance OOD detection. Despite their effectiveness in OOD detection, it is unclear
whether a common mechanism underlies the effectiveness
of these differently designed methods.

This paper explains out-of-distribution (OOD) detection
from a novel view, i.e., interactions between different input variables of deep neural networks (DNNs). Specifically,
we provide a unified understanding of the effectiveness of
current training-time OOD detection methods, i.e., DNNs
trained with these methods all encode more complex interactions for inference than those trained solely with the
cross-entropy loss, which contributes to their superior OOD
detection performance. We further conduct empirical analyses and verify that complex interactions play a primary
role in OOD detection, by developing a simple-yet-efficient
method to force the DNN to learn interactions of specific
complexities and evaluate the change of OOD detection performances. Besides, we also use interactions to investigate
why near-OOD samples are more difficult to distinguish
from in-distribution (ID) samples than far-OOD samples,
mainly because compared to far-OOD samples, the distribution of interactions in near-OOD samples is more similar
to that of ID samples. Moreover, we discover that trainingtime OOD detection methods can effectively decrease such
similarities.

Thus, in this paper, we make the first attempt to explain
the common mechanism behind the effectiveness of different training-time OOD detection methods, as well as the
underlying reason why near-OOD samples are more difficult to distinguish from ID samples than far-OOD samples,
from a novel perspective of interactions, which shed new
light on understanding OOD detection.
To this end, we use interactions between different input
variables of DNNs to explain OOD detection. It is because
given a sample x, the DNN usually does not employ each
single input variable of x independently to identify whether
it is in distribution or out of distribution. Instead, the DNN
lets each input variable interact with each other to form a
certain pattern for inference. For a better understanding,
let us consider the toy example in Fig. 1(a). The DNN
v encodes the interaction between a set of input variables
S = {x1 , x2 } of the input sample x to form the dog ear
for inference. Each interaction represents an AND relationship between input variables in S. That is, only when all
two variables in S are all present, the dog ear is activated
and makes a numerical effect I(S|x) to the network output
v(x). The absence/masking1 of any variable in S will deactivate the interaction, and remove its corresponding effect
I(S|x).

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution detection is a task to identify whether or
not a given test sample is drawn out of the training distribution, which is crucial for ensuring the robustness and reliability of DNNs in real-world applications. To this end, a rich
line of literature has dedicated to enhancing OOD detection,
and one typical direction is to adjust model training strategy to make OOD samples more distinguishable directly at
training [10, 11, 16, 25, 33, 37], which is commonly referred to as training-time OOD detection methods [39, 42].
Existing training-time OOD detection methods are usually designed based on different observations and intuitions.
For example, LogitNorm [37] employed logit normalization during training to produce distinguishable confidence

Faithfulness of the interaction-based explanation.
More crucially, Ren et al. [28] have derived two theorems
to justify the faithfulness of taking such interactions as symbolic primitive inference patterns encoded by the DNN for
inference. Specifically, it is proven that a well-trained
DNN usually encodes a few interactions, and its network
output v(x) can be well explained as the sum of numerP
ical effects of these interactions, v(x) = S I(S|x), as
shown in Fig. 1(a). Besides, Li and Zhang [20] have empirically verified the generalization property of the interaction

* Corresponding author.

2142

