This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EvaGaussians: Event Stream Assisted Gaussian Splatting from Blurry Images
Wangbo Yu1,2* , Chaoran Feng1* , Jianing Li3 , Jiye Tang4 , Jiashu Yang5 , Zhenyu Tang1 , Meng Cao6 ,
Xu Jia5 , Yuchao Yang1 , Li Yuan1,2† and Yonghong Tian1,2†
1

Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University , 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 School of Computer and Science, Peking University
4

University of Science and Technology of China, 5 Dalian University of Technology, 6 MBZUAI

{wbyu, chaoran.feng}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yuanli-ece, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn

Blurry Inputs

BAD-Gaussians

BAGS

[ECCV2024]

[ECCV2024]

Hybrid Inputs

EvDNeRF

EvaGaussians

[CVPR2024]

[Ours]

Ground Truth

Figure 1. EvaGaussians integrates frame-based cameras and event cameras to reconstruct sharp 3D-GS from motion-blurred images. It
achieves higher-quality novel view synthesis compared to previous methods.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) has demonstrated exceptional capabilities in synthesizing novel views of 3D scenes.
However, its training is heavily reliant on high-quality images and precise camera poses. Meeting these criteria can
be challenging in non-ideal real-world conditions, where
motion-blurred images frequently occur due to high-speed
camera movements. To address these challenges, we introduce Event Stream Assisted Gaussian Splatting (EvaGaussians), a novel approach that harnesses event streams captured by event cameras to facilitate the learning of highquality 3D-GS from motion-blurred images. Capitalizing
on the high temporal resolution and dynamic range offered
by event streams, we seamlessly integrate them into the
initialization and optimization of 3D-GS, thereby enhancing the acquisition of high-fidelity novel views with intricate texture details. We also contribute two novel datasets
comprising RGB frames, event streams, and corresponding camera parameters, featuring a wide variety of scenes

and various camera motions. The comparison results reveal
that our approach not only excels in generating high-fidelity
novel views, but also offers improved training and inference
efficiency. Video and code are available at the project page.

1. Introduction

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Novel view synthesis from 2D image collections has presented a persistent challenge within the field of computer
vision and computer graphics. This task stands as a fundamental component in various vision applications, such
as virtual reality [17, 60], robotics navigation [42, 62,
74], scene understanding [15, 24, 25], and many others,
thereby prompting significant research efforts over the last
decades. Amid pioneering works, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3D-GS) [14] achieves notable success in generating highfidelity novel views. However, the optimization of 3D-GS
heavily relies on accurate camera poses and point cloud initialization produced by COLMAP [44], which necessitates
high-quality images without blurring. Fulfilling such conditions can be challenging in real-world situations. For example, in UAVs and robotics, rapid camera movement is

24780

