This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CARL: Causality-guided Architecture Representation Learning for an
Interpretable Performance Predictor
Han Ji Yuqi Feng Jiahao Fan Yanan Sun*
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
jihan@stu.scu.edu.cn, feng770623@gmail.com, {fanjh,ysun}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) can automatically design
well-performing architectures for a speciﬁc task and even
surpass manually designed solutions [12]. NAS typically
involves three key components: the search space, the search
strategy, and the performance evaluation. Conventional
methods evaluate architecture performance by training from
scratch [59, 70, 71], making the evaluation stage timeconsuming and resource-intensive. To mitigate this issue,
a considerable number of approaches aim to reduce evalu* Corresponding author.

Density

Performance predictors have emerged as a promising
method to accelerate the evaluation stage of neural architecture search (NAS). These predictors estimate the performance of unseen architectures by learning from the correlation between a small set of trained architectures and
their performance. However, most existing predictors ignore the inherent distribution shift between limited training samples and diverse test samples. Hence, they tend
to learn spurious correlations as shortcuts to predictions,
leading to poor generalization. To address this, we propose
a Causality-guided Architecture Representation Learning
(CARL) method aiming to separate critical (causal) and
redundant (non-causal) features of architectures for generalizable architecture performance prediction. Speciﬁcally,
we employ a substructure extractor to split the input architecture into critical and redundant substructures in the latent space. Then, we generate multiple interventional samples by pairing critical representations with diverse redundant representations to prioritize critical features. Extensive experiments on ﬁve NAS search spaces demonstrate
the state-of-the-art accuracy and superior interpretability
of CARL. For instance, CARL achieves 97.67% top-1 accuracy on CIFAR-10 using DARTS. Codes are available at
https://github.com/jihan4431/CARL.

Good Motif

Diverse
Test
Samples

Bad Motif

……

Redundant Features (same)

……

Limited
Training
Samples

Architecture Performance

Figure 1. Illustration of the distribution shift between training and
test samples for performance predictors. Good/Bad motifs lead to
good/poor performance. In practice, only a small portion of samples are randomly collected to train the predictor. For architectures containing the same redundant features, there can exist a distinct performance gap between training and test samples. Hence,
the trained predictors inevitably use speciﬁc redundant features
as shortcuts to predictions, causing poor generalization on diverse
test samples which have a much wider performance range.

ation cost by shrinking the search space [14, 24], sharing
weights [6, 26], and employing zero-cost proxies [1, 33].
However, they still have notable drawbacks. Reducing
search space diminishes the diversity of architectures [48].
Weight-sharing methods suffer from severe performance
collapse [6], thus hardly discovering the optimal architecture in the search space [43]. Zero-cost proxies tend to have
weak correlations between the predicted accuracy and the
actual architecture performance [22].
Performance predictors have achieved remarkable success in improving NAS efﬁciency [27, 53, 54], which can
directly evaluate unseen architectures after learning from a
small amount of training samples. Architecture representation learning has played a key role in performance evaluation. To obtain informative architecture representation,
most predictors mainly focus on designing advanced models [29, 66], mimicking the information ﬂow in architectures [35, 37], and tailoring self-supervised tasks [17, 69].

23019

