This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IGL-Nav: Incremental 3D Gaussian Localization for Image-goal Navigation
Wenxuan Guo1∗ Xiuwei Xu1∗ Hang Yin1 Ziwei Wang2
Jianjiang Feng1† Jie Zhou1 Jiwen Lu1
1
2
Tsinghua University
Nanyang Technological University
{gwx22, xxw21, yinh23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

ziwei.wang@ntu.edu.sg

{jfeng, jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Goal Capturing

Abstract

Any Camera!
Free View!

Arrive!

Horizontal
View

0.88 m

3DGS Rendering

Robotic Setup

Visual navigation with an image as goal is a fundamental
and challenging problem. Conventional methods either rely
on end-to-end RL learning or modular-based policy with
topological graph or BEV map as memory, which cannot
fully model the geometric relationship between the explored
3D environment and the goal image. In order to efficiently
and accurately localize the goal image in 3D space, we
build our navigation system upon the renderable 3D gaussian (3DGS) representation. However, due to the computational intensity of 3DGS optimization and the large search
space of 6-DoF camera pose, directly leveraging 3DGS for
image localization during agent exploration process is prohibitively inefficient. To this end, we propose IGL-Nav, an
Incremental 3D Gaussian Localization framework for efficient and 3D-aware image-goal navigation. Specifically, we
incrementally update the scene representation as new images arrive with feed-forward monocular prediction. Then
we coarsely localize the goal by leveraging the geometric information for discrete space matching, which can be
equivalent to efficient 3D convolution. When the agent is
close to the goal, we finally solve the fine target pose with
optimization via differentiable rendering. The proposed
IGL-Nav outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by
a large margin across diverse experimental configurations.
It can also handle the more challenging free-view imagegoal setting and be deployed on real-world robotic platform
using a cellphone to capture goal image at arbitrary pose.
Project page: https://gwxuan.github.io/IGL-Nav/.

Figure 1. IGL-Nav effectively guides the agent to reach free-view
image goal via incremental 3D gaussian localization.

agent to precisely understand spatial information, as well as
to reason how to explore the scene with past observations,
which is hard to learn with end-to-end RL [32] due to low
sample efficiency and catastrophic forgetting.
Recent advances in visual navigation have witnessed significant progress in modular-based approaches [2, 3, 7, 14,
23, 34, 35], which establish an explicit memory to cache
observed environmental information and derive navigation
policies based on the memory representations. While these
approaches demonstrate enhanced capabilities for longhorizon reasoning and temporal dependency modeling in
object-goal navigation tasks, their extension to image-goal
navigation remains challenging. Unlike object-goal scenarios that primarily rely on high-level semantic understanding, image-goal navigation necessitates the preservation and processing of low-level visual features, including
fine-grained texture patterns and color distributions. Consequently, conventional representation paradigms of memory such as topological graphs prove insufficient for effectively encoding the requisite environmental information in
image-goal settings. To address these limitations, RNRMap [14] introduces a renderable neural radiance map representation. Drawing inspiration from NeRF [20], this rep-

1. Introduction
Image-goal navigation, which requires an agent initialized
in unknown environment to navigate to the location and orientation specified by an image [39], is a fundamental problem in a wide range of robotic tasks. This task requires the
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

6808

