This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StochasticSplats:
Stochastic Rasterization for Sorting-Free 3D Gaussian Splatting
Shakiba Kheradmand*1,2 , Delio Vicini*3 , George Kopanas†3,4 ,
Dmitry Lagun1 , Kwang Moo Yi2 , Mark Matthews1 , Andrea Tagliasacchi1,5,6
1

Google DeepMind, 2 University of British Columbia, 3 Google, 4 Runway ML,
5
Simon Fraser University, 6 University of Toronto,
*equal contribution, † work done at Google

1 SPP, 2.7 ms
MSE: 0.0211

2 SPP, 2.9 ms
MSE: 0.0154

4 SPP, 3.3 ms
MSE: 0.0072

8 SPP, 5.6 ms
MSE: 0.0048

16 SPP, 6.5 ms
MSE: 0.0020

Figure 1. Teaser – We render a 3DGS radiance field using an unbiased Monte Carlo estimator of the volume rendering equation. Unlike
prior radiance field approaches, our method does not require sorted back-to-front rendering. This results in fast, portable, and pop-free
rendering that is easy to implement. The number of Monte Carlo samples per pixel allows a trade-off between interactivity and visual
quality, similar to physically-based rendering. From left to right, we increase the number of samples per pixel, which increases visual
fidelity at a predictable increase in rendering cost. We report the mean square error (MSE) and render time on an NVIDIA RTX 4090.

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) is a popular radiance field
method, with many application-specific extensions. Most
variants rely on the same core algorithm: depth-sorting of
Gaussian splats then rasterizing in primitive order. This
ensures correct alpha compositing, but can cause rendering artifacts due to built-in approximations. Moreover, for
a fixed representation, sorted rendering offers little control over render cost and visual fidelity. For example,
and counter-intuitively, rendering a lower-resolution image is not necessarily faster. In this work, we address the
above limitations by combining 3D Gaussian splatting with
stochastic rasterization. Concretely, we leverage an unbi-

ased Monte Carlo estimator of the volume rendering equation. This removes the need for sorting, and allows for accurate 3D blending of overlapping Gaussians. The number of Monte Carlo samples further imbues 3DGS with a
way to trade off computation time and quality. We implement our method using OpenGL shaders, enabling efficient rendering on modern GPU hardware. At a reasonable visual quality, our method renders more than four
times faster than sorted rasterization. The project page and
source code are publicly available at https://ubcvision.github.io/stochasticsplats/.

26326

