This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-Adapted Region-to-Text Learning for Generative Open-Vocabulary
Semantic Segmentation
Jiannan Ge1,2∗, Lingxi Xie3 , Hongtao Xie2†, Pandeng Li2 ,
Sun-Ao Liu2 , Xiaopeng Zhang3 , Qi Tian3 , Yongdong Zhang1,2
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
2
University of Science and Technology of China 3 Huawei Inc.
{gejn,lpd,lsa1997}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn,
{198808xc,zxphistory}@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
classifier

In recent years, Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
(OVSS) has been largely advanced. However, existing methods mostly rely on a pre-trained vision-language model
(e.g., CLIP) and require a predefined set of classes to guide
the semantic segmentation process during the inference.
This not only narrows the application scenario but also
constrains comprehension within a finite vocabulary. To
overcome this, we reformulate OVSS as a text generation
task and propose the CLIP-adapted Region-to-Text Network
(CRTNet) that achieves vocabulary-free OVSS by generating category names and descriptions upon segmentation
masks. The training process consists of two steps to ensure an accurate and detailed interpretation of the masked
regions: (i) the initial step adapts CLIP visual features
to mask-level proposal features using binarized masks extracted by a trained mask extractor, and (ii) the subsequent
step involves selecting and aggregating these features to become text-aware by integrating CLIP text embeddings, effectively aligning visual data with corresponding linguistic
data to facilitate region-to-text learning. Furthermore, we
introduce a series of parsing and filtering techniques to integrate multiple sources of training data to improve the generalization ability of our model. Experiments demonstrate
that our model not only excels in OVSS but also exhibits
scalability and can be adapted to various foundation models (e.g., SAM) without being retrained.

171 categories

(a) Closed-vocabulary SS
Predefined vocabulary set
“Identify the category:”

Language
Model
“Describe the region:”

similarity

person

Diverse
concepts

This is the image
of the [person |
road | house ]

person

CLIP Text

(b) OVSS

Generate directly
person
boy
man
young man

…

Detailed
A boy in a white short sleeve
descriptions
and a red hat
A young man in white is
playing

…

(c) Generative OVSS

Figure 1. (a) Traditional semantic segmentation can only recognize closed-set vocabularies. (b) OVSS requires a predefined vocabulary set during inference. (c) We can recognize masked regions in a generative manner without relying on any vocabulary
set. To simplify, display only the recognition of proposal features,
ignoring the semantic segmentation maps.

they are limited to finite categories. Recent advancements
in Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation (OVSS), using visual-language models like CLIP [41], overcome
this by enabling text-based retrieval of region-level features,extending applicability to open environments.

1. Introduction

Current OVSS methods focus on adapting CLIP’s imagelevel zero-shot abilities to the pixel level. Initial models like
SimSeg [55] and Zegformer [15] implemented a two-stage
approach, allowing CLIP to independently process regions.
Subsequent models, such as DeOp [21] and SAN [56],
deeply integrated the CLIP Image Encoder with the segmentation pipeline, efficiently employing CLIP for masklevel recognition. However, these methods typically require
prior knowledge of the test set’s relevant vocabulary, lead-

Semantic segmentation [3, 25, 36, 37, 63] is essential for
enabling machines to understand the visual world. While
traditional models have achieved superior performance,
∗ Work done during the internship at Huawei Inc.
† Corresponding author.

24034

