This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S PL A RT: Articulation Estimation and Part-Level Reconstruction
with 3D Gaussian Splatting
Shengjie Lin† , Jiading Fang† , Muhammad Zubair Irshad‡ , Vitor Campagnolo Guizilini‡ ,
Rares Andrei Ambrus‡ , Greg Shakhnarovich†‡ , Matthew R. Walter†
†
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, ‡ Toyota Research Institute
{slin, fjd, greg, mwalter}@ttic.edu, {zubair.irshad, vitor.guizilini, rares.ambrus}@tri.global

Abstract
Reconstructing articulated objects prevalent in daily environments is crucial for applications in augmented/virtual
reality and robotics. However, existing methods face scalability limitations (requiring 3D supervision or costly annotations), robustness issues (being susceptible to local
optima), and rendering shortcomings (lacking speed or
photorealism). We introduce S PL A RT, a self-supervised,
category-agnostic framework that uses 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) to reconstruct and infer the kinematics of articulated objects from two sets of posed RGB images captured
at different articulation states, enabling real-time photorealistic rendering for novel viewpoints and articulations.
S PL A RT augments 3DGS with a differentiable mobility parameter per Gaussian, achieving refined part segmentation.
A multi-stage optimization strategy is employed to progressively handle reconstruction, part segmentation, and articulation estimation, significantly enhancing robustness and
accuracy. S PL A RT exploits geometric self-supervision, effectively addressing challenging scenarios without requiring 3D annotations or category-specific priors. Evaluations on established and newly proposed benchmarks, along
with applications to real-world scenarios using a handheld RGB camera, demonstrate S PL A RT’s state-of-the-art
performance and real-world practicality. Code is publicly
available at https://github.com/ripl/splart.

Figure 1. Given (top) RGB images of an object at two articulation
states, (middle) S PL A RT uses 3DGS to simultaneously reconstruct
its static and dynamic parts and estimate the kinematic articulation
model. S PL A RT is then able to (bottom) render high-fidelity 3D
reconstructions of the object along with part-level segmentations
for novel articulation states, allowing for novel view synthesis.

40, 54, 56], they depend on 3D supervision that restricts
practical use [23, 29, 33, 40, 60], they produce categoryspecific models that limit scalability [29, 40, 54, 59], or
they are not capable of real-time, photorealistic rendering [6, 13, 23, 29, 30, 40, 54, 56, 59, 60]. To address these
challenges, we introduce S PL A RT, a novel self-supervised
and category-agnostic framework that leverages 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26] to reconstruct articulated objects
from minimal input—two sets of posed RGB images at distinct articulation states. S PL A RT reconstructs the object’s
parts and infers its kinematics, enabling real-time, photorealistic rendering for novel views and articulation states.

1. Introduction
Articulated objects, such as drawers, doors, and scissors,
are ubiquitous in our daily lives, yet their dynamic nature poses significant challenges for 3D reconstruction—
a critical task for applications in augmented/virtual reality [36, 51], robotics [1, 5, 16, 24, 50, 57], and computer vision [20, 45]. Existing methods for reconstructing articulated objects are hindered by several key limitations: they often require labor-intensive supervision (e.g.,
part-level segmentation or articulation annotations) [23, 29,

8841

