This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VMem: Consistent Interactive Video Scene Generation with Surfel-Indexed
View Memory
Runjia Li

Philip Torr

Andrea Vedaldi

Tomas Jakab

University of Oxford
v-mem.github.io

A

D

C

C

D

E

VMem

E

B

B

w/o memory

A

Figure 1. VMem enables autoregressive scene generation from a single image along user-defined trajectories. The green region shows
results with the proposed memory module, maintaining coherence when generating previously seen parts of the scene. The red region,
without memory, exhibits degradation highlighted with red ellipses, demonstrating VMem is effective for consistent scene generation.

Abstract

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of generating long videos that explore an imagined space following a camera path specified
interactively by the user. In this paradigm, the user tells
the model which camera path to follow for the next few
frames, observes the generated content, and then decides
where to explore next based on what they have seen. For example, exploring a house may involve visiting the kitchen,
the living room, and the bathroom, eventually returning to
the kitchen. Throughout the video, the scene must remain
consistent, ensuring that the kitchen looks the same upon
return. Generating such videos is essential for immersive
applications such as games, where players can navigate generated worlds. However, even recent large-scale interactive
video generators such as Google’s Genie 2 [20] struggle to
achieve this goal.
This problem has so far been addressed by two types of
methods. First, outpainting-based methods [7, 11, 15, 16,
18, 21, 24, 26, 36, 43] iterate between generating new 2D
views of the scene and estimating its 3D geometry. They
use the estimated geometry to partially render a new viewpoint and then employ an outpainting model to complete
the missing parts, thus adding one more image to the col-

We propose a novel memory module for building video
generators capable of interactively exploring environments.
Previous approaches have achieved similar results either
by out-painting 2D views of a scene while incrementally reconstructing its 3D geometry—which quickly accumulates
errors—or by using video generators with a short context
window, which struggle to maintain scene coherence over
the long term. To address these limitations, we introduce
Surfel-Indexed View Memory (VMem), a memory module
that remembers past views by indexing them geometrically
based on the 3D surface elements (surfels) they have observed. VMem enables efficient retrieval of the most relevant past views when generating new ones. By focusing
only on these relevant views, our method produces consistent explorations of imagined environments at a fraction of
the computational cost required to use all past views as
context. We evaluate our approach on challenging longterm scene synthesis benchmarks and demonstrate superior
performance compared to existing methods in maintaining
scene coherence and camera control.

25690

