This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention to Neural Plagiarism:
Diffusion Models Can Plagiarize Your Copyrighted Images!
Zihang Zou1 Boqing Gong2 Liqiang Wang1
1
University of Central Florida
2
Boston University
{zihang.zou, liqiang.wang}@ucf.edu, bgong@bu.edu

Figure 1. Copyrighted images (top left) and watermarked data (bottom left) can be easily plagiarized by diffusion models.

Abstract
In this paper, we highlight a critical threat posed by emerging neural models—data plagiarism. We demonstrate how
modern neural models (e.g., diffusion models) can effortlessly replicate copyrighted images, even when protected by
advanced watermarking techniques. To expose the vulnerability in copyright protection and facilitate future research,
we propose a general approach regarding neural plagiarism that can either forge replicas of copyrighted data or
introduce copyright ambiguity. Our method, based on “anchors and shims”, employs inverse latents as anchors and
finds shim perturbations that can gradually deviate the anchor latents, thereby evading watermark or copyright detection. By applying perturbation to the cross-attention mechanism at different timesteps, our approach induces varying degrees of semantic modifications in copyrighted images, making it to bypass protections ranging from visible trademarks, signatures to invisible watermarks. Notably, our method is a purely gradient-based search that
requires no additional training or fine-tuning. Empirical
experiments on MS-COCO and real-world copyrighted im-

19546

ages show that diffusion models can replicate copyrighted
images, underscoring the urgent need for countermeasures
against neural plagiarism. Source code is available at:
https://github.com/zzzucf/Neural-Plagiarism.

1. Introduction
Plagiarism has long been a critical concern for data copyrights, and recent advances in generative models[36, 37, 39,
42, 57] have intensified this issue. These neural generative
models, trained on vast datasets, are capable of producing
high quality images, showing a troubling potential for what
we term “neural plagiarism”. Specifically, they may memorize training data and then directly reproduce copyrighted
content [5, 7], or generate outputs that closely resemble
copyrighted works. As generative AI continues to evolve,
the risk of copyright infringement escalates across a broad
spectrum of data types, including watermarked user’s data,
photographs, artworks, signatures, and human portraits.
Legal regulations have been put in place to counteract
the misconducts of neural models. For example, the Gen-

