This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LACONIC: A 3D Layout Adapter for Controllable Image Creation
Léopold Maillard1,2
1

Tom Durand2

Adrien Ramanana Rahary*

LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris

{maillard,maks}@lix.polytechnique.fr

2

Maks Ovsjanikov1

Dassault Systèmes

{firstname.lastname}@3ds.com

Floor
Cam
“[…]”

(b) “A Van-Gogh Painting”

(a) Input 3D Layout and Viewpoint

(C2)

(c) “A Colorful Hawaii Interior”

(d) “Mona Lisa”

(C1)
“A modern
bedroom”

(C3)

(e) Multiple Camera Viewpoints

(f) Rendered Scene from Camera (C1) (g) Rendered Scene from Camera (C2) (h) Rendered Scene from Camera (C3)

“A bedroom
in the
eighties”

(i) 3D-Aware Object Manipulation

(j) Semantic 𝑠 = “a mirror”

(k) Semantic 𝑠 = “a colorful painting”

(l) Dimension 𝑑 Editing

Figure 1. Overview of LACONIC Capabilities and Applications. Our model generates realistic renderings from an input semantic 3D
layout and target viewpoint (a), while leveraging the comprehensive knowledge of a text-to-image prior (b–d). A given 3D scene can be
rendered from multiple camera poses (e) while maintaining a consistent 3D structure across views (f–h). Finally, objects can be individually
manipulated (i) by editing their open-vocabulary text caption, or position and dimension attributes in the 3D space (j–l).

Abstract
Existing generative approaches for guided image synthesis
of multi-object scenes typically rely on 2D controls in the
image or text space. As a result, these methods struggle to
maintain and respect consistent three-dimensional geometric structure, underlying the scene. In this paper, we propose a novel conditioning approach, training method and
adapter network that can be plugged into pretrained textto-image diffusion models. Our approach provides a way
to endow such models with 3D-awareness, while leveraging
their rich prior knowledge. Our method supports camera

control, conditioning on explicit 3D geometries and, for the
first time, accounts for the entire context of a scene, i.e.,
both on and off-screen items, to synthesize plausible and
semantically rich images. Despite its multi-modal nature,
our model is lightweight, requires a reasonable number of
data for supervised learning and shows remarkable generalization power. We also introduce methods for intuitive
and consistent image editing and restyling, e.g., by positioning, rotating or resizing individual objects in a scene. Our
method integrates well within various image creation workflows and enables a richer set of applications compared to
previous approaches.

* Work done during an internship at Dassault Systèmes.

18046

