This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Event Memory for Accurate and Low-latency Online Video
Temporal Grounding
Minghang Zheng1 Yuxin Peng1 Benyuan Sun3 Yi Yang3 Yang Liu1,2 *
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Central Media Technology Institute, Huawei
{minghang,pengyuxin,yangliu}@pku.edu.cn
{sunbenyuan,yangyi16}@huawei.com

Query: The guy plays the saxophone again.
Ground Truth:

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the task of online video temporal grounding (OnVTG), which requires the model to locate events related to a given text query within a video
stream. Unlike regular video temporal grounding, OnVTG requires the model to make predictions without observing future frames. As online videos are streaming inputs
and can go on indefinitely, it is impractical and inefficient
to store all historical inputs. The existing OnVTG models employ memory to store recent historical video frame
features and predict scores indicating whether the current
frame corresponds to the start or end time of the target
event. However, these methods lack effective event modeling
and cannot retain long-term historical information, leading
to low performance. To tackle these challenges, we propose a hierarchical event memory for OnVTG. We propose
an event-based OnVTG framework that makes predictions
based on event proposals that model event-level information with various durations. To preserve historically valuable event information, we introduce a hierarchical event
memory that retains historical events, allowing the model
to access both recent and long-term information. To enable
the real-time prediction, we further propose a future prediction branch that predicts whether the target event will occur
shortly and further regresses the start time of the event. We
achieve state-of-the-art performance on the TACoS, ActivityNet Captions, and MAD datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/minghangz/OnVTG.

Real-time prediction

Short-term
window
Current time 𝑡𝑡

Long-term history

Future (invisible)

(a) Online video temporal Grounding

…

…
Long-Term History

Long-Term History

Current Frames

Current Frames

…

…
Frame-level
Memory

Grounding
Model

Hierarchical
Event Memory

Event Proposals

Future Prediction

IoU prediction &
Boundary regression

Prediction scores
start

…

end
Time flow

Current time 𝑡𝑡

(b) Existing OnVTG Models

Grounding
Model

start Prediction end
(c) Our Models

Figure 1. (a) The online video temporal grounding. (b) Existing
work employs memory to store recent historical video frames and
predicts scores indicating whether the current frame corresponds
to the start or end time of the target event. (c) We propose a hierarchical event memory that retains historical events at different
scales, allowing the model to acquire long-term historical information and make predictions based on event proposals.

1. Introduction

As shown in Figure 1 (a), online video temporal grounding (OnVTG) [10] can localize the location of events described by natural language queries within online videos
in real time, showing potential applications in areas such
as alert in surveillance [1, 49] and online cross-media retrieval [19, 30, 54].
Unlike the traditional video temporal grounding [7, 11,
21, 23, 28, 41, 43, 45, 51] method, the OnVTG model can
only observe the video from 0 to t at the current timestamp

In recent decades, the number of online videos, such as
surveillance and live streaming, has increased significantly.
* Corresponding author

21589

