This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Class Imbalance and Partial Labeling via Spectral-Balanced Energy
Propagation for Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Yandan Wang1,†, Chenqi Guo1,†, Yinglong Ma1, ,* Jiangyan Chen1 , Yuan Gao1 , Weiming Dong2
1
School of Control and Computer Engineering, North China Electric Power University
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Abstract
Skeleton-based action recognition faces class imbalance
and insufﬁcient labeling problems in real-world applications. Existing methods typically address these issues separately, lacking a uniﬁed framework that can effectively handle both issues simultaneously while considering their inherent relationships. Our theoretical analysis reveals two
fundamental connections between these problems. First,
class imbalance systematically shifts the eigenvalue spectrum of normalized afﬁnity matrices, compromising both
convergence and accuracy of label propagation. Second,
boundary samples are critical for model training under
imbalanced conditions but are often mistakenly excluded
by conventional reliability metrics, which focus on relative
class differences rather than holistic connectivity patterns.
Built upon these theoretical ﬁndings, we propose SpeLER
(Spectral-balanced Label Propagation with Energy-based
Tightened Reliability), which introduces a spectral balancing technique that explicitly counteracts spectral shifts by
incorporating class distribution information. Meanwhile,
a propagation energy-based tightened reliability measure
is proposed to better preserve crucial boundary samples
by evaluating holistic connectivity patterns. Extensive experiments on six public datasets demonstrate that SpeLER
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods, validating both our theoretical ﬁndings and practical effectiveness. Codes are available at:https://github.com/
ydanwang/SpeLER.

1. Introduction
Skeleton-based action recognition (SAR) has gained increasing attention due to its compact yet expressive repre* Corresponding author: yinglongma@ncepu.edu.cn
† These authors contribute equally to this work. This work was solely

supported by State Grid Corporation of China Science and Technology
Program under Grant (SGDK0000AIJS2502122).

sentation of human actions and rich temporal trajectory information [6, 12, 17, 26, 42]. While recent SAR approaches
have achieved remarkable performance, they predominantly
rely on balanced, fully-annotated datasets [13, 21, 33, 49,
55]. However, in the real world, SAR often faces class imbalance issues and partial labeling problems due to the inherent variability in action frequencies and the high cost of
manual annotation [8, 57]. To enhance the classiﬁcation
performance for minority classes, several data-level and
algorithm-level approaches have been proposed in SAR.
To generate accurate pseudo-labels for unlabeled samples,
graph-based transductive methods like Label Propagation
(LP) are used [7, 20, 25, 28, 38, 43], effectively leveraging
data’s geometric structure for better performance in smaller
datasets, which is often the case in SAR compared to image
classiﬁcation. Most of existing studies have addressed class
imbalance or incomplete labeling in SAR separately, while
few works address both problems simultaneously [18, 51].
Existing studies have enhanced graph-based pseudolabeling by incorporating class-imbalance awareness during
propagation [35, 40, 56], aiming to improve the propagation
quality for minority classes. Meanwhile, semi-supervised
learning strategies have been explored to focus on generating reliable pseudo-labels for minority classes to address the
class imbalance problem [11, 24]. Most existing methods
adopt an iterative optimization paradigm [23, 48], where
pseudo-labeling algorithms generate annotations for unlabeled data, subsequently used for model training. However,
the intricate interplay between these two steps, i.e., pseudolabel generation and imbalanced model training, remains
theoretically underexplored.
In this work, we systematically investigate the interaction mechanisms between graph-based pseudo-labeling and
model training under class-imbalanced conditions, while
identifying two critical factors that mediate their relationship: the spectral properties of normalized afﬁnity matrices
and boundary samples. Speciﬁcally, we identify that class
imbalance fundamentally alters the spectral characteristics
of afﬁnity graphs used in label propagation. Since graph-

10162

