This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Catastrophic Overfitting in Fast Adversarial Training via Label
Information Elimination

1

Chao Pan1,2 , Ke Tang1 , Qing Li2 , Xin Yao3 *
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
Lingnan University, Hong Kong, China
11930665@mail.sustech.edu.cn

Abstract

𝜖 ⋅ sign ∇𝒙 ℒ(𝑓(𝒙; 𝜽), 𝑦𝑐𝑎𝑡 )

Fast Adversarial Training (FAT) employs the single-step
Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) to generate adversarial examples, reducing the computational costs of traditional adversarial training. However, FAT suffers from
Catastrophic Overfitting (CO), where models’ robust accuracy against multi-step attacks plummets to zero during training. Recent studies indicate that CO occurs because single-step adversarial perturbations contain label
information that models exploit for prediction, leading to
overfitting and diminished robustness against more complex attacks. In this paper, we discover that after CO occurs, the label information of certain samples can transfer across different samples, significantly increasing the
likelihood of modified images being classified as the intended label. This discovery offers a new perspective on
why various adversarial initialization strategies are effective. To address this issue, we introduce an innovative FAT
strategy that leverages special samples to capture transferable label information and proactively removes potential label information during training, complemented by
a non-uniform label smoothing technique to further eliminate label information. Experimental results across three
datasets demonstrate that our method maintains competitive robustness against several attacks compared to other
FAT approaches, with ablation studies confirming the effectiveness of our methodology. The code is available at
https://github.com/fzjcdt/LIET .

pred: 65.92% bird

pred:
100.00% cat

+

Consistent gray image 𝒙

label: dog
pred: 98.76% dog

pred:
99.77% cat

+

label: horse
pred: 47.75% horse

pred:
97.62% cat

+
…

…

label: bird
pred: 72.23% bird
10000 test samples
10.23% of samples were
classified as cat.

+

pred:
99.84% cat

53.89% of samples were
classified as cat.
84.84% of samples being
predicted as cats increased.

Figure 1. Label information transferability post-catastrophic overfitting. A ResNet18 model, FAT-trained on CIFAR10 and experiencing CO, was tested. A single-step perturbation targeting “cat”
(ycat ), generated from a gray image (value 0.5), was applied to
10,000 test images. “Cat” classification surged from 10.23% to
53.89%. This highlights that single-step perturbations after CO
encode transferable label information.

(AEs) using single-step gradient propagation, FAT significantly reduces computational costs compared to multi-step
approaches [3, 7, 14, 28]. However, this efficiency comes
at a cost: FAT is highly susceptible to Catastrophic Overfitting (CO), a phenomenon where the model suddenly loses
its robustness against multi-step adversarial attacks, such as
those generated by the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD)
method [7, 16, 18, 24, 28]. The contrast between increasing
single-step robust accuracy and the sudden drop to zero of
multi-step robust accuracy exposes a critical vulnerability
in FAT.

1. Introduction
Fast Adversarial Training (FAT) has gained popularity in
adversarial machine learning as an efficient alternative to
traditional methods. By generating Adversarial Examples
* Corresponding Author.

2991

