This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revelio: Interpreting and leveraging semantic information in diffusion models
Dahye Kim1 *

Xavier Thomas1 *
1
Boston University

Deepti Ghadiyaram12†
2
Runway

{dahye, xthomas, dghadiya}@bu.edu

Abstract

Great Pyrenees

We study how rich visual semantic information is represented within various layers and denoising timesteps of different diffusion architectures. We uncover monosemantic
interpretable features by leveraging k-sparse autoencoders
(k-SAE). We substantiate our mechanistic interpretations
via transfer learning using light-weight classifiers on offthe-shelf diffusion models’ features. On 4 datasets, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of diffusion features for representation learning. We provide an in-depth analysis of
how different diffusion architectures, pre-training datasets,
and language model conditioning impacts visual representation granularity, inductive biases, and transfer learning
capabilities. Our work is a critical step towards deepening
interpretability of black-box diffusion models. Code and
visualizations available at: https://github.com/
revelio-diffusion/revelio

Yorkshire Terrier

Input

Havanese

Encoder
Samoyed

Keeshond

Decoder

Output

: non-active neuron

Figure 1. k-sparse autoencoders (k-SAE) trained on complex visual
features help identify monosemantic visual properties represented within
black-box diffusion models. We show sample k-SAE neurons and top-4
images that yield highest activations when the k-SAE is trained on intermediate diffusion layer’s features on Oxford-IIIT Pet [44] dataset. Note
how these features encapsulate distinct fine-grained information about different breeds like Keeshond and Samoyed. Best viewed in color.

understand and interpret diffusion models’ internal states.
Concretely, we address the following questions: what flavors of visual information is captured in different layers
and time-steps of a diffusion model? How do they interact with and complement each other and the overall learnt
visual information? Do different layers benefit differently
from external conditioning and why? What inductive biases are uniquely captured in convolution-based diffusion
models compared to transformer-based ones?
Understanding how a model learns visual information
offers several key benefits. First, current visual generative
models are black box in nature: it is not clear why a benign prompt sometimes produces an unsafe output or why a
very slight tweak to the same prompt generates a very different output [5]. Answering the above fundamental questions
will be a crucial step towards interpreting black box generative models. Second, distilling the granularity of semantic
information represented across different layers, timesteps,
and model architectures can aid in designing more efficient
algorithms that offer semantic and style control.
To reveal the visual knowledge learnt by diffusion models, we adopt “mechanistic interpretation” techniques and

1. Introduction
Generating high-quality photo-realistic and creative visual
content using diffusion models is a thriving area of research.
For a generative model to accurately simulate the visual
world around us, its latent space should in principle capture rich visual semantics and the physical dynamics of the
real world. A direct empirical evidence is in recent efforts
that leverage diffusion features for discriminative tasks such
as detection [13], segmentation [9, 67], classification [33],
semantic correspondence [36], depth estimation [66, 71], or
visual reasoning [65] tasks. Yet, they do not offer clear insights on how this rich semantic information is represented
within the model. Some prior attempts that visualize attention maps [7] or use PCA [63] on the intermediate features,
though valuable, operate on per-image basis and thus, do
not offer a more holistic in-depth interpretation of diffusion
models’ internal representations.
In this work, we go beyond harnessing the rich representations of diffusion models and aim to fundamentally
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

4659

