This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Outdoor Monocular SLAM with Global Scale-Consistent 3D Gaussian
Pointmaps
Chong Cheng1*
1

Sicheng Yu1*

Zijian Wang1

Yifan Zhou1

Hao Wang1†

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

ccheng735@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

yusch@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

PSNR: 16.80

PSNR: 12.90

PSNR: 15.29

PSNR: 25.05

ATE: 2.873

ATE: 7.381

ATE: 5.142

ATE: 0.473

Glorie-SLAM

MonoGS

OpenGS-SLAM

haowang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Localization and novel view synthesis results on KITTI. Our method S3PO-GS maintains robust tracking and high-quality
novel view synthesis even in cases of large-angle turns. This is achieved through our self-consistent 3DGS pointmap tracking and the
patch-based pointmap dynamic mapping module.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become a popular solution in SLAM due to its high-fidelity and real-time novel
view synthesis performance. However, some previous 3DGS
SLAM methods employ a differentiable rendering pipeline
for tracking, lack geometric priors in outdoor scenes. Other
approaches introduce separate tracking modules, but they
accumulate errors with significant camera movement, leading to scale drift. To address these challenges, we propose a
robust RGB-only outdoor 3DGS SLAM method: S3PO-GS.
Technically, we establish a self-consistent tracking module
anchored in the 3DGS pointmap, which avoids cumulative
scale drift and achieves more precise and robust tracking
with fewer iterations. Additionally, we design a patch-based
pointmap dynamic mapping module, which introduces geometric priors while avoiding scale ambiguity. This signifi-

cantly enhances tracking accuracy and the quality of scene
reconstruction, making it particularly suitable for complex
outdoor environments. Our experiments on the Waymo,
KITTI, and DL3DV datasets demonstrate that S3PO-GS
achieves state-of-the-art results in novel view synthesis and
outperforms other 3DGS SLAM methods in tracking accuracy. Project page: https : / / 3dagentworld .
github.io/S3PO-GS/.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), a
core problem in fields like autonomous driving, robotics,
and virtual reality (VR), has received substantial attention.
Within this area, 3D scene representation has become a primary research focus, resulting in the development of numerous sparse [3, 16, 24, 25] and dense [26, 27, 42] representation methods, which advance localization accuracy.
However, these methods still face significant challenges in

26035

