This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How Do Multimodal Large Language Models Handle Complex Multimodal
Reasoning? Placing Them in An Extensible Escape Game
Ziyue Wang*, ´,1 Yurui Dong*, 2 , Fuwen Luo1 , Minyuan Ruan1 , Zhili Cheng1 , Chi Chen1 ,
Peng LiB,1,3 , Yang LiuB,1,3
1
2
Tsinghua University, China
Fudan University, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China
Configuration
Files

Automatic
Generation

Key Prop

Scene
Data

Engine
Rendering

Action: forward rotate

jump

interact

grab

read

tilt

Initial
Position

Door (Room 1 Exit &
Room 2 Entrance)
Game Target:
Exit of Room 2

Target 1: Room Escaping
Q1: Describe the
Room

- The first room where
I started had a clean,
minimalistic design, with
modern furniture …

Room 1

Q2: Recall the
Escape Process

- Some notable items
I observed: Small
plants and a key to
open box for …

Q 3: Piece Together the
Whole Story

- The room appeared to be a
cross between a living area
and a storage space, likely
used for daily life …

Target 2: Post-Game Debriefing (Optional)

Room 2

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed room escape environment EscapeCraft, which allows us to generate customized room scenes (left)
and define groundtruth reasoning path of tasks (right). Based on EscapeCraft, we create MM-Escape benchmark, targeting at evaluating
both the task completion performance and the entire multimodal reasoning process of MLLMs.

Abstract

show that MLLMs, regardless of scale, can successfully
complete the simplest room escape tasks, with some exhibiting human-like exploration strategies. Yet, performance
dramatically drops as task difficulty increases. Moreover,
we observe that models severely suffer from accidental success, and that performance bottlenecks vary across models,
revealing distinct failure modes and limitations in their multimodal reasoning abilities, such as repetitive trajectories
without adaptive exploration, getting stuck in corners due
to poor visual spatial awareness, and ineffective use of acquired props, such as the key. We hope our work sheds light
on new challenges in multimodal reasoning, and uncovers
potential improvements in MLLMs capabilities. 1 2

The rapid advancing of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has spurred interest in complex multimodal
reasoning tasks in the real-world and virtual environment,
which require coordinating multiple abilities, including visual perception, visual reasoning, spatial awareness, and
target deduction. However, existing evaluations primarily
assess the final task completion, often degrading assessments to isolated abilities such as visual grounding and visual question answering. Less attention is given to comprehensively and quantitatively analyzing reasoning process
in multimodal environments, which is crucial for understanding model behaviors and underlying reasoning mechanisms beyond merely task success. To address this, we
introduce MM-Escape, an extensible benchmark for investigating multimodal reasoning, inspired by real-world escape games. MM-Escape emphasizes intermediate model
behaviors alongside final task completion. To achieve this,
we develop EscapeCraft, a customizable and open environment that enables models to engage in free-form exploration
for assessing multimodal reasoning. Extensive experiments

1. Introduction
The rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs)
and Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
driven the advancement of diverse multimodal systems and
applications for academic research [2, 43], industrial engineering [16], and everyday assistance [14, 35]. Multimodal
1 GitHub repo: https://github.com/THUNLP-MT/EscapeCraft.

* Equal contribution, ´ Project lead, B Corresponding author

2 Home page: https://thunlp-mt.github.io/EscapeCraft.

4807

