This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learned Image Compression with Hierarchical Progressive Context Modeling
Yuqi Li* Haotian Zhang*

Li Li

Dong Liu

MOE Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230093, China

Abstract
Context modeling is essential in learned image compression
for accurately estimating the distribution of latents. While
recent advanced methods have expanded context modeling
capacity, they still struggle to efficiently exploit long-range
dependency and diverse context information across different coding steps. In this paper, we introduce a novel Hierarchical Progressive Context Model (HPCM) for more efficient context information acquisition. Specifically, HPCM
employs a hierarchical coding schedule to sequentially
model the contextual dependencies among latents at multiple scales, which enables more efficient long-range context modeling. Furthermore, we propose a progressive context fusion mechanism that incorporates contextual information from previous coding steps into the current step,
effectively exploiting diverse contextual information. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art rate-distortion performance and strikes a
better balance between compression performance and computational complexity. The code is available at https:
//github.com/lyq133/LIC-HPCM .

BD-rate (%) over VTM-22.0

{lyq010303, zhanghaotian}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {lil1, dongeliu}@ustc.edu.cn

Ours (Large)
89.71M

20
18
16

Ours (Base)
68.5M

FLIC
70.96M

14

MLIC++
116.72M
TCM-Large
76.57M

12
10

1000

1200

1400

kMACs per pixel

1600

1800

Figure 1. Comparison between BD-rate over VTM-22.0 and endto-end computational complexity on Kodak dataset. We select recent advanced learned image compression methods [18, 23, 34]
for comparison. Model parameters of various methods are noted
in this figure. Top-left is better.

1. Introduction

is transformed to produce quantized latent representations.
Subsequently, the quantized latents are entropy-coded into
bitstreams through an entropy model. The decoder recovers
the quantized latents and then applies a synthesis transform
to reconstruct the image. The entropy model is used to estimate the distribution of latent variables for entropy coding.
A more accurate entropy model leads to fewer bits, thereby
improving compression performance.
Most advanced learned image compression models apply conditional entropy models for entropy coding, which
jointly utilize the hyperprior model [3] and context models [38, 39]. The context model divides latents into several groups and utilizes sequential autoregression to capture contextual information, thereby enabling accurate distribution estimation. Some studies utilized spatial context
modeling [14, 39] to exploit the local spatial redundancy
in the latent domain. Recent studies [40] have explored
long-range spatial context modeling with transformer architectures, while introducing higher complexity. Some studies [14, 25] exploited context information in both channel and spatial dimensions. Jiang et al. [18] introduced

Image compression is a fundamental topic in the field of
computer vision and image processing, which plays a crucial role in enabling efficient visual data storage and transmission. In the passing decades, many traditional codecs
have achieved impressive compression performance with
manual design for each module, including JPEG [44],
JPEG2000 [42], BPG [4], and VVC [6].
In recent years, various learned compression methods
[15, 18, 23, 34] have demonstrated superior performance.
Most learned image compression models are based on the
transform coding scheme [12]. In such a model, the image
* Equal contribution. This work is supported by the Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62021001. We acknowledge the support
of GPU cluster built by MCC Lab of Information Science and Technology
Institution, USTC. (Corresponding author: Dong Liu.)

18834

