This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auto-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Osman Ülger1 * Maksymilian Kulicki2,3 * Yuki Asano4
1

University of Amsterdam

2

Martin R. Oswald1

Institute of Fundamental Technological Research, Polish Academy of Science
4

University of Technology Nuremberg

3

IDEAS NCBR

* equal contribution
Fixed-Set Ground Truth

Open-Ended Predictions

Out-of-Vocabulary Predictions

AutoSeg (Ours)

Unseen Images

Figure 1. AutoSeg Exemplary Results. AutoSeg is readily applicable to unseen images for open-ended segmentation for objects such as
mascot and hole, such as the two images on the left. Furthermore, where established segmentation datasets have a fixed set of annotation
categories, our method is able to identify and segment with more semantically precise object categories beyond the fixed-set ground truth,
such as dachshund, bed and pagoda. Images are from the Road Anomaly [20], PASCAL [9] and ADE20K [47] datasets.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Open-Vocabulary Segmentation (OVS) methods are capable of performing semantic segmentation without relying
on a fixed vocabulary, and in some cases, without training or fine-tuning. However, OVS methods typically require
a human in the loop to specify the vocabulary based on
the task or dataset at hand. In this paper, we introduce
Auto-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation (AVS), advancing
open-ended image understanding by eliminating the necessity to predefine object categories for segmentation. Our approach, AutoSeg, presents a framework that autonomously
identifies relevant class names using semantically enhanced
BLIP embeddings and segments them afterwards. Given
that open-ended object category predictions cannot be directly compared with a fixed ground truth, we develop a
Large Language Model-based Auto-Vocabulary Evaluator
(LAVE) to efficiently evaluate the automatically generated
classes and their corresponding segments. With AVS, our
method sets new benchmarks on datasets PASCAL VOC,
Context, ADE20K, and Cityscapes, while showing competitive performance to OVS methods that require specified
class names. All code is released here.

24266

While humans possess an open-ended understanding of
scenes, recognizing thousands of distinct categories, semantic segmentation methods [25] typically rely on a fixed
vocabulary of predefined semantic categories. They require large human-annotated datasets and have limited capabilities for handling a broad range of classes or unknown objects. Recent studies have focused on addressing these limitations [23, 28] with models that leverage
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) as an emerging category [3, 5, 7, 10, 17, 19, 43, 45, 46]. Such VLMs learn
rich multi-modal features from large numbers of imagetext pairs. Due to the immense computational training
costs of VLMs, it is common to build upon pre-trained
VLMs such as CLIP [29] or BLIP [18]. However, applying these VLMs on per-pixel tasks to obtain precise locality
information is non-trivial, as they are trained on full images and lack the ability to directly reason over local regions in the image. This makes them less useful for obtaining precise segmentation boundaries, which is crucial
for downstream tasks like robot grasping. Moreover, current Open-Vocabulary segmentation (OVS) methods still
require a human in the loop, inherently limiting the scal-

