This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboAnnotatorX: A Comprehensive and Universal Annotation Framework for
Accurate Understanding of Long-horizon Robot Demonstration
Longxin Kou* Fei Ni* Yan Zheng† Peilong Han
Haiqin Cui Rui Liu Jianye Hao†
Tianjin University, China
Object Identification

The robot takes a
.

and puts it on a

Jinyi Liu

Spatial Relationship

Action Identification

The white sponge was initially on the table, and was
subsequently in the bowl.

The robot interact with a ranch bottle, and put it
into a pot.

RoboX-VQA

RoboAnnotatorX
Question: At what point can the
action fold the cloth......
Robotic Demonstration

1M QA Pairs

Tokenizer

500K Robot episodes

LLM

500+ Hours
20+ Embodiments

Multi-scale
Encoder

600+ Skills

Time. t

Temporal Reasoning

Temporal Localization

The robot's sequential arrangement of a pot, mug, and coffee
suggests it is preparing to make a coffee.

the robot folds the cloth left-to-right; 2.
the robot fold
the cloth down-to-up; 2.
the robot put folded cloth in a box.

Figure 1. RoboAnnotatorX (X signifies the comprehensive annotation capabilities and universal generalization across diverse datasets),
an innovative automated annotation framework that leverages MLLM to generate high-quality, context-rich annotations for complex longhorizon robotic demonstrations. Powered by our constructed RoboX-VQA dataset comprising 1M QA pairs and 500K robot episodes,
RoboAnnotatorX develop comprehensive annotation capabilities covering fine-grained scene understanding and temporal reasoning.

Abstract
Recent advances in robotics have produced numerous valuable large-scale demonstration datasets, yet their potential remains underutilized due to annotation limitations.
Current datasets often suffer from sparse temporal annotations and inconsistent labeling granularity, particularly
for complex long-horizon demonstrations. Traditional manual annotation methods are expensive and poorly scalable
while existing automated methods struggle with temporal
coherence and semantic richness across extended demonstrations. For this, we propose RoboAnnotatorX, a reliable annotation tool that enhances multimodal large language model to generate high-quality, context-rich annotations for complex long-horizon demonstrations. Specifically, we introduce a multi-scale token-efficient encoder

to maintain computational efficiency while simultaneously
capturing fine-grained visual details and preserving temporal information by jointly integrating scene-level anchoring,
clip-level temporal dynamics, and video-level global modeling. We further construct a comprehensive dataset RoboXVQA that synthesizes diverse QA pairs from both realworld and simulated data, bridging the significant domain
gap in robotics demonstrations. Moreover, we leverage
a curriculum-inspired three-stage training to progressively
develop capabilities from basic visual perception to sophisticated temporal reasoning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that RoboAnnotatorX significantly outperforms existing approaches in annotation quality and exhibits strong
generalization across diverse robotic environments, helping
unlock the full potential of existing robotic datasets. The
details and visualizations are available at project website.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn, yanzheng@tju.edu.cn

10353

