This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VistaDream: Sampling multiview consistent images
for single-view scene reconstruction
Haiping Wang1 Yuan Liu2,3,† Ziwei Liu3 Wenping Wang4 Zhen Dong1,† Bisheng Yang1
1
Wuhan University 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Texas A&M University
{hpwang,dongzhenwhu,bshyang}@whu.edu.cn
yuanly@ust.hk

ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

wenping@tamu.edu

Figure 1. Overview. (Top) Given a single-view image of a scene, VistaDream reconstructs a 3D scene represented by 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [22] for novel view synthesis. (Bottom) The proposed Multiview Consistency Sampling (MCS) significantly improves
scene quality and achieves better results compared to the commonly used Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [44].

Abstract
In this paper, we propose VistaDream, a novel framework to reconstruct a 3D scene from a single-view image. Recent diffusion models enable generating highquality novel-view images from a single-view input image.
Most existing methods only concentrate on building the consistency between the input image and the generated images
while losing the consistency between the generated images.
VistaDream addresses this problem by a two-stage pipeline.
In the first stage, VistaDream builds a global coarse 3D
scaffold by zooming out a little step with inpainted boundaries and an estimated depth map. Then, on this global
scaffold, we use iterative diffusion-based RGB-D inpaint-

ing to generate novel-view images to inpaint the holes of the
scaffold. In the second stage, we further enhance the consistency between the generated novel-view images by a novel
training-free Multiview Consistency Sampling (MCS) that
introduces multi-view consistency constraints in the reverse
sampling process of diffusion models. Experimental results
demonstrate that without training or fine-tuning existing
diffusion models, VistaDream achieves high-quality scene
reconstruction and novel view synthesis using a single-view
image and outperforms baseline methods by a large margin. The code, videos, and demos are available at https:
//vistadream-project-page.github.io/.

†: Corresponding authors.

26772

