This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fuzzy Contrastive Decoding to Alleviate Object Hallucination
in Large Vision-Language Models
Jieun Kim

Jinmyeong Kim Yoonji Kim
Yonsei University

Sung-Bae Cho

{lilly9928, jmkim , yoonjikim, sbcho}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

What is a vicuna standing in the sand looking at?
A vicuna is ..

Large vision-language models (LVLMs) often exhibit object hallucination, a phenomenon where models generate
descriptions of non-existent objects within images. Prior
methods have sought to mitigate this issue by adjusting model logits to reduce linguistic bias, but they often lack precise control over visual uncertainty, sometimes
exacerbating hallucinations instead of mitigating them.
To address this limitation, we propose a novel decoding
strategy called fuzzy contrastive decoding (FuzzyCD) that
uses Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy inference to refine hallucination
control. FuzzyCD adaptively assigns weights to highhallucination logits while mitigating unnecessary linguistic
bias. Specifically, it transforms the log-probabilities of top1 tokens from both standard and hallucination logits into
a confidence linguistic fuzzy set. Through Takagi-Sugeno
fuzzy inference, it dynamically adjusts hallucination logits to prevent the model from over-relying on spurious linguistic patterns. Experimental results on object hallucination datasets demonstrate that hallucination is mitigated by
11%p compared to conventional LVLMs. In-depth analyses highlight the effectiveness of FuzzyCD in enhancing the
reliability of vision-language models. The source code is
available at: https://github.com/lilly9928/FuzzyCD

VisualCD

Standing

Confidence

FuzzyCD

Invisible

IF
is mid
and is low
THEN 𝐀𝐦𝐩𝐥𝐢𝐟𝐢𝐞𝐝 𝐥𝐨𝐠𝐢𝐭𝐬

…

Mid

High

Low

Mid

High

𝟏 + 𝜶 𝒍𝒐𝒈𝒊𝒕𝒔 𝒚 𝒙, 𝒗
− 𝛂 𝐀𝐦𝐩𝐥𝐢𝐟𝐢𝐞𝐝 𝐥𝐨𝐠𝐢𝐭𝐬

Low

Mid

High

standing
looking
Invisible

…

Low

Figure 1. An illustration of the fuzzy contrastive decoding. Orange
background image represents the original, while the blue background images represent the filtered.

1. Introduction

on the implicit assumptions within the question. This phenomenon reflects an excessive reliance on textual cues over
actual visual information, thereby constraining the efficacy
of the model in real-world applications where precision is
essential. The primary causes of object hallucination can
be attributed to the statistical biases inherent in the training
data and the reliance on language priors [1, 7, 14].
To mitigate it, various methods have been proposed, including fine-tuning models with specially curated datasets
designed to reduce hallucination and reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) [17, 22, 30]. However,
they require substantial human resources and computational
costs and often exhibit limited generalization ability across
various scenarios, thus constraining their scalability and
practical applicability. Recently, decoding techniques have
emerged to address object hallucination [9, 15, 20, 38], but
they mainly focus on amplifying or suppressing hallucinations rather than directly detecting them. A key limitation
is the lack of direct control over hallucination amplification, which prevents the selective enhancement of accurate
tokens. Consequently, instead of mitigating hallucinations,
they inadvertently introduce new hallucinations, further ex-

Recent advances in large vision-language models (LVLMs)
have led to substantial progress in multimodal understanding and interaction by integrating large-scale language models with visual input [8, 19, 21, 25, 32]. However, these
models are prone to object hallucination, a phenomenon
in which they either describe non-existent objects or fail
to recognize objects that are actually present in the given
image [11, 13, 17, 20, 34]. For example, for the question
asked: ”What is the vicuna standing on the sand looking
at?” in Figure 1, LVLM fails to recognize the absence of a
vicuna in the image and instead generates a response based

20572

