This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeometryCrafter: Consistent Geometry Estimation for Open-world Videos
with Diffusion Priors
Tian-Xing Xu1 Xiangjun Gao3 Wenbo Hu2 † Xiaoyu Li2 Song-Hai Zhang4,1 † Ying Shan2
1
Tsinghua University 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 HKUST 4 Qinghai University
Project Page:

https://geometrycrafter.github.io

Camera Pose Estimation and 3D Reconstruction

Camera Pose Estimation and 4D Reconstruction

Input Video

Point Map Prediction

Depth/Disparity Maps for Video Generation/Editing

Figure 1. Our GeometryCrafter, empowered by a novel point map VAE, can estimate temporally consistent, high-quality point maps from
open-world videos, facilitating downstream applications such as 3D/4D reconstruction and depth-based video editing or generation.

Abstract

videos. Thus, we can recover high-fidelity point map sequences with temporal coherence from open-world videos,
facilitating accurate 3D/4D reconstruction, camera parameter estimation, and other depth-based applications. Extensive evaluations on diverse datasets demonstrate that
our method achieves state-of-the-art 3D accuracy, temporal consistency, and generalization capability.

Despite remarkable advancements in video depth estimation, existing methods fall short in geometric fidelity due
to their affine-invariant predictions, restricting their applicability in reconstruction and other metrically grounded
downstream tasks. We propose a novel point map Variational Autoencoder (VAE) for encoding and decoding unbounded point maps. Notably, its latent space is agnostic
to video latent distributions of video diffusion models, allowing us to leverage generation priors to model the distribution of point map sequences conditioned on the input

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D geometry from 2D observations remains a
long-standing challenge in computer vision, serving as a
fundamental pillar for numerous applications, ranging from

† Corresponding authors.

6632

