This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMD: Explicit Motion Modeling for High-Quality Street Gaussian Splatting
Xiaobao Wei1,2,3,4,∗,† Qingpo Wuwu1,2,∗,† Zhongyu Zhao1,2,† Zhuangzhe Wu1
Nan Huang1 Ming Lu1 Ningning Ma2 Shanghang Zhang1,
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Autonomous Driving Development, NIO 3 Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
weixiaobao0210@gmail.com

  

   

    

 



  

Figure 1. Previous street Gaussian splatting methods ﬁnd it challenging to accurately model the motion patterns of dynamic objects, which
leads to blurry reconstructions. With the introduction of the proposed Explicit Motion Decomposition (EMD), which compensates for the
modeling of dynamic object motion, achieving the state-of-the-art reconstruction quality.

Abstract
Photorealistic reconstruction of street scenes is essential
for developing real-world simulators in autonomous driving. While recent methods based on 3D/4D Gaussian Splatting (GS) have demonstrated promising results, they still
encounter challenges in complex street scenes due to the
unpredictable motion of dynamic objects. Current methods
typically decompose street scenes into static and dynamic
objects, learning the Gaussians in either a supervised manner (e.g., w/ 3D bounding-box) or a self-supervised manner
(e.g., w/o 3D bounding-box). However, these approaches do
not effectively model the motions of dynamic objects (e.g.,
the motion speed of pedestrians is clearly different from that
of vehicles), resulting in suboptimal scene decomposition.
To address this, we propose Explicit Motion Decomposi* Equal contribution.
† Work done during internship at NIO.

 Corresponding author.

tion (EMD), which models the motions of dynamic objects
by introducing learnable motion embeddings to the Gaussians, enhancing the decomposition in street scenes. The
proposed plug-and-play EMD module compensates for the
lack of motion modeling in self-supervised street Gaussian
splatting methods. We also introduce tailored training strategies to extend EMD to supervised approaches. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, achieving state-of-the-art novel view synthesis performance in self-supervised settings. The code is available
at: https://qingpowuwu.github.io/emd.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis for dynamic street scenes is essential in closed-loop autonomous driving. Recent advances
in neural rendering, particularly Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [31] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19], have
emerged as promising scene reconstruction methods. These

28462

