This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RnGCam: High-speed video from rolling & global shutter measurements
Kevin Tandi1 * Xiang Dai1⇤ Chinmay Talegaonkar1 Gal Mishne1,2 Nick Antipa1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego
2
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego
{ktandi, xidai, ctalegaonkar, gmishne, nantipa}@ucsd.edu

Abstract

to reduce the trade-off by directly increasing bandwidth.
In contrast, compressive video breaks this trade-off by
encoding multiple frames of high-speed video into a single digital exposure captured with a 2D image sensor. The
video frames are then computationally reconstructed. The
resulting inverse problem is ill-posed and requires strong
video priors to uniquely recover the video [1, 48].
While many hardware solutions for compressive video
have been proposed, we focus here on exploiting the rolling
shutter (RS) available in nearly all low-cost CMOS image
sensors. Previous work shows that high-speed compressive
video can be recorded by coupling RS sensors with optical
multiplexing elements such as diffusers [1, 37, 48]. However, these methods rely on sparse video priors. As a result,
they struggle to recover dense scenes with bright, detailed
backgrounds. This limits their utility to relatively simple
scenes with empty backgrounds, which are consistent with
the sparsity priors. Data-driven video interpolation methods [16, 18, 25] are commonly used to upsample videos
captured by conventional low-fps cameras. However, since
these methods are typically trained on internet videos, they
often generalize poorly to out-of-distribution scenarios, particularly when interpolating chaotic motions over large temporal gaps. We demonstrate this with a simple toy experiment in Fig. 2. We aim to accelerate conventional sensors
by over 100⇥, a regime in which learned upsampling performs poorly for chaotic, out-of-distribution scenes.

Compressive video capture encodes a short high-speed
video into a single measurement using a low-speed sensor,
then computationally reconstructs the original video. Prior
implementations rely on expensive hardware and are restricted to imaging sparse scenes with empty backgrounds.
We propose RnGCam, a system that fuses measurements
from low-speed consumer-grade rolling-shutter (RS) and
global-shutter (GS) sensors into video at kHz frame rates.
The RS sensor is combined with a pseudorandom optic,
called a diffuser, which spatially multiplexes scene information. The GS sensor is coupled with a conventional
lens. The RS-diffuser provides low spatial detail and high
temporal detail, complementing the GS-lens system’s high
spatial detail and low temporal detail. We propose a reconstruction method using implicit neural representations
(INR) to fuse the measurements into a high-speed video.
Our INR method separately models the static and dynamic
scene components, while explicitly regularizing dynamics.
In simulation, we show that our approach significantly outperforms previous RS compressive video methods, as well
as state-of-the-art frame interpolators. We validate our approach in a dual-camera hardware setup, which generates
230 frames of video at 4,800 frames per second for dense
scenes, using hardware that costs 10⇥ less than previous
compressive video systems.

Our Contributions: In this paper, we address these limitations and demonstrate that RS sensors can capture highspeed compressive video of scenes comprising nontrivial
backgrounds, by leveraging a few GS frames captured during the exposure of the RS sensor. We build a hardware
prototype, RnGCam, to capture optically aligned GS and
RS measurements. We propose an implicit neural representation (INR)-based space-time fusion model (STFM), to
recover high-speed videos from the combination of diffusercoded RS and GS measurements. Using GS measurements
and our proposed regularization, we recover high-speed
videos with dense backgrounds with much higher fidelity

1. Introduction
High-speed video imaging is instrumental in visualizing
and analyzing fast-moving systems across disciplines, such
as neuroscience [8, 26] and microscopy [15, 55]. Conventional image sensors have limited analog-to-digital bandwidth, which limits the spatio-temporal sampling rate a
given sensor can acquire. This forces a trade-off between
temporal and spatial resolution. Conventional high-speed
cameras use expensive, bulky sensors and read architectures
* Joint first authors

8830

