This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diorama: Unleashing Zero-shot Single-view 3D Indoor Scene Modeling

1

Qirui Wu1 Denys Iliash1 Daniel Ritchie2 Manolis Savva1 Angel X. Chang1,3
Simon Fraser University 2 Brown University 3 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
https://3dlg-hcvc.github.io/diorama/

Synthetic Image (a)

Real-world Image (b)

Text2Scene (c)
Gaming room setup: Lshaped gaming desk with
triple monitors, racing-style
chair, entertainment unit
with console collection, bean
bag lounger, floating shelves
displaying collectibles
Figure 1. We propose Diorama: a system for zero-shot single-view 3D scene modeling. Our system produces a holistic 3D scene model
given a single input image, representing both architectural elements and objects in cluttered indoor scenes. We showcase three examples of
our system where the input image is shown in the top left in each case. Other images are renderings of the output 3D scene from different
camera viewpoints. (a) 3D scene model from a synthetic image input. (b) 3D scene model from a real-world internet image input. (c)
Text-to-scene pipeline where the input image on the left is generated from a text prompt.

Abstract

trieval, object pose estimation, and scene layout optimization. We evaluate our system on both synthetic and realworld data to show we significantly outperform baselines
from prior work. We also demonstrate generalization to
real-world internet images and the text-to-scene task.

Reconstructing structured 3D scenes from RGB images
using CAD objects unlocks efficient and compact scene
representations that maintain compositionality and interactability. Existing works propose training-heavy methods
relying on either expensive yet inaccurate real-world annotations or controllable yet monotonous synthetic data that
do not generalize well to unseen objects or domains. We
present Diorama, the first zero-shot open-world system that
holistically models 3D scenes from single-view RGB observations without requiring end-to-end training or human annotations. We show the feasibility of our approach by decomposing the problem into subtasks and introduce better
solutions to each: architecture reconstruction, 3D shape re-

1. Introduction
Modeling a 3D scene from a single image input is a
cornerstone task in computer vision that is critical in
real-world applications such as autonomous driving, augmented/virtual reality, and robotic perception. Recent
works tackling 3D perception as a reconstruction problem
tend to produce imperfect surface-only 3D meshes that are
incompatible with modern graphics pipelines or simula-

8896

