This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Environment-Agnostic Pose: Generating Environment-independent Object
Representations for 6D Pose Estimation
Shaobo Zhang1
1

Northwest University

Yuhang Huang2
Wanqing Zhao1 *
Wei Zhao3
1
1*
Ziyu Guan
Jinye Peng
2
3
National University of Defense Technology
Xidian University

{zhangshaobo,zhaowq,ziyuguan,pjy}@nwu.edu.cn, huangai@nudt.edu.cn, ywzhao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Input Images

Abstract

Image
encoder

This paper introduces EA6D, a novel diffusion-based framework for 6D pose estimation that operates effectively in any
environment. Traditional pose estimation methods struggle
with the variability and complexity of real-world scenarios, often leading to overﬁtting on controlled datasets and
poor generalization to new scenes. To address these challenges, we propose a generative pose estimation paradigm
that generates environment-independent object representations for pose estimation, which are robust to environmental
variations such as illumination, occlusion, and background
clutter. Speciﬁcally, we propose the novel Environment Decoupling Diffusion Model (EDDM) which separates object
representations from environmental factors while enabling
efﬁcient few-step sampling by leveraging input image priors instead of pure noise initialization. We validate our
approach on four standard benchmarks and a self-made
dataset DiverseScenes. The results demonstrate that EA6D,
trained using only synthetic data, can outperform the stateof-the-art methods with both synthetic and realistic data. In
particular, for fair comparisons with synthetic data, we can
exceed the previous SOTA by 18.1% and 33.5% on Linemod
and Linemod-Occluded datasets respectively. Project page:
https://github.com/acmff22/EA6D

Pose
decoder
Environment
coupled features

(a) Typical solution

Environment-independent
object representations

EDDM

decode

Pose
decoder

(b) Environment decoupling solution

Figure 1. Different from typical RGB-based pose estimation
frameworks, which are easily inﬂuenced by environmental factors leading to inaccurate pose estimation, we propose a generative
paradigm that leverages diffusion models to generate environmentindependent object representations for pose estimation.

been proposed. These methods achieve state-of-the-art results, but require large annotated datasets. Generating accurate annotations for pose data is a labor-intensive and timeconsuming process, leading most deep-learning-based 6D
pose estimation methods to be trained and tested on closed
datasets. These datasets [3, 10, 12, 16] typically contain
only a few hundred images with limited variation and controlled factors, such as object arrangement, lighting conditions, and background, resulting in overﬁtting to the training
set and the struggle to generalize to new scenes.
Consequently, synthetic datasets have been employed as
an additional complement to real datasets, or alternative to
real datasets, as they can be easily and automatically annotated in simulated environments. The primary challenge
with synthetic data is the domain discrepancy between real
and synthetic datasets, which often leads to reduced accuracy when applied to real-world scenarios. To alleviate this
problem, some self-supervised methods [20, 37, 39, 40, 46]
are proposed, which leverage synthetic images with pose
annotations and unannotated real images during training.

1. Introduction
6D Pose Estimation is a pivotal task in the ﬁeld of computer
vision and robotics, which aims to determine the exact position and orientation of an object in three-dimensional space
relative to a camera or a coordinate system. The ability to
accurately perceive an object’s pose is fundamental for a
wide range of applications, including robotic manipulation,
augmented reality and autonomous navigation.
Recently, a series of deep-learning-based object 6D pose
estimation methods [17, 22, 23, 28, 31, 35, 41, 44] have
* Corresponding authors

8678

