This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interaction-Merged Motion Planning: Effectively Leveraging Diverse Motion
Datasets for Robust Planning
Giwon Lee1∗ , Wooseong Jeong1∗ , Daehee Park2 , Jaewoo Jeong1 , and Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
2
Intelligent Systems and Learning Lab., DGIST, Korea

Abstract
Motion planning is a crucial component of autonomous
robot driving. While various trajectory datasets exist, effectively utilizing them for a target domain remains challenging due to differences in agent interactions and environmental characteristics. Conventional approaches, such
as domain adaptation or ensemble learning, leverage multiple source datasets but suffer from domain imbalance,
catastrophic forgetting, and high computational costs. To
address these challenges, we propose Interaction-Merged
Motion Planning (IMMP), a novel approach that leverages
parameter checkpoints trained on different domains during
adaptation to the target domain. IMMP follows a two-step
process: pre-merging to capture agent behaviors and interactions, sufficiently extracting diverse information from the
source domain, followed by merging to construct an adaptable model that efficiently transfers diverse interactions to
the target domain. Our method is evaluated on various
planning benchmarks and models, demonstrating superior
performance compared to conventional approaches.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of different approaches for leveraging the
source domains for target domain adaptation. (a) Domain generalization or adaptation directly utilizes relationships within datasets.
(b) Ensemble learning combines predictions from multiple planning models, each trained on different datasets. (c) The proposed
IMMP collects parameter checkpoints Θ and merges task vectors
τ , which capture differences between trained and initial parameters, to improve adaptation to the target domain.

Motion planning [7, 53, 80, 81] is the final step in autonomous robot driving, focused on generating safe and efficient trajectory based on perception and prediction. With
the availability of various trajectory datasets [4, 6, 23, 36,
42, 50, 52, 73], data-driven approaches have become more
popular due to their ability to adapt to diverse driving scenarios [19–21, 24, 32, 61, 74].
However, existing trajectory datasets exhibit distinct
characteristics, including differences in scene composition,
agent interaction tendencies, and the difficulties in data acquisition. Indoor datasets are constrained in movement due
to static structures, where robots generally move at slower
* Equal contribution to this work.
Our source code is available at:
wooseong97/IMMP

https : / / github . com /

speeds. In contrast, outdoor datasets encompass unconstrained environments and results in a more dynamic maneuver. To account for these diverse environments, HumanHuman Interaction (HHI) datasets and Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) datasets are collectively utilized to train a
planner model. However, using HHI datasets for planning
assumes human locomotion as ego-agent motion, therefore
incorporating interaction dynamics that differ from HRI
datasets where real robot-human interactions shape agent
behaviors. These inherent differences across datasets collectively lead to variations in the nature of agents’ maneuvers and their interactions. Holistically accounting for such
disparities is crucial towards enhancing the overall adaptability in diverse real-world scenarios.

28610

