This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Unsupervised Shortcut Learning Detection and Mitigation in
Transformers
Lukas Kuhn∗1,3,4 , Sari Sadiya∗1 , Jörg Schlötterer2 , Florian Buettner1,3,4 , Christin Seifert2 , Gemma Roig1
1

3

Goethe Universität, Frankfurt
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

Abstract

2

4

Philipps-Universität, Marburg
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK)

features in the dataset, and of mitigating this shortcut learning, are active research topics that are also essential to the
more general areas of fairness and bias mitigation in machine learning [3]. Despite recent progress, shortcut learning research still faces a number of challenges: First, Shortcut mitigation approaches often require knowledge of which
features are spurious. In addition, many methods require
group annotations for a subset of the data, i.e., knowledge of
both the class labels and the presence / absence of the spurious feature [16, 21, 25]. However, this assumption rarely
holds in real-world settings. Second, in methods that do
not require group annotations, the user often has no knowledge of the features that were suppressed [30, 34]. However, use in sensitive domains requires the development of
methods that allow users to retain control over the behavior
of the model. Third, many current methods involve modifying the data and retraining the model [2, 21, 25, 34]. These
processes are highly computationally expensive. However,
for a shortcut mitigation method to be widely adopted, it
should support efficient exploratory analysis of model behavior when suppressing different correlations.

Shortcut learning, i.e., a model’s reliance on undesired features not directly relevant to the task, is a major challenge
that severely limits the applications of machine learning
algorithms, particularly when deploying them to assist in
making sensitive decisions, such as in medical diagnostics.
In this work, we leverage recent advancements in machine
learning to create an unsupervised framework that is capable of both detecting and mitigating shortcut learning in
transformers. We validate our method on multiple datasets.
Results demonstrate that our framework significantly improves both worst-group accuracy (samples misclassified
due to shortcuts) and average accuracy, while minimizing
human annotation effort. Moreover, we demonstrate that
the detected shortcuts are meaningful and informative to
human experts, and that our framework is computationally efficient, allowing it to be run on consumer hardware.
Our code is available at github.com/Arsu-Lab/ShortcutDetection-Mitigation-Transformers.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we introduce a framework for effective, efficient, and explainable shortcut detection and mitigation in
transformers. Our approach leverages recent advancements
in explainable AI, including prototype learning [6, 24]
and Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) concept identification [32], to enable explainable unsupervised
shortcut detection and mitigation. The framework employs
a multi-step process that analyzes model activations, detects
prototypes in image patches, and uses MLLMs for prototype interpretation. The resulting interpretable shortcut detection component is then used to mitigate shortcuts during
inference by selectively ablating image patches containing
spurious features. Overall, our approach yields significant
improvements in both worst group and average accuracy,
offering a promising new direction in addressing shortcut
learning. Finally, we conduct a user study to confirm that
the prototype concepts discovered provide a meaningful insight into the spurious features present in the data. In sum-

Despite achieving performance comparable to that of human experts in many tasks, the deployment of deep neural
networks still faces many challenges, especially in sensitive
domains such as medical imaging [26]. One major challenge is Shortcut Learning; a phenomenon where models
exploit the presence of spurious features that coincidentally
correlate with labels in the training data, despite not being relevant to the underlying relationship of interest. For
instance, a review of hundreds of models for diagnosing
COVID-19 from chest radiographs discovered that reported
accuracies were often inflated by shortcut learning, with age
being the spurious feature, and that none of the models can
generalize to real world diagnostic settings [27]. Both the
challenges of detecting when the model is learning shortcuts that rely on spuriously correlated (as opposed to core)
* These authors contributed equally to this work

2217

