This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Phantom: Subject-Consistent Video Generation via Cross-Modal Alignment
Lijie Liu∗

Tianxiang Ma∗ Bingchuan Li∗† Zhuowei Chen∗
Gen Li Siyu Zhou Qian He Xinglong Wu

Jiawei Liu

Intelligent Creation Team, ByteDance
https://phantom-video.github.io/Phantom/

Abstract

Text-to-video
in
g

The continuous development of foundational models for
video generation is evolving into various applications, with
subject-consistent video generation still in the exploratory
stage. We refer to this as Subject-to-Video, which extracts subject elements from reference images and generates
subject-consistent videos following textual instructions. We
believe that the essence of subject-to-video lies in balancing
the dual-modal prompts of text and image, thereby deeply
and simultaneously aligning both text and visual content. To
this end, we propose Phantom, a unified video generation
framework for both single- and multi-subject references.
Building on existing text-to-video and image-to-video architectures, we redesign the joint text-image injection model
and drive it to learn cross-modal alignment via text-imagevideo triplet data. The proposed method achieves highfidelity subject-consistent video generation while addressing issues of image content leakage and multi-subject confusion. Evaluation results indicate that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art closed-source commercial solutions. In particular, we emphasize subject consistency in
human generation, covering existing ID-preserving video
generation while offering enhanced advantages.

Pr

om

pt

fo
llo
w

Text-modal
Alignment

Balanced
Vi
sio

n

co

ns

ist
e

nc

y

Subject-to-video

Image-modal
Alignment

Image-to-video

Figure 1. Relationship in cross-modal video generation tasks.

Sora [28, 36, 41, 60, 64], which have demonstrated promising visual effects and are paving the way for a new era in
Artificial Intelligence Generated Content.

1. Introduction

Currently, foundational video generation models focus
mainly on two major tasks: text-to-video[36] and imageto-video [2]. Text-to-video (T2V) leverages language models to understand input text instructions and generate visual
content describing the expected characters, movements, and
backgrounds. While it allows for creative and imaginative content combinations, it often struggles with generating
consistently predictable results due to inherent randomness.
On the other hand, image-to-video (I2V) typically provides
the first frame of an image along with optional text descriptions to transform a static image into a dynamic video. Although it is more controllable, the content richness is often limited by the strict “copy-paste” [4, 41] nature of the
first frame. We term the process of subject-consistent video
generation as subject-to-video (S2V) [4, 23, 26, 35], which
involves capturing the subject from an image and flexibly
generating a video based on text prompts, while combining
the diversity and controllability of joint image and text inputs. As shown in Figure 1, its essence lies in balancing

The rise of diffusion models [18, 39] is rapidly reshaping the field of generative modeling at an astonishing
pace. Among them, the advancements in video generation
brought by diffusion models are particularly remarkable. In
the visual domain, video generation requires to pay more attention to the continuity and consistency of multiple frames
compared to image generation, which poses additional challenges. Inspired by the scaling laws of large language models [37, 52, 59], the focus of video generation has shifted
towards investigating foundational large models, similar to
∗ Equal Contributions
† Project Lead

14951

