This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Streaming VideoLLMs for Real-time Procedural Video Understanding
Dibyadip Chatterjee1,3∗ Edoardo Remelli1 Yale Song2 Bugra Tekin1 Abhay Mittal1 Bharat Bhatnagar1
Necati Cihan Camgöz1 Shreyas Hampali1 Eric Sauser1 Shugao Ma1 Angela Yao3 Fadime Sener1
1

Meta Reality Labs

2

3

FAIR, Meta

National University of Singapore

dibschat.github.io/ProVideLLM

Figure 1. Overview of ProVideLLM. A streaming video large language model for real-time procedural video tasks with a low memory
footprint. It features a multimodal interleaved cache that stores textual descriptions of long-term observations (spanning several minutes)
and visual tokens representing short-term observations (spanning a few seconds). We also introduce a new DETR-QFormer connector for
better fine-grained tokenization of the short-term. ProVideLLM is capable of handling multiple procedural tasks within a single model.

1. Introduction

Abstract
We introduce ProVideLLM, an end-to-end framework for
real-time procedural video understanding. ProVideLLM integrates a multimodal cache configured to store two types of
tokens – verbalized text tokens, which provide compressed
textual summaries of long-term observations, and visual tokens, encoded with DETR-QFormer to capture fine-grained
details from short-term observations. This design reduces
token count by 22× over existing methods when representing
one hour of long-term observations while effectively encoding fine-granularity of the present. By interleaving these
tokens in our multimodal cache, ProVideLLM achieves sublinear scaling of memory and compute with video length, ensuring per-frame streaming inference at 10 FPS and streaming dialogue at 25 FPS, with a minimal 2GB GPU memory
footprint. ProVideLLM also sets new state-of-the-art results
on six procedural tasks across four datasets.

∗ Work done during an internship at Meta.

Procedural videos, spanning several minutes to hours, capture multi-step tasks [82] such as cooking [65, 101], toy
assembly [60, 67], and furniture building [7, 8]. With the
growing adoption of AR assistants, streaming video understanding is essential for real-time procedural assistance. This
requires real-time, online inference, as frames appear in a
live video, without access to future observations. Despite its
importance, streaming video understanding remains largely
unexplored in existing procedural research [19, 36, 100].
Existing works on streaming video understanding [17, 70]
focus on online action detection [53, 79, 86, 97] or live conversations [14, 83]. These use-cases target a small set of
unrelated actions [17, 34] and do not require long-term temporal modeling. In contrast, procedural videos are inherently
long and causal, where each step depends on prior steps.
Applying existing approaches to such videos significantly
increases token count and memory overhead, leading to longcontext degradation [31, 46] and making them unsuitable for
streaming, even with excessive frame dropping [29]. The
semantic inter-connectivity of activity steps introduces re-

22586

