This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Normal Flow Directly From Events
Dehao Yuan

Levi Burner

Jiayi Wu

Minghui Liu

dhyuan@umd.edu

lburner@umd.edu

jiayiwu@umd.edu

minghui@umd.edu

Jingxi Chen

Yiannis Aloimonos

Cornelia Fermüller

ianchen@umd.edu

jyaloimo@umd.edu

fermulcm@umd.edu

Abstract
Event-based motion field estimation is an important task.
However, current optical flow methods face challenges:
learning-based approaches, often frame-based and relying
on CNNs, lack cross-domain transferability, while modelbased methods, though more robust, are less accurate. To
address the limitations of optical flow estimation, recent
works have focused on normal flow, which can be more reliably measured in regions with limited texture or strong
edges. However, existing normal flow estimators are predominantly model-based and suffer from high errors.
In this paper, we propose a novel supervised point-based
method for normal flow estimation that overcomes the limitations of existing event learning-based approaches. Using a local point cloud encoder, our method directly estimates per-event normal flow from raw events, offering multiple unique advantages: 1) It produces temporally and
spatially sharp predictions. 2) It supports more diverse
data augmentation, such as random rotation, to improve robustness across various domains. 3) It naturally supports
uncertainty quantification via ensemble inference, which
benefits downstream tasks. 4) It enables training and inference on undistorted data in normalized camera coordinates, improving transferability across cameras. Extensive
experiments demonstrate our method achieves better and
more consistent performance than state-of-the-art methods when transferred across different datasets. Leveraging this transferability, we train our model on the union
of datasets and release it for public use. Finally, we introduce an egomotion solver based on a maximum-margin
problem that uses normal flow and IMU to achieve strong
performance in challenging scenarios. Codes are available
at github.com/dhyuan99/VecKM flow.

Figure 1. We propose a point-based network for estimating normal
flow from raw event data. We discover multiple key advantages of
this point-based approach compared with existing learning-based
approaches. An event and its neighborhood are first encoded as a
fixed-dimensional vector, which is then input to a network trained
in a supervised way to predict normal flow. This approach achieves
high accuracy while maintaining strong transferability across different domains and datasets. Besides, we demonstrate the usefulness of the estimated normal flow in a new egomotion solver that
is shown to remain robust even during aggressive camera motions.

ical for various applications, such as egomotion estimation
[67], video interpolation [14], and motion deblurring [54].
Most works on image motion focus on estimating optical flow (OF). Learning-based OF estimators like [21] perform impressively when evaluated within specific domains
or datasets but suffer from accuracy degradation when applied across different domains, as shown in [25, 26]. In contrast, model-based OF estimators like [46] are more robust
to domain shifts, but their accuracy is limited, particularly
in scenarios where the event textures are sparse.
The lack of robustness in optical flow estimators is
mainly due to the local aperture problem [2]. In regions
with limited texture or strong linear edges, only the motion component perpendicular to the edges (normal flow)
can be reliably measured, while the motion parallel to the

1. Introduction
Event-based motion field estimation is a challenging problem with significant potential for visual motion interpretation tasks, primarily due to its high temporal resolution,
wide dynamic range, and low latency. Image motion is crit-

7969

