This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Marigold-DC: Zero-Shot Monocular Depth Completion with Guided Diffusion
Massimiliano Viola

Kevin Qu Nando Metzger Bingxin Ke
Konrad Schindler Anton Obukhov

Alexander Becker

ETH Zürich

Figure 1. Marigold-DC is a zero-shot, generative method for depth completion. It leverages a pretrained, diffusion-based monocular
depth estimator as scene understanding prior and integrates sparse depth guidance into the denoising process. No fine-tuning is required,
as the method utilizes test-time optimization to update the latent representation. Compared to existing methods, Marigold-DC recovers
plausible depth maps even from very sparse depth observations and excels at zero-shot generalization across a broad range of scenes.

Abstract

iterative inference of denoising diffusion. The method exhibits excellent zero-shot generalization across a diverse
range of environments and handles even extremely sparse
guidance effectively. Our results suggest that contemporary
monodepth priors greatly robustify depth completion: it may
be better to view the task as recovering dense depth from
(dense) image pixels, guided by sparse depth; rather than
as inpainting (sparse) depth, guided by an image. Project
website: https://MarigoldDepthCompletion.github.io/

Depth completion upgrades sparse depth measurements into
dense depth maps, guided by a conventional image. Existing methods for this highly ill-posed task operate in tightly
constrained settings, and tend to struggle when applied to images outside the training domain, as well as when the available depth measurements are sparse, irregularly distributed,
or of varying density. Inspired by recent advances in monocular depth estimation, we reframe depth completion as imageconditional depth map generation, guided by a sparse set
of measurements. Our method, Marigold-DC, builds on a
pretrained latent diffusion model (LDM) for depth estimation and injects the depth observations as test-time guidance,
via an optimization scheme that runs in tandem with the

1. Introduction
Depth completion aims to convert sparse depth measurements into a dense depth map, using an image – typically
standard RGB or grayscale – as guidance (Fig. 1). It is

5359

