This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIP-I2V: A Million-Scale Real Text and Image Prompt Dataset
for Image-to-Video Generation
Wenhao Wang
University of Technology Sydney

Yi Yang*
Zhejiang University

wangwenhao0716@gmail.com

yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Over 1.70 million unique text and image prompts from real image-to-video users
Baby turtle is flowing in the
Curly hair, close your eyes,
sea, and all the objects in the open your eyes, high quality,
background move logically sharpness, contrast, brightness

Let the dragon in the picture
move, giving it a feeling of
riding the wind and waves

The shaking of tree branches
and leaves, the movement of
clouds in the sky

The generated videos from 5 state-of-the-art image-to-video diffusion models
Figure 1. TIP-I2V is the first dataset comprising over 1.70 million unique user-provided text and image prompts. Besides the prompts, TIPI2V also includes videos generated by five state-of-the-art image-to-video models (Pika [5], Stable Video Diffusion [8], Open-Sora
[73], I2VGen-XL [71], and CogVideoX-5B [69]). The TIP-I2V inspires new research directions related to image-to-video generation.

Abstract
Video generation models are revolutionizing content creation, with image-to-video models drawing increasing attention due to their enhanced controllability, visual consistency, and practical applications. However, despite their
popularity, these models rely on user-provided text and image prompts, and there is currently no dedicated dataset
for studying these prompts. In this paper, we introduce
TIP-I2V, the first large-scale dataset of over 1.70 million
unique user-provided Text and Image Prompts specifically
for Image-to-Video generation. Additionally, we provide
the corresponding generated videos from five state-of-theart image-to-video models. We begin by outlining the timeconsuming and costly process of curating this large-scale
dataset. Next, we compare TIP-I2V to two popular prompt

datasets, VidProM (text-to-video) and DiffusionDB (text-toimage), highlighting differences in both basic and semantic
information. This dataset enables advancements in imageto-video research. For instance, to develop better models, researchers can use the prompts in TIP-I2V to analyze
user preferences and evaluate the multi-dimensional performance of trained models; and to enhance model safety, they
may focus on addressing the misinformation issue caused
by image-to-video models. The new research inspired by
TIP-I2V and the differences with existing datasets emphasize the importance of a specialized image-to-video prompt
dataset. The project is available at https://tip-i2v.github.io/.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Image-to-video diffusion models transform static images
into dynamic videos, with wide-ranging applications in animation, content creation, and visual storytelling [21, 39, 67,

14898

