This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Unfolding Network for HDR Imaging with Modulo Cameras
Zhile Chen1
1

Hui Ji2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
cs zhilechen@mail.scut.edu.cn, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

sensors [1, 15, 42] that directly encode a wider dynamic
range during capturing, thereby facilitating HDR reconstruction. One such sensor is the modulo camera [53],
which records only the least significant bits of the irradiance signal. Specifically, when the accumulated radiance
value reaches some pre-defined threshold, e.g., 256 for an
8-bit sensor, it resets to zero and resumes counting. This
periodic wrapping of radiance values enables a theoretically
unbounded dynamic range [56].
Compared to other HDR-specific sensors, modulo cameras offer a simpler and more cost-effective solution, as they
operate on conventional sensors with a simple in-pixel reset
mechanism, avoiding complex fabrication. Moreover, they
maintain full spatial resolution, unlike spatially multiplexed
HDR sensors that sacrifice details due to pixel binning or
alternating exposure patterns. These merits make modulo
cameras a practical and scalable solution for HDR imaging.

High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging with modulo cameras involves solving a challenging inverse problem, where
degradation occurs due to the modulo operation applied to
the target HDR image. Existing methods operate directly in
the image domain, overlooking the underlying properties of
the modulo operation. Motivated by Itoh’s continuity condition in optics, we reformulate modulo HDR reconstruction
in image gradient domain, leveraging the inherent properties of modulo-wrapped gradients to simplify the problem.
Furthermore, to address possible ambiguities on large image gradients, we introduce an auxiliary variable with a
learnable sparsity prior in an optimization formulation to
absorb the related residuals. This is implemented within
an unfolding network, where sparsity is enforced through
a spiking neuron-based module. Experiments show that
our method outperforms existing approaches while being
among the lightest models of existing works.

1.1. Modulo HDR Image Reconstruction
Reconstructing an HDR image from modulo camera measurement requires solving a challenging non-linear inverse
problem, as the observed signal undergoes periodic wrapping due to the modulo operation. This non-linearity disrupts the smooth intensity variations in high-illuminance regions, making reconstruction difficult. The imaging process of modulo camera can be defined as follows. Let
Y ∈ [0, 2B )H×W ×C and X ∈ [0, a)H×W ×C represent
the irradiance of the B-bit HDR image and its modulowrapped measurement, respectively. For a b-bit modulo
camera, a = 2b , their relationship is given by

1. Introduction
High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging is a technique that
expands the range of light captured in a digital image. HDR
imaging is widely used in photography, computer graphics,
and other fields to achieve greater fidelity in light intensity
reproduction. HDR imaging techniques can be either based
on conventional cameras or specific hardware. With conventional cameras, one type of approaches captures multiple exposures and merges them to reconstruct an HDR image [8, 16, 18, 43], while another reconstructs HDR image directly from a single low dynamic range (LDR) input
through computational inference [13, 29, 31, 55]. The former multi-exposure capture process is time-consuming and
impractical for dynamic scenes. The latter, despite being
more convenient, often produces unsatisfactory results due
to inherent information loss in over-exposed areas and low
signal-to-noise ratio in under-exposed areas.
An alternative approach to HDR imaging involves modifying camera hardware [17, 34] or employing specialized

 \label {eq:model formulation} \mX = \oM (\mY ), 

(1)

where M(·) denotes an element-wise operator which wraps
each entry of Y by
 \label {eqn:modulo} x=\oM (y)=y\bmod a= y-a\cdot r, \quad r=\lfloor y/a\rfloor , 

(2)

25218

where the modulo operation is a non-linear operation that
wraps the input signal to the range [0, a), leading to a loss
of information. The goal of modulo HDR reconstruction is
to estimate the HDR image Y from the modulo image X.

