This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Framework to BRIDGE Complete and Incomplete Deep Multi-View
Clustering under Non-IID Missing Patterns
Xiaorui Jiang1 , Buyun He1 , Peng Yuan Zhou3 , Xinyue Chen2 , Jingcai Guo4 , Jie Xu2,5,∗ , Yong Liao1,∗
1

University of Science and Technology of China; 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China; 3 Aarhus University;
4

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; 5 Singapore University of Technology and Design

Abstract

tion to improve clustering performance [20, 22, 27, 48]. For
real-world application scenarios, however, some views of
samples in multi-view datasets usually are missing or unusable, resulting in the development of incomplete multi-view
clustering (IMVC) methods [18, 19, 28, 33, 45]. Owing
to the superior representation capability of deep neural networks, deep-learning-based MVC methods (a.k.a., DMVC)
and IMVC methods (a.k.a., DIMVC) have been receiving
increasing attention. We summarize representative DMVC
and DIMVC methods from recent literature as shown in Figure 1. Their primary techniques to achieve multi-view interaction could be categorized into mutual information-based,
contrastive-based, and divergence-based approaches. Meanwhile, the key strategies to handle incomplete multi-view
data include imputation-based and imputation-free methods.

Incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) has gained increasing attention due to its ability to analyze incomplete
multi-view data. Despite deep IMVC methods achieved
significant progress, they still face two challenges: (I)
The method-specific inseparable designs limit their application. (II) Non-independent and identically distributed
(Non-IID) missing patterns has not been considered and
caused degeneration. To address these issues, we propose a novel unified framework that bridges from deep
MVC to deep IMVC, while emphasizing the robustness
against Non-IID missing patterns. Our framework has a
two-stage process: (I) Multi-view learning on complete
data, where our framework is modularly established to be
compatible with different multi-view interaction objectives.
(II) Transfer learning and clustering on incomplete data,
where we propose a multi-view domain adversarial learning method to improve the model robustness to Non-IID
missing patterns. Moreover, an intra-view and inter-view
imputation strategy is introduced for more reliable clustering. Based on our unified framework, we easily construct
multiple IMVC instances and extensive experiments verified their clustering effectiveness. The code is available at
https://github.com/xiaorui-jiang/BRIDGE.

Although extensive prior research has laid a solid founda1
tion, several critical challenges remain to be addressed. ⃝
The method-specific nature of DIMVC limit its development and application. Specifically, DIMVC methods often
develop specialized network frameworks for training the
data while incorporating the specialized modules to handle the incomplete multi-view data. However, the tight
coupling between these components restricts the transferability and universality, preventing the seamless integration
of effective strategies across different methods. For example, APADC [41] enhances complete multi-view data by
maximizing multi-view mutual information while refining
incomplete data representations through maximum mean
discrepancy loss. Despite its effectiveness, this approach
may face challenges in being directly adapted to alternative
paradigms such as contrastive learning or deep divergence
loss. This issue might limit the application potential of
DIMVC, and thus we are encouraged to present a more flexible and method-agnostic solution, to enhance the adaptability
of DMIVC methods and facilitate their effective compari2 Ignoring the potential risks of
son and integration. ⃝
Non-IID missing patterns. Existing IMVC methods typically follow the independent and identically distributed (IID)
missing patterns assumption, which implies that complete
and incomplete multi-view data share the same distribution.

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) [8, 11, 26, 32, 44] has garnered increasing attention due to its ability to uncover the
intrinsic cluster structures within multi-view data in an unsupervised manner. Traditional machine learning-based
methods [16, 20, 25, 32, 35] and deep learning-based methods [7, 29, 40, 43, 47] constitute the two primary research
paradigms in MVC. Behind them, a fundamental assumption
is that each sample must be observed from multiple views
and thus MVC can explore their common semantic informa* Co-corresponding authors.

594

