This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynFER: Towards Boosting Facial Expression Recognition with Synthetic Data
Xilin He1,9∗ , Cheng Luo4,5∗ , Xiaole Xian1 , Bing Li4 , Muhammad Haris Khan8
Zongyuan Ge5 , Weicheng Xie1,2,3† , Siyang Song6† , Linlin Shen7† , Bernard Ghanem4 , Xiangyu Yue9
1
School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, China
4
KAUST, 5 Monash University, 6 School of Computer Science, University of Exeter, UK
7
Computer Vision Institute, School of Artificial Intelligence, Shenzhen University, China
8
MBZUAI 9 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Facial expression datasets remain limited in scale due to the
subjectivity of annotations and the labor-intensive nature
of data collection. This limitation poses a significant challenge for developing modern deep learning-based facial expression analysis models, particularly foundation models,
that rely on large-scale data for optimal performance. To
tackle the overarching and complex challenge, instead of
introducing a new large-scale dataset, we introduce SynFER (Synthesis of Facial Expressions with Refined Control),
a novel synthetic framework for synthesizing facial expression image data based on high-level textual descriptions as
well as more fine-grained and precise control through facial
action units. To ensure the quality and reliability of the synthetic data, we propose a semantic guidance technique to
steer the generation process and a pseudo-label generator
to help rectify the facial expression labels for the synthetic
images. To demonstrate the generation fidelity and the effectiveness of the synthetic data from SynFER, we conduct
extensive experiments on representation learning using both
synthetic data and real-world data. Results validate the efficacy of our approach and the synthetic data. Notably, our
approach achieves a 67.23% classification accuracy on AffectNet when training solely with synthetic data equivalent
to the AffectNet training set size, which increases to 69.84%
when scaling up to five times the original size. Code is
available here.

From automatic emotion detection to early interventions in
mental health [63], accurate pain assessment [33], and enhancing human-computer interaction [1], the potential impact of FER systems is profound [57, 67, 91]. In recent
years, learning-based FER models have gained significant
traction due to their promising performances [24, 42, 86].
However, despite recent advancements in network architectures and learning methodologies, the progress of existing
FER models has been hindered by the inadequate scale and
quality of available training data, underscoring the need to
expand datasets with high-quality data to push the boundaries of FER capabilities.

1. Introduction

Existing FER datasets, such as CK+ (953 sequences)
[53], FER-2013 (30,000 48×48 images) [5], RAF-DB
(29,672 images) [43], AFEW (113,355 images) [19], and
SFEW (1,766 images) [18], are small compared to popular image datasets for general image processing (e.g., ImageNet [17] with 1.4 million images and Laion [68] with
billion-level data). While AffectNet [58] compiles a large
number of facial images from the web, it still suffers from
vital drawbacks. A considerable portion of AffectNet’s images are low-quality, and its annotations often contain incorrect labels, which impairs the training process of FER models [38, 78]. Consequently, the absence of high-quality and
large-scale FER datasets has delayed the development of
FER foundation models. However, collecting a large-scale
FER dataset with high-quality facial images and meticulous
annotations is almost an unrealistic endeavor due to substantial financial and time costs, ethical concerns around
facial data collection, and limited resources for large-scale
acquisition. Additionally, the subjective interpretation of facial expressions results in inconsistent labeling by annotators, which exacerbates variability and hinders the creation
of reliable datasets.

Facial Expression Recognition (FER) is at the forefront of
advancing AI’s ability to interpret human emotions, opening new frontiers for various human-centered applications.
* These authors contributed equally.
† indicates corresponding authors.

To address the challenges in developing FER models, we

10184

