This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Identity Extraction
Ryan Webster Teddy Furon
Inria/IRISA
Centre Inria de l’Université de Rennes, France
ryan.webster@inria.fr

Abstract
The success of multi-modal foundational models is partly
attributed to their diverse, billions-scale training data.
By nature, web data contains human faces and descriptions of individuals. Thus, these models pose potentially
widespread privacy issues. Recently, identity membership
inference attacks (IMIAs) against the CLIP model showed
that membership of an individual’s name and image within
training data can be reliably inferred.
This work formalizes the problem of identity extraction,
wherein an attacker can reliably extract the names of individuals given their images only. We provide the following
contributions (i) we adapt a previous IMIA to the problem
of selecting the correct name among a large set and show
that the method scales to millions of names (ii) we design an
attack that outperforms the adapted baseline (iii) we show
that an attacker can extract names via optimization only. To
demonstrate the interest of our framework, we show how
identity extraction can be used to audit model privacy. Indeed, a family of prominent models that advertise blurring
faces before training to protect privacy is still highly vulnerable to attack.

people are limited” when queried with a human face picture.
Major providers like Anthropic or OpenAI expressly prohibit people identification and assert their vision-language
models will refuse to do so. One can read in the Anthropic
Usage Policy [2]: “Do Not Compromise Someone’s Privacy
or Identity ... If the shared image happens to contain a human face, Claude never identifies or names any humans in
the image, nor does it imply that it recognizes the human”
Likewise, many recent academic works advertise privacy as a top priority when releasing multi-modal datasets
or models, such as explicitly blurring faces [16], removing
personally identifiable information [41], or employing differentially private pre-training [31]. However, less work has
been done to audit the model privacy post hoc to verify privacy claims. D. Hintersdorf et al. propose a novel attack
for CLIP-based vision-language models to assess their privacy risk by answering the question “Does CLIP know my
face?” [17]. They introduce Identity Membership Inference (IMI), which is the problem of determining whether a
face/name pair was used for training. However, this attack
depends on the possession of the ground truth name for each
person’s facial image. This work aims at broadening the efficiency of the privacy audit by asking the more challenging
questions:

1. Introduction
Multi-modal models have become a crucial component in
many advanced systems due to their versatility, performance, and availability as open-sourced models. Likewise, even bigger models such as GPT-4o or Claude Sonnet are accessible with prices of around a few cents per image/prompt query. These models are trained on a massive
amount of data scraped from the Internet. This raises privacy concerns. Indeed, publicly available does not imply
non-private [36]. Individuals often post data online that is
implicitly not intended for any usage.
Major AI service providers are aware of this privacy concern. Indeed, most of them prohibit the ability to retrieve
someone’s name from a photo. For instance, Google’s reverse image search now usually returns “image results for

How many faces does CLIP know?
Who are these people?
To answer these questions, we introduce Identity Extraction (IE), which is the problem of extracting the ground
truth name given only facial images. In other words, our attack doesn’t just reveal membership information; it yields a
person’s previously unknown identity. We summarize our
outline and our contributions below.

10797

Contributions
• Section 3 formalizes the problem of Identity Extraction
that is solved in two ways in Sect. 4: Our Extraction by
Selection Attack (IESA) extracts correct names from a
large set of candidate names, whereas our Extraction by
Generation (IEGA) directly generates the candidate set.

