This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PriorMotion: Generative Class-Agnostic Motion Prediction with Raster-Vector
Motion Field Priors
Kangan Qian1 , Jinyu Miao1 , Xinyu Jiao1,† , Ziang Luo1 , Zheng Fu1 , Yining Shi1 ,
Yunlong Wang1 , Kun Jiang1,2,† , Diange Yang1,2,†
1
2

School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Green Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University, 10084, China
{qka23, jiangkun, ydg}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Conventional Pipelines

Abstract

Decoder

STPN

Reliable spatial and motion perception is essential for safe
autonomous navigation. Recently, class-agnostic motion
prediction on bird’s-eye view (BEV) cell grids derived from
LiDAR point clouds has gained significant attention. However, existing frameworks typically perform cell classification and motion prediction on a per-pixel basis, neglecting important motion field priors such as rigidity constraints, temporal consistency, and future interactions between agents. These limitations lead to degraded performance, particularly in sparse and distant regions. To address these challenges, we introduce PriorMotion, an innovative generative framework designed for class-agnostic
motion prediction that integrates essential motion priors by
modeling them as distributions within a structured latent
space. Specifically, our method captures structured motion priors using raster-vector representations and employs
a variational autoencoder with distinct dynamic and static
components to learn future motion distributions in the latent space. Experiments on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate that PriorMotion outperforms state-of-the-art methods across both traditional metrics and our newly proposed
evaluation criteria. Notably, we achieve improvements of
approximately 15.24% in accuracy for fast-moving objects,
an 3.59% increase in generalization, a reduction of 0.0163
in motion stability, and a 31.52% reduction in prediction
errors in distant regions. Further validation on FMCW LiDAR sensors confirms the robustness of our approach.

Poor spatial-temporal consistency and insufficient generalization

PriorMotion

BEV Features

Generative
Decoder

STPN

DSpG

RVpE

Motion Field

“Prior knowlegde”

Motion Field Ground Truth
(MFGT)

Leverage prior knowledge and improve motion prediciton performance!
Traditional speedmean errors(m/s)
Newly proposed metrics
+8.92%

+4.67%

+15.73%

+14.75%
The radius of the circle
represents generalizability

Figure 1. Comparison of PriorMotion with conventional pipelines.
Top row: Previous SOTA framework, which adopts encoderdecoder pipeline. Bottom: Our approach leverages prior knowledge from the MFGT, modeling motion prediction as a future generation task in a structured latent space. Our methods outperforms
the baseline across both (a) traditional mean speed error among
both slow and fast moving objects and (b) newly proposed metrics. The radius of the circle represents generalization ability.

fort in open-world scenarios [1, 30, 44]. The traditional
paradigm of object-centric methods models motion behavior estimation as a trajectory prediction task [5, 7, 9, 27, 55],
which, despite its maturity, falters in open environments due
to its reliance on detection-tracking-prediction pipelines
that are ill-equipped to handle inexhaustible categories of
traffic participants critical for system safety [51].

1. Introduction

Recently, class-agnostic methods have emerged as a
promising alternative by jointly performing semantic classification and motion prediction through BEV occupancy
grids, removing the limitation of the requirement to detect
the semantic object first [41]. However, these methods formulate motion prediction and cell classification tasks on the
per-pixel basis, which suffer from poor spatial and temporal consistency as well as instance interaction. Traditional
pipelines primarily focus on designing novel encoders and

Autonomous driving systems [1, 16, 18, 24, 33] demand
highly precise spatial perception, including position information [11], semantic classification [36], and motion behavior [26], which are crucial for ensuring safety and com† Corresponding authors: Xinyu Jiao, Kun Jiang, Diange Yang

27284

