This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Constrained Optimization Approach for Gaussian Splatting from
Coarsely-posed Images and Noisy Lidar Point Clouds
Jizong Peng1∗ , Tze Ho Elden Tse2∗ , Kai Xu2 , Wenchao Gao1 , Angela Yao2
1
dConstruct Robotics 2 National University of Singapore
{jizong.peng,wehchao.gao}@dconstruct.ai

{eldentse,kxu,ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) is a powerful reconstruction technique; however, it requires initialization from accurate camera poses and high-fidelity point clouds. Typically,
the initialization is taken from Structure-from-Motion (SfM)
algorithms; however, SfM is time-consuming and restricts
the application of 3DGS in real-world scenarios and largescale scene reconstruction. We introduce a constrained optimization method for simultaneous camera pose estimation
and 3D reconstruction that does not require SfM support.
Core to our approach is decomposing a camera pose into a
sequence of camera-to-(device-)center and (device-)centerto-world optimizations. To facilitate, we propose two optimization constraints conditioned on the sensitivity of each
parameter group and restricts the search space of each parameter. In addition, as we learn the scene geometry directly from the noisy point clouds, we propose geometric
constraints to improve the reconstruction quality. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed method significantly
outperforms the existing (multi-modal) 3DGS baseline and
methods supplemented by COLMAP on both our collected
dataset and two public benchmarks. Project webpage:
https://eldentse.github.io/contrainedoptimization-3dgs.

Figure 1. Given noisy point clouds and inaccurate camera poses,
our constrained optimization approach reconstructs the 3D scene
in Gaussian Splatting with high visual quality.

pose estimates and noisy point clouds. Additionally, lessthan-perfect camera intrinsics and Lidar-to-camera extrinsic calibration introduce errors and uncertainty into the 3D
reconstruction. Directly using such SLAM inputs results in
blurry reconstructions and degraded geometry (see Fig. 1)
for standard 3DGS methods. While the SLAM outputs can
be enhanced by additional hardware [7, 14], this invariably
increases hardware costs and acquisition time.
This paper addresses the challenge of training 3DGS under imprecise initialization conditions, i.e. inaccurate sensor
calibration and approximate camera pose estimation. We
consider inputs from a typical 3D scanning setup, comprising multiple RGB cameras, a Lidar, and an inertial motion
unit (IMU) within a rigid body framework. In the absence
of Sf M support, we introduce a constrained optimization
method for simultaneously estimating camera parameters
and reconstructing 3D scenes. Specifically, our constrained
optimization strategies are targeted at refining the extrinsics
and intrinsics of the multi-camera setup, as well as 3DGS.
To achieve this, we first decouple multi-camera poses
into a sequence of camera-to-(device-) center and (device-)
center-to-world transformations. However, simply optimizing for camera parameters and scene reconstruction can result in sub-optimal solutions for two main reasons. First,
there is inherent ambiguity in the perspective projection;
the intrinsic parameters and camera poses describe relative

1. Introduction
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is critical for robotics and AR/VR applications. Traditional
SLAM approaches [8, 13, 28] are reasonably accurate in
localization but struggle to produce dense 3D maps with
fine-grained detailing. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [17] has shown great promise for fast and highquality rendering. As a result, there is increasing interest in
combining 3DGS with SLAM [10, 16, 23, 33, 38]. One way
is to incorporate SLAM for 3DGS initialization as a faster
alternative to Structure-from-Motion (Sf M) algorithms.
Yet standard SLAM systems produce only rough camera
∗ Equal contribution

2961

