This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnimeGamer: Inﬁnite Anime Life Simulation with Next Game State Prediction
Junhao Cheng1,2
1

Yuying Ge2,



Yixiao Ge2
2

City University of Hong Kong

Jing Liao1

Ying Shan2

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

Figure 1. An example of inﬁnite anime life simulation by our AnimeGamer. Users can continuously interact with the game world as the
character Sosuke (the main character of the ﬁlm “Ponyo on the Cliff”) through open-ended language instructions. AnimeGamer generates
consistent multi-turn game states, consisting of dynamic animation shots (i.e., videos ) with contextual consistency (e.g., the purple car
and the forest background), and updates to character states including stamina, social, and entertainment values.

Abstract
Recent advancements in image and video synthesis have
opened up new promise in generative games. One particularly intriguing application is transforming characters from
anime ﬁlms into interactive, playable entities. This allows
players to immerse themselves in the dynamic anime world
as their favorite characters for life simulation through language instructions. Such games are deﬁned as “inﬁnite
game” since they eliminate predetermined boundaries and
ﬁxed gameplay rules, where players can interact with the
game world through open-ended language and experience
ever-evolving storylines and environments. Recently, a pioneering approach for inﬁnite anime life simulation employs large language models (LLMs) to translate multi-turn
text dialogues into language instructions for image generation. However, it neglects historical visual context, leading to inconsistent gameplay. Furthermore, it only generates static images, failing to incorporate the dynamics necessary for an engaging gaming experience. In this work,
we propose AnimeGamer, which is built upon Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) to generate each game
state, including dynamic animation shots that depict character movements and updates to character states, as illus-

trated in Figure 1. We introduce novel action-aware multimodal representations to represent animation shots, which
can be decoded into high-quality video clips using a video
diffusion model. By taking historical animation shot representations as context and predicting subsequent representations, AnimeGamer can generate games with contextual
consistency and satisfactory dynamics. Extensive evaluations using both automated metrics and human evaluations
demonstrate that AnimeGamer outperforms existing methods in various aspects of the gaming experience.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative models have signiﬁcantly enhanced anime production, particularly in character design
and the creation of character-centric images and videos [21,
71, 73]. This progress raises an intriguing question: Can we
transcend static content generation to create inﬁnite anime
games by transforming characters from anime ﬁlms into
interactive, playable entities? Imagine experiencing the
life of characters crafted by Hayao Miyazaki within a dynamic anime world. Users can continuously interact with
this world using open-ended language instructions, while

10875

