This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VFlowOpt: A Token Pruning Framework for LMMs with Visual Information
Flow-Guided Optimization
Sihan Yang1
1

Runsen Xu1,2

Shanghai AI Laboratory
†

Chenhang Cui3
2

Tai Wang1†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Corresponding Author taiwang.me@gmail.com

Dahua Lin1,2
3

Jiangmiao Pang1†

National University of Singapore

pangjiangmiao@gmail.com

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) excel in visual-language
tasks by leveraging numerous visual tokens for fine-grained
visual information, but this token redundancy results in
significant computational costs. Previous research aimed
at reducing visual tokens during inference typically leverages importance maps derived from attention scores among
vision-only tokens or vision-language tokens to prune tokens across one or multiple pruning stages. Despite this
progress, pruning frameworks and strategies remain simplistic and insufficiently explored, often resulting in substantial performance degradation. In this paper, we propose VFlowOpt, a token pruning framework that introduces
an importance map derivation process and a progressive
pruning module with a recycling mechanism. The hyperparameters of its pruning strategy are further optimized
by a visual information flow-guided method. Specifically,
we compute an importance map for image tokens based on
their attention-derived context relevance and patch-level information entropy. We then decide which tokens to retain
or prune and aggregate the pruned ones as recycled tokens to avoid potential information loss. Finally, we apply a visual information flow-guided method that regards
the last token in the LMM as the most representative signal
of text-visual interactions. This method minimizes the discrepancy between token representations in LMMs with and
without pruning, thereby enabling superior pruning strategies tailored to different LMMs. Experiments demonstrate
that VFlowOpt can prune 90% of visual tokens while maintaining comparable performance, leading to an 89% reduction in KV-Cache memory and 3.8× faster inference.

Figure 1. VFlowOpt Performance and Efficiency. Our
VFlowOpt significantly outperforms other LMM token reduction
methods across three general benchmarks (MME, MMStar, and
MMBench) on LLaVA-OneVision-7B. It achieves zero performance degradation when reducing 50% of visual tokens. Furthermore, when retaining only 10% of the tokens, it achieves 90% of
the original performance while reducing KV-Cache memory usage
by 89% and accelerating inference by 3.8×.

tonomous driving [9, 31, 35] and robotics [18, 20, 24].
To capture fine-grained visual details, modern LMMs
treat images as token sequences, with models such as
LLaVA-1.5 [21] processing hundreds of tokens and LLaVAOneVision [17] handling up to several thousand tokens.
Nonetheless, the increasing quantity of visual tokens significantly magnifies computational cost, memory usage,
and inference time, creating a critical bottleneck for LMM
deployment, particularly in resource-constrained environments or latency-sensitive scenarios.

1. Introduction

To alleviate these constraints, recent work explores various methods for reducing the number of visual tokens during inference. Most existing approaches evaluate the importance of visual tokens in LMMs using attention-based importance maps derived either from vision-only tokens [40,
49] or from text-visual interactions [36, 52]. Following a
predefined pruning ratio, visual tokens are pruned in a single stage [33] or progressively across multiple stages [42],
often with heuristic strategies applied uniformly across different LMMs. Although promising, these methods are sim-

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [3, 8, 21, 22] have
attained remarkable performance in tasks such as visual
question answering [2, 12] and multimodal reasoning [44,
45], making them indispensable for applications like au-

23924

