This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPA: Efficient User-Preference Alignment against Uncertainty in Medical Image
Segmentation
Jiayuan Zhu * Junde Wu * Cheng Ouyang Konstantinos Kamnitsas
University of Oxford

J. Alison Noble

{jiayuan.zhu, junde.wu, cheng.ouyang, konstantinos.kamnitsas, alison.noble}@eng.ox.ac.uk

1. Introduction

Abstract
Medical image segmentation data inherently contain uncertainty. This can stem from both imperfect image quality and variability in labeling preferences on ambiguous
pixels, which depend on annotator expertise and the clinical context of the annotations. For instance, a boundary
pixel might be labeled as tumor in diagnosis to avoid underestimation of severity, but as normal tissue in radiotherapy
to prevent damage to sensitive structures. As segmentation
preferences vary across downstream applications, it is often
desirable for an image segmentation model to offer useradaptable predictions rather than a fixed output. While
prior uncertainty-aware and interactive methods offer adaptability, they are inefficient at test time: uncertainty-aware
models require users to choose from numerous similar outputs, while interactive models demand significant user input
through click or box prompts to refine segmentation. To address these challenges, we propose SPA, a new Segmentation
Preference Alignment framework that efficiently adapts to
diverse test-time preferences with minimal human interaction. By presenting users with a select few, distinct segmentation candidates that best capture uncertainties, it reduces the user workload to reach the preferred segmentation.
To accommodate user preference, we introduce a probabilistic mechanism that leverages user feedback to adapt a
model’s segmentation preference. The proposed framework
is evaluated on several medical image segmentation tasks:
color fundus images, lung lesion and kidney CT scans, MRI
scans of brain and prostate. SPA shows 1) a significant
reduction in user time and effort compared to existing interactive segmentation approaches, 2) strong adaptability
based on human feedback, and 3) state-of-the-art image segmentation performance across different imaging modalities
and semantic labels. Our code is publicly available here:
https://github.com/SuperMedIntel/SPA.

* equal contribution

Deep learning-based medical image segmentation has
achieved remarkable progress over the past decade [5, 26,
30]. However, existing approaches often fail when applied
to real-world clinical scenarios. A critical challenge is how
to handle the inherent uncertainties in medical images [12].
A single medical image may have multiple different valid
segmentation results, depending on the labeling criteria for
a specific medical context. For example, in glioma detection from brain CT scans, it is often preferred to include
surrounding tissue rather than risk missing part of the tumor
[2]. In contrast, in radiation therapy for low-grade glioma,
undersegmentation is preferred to protect sensitive brain tissue from excessive radiation damage [25]. Therefore, it is
essential to develop adaptive methodologies that align segmentation uncertainties with specific labeling preferences
for different clinical needs.
Existing uncertainty-aware approaches [3, 16, 21, 27]
represent segmentation uncertainty to users by generating
numerous stochastic predictions (Fig. 1 (a)). However, users
often have to carefully choose from countless similar-looking
candidates, making the process time-consuming. Furthermore, since these models cannot incorporate human feedback for adjustments, there is a risk that none of the predictions be satisfying.
Incorporating human feedback into segmentation, often
in the form of visual prompts (such as clicks and bounding
boxes) has shown promise [6, 17, 23, 29]. However, most
such interactive segmentation approaches do not incorporate
uncertainty. Additionally, existing visual prompts are often
cumbersome to attain in the real world, as they require pixellevel interaction input from a user (Fig. 1 (b)).
To address the above challenges, we propose to present
users a small number of distinct segmentations to represent uncertainty. It allows users to select their preferred
option, simplifying interactive refinement into a straightforward multiple-choice selection. In this paper, we introduce
SPA, a new approach for efficient Segmentation Preference
Alignment with uncertainty in medical image segmentation

23731

