This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leaps and Bounds: An Improved Point Cloud Winding Number Formulation for
Fast Normal Estimation and Surface Reconstruction
Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage

Dylan Campbell

Stephen Gould

The Australian National University
{chamin.hewa, dylan.campbell, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au

Abstract

1.5

Recent methods for point cloud surface normal estimation
predominantly use the generalized winding number ﬁeld induced by the normals. Optimizing the ﬁeld towards satisfying desired properties, such as the input points being
on the surface deﬁned by the ﬁeld, provides a principled
way to obtain globally consistent surface normals. However, we show that the existing winding number formulation for point clouds is a poor approximation near the input surface points, diverging as the query point approaches
a surface point. This is problematic for methods that rely
on the accuracy and stability of this approximation, requiring heuristics to compensate. Instead, we derive a more
accurate approximation that is properly bounded and converges to the correct value. We then examine two distinct
approaches that optimize for globally consistent normals
using point cloud winding numbers. We show how the original unbounded formulation inﬂuences key design choices in
both methods and demonstrate that substituting our formulation yields substantive improvements with respect to normal estimation and surface reconstruction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Surface normal estimation and 3D reconstruction are fundamental tasks in computer vision and graphics. Given a point
cloud, normal estimation assigns an outward pointing unit
normal vector to each point, providing crucial geometric information. Surface reconstruction, on the other hand, aims
to recover the underlying 3D surface from the point cloud.
These techniques are crucial for various applications, including object recognition, scene understanding, rendering,
and 3D printing [9, 24].
In order to guarantee that the 3D representation is watertight, most methods use implicit ﬁelds, where the surface
of the object is represented as the level set of a continuous
ﬁeld deﬁned on the domain. Often these ﬁelds are parameterized by some function space, e.g., basis functions deﬁned

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

Existing (wU (q))

Ours (wB (q))

Figure 1. The winding number ﬁeld robustly determines whether
points are inside or outside a shape. It resembles an indicator function: 1 inside, 0 outside, and intermediate values where uncertain.
Here, we plot the 2D winding number ﬁeld induced by 50 (top)
and 10 (bottom) input surface points given their ground-truth attributes such as normals (white arrows). The existing formulation
wU (q) (left) has values far outside [0, 1], while our corrected formulation wB (q) (right) stays close to this range and better resembles an indicator function. See Fig. 4 (a–b) for histograms of the
winding number values of these 2D examples.

on some spatial data structure or coordinate neural networks
[9, 26, 44]. These methods optimize the implicit ﬁeld to best
represent the surface based on the input point cloud and desirable properties of the ﬁeld.
Recently, methods that directly parameterize a ﬁeld with
normals rather than neural network parameters have become popular for the unoriented reconstruction task [17,
31, 32, 49]. Similar to the previous approaches, they optimize towards appropriate properties of the parameterized
ﬁeld. However, instead of optimizing the parameters of
some function space, they optimize the normals directly.

26116

