This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Prompt Alignment for Facial Expression Recognition
Fuyan Ma1 , Yiran He2 , Bin Sun3 ,* Shutao Li3
1
Chinese Academy of Military Science
2
Changchun University of Science and Technology, 3 Hunan University

Abstract

❄

Text
Encoder

Prompt learning has been widely adopted to efficiently
adapt vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP for various downstream tasks. Despite their success, current VLMbased facial expression recognition (FER) methods struggle
to capture fine-grained textual-visual relationships, which
are essential for distinguishing subtle differences between
facial expressions. To address this challenge, we propose
a multimodal prompt alignment framework for FER, called
MPA-FER, that provides fine-grained semantic guidance to
the learning process of prompted visual features, resulting
in more precise and interpretable representations. Specifically, we introduce a multi-granularity hard prompt generation strategy that utilizes a large language model (LLM) like
ChatGPT to generate detailed descriptions for each facial
expression. The LLM-based external knowledge is injected
into the soft prompts by minimizing the feature discrepancy
between the soft prompts and the hard prompts. To preserve
the generalization abilities of the pretrained CLIP model,
our approach incorporates prototype-guided visual feature
alignment, ensuring that the prompted visual features from
the frozen image encoder align closely with class-specific
prototypes. Additionally, we propose a cross-modal globallocal alignment module that focuses on expression-relevant
facial features, further improving the alignment between
textual and visual features. Extensive experiments demonstrate our framework outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on three FER benchmark datasets, while retaining the benefits of the pretrained model and minimizing computational
costs.

🔥 [class]
🔥

Image
Encoder

Contrastive
Learning

(a) Existing CLIP-based FER via fine-tuning

LLMs-based knowledge

🔥 [class]

❄

Text
Encoder

Prompt
Alignment

Cross-modal
Alignment

🔥 ❄

Image
Encoder

🔥 Learnable

Prototype-guided ❄ Frozen
Alignment
Visual prompt
Textual prompt

(b) Our proposed framework via multimodal prompt alignment

Figure 1. (a) Conventional CLIP-based FER paradigm that adapts
the pretrained model by fine-tuning the image encoder, which may
lead to overfitting and diminished generalization. (b) Our proposed multimodal prompt alignment approach for FER, where the
CLIP backbone remains frozen and learnable visual and textual
prompts are used to achieve fine-grained cross-modal alignment,
leveraging external language priors to enhance task-specific adaptation.

1. Introduction

recognition (FER) methods have primarily been developed
for highly controlled environments [22, 32, 45] with consistent lighting, neutral backgrounds, and limited head poses,
which may lack the robustness needed for real-world applications. Despite the progress made by deep learning approaches [18, 42], in-the-wild FER remains challenging due
to the subtle and nuanced differences among facial expressions, varying lighting conditions, occlusions, and the presence of irrelevant background information.
Mainstream in-the-wild FER methods [14, 17, 21, 23,
34, 35, 43] rely on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
[12] or Vision Transformers (ViTs) [8] to extract features
from facial images, using one-hot labels for supervision

Facial expression is one of the most common and natural ways for people to convey different emotions. Understanding facial expressions has various emerging applications, such as human-robot interaction [38], psychology
study [33] and healthcare [5]. Previous facial expression
* Bin Sun is the corresponding author.

12581

