This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InterSyn: Interleaved Learning for Dynamic Motion Synthesis in the Wild
Yiyi Ma*1
Yuanzhi Liang2
Xiu Li 1†
Chi Zhang 2
Xuelong Li2†
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, China Telecom2

Abstract

Individual Motion for single person.

We present Interleaved Learning for Motion Synthesis (InterSyn), a novel framework that targets the generation of realistic interaction motions by learning from integrated motions
that consider both solo and multi-person dynamics. Unlike
previous methods that treat these components separately,
InterSyn employs an interleaved learning strategy to capture
the natural, dynamic interactions and nuanced coordination
inherent in real-world scenarios. Our framework comprises
two key modules: the Interleaved Interaction Synthesis (INS)
module, which jointly models solo and interactive behaviors in a unified paradigm from a first-person perspective to
support multiple character interactions, and the Relative Coordination Refinement (REC) module, which refines mutual
dynamics and ensures synchronized motions among characters. Experimental results show that the motion sequences
generated by InterSyn exhibit higher text-to-motion alignment and improved diversity compared with recent methods,
setting a new benchmark for robust and natural motion synthesis. Additionally, our code will be open-sourced in the
future to promote further research and development in this
area. Project website: https://myy888.github.io/InterSyn/

Latent space:

Separate Two Motion Sequence for the interaction respectively.

Latent space:

Ours: Interleaved dynamic motion in First-person perspective.

Latent space:

Figure 1. Unlike conventional approaches that process singleperson and interaction motions separately, real human behavior
exhibits a dynamic interleaving of solo and multi-person actions.
Our InterSyn framework learns to generate these integrated motion sequences, closely emulating the fluid and natural dynamics
observed in real-world interactions. For multi-human motion, InterSyn takes separate descriptions as inputs to better capture distinct
roles and coordination.

1. Introduction
Given the crucial role of motion information in applications such as visual perception [21, 23, 24], visual generation [3, 44], and 3D synthesis [13, 40, 42], text-to-motion
(T2M) synthesis [11, 18, 36] has garnered increasing attention. Despite significant progress on benchmarks like HumanML3D [10], generating realistic and diverse human motion in the wild remains challenging. Current motion generators [10, 22, 31, 37] often excel on specific datasets yet struggle to generalize to the varied and complex motions observed
in real-world interactions. While some works [6, 20, 45] have
explored general motion generation for multiple characters,
the generalization issue is still largely unresolved.
A promising direction for achieving motion generaliza* This work was performed at TeleAI.

tion is to simulate real human learning. In everyday life,
human motion arises from two intertwined components: semantic expression and social interaction. Motions for selfexpression, such as walking and talking, are fundamental to
individual development and well-being [15–17, 25, 33, 38],
while social motions like hugging or gesturing are primarily acquired through observation, imitation, and active engagement with others [1, 8, 29]. The dynamic nature of
human learning, further supported by theories such as situated learning [7, 12, 32, 39] and Cultural-Historical Activity
Theory [5, 14, 28], as well as studies on peer group interactions [2, 4, 19], suggests that semantic and social motions
mutually reinforce each other, providing a natural blueprint

12832

