This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
Motion Masks

C4D

2D Point Tracking

C4D: 4D Made from 3D through Dual Correspondences
Shizun Wang1
Monocular Video

1

Zhenxiang Jiang1

Xingyi Yang2

Xinchao Wang1 *

2
National University
of dense Point
Singapore
ThePoses
Hong Kong
Polytechnic University
Per-frame
Cloud & Camera
Camera Intrinsics
3D Point Tracking

{shizun.wang, zhenxiang.jiang}@nus.u.edu, xingyi.yang@polyu.edu.hk, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Motion Masks

C4D

2D Point Tracking

Monocular Video

Per-frame dense Point Cloud & Camera Poses

Camera Intrinsics

3D Point Tracking

Figure 1. Given a monocular video that contains both camera movement and object movement, C4D can recover the dynamic scene in 4D,
including per-frame dense point cloud, camera poses and intrinsic parameters. Video depth, motion masks, and point tracking in both 2D
and 3D space are also available in the outputs.

Abstract

tories, enabling fully integrated 4D reconstruction. Experiments show that our framework achieves complete 4D recovery and demonstrates strong performance across multiple downstream tasks, including depth estimation, camera pose estimation, and point tracking. Project Page:
https://littlepure2333.github.io/C4D

Recovering 4D from monocular video, which jointly estimates dynamic geometry and camera poses, is an inevitably challenging problem. While recent pointmap-based
3D reconstruction methods (e.g., DUSt3R) have made great
progress in reconstructing static scenes, directly applying
them to dynamic scenes leads to inaccurate results. This
discrepancy arises because moving objects violate multiview geometric constraints, disrupting the reconstruction.
To address this, we introduce C4D, a framework that leverages temporal Correspondences to extend existing 3D reconstruction formulation to 4D. Specifically, apart from
predicting pointmaps, C4D captures two types of correspondences: short-term optical flow and long-term point
tracking. We train a dynamic-aware point tracker that provides additional mobility information, facilitating the estimation of motion masks to separate moving elements from
the static background, thus offering more reliable guidance
for dynamic scenes. Furthermore, we introduce a set of dynamic scene optimization objectives to recover per-frame
3D geometry and camera parameters. Simultaneously, the
correspondences lift 2D trajectories into smooth 3D trajec-

1. Introduction
Recovering complete 4D representations from monocular
videos, which involves estimating dynamic scene geometry,
camera poses, and 3D point tracking, is a highly challenging
task. While extending 3D reconstruction methods over the
time dimension might seem straightforward, achieving accurate and smooth time-varying geometries and consistent
camera pose trajectories is far from simple.
Recent paradigm shifts in 3D reconstruction, such as
DUSt3R [58], have shown significant success in reconstructing static scenes from unordered images. It directly
predicts dense 3D pointmaps from images and makes many
3D downstream tasks, like recovering camera parameters
and global 3D reconstruction, become easy by just applying global alignment optimization on 3D pointmaps.
However, when applied to dynamic scenes, these for-

* Corresponding author.

7570

