This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Easi3R: Estimating Disentangled Motion from DUSt3R Without Training
Xingyu Chen1,2 Yue Chen1,2 Yuliang Xiu2,3 Andreas Geiger4 Anpei Chen2,4
1
Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
4
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
easi3r.github.io

4D Reconstruction

Abstract
Recent advances in DUSt3R have enabled robust estimation of dense point clouds and camera parameters of static
scenes, leveraging Transformer network architectures and
direct supervision on large-scale 3D datasets. In contrast,
the limited scale and diversity of available 4D datasets
present a major bottleneck for training a highly generalizable 4D model. This constraint has driven conventional
4D methods to fine-tune 3D models on scalable dynamic
video data with additional geometric priors such as optical flow and depths. In this work, we take an opposite path
and introduce Easi3R, a simple yet efficient training-free
method for 4D reconstruction. Our approach applies attention adaptation during inference, eliminating the need
for from-scratch pre-training or network fine-tuning. We
find that the attention layers in DUSt3R inherently encode
rich information about camera and object motion. By carefully disentangling these attention maps, we achieve accurate dynamic region segmentation, camera pose estimation,
and 4D dense point map reconstruction. Extensive experiments on real-world dynamic videos demonstrate that our
lightweight attention adaptation significantly outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods that are trained or finetuned on extensive dynamic datasets.

Static Scene

Camera
Motion
···

···

Object Motion
Frame

Easi3R
···

Frame
···

Video

Frame

Frame

Frame

Figure 1. We present Easi3R, a training-free, plug-and-play approach that efficiently disentangles object and camera motion, enabling the adaptation of DUSt3R for 4D reconstruction.

mon component in real-world videos. Moving objects violate fundamental assumptions of homography and epipolar consistency in traditional SfM methods [36, 47]. In addition, in dynamic videos, where camera and object motions are often entangled, these methods struggle to disentangle the two motions, often causing the motion with
rich texture to mainly contribute to camera pose estimation erroneously. Recent efforts, such as MonST3R [72]
and CUT3R [62], have made strides to address these challenges. However, their success is based on extensive training data [19, 25, 62, 67, 72] or task-specific prior models [22, 25, 72, 73], such as the depth, optical flow, and
object mask estimators. These limitations motivate us to
innovate further to minimize the gap between static and dynamic reconstruction.
We ask ourselves if there are lessons from human perception that can be used as design principles for dynamic
4D reconstruction: Human beings are capable of perceiving body motion and the structure of the scene, identifying

1. Introduction
Recovering geometry and motions from dynamic image collections is still a fundamental challenge in computer vision, with broad downstream applications in novel
view synthesis, AR/VR, autonomous navigation, and
robotics. The literature commonly identifies this problem as
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and has been the core focus
in 3D vision over decades, yielding mature algorithms that
perform well under stationary conditions and wide baselines. However, these algorithms often fail when applied
to dynamic video input.
The main reason for the accuracy and robustness gap between static and dynamic SfM is object dynamics, a com-

9158

