This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpiLiFormer: Enhancing Spiking Transformers with Lateral Inhibition
Zeqi Zheng1,2* , Yanchen Huang2,3* , Yingchao Yu4,2 , Zizheng Zhu2,5 ,
Junfeng Tang1,2 , Zhaofei Yu6 , Yaochu Jin2†
1
2
Zhejiang University
Westlake University 3 Nanjing University 4 Donghua University
5
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 6 Peking University
{zhengzeqi, huangyanchen, jinyaochu}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) based on Transformers
have garnered significant attention due to their superior
performance and high energy efficiency. However, the spiking attention modules of most existing Transformer-based
SNNs are adapted from those of analog Transformers, failing to fully address the issue of over-allocating attention
to irrelevant contexts. To fix this fundamental yet overlooked issue, we propose a Lateral Inhibition-inspired Spiking Transformer (SpiLiFormer). It emulates the brain’s
lateral inhibition mechanism, guiding the model to enhance attention to relevant tokens while suppressing attention to irrelevant ones. Our model achieves state-of-theart (SOTA) performance across multiple datasets, including CIFAR-10 (+0.45%), CIFAR-100 (+0.48%), CIFAR10DVS (+2.70%), N-Caltech101 (+1.94%), and ImageNet-1K
(+1.6%) 1 . Notably, on the ImageNet-1K dataset, SpiLiFormer (69.9M parameters, 4 time steps, 384 resolution)
outperforms E-SpikeFormer (173.0M parameters, 8 time
steps, 384 resolution), a SOTA spiking Transformer, by
0.46% using only 39% of the parameters and half the time
steps. The code and model checkpoints are publicly available at https://github.com/KirinZheng/SpiLiFormer.

1. Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), regarded as the third
generation of neural networks [18], are seen as a potential alternative to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) due to
their biological interpretability and high energy efficiency,
which stem from their event-driven properties. Transformer [25], originally designed for natural language processing tasks, has now become a dominant neural network
architecture, demonstrating remarkable performance across
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
1 These results are obtained by comparing with state-of-the-art spiking

neural network models that have a similar number of parameters.

various visual tasks [6, 27, 32, 42]. The success of Transformers has driven the exploration of their integration with
SNNs, with the objective of enhancing SNN models’ performance across various tasks and progressively bridging
the performance gap with ANNs, particularly in image classification [29, 30, 37, 38], object detection [10, 17], action
recognition [14, 26], and semantic segmentation [16, 29].
The attention module plays a crucial role in Transformerbased SNNs, significantly influencing model performance.
Recent research advancements in spiking attention modules can be broadly classified into three categories: 1) SelfSpiking Attention (SSA) [36, 38, 39], which directly converts the Query (Q), Key (K), and Value (V ) into sparse
spikes; 2) Spike-Driven Self-Attention (SDSA) [29, 30]
and Spiking RWKV (S-RWKV) [40], which replace the
dot product in SSA with the Hadamard product, achieving linear complexity while reducing both energy consumption and computational cost; 3) Spatial-Temporal Attention
(STA) [12, 28], which refines traditional spatial attention by
explicitly modeling the key temporal dependencies intrinsic
to spike-based processing.
However, we observe that most Transformer-based
SNNs exhibit a phenomenon referred to as attention distraction. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the model disproportionately assigns high attention weights to background information during decision-making, leading to the neglect
of critical object-related features and ultimately impairing classification performance. This issue stems from the
fact that spiking attention largely inherits the traditional
attention forward propagation paradigm. Previous studies [1, 21, 34] suggest that traditional attention mechanisms process Q, K, and V uniformly in the mapping
sof tmax(QK ⊤ )V , thereby limiting their capacity to regulate contextual sparsity and relevance. Therefore, we posit
that constructing additional pathways to process Q, K, and
V separately is essential for mitigating attention distraction
in Transformer-based SNNs and enhancing model performance.
By contrast, the natural lateral inhibition mechanism in

24539

