This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FontAnimate: High Quality Few-shot Font Generation via
Animating Font Transfer Process
Bin Fu1,2 , Zixuan Wang1 , Kainan Yan1 , Shitian Zhao2 , Qi Qin2 , Jie Wen3* , Junjun He2 , Peng Gao1,2*
1
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
1
2

{bin.fu, zx.wang8, kn.yan}@siat.ac.cn, 2 {zhaoshitian, qinqi}@pjlab.org.cn,

{hejunjun, gaopeng}@pjlab.org.cn, 3 jiewen pr@126.com, * Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Generated font videos from our FontAnimate in the Unseen Fonts and Unseen Contents (UFUC) setting. We model the font
generation task as a video generation task by representing the font transfer process as a sequence of frames transitioning from the source
font image (the first frame) to the target font image (the last frame). More font videos are provided in Supplementary Materials.

Abstract
Few-shot font generation (FFG) aims to create new font images by imitating the style from a limited set of reference
images, while maintaining the content from the source images. Although this task has achieved significant progress,
most existing methods still suffer from incorrect generation
of complicated character structure and detailed font style.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we regard font
generation as a font transfer process from the source font
to the target font, and construct a video generation framework to model this process. Moreover, a test-time condition alignment mechanism is further developed to enhance
the consistency between the generated samples and the provided condition samples. Specifically, we first construct a
diffusion-based image-to-image font generation framework
for the few-shot font generation task. This framework is expanded into an image-to-video font generation framework
by integrating temporal components and frame-index information, enabling the production of high-quality font videos
that transition from the source font to the target font. Based

on this framework, we develop a noise inversion mechanism
in the generative process to perform content and style alignment between the generated samples and the provided condition samples, enhancing style consistency and structural
accuracy. The experimental results show that our model
achieves superior performance on FFG tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method. The code is available
at: https://github.com/fubinfb/FontAnimate.

1. Introduction

16015

Automatic few-shot font generation (FFG) is a challenging task that requires creating new font images by rendering the source character in the target style based on a limited number of reference samples, which is an emerging research topic due to its commercial values and application
prospects, especially for glyph-rich scripts. In this task,
the generated font images should maintain the global structures of the source characters and exhibit the specific font
styles of the reference images. To achieve these objectives,

