This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeFlux: Understanding and Exploiting Layer-Specific Roles in RoPE-Based
MMDiT for Versatile Image Editing
Tianyi Wei1 , Yifan Zhou1 , Dongdong Chen2 , Xingang Pan1
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Microsoft GenAI

{tianyi.wei, yifan006, xingang.pan}@ntu.edu.sg , cddlyf@gmail.com
https://wtybest.github.io/projects/FreeFlux/
Non-Rigid

Object Movement

Outpainting

“Jumping”

Object Addition

Background Replacement

“Yelling”

“Add a
blue glasses”

“Add a
red scarf”

“Next to a
coconut”

“desert”

“snow
mountain”

“streamlet”

Figure 1. Leveraging the layer-specific roles in RoPE-based MMDiT we discovered, versatile training-free image editing is tailored to
different task characteristics, including non-rigid editing, object addition, background replacement, object movement, and outpainting.

Abstract

tic content and achieving seamless modifications.

The integration of Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE)
in Multimodal Diffusion Transformer (MMDiT) has significantly enhanced text-to-image generation quality. However,
the fundamental reliance of self-attention layers on positional embedding versus query-key similarity during generation remains an intriguing question. We present the first
mechanistic analysis of RoPE-based MMDiT models (e.g.,
FLUX), introducing an automated probing strategy that disentangles positional information versus content dependencies by strategically manipulating RoPE during generation.
Our analysis reveals distinct dependency patterns that do
not straightforwardly correlate with depth, offering new insights into the layer-specific roles in RoPE-based MMDiT.
Based on these findings, we propose a training-free, taskspecific image editing framework that categorizes editing
tasks into three types: position-dependent editing (e.g., object addition), content similarity-dependent editing (e.g.,
non-rigid editing), and region-preserved editing (e.g., background replacement). For each type, we design tailored keyvalue injection strategies based on the characteristics of the
editing task. Extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-theart approaches, particularly in preserving original seman-

1. Introduction

16745

After years of rapid development, diffusion [10, 34]-based
text-to-image generation models have become the default
modeling paradigm. Recently, new models, exemplified by
FLUX [16] and Stable Diffusion 3 [5], have pushed generation quality to an unprecedented level. Compared to previous state-of-the-art text-to-image models such as SD 1 [30],
SD 2, and SDXL [25], these models share several key improvements: a rectified flow formulation [20], a novel Multimodal Diffusion Transformer (MMDiT) [24] replacing the
conventional U-Net architecture [31], and a unified information interaction scheme where text and image tokens are
concatenated and processed through self-attention with the
classic query-key-value design.
A key distinction between FLUX and SD3 lies in how
positional information is incorporated. SD3 injects Positional Embedding only at the input layer of the network, whereas FLUX applies Rotary Position Embedding
(RoPE) [35] to both queries and keys at every self-attention
layer. This more explicit encoding of absolute and relative
positional information enables FLUX to achieve superior
generation quality and better high-resolution extrapolation,

