This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Silent Assistant: NoiseQuery as Implicit Guidance for
Goal-Driven Image Generation
Ruoyu Wang1

Huayang Huang1

Ye Zhu2

Olga Russakovsky2

Yu Wu1 *

1

2

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
{wangruoyu, hyhuang, wuyucs}@whu.edu.cn
{yezhu, olgarus}@princeton.edu

Abstract

Stable Diffusion
v1.4（UNet）

In this work, we introduce NoiseQuery as a novel
method for enhanced noise initialization in versatile goaldriven text-to-image (T2I) generation. Specifically, we propose to leverage an aligned Gaussian noise as implicit guidance to complement explicit user-defined inputs, such as
text prompts, for better generation quality and controllability. Unlike existing noise optimization methods designed for
specific models, our approach is grounded in a fundamental examination of the generic finite-step noise scheduler design in diffusion formulation, allowing better generalization
across different diffusion-based architectures in a tuningfree manner. This model-agnostic nature allows us to construct a reusable noise library compatible with multiple T2I
models and enhancement techniques, serving as a foundational layer for more effective generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that NoiseQuery enables fine-grained
control and yields significant performance boosts not only
over high-level semantics but also over low-level visual
attributes, which are typically difficult to specify through
text alone, with seamless integration into current workflows
with minimal computational overhead. Code is available at
https://github.com/wangruoyu02/NoiseQuery.

Stable Diffusion
v2.1（UNet）

PixArt-α
（DiT）

SD-Turbo
（Distilled）

Figure 1. Each row shows a set of images generated by different diffusion models starting from the same initial noise, using
the same sampler, and with NULL as the text prompt. The generated images demonstrate striking both high-level semantic and
low-level visual similarities across models.

1. Introduction

explored various techniques, including fine-tuning diffusion
UNet [2, 12, 53], enhancing language encoders [23, 67], refining inference strategies [3, 10], and extra additional image conditions [15, 45, 66]. A recent popular line of research focuses on optimizing the initial noise [4, 11, 18, 41],
motivated by the observation that images generated from
the same noise often exhibit high similarities within a single model, even when prompted differently. In this work,
we extend this understanding by revealing that such noiseinduced consistency persists across T2I models with different diffusion backbones, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
To better understand this phenomenon, we examine the
formulation of diffusion models and reveal that cross-model
similarities stem from the finite-step noise scheduler design

Text-to-image synthesis (T2I) has gained significant research attention with the rising popularity of diffusion generative models [20, 39, 50, 51]. While these models demonstrate impressive generative capabilities, they still struggle to faithfully align generated content with user prompts,
leading to suboptimal outputs. To enrich the text-based conditioning capabilities of diffusion models, researchers have
* Corresponding author.

17618

