This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Decomposition-Recomposition in Large Vision-Language Model for
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning

1

Zongyao Xue1,2 , Meina Kan1,2 , Shiguang Shan 1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100090, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100090, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China

Abstract

[23]. However, real-world scenarios such as autonomous
driving and robotic field operations often involve continuously arriving data streams, where new categories emerge
incrementally with only sparse samples available. Although humans excel at adapting to such dynamic environments, existing learning-based algorithms struggle under these constraints. To bridge this gap, Few-Shot ClassIncremental Learning (FSCIL)[22] is introduced as a more
practical and challenging task, aiming to incrementally recognize novel classes from few-shot examples while preserving performance on base classes. The FSCIL task inherits
dual challenges from few-shot learning and continual learning. First, models must overcome the unreliable empirical risk minimization problem [26] when generalizing with
scarce novel class samples. Second, they must maintain
stability against catastrophic forgetting [16] of base classes
while adapting to incremental updates.
Since its introduction in 2020 [22], FSCIL has attracted
significant attention due to its potential in real-world applications, leading to a variety of early methodological developments, including meta learning[9, 31, 33], specialized model architectures[28, 29], optimization strategies
[19] and replay-based methods[10, 15]. However, these approaches face a longstanding plasticity-stability dilemma,
wherein models struggle to simultaneously preserve base
class knowledge while effectively accommodating novel
class acquisition.
Recently, leveraging the generalizable representations
of pre-trained models such as CLIP, prototype-based metric learning approaches [1, 21, 30, 32] have emerged as
a prominent solution to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
These methods typically freeze the pre-trained backbone
networks and aggregate features from samples within each
class to construct prototypes, enabling effective knowledge
preservation and incremental learning. However, the scarce
samples of novel classes hinder the full exploitation of features from large pre-trained models, yielding semantically
biased novel prototypes that deviate from true class distributions. To address these biases, existing methods [1, 7, 10]

Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) focuses on
incrementally learning novel classes using only a limited
number of samples from novel classes, which faces dual
challenges: catastrophic forgetting of previously learned
classes and over-fitting to novel classes with few available samples. Recent advances in large pre-trained visionlanguage models (VLMs), such as CLIP, provide rich feature representations that generalize well across diverse
classes. Therefore, freezing the pre-trained backbone and
aggregating class features as prototypes becomes an intuitive and effective way to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
However, this strategy fails to address the overfitting challenge, and the prototypes of novel classes exhibit semantic bias due to the few samples per class. To address these
limitations, we propose a semantic Feature DecompositionRecomposition (FDR) method based on VLMs. Firstly, we
decompose the CLIP features into semantically distinct segments guided by text keywords from base classes. Then,
these segments are adaptively recomposed at the attribute
level given text descriptions, forming calibrated prototypes
for novel classes. The recomposition process operates linearly at the attribute level but induces nonlinear adjustments across the entire prototype. This fine-grained and
non-linear recomposition inherits the generalization capabilities of VLMs and the adaptive recomposition ability of
base classes, leading to enhanced performance in FSCIL.
Extensive experiments demonstrate our method’s effectiveness, particularly in 1-shot scenarios where it achieves improvements between 6.70% and 19.66% for novel classes
over previous prototype-based methods on CUB200. Code
is available at https://github.com/herb1999/FDR.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep neural networks (DNNs)
is largely based on training with large-scale static datasets

3153

