This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UAVScenes: A Multi-Modal Dataset for UAVs
Sijie Wang*1 Siqi Li*1 Yawei Zhang*1 Shangshu Yu*2 Shenghai Yuan*1 Rui She*3
Quanjiang Guo4 JinXuan Zheng1 Ong Kang Howe1 Leonrich Chandra1 Shrivarshann Srijeyan1
Aditya Sivadas1 Toshan Aggarwal1 Heyuan Liu1 Hongming Zhang1 Chujie Chen1 Junyu Jiang1
Lihua Xie1 Wee Peng Tay1
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China
3
Beihang University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
wang1679@e.ntu.edu.sg, shyuan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Multi-modal perception is essential for unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) operations, as it enables a comprehensive understanding of the UAVs’ surrounding environment. However, most existing multi-modal UAV datasets are primarily biased toward localization and 3D reconstruction tasks,
or only support map-level semantic segmentation due to
the lack of frame-wise annotations for both camera images and LiDAR point clouds. This limitation prevents
them from being used for high-level scene understanding tasks. To address this gap and advance multi-modal
UAV perception, we introduce UAVScenes, a large-scale
dataset designed to benchmark various tasks across both
2D and 3D modalities. Our benchmark dataset is built
upon the well-calibrated multi-modal UAV dataset MARSLVIG, originally developed only for simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). We enhance this dataset by
providing manually labeled semantic annotations for both
frame-wise images and LiDAR point clouds, along with accurate 6-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF) poses. These additions
enable a wide range of UAV perception tasks, including
segmentation, depth estimation, 6-DoF localization, place
recognition, and novel view synthesis (NVS). Our dataset
is available at https://github.com/sijieaaa/
UAVScenes

Image

Figure 1. Visualization of frame-wise image and LiDAR point
cloud annotations of the proposed UAVScenes dataset.

culture [69], inspection [16, 66, 67, 105], and emergency
response [44]. Unlike ground vehicles, UAVs can operate
above ground constraints, addressing limitations in current
urban systems.
Yet, as UAVs tackle increasingly sophisticated tasks in
diverse urban settings, they require training on high-quality
datasets for reliable perception. Despite the potential of a

1. Introduction
With the expansion of the low-altitude aerial economy
[44, 54, 70, 83], UAVs have become indispensable for aerial
taxi services [15, 17, 18], low-altitude logistics [8], agri* The first six authors contribute equally: Sijie Wang, Siqi Li, Yawei
Zhang, Shangshu Yu, Shenghai Yuan, and Rui She.

28946

