This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HERO: Human Reaction Generation from Videos
Chengjun Yu1 , Wei Zhai1,† , Yuhang Yang1 , Yang Cao1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition, USTC
{yucj@mail., wzhai056@, yyuhang@mail., forrest@, zhazj@}ustc.edu.cn

Figure 1. Overview of our work. We propose to generate 3D human reactions from RGB videos. To tackle this task, a simple yet
effective framework, HERO, is presented. Furthermore, to facilitate research in this area, we introduce the ViMo dataset, which features a
wide range of interaction categories covering three broad ones: human-human interactions, animal-human interactions, and scene-human
interactions. For the human reactions visualized in the ﬁgure, the darker colors indicate the later in time.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Human reaction generation represents a signiﬁcant research domain for interactive AI, as humans constantly interact with their surroundings. Previous works focus mainly
on synthesizing the reactive motion given a human motion
sequence. This paradigm limits interaction categories to
human-human interactions and ignores emotions that may
inﬂuence reaction generation. In this work, we propose to
generate 3D human reactions from RGB videos, which involves a wider range of interaction categories and naturally provides information about expressions that may reﬂect the subject’s emotions. To cope with this task, we
present HERO, a simple yet effective framework for Human
rEaction geneRation from videOs. HERO considers both
global and frame-level local representations of the video to
extract the interaction intention, and then uses the extracted
interaction intention to guide the synthesis of the reaction.
Besides, local visual representations are continuously injected into the model to maximize the exploitation of the dynamic properties inherent in videos. Furthermore, the ViMo
dataset containing paired Video-Motion data is collected to
support the task. In addition to human-human interactions,
these video-motion pairs also cover animal-human interactions and scene-human interactions. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of our method.
†Corresponding Author.
Project page: https://jackyu6.github.io/HERO

Human reaction generation refers to the technology that allows computers to synthesize realistic and natural human
reactions based on input signals. It has a wide range of applications in interactive virtual and augmented reality, animation, games, human-robot interaction, and embodied AI,
which promises to bring non-player characters (NPCs) to
life and enable humanoid robots to understand and respond
to social cues and environmental factors in a human-like
manner [21, 59, 103]. Previous works [13, 21, 58, 59, 103]
focus mainly on synthesizing the motions of reactors conditioned on the motions of actors. These motions are wellorganized structured data that computers can easily process.
However, intelligent systems such as humanoid robots often
use raw visual signals as input. Therefore, human reaction
generation from videos is worth exploring.
We note that using human motions as input introduces
two limitations in the context of human reaction generation: restricted interaction categories and the absence of
emotional information. On the one hand, it limits the interaction types to human-human interactions, overlooking
other forms of interaction such as animal-human and scenehuman interactions, thereby constraining the machine’s capacity to engage with the broader world. On the other hand,
the motion data used in prior works do not reﬂect the emotional states of the characters. In fact, during human-human
interactions, the actor’s emotions may inﬂuence the reactor’s decision-making process, particularly when the actor’s

10262

