This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Egocentric Action-aware Inertial Localization in Point Clouds with
Vision-Language Guidance
Mingfang Zhang1 , Ryo Yonetani2 , Yifei Huang1∗ , Liangyang Ouyang1 , Ruicong Liu1 , Yoichi Sato1
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 CyberAgent AI Lab
{mfzhang,hyf,oyly,lruicong,ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp,

yonetani ryo@cyberagent.co.jp

Head-mounted IMU signals

Abstract

Localization:

Acceleration

This paper presents a novel inertial localization framework named Egocentric Action-aware Inertial Localization
(EAIL), which leverages egocentric action cues from headmounted IMU signals to localize the target individual within
a 3D point cloud. Human inertial localization is challenging due to IMU sensor noise that causes trajectory drift
over time. The diversity of human actions further complicates IMU signal processing by introducing various motion
patterns. Nevertheless, we observe that some actions captured by the head-mounted IMU correlate with spatial environmental structures (e.g., bending down to look inside
an oven, washing dishes next to a sink), thereby serving
as spatial anchors to compensate for the localization drift.
The proposed EAIL framework learns such correlations via
hierarchical multi-modal alignment with vision-language
guidance. By assuming that the 3D point cloud of the environment is available, it contrastively learns modality encoders that align short-term egocentric action cues in IMU
signals with local environmental features in the point cloud.
The learning process is enhanced using concurrently collected vision and language signals to improve multimodal
alignment. The learned encoders are then used in reasoning the IMU data and the point cloud over time and space to
perform inertial localization. Interestingly, these encoders
can further be utilized to recognize the corresponding sequence of actions as a by-product. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework
over state-of-the-art inertial localization and inertial action
recognition baselines. Project page: https://github.

Angular Velocity

00:30:00

EAIL
Pre-built Point Clouds

00:00:10

Action Recognition:
00:00:10 Washing dishes

……
00:30:00 Stir-frying at a Stove

Figure 1. Egocentric Action-aware Inertial Localization (EAIL).
Our framework leverages egocentric action cues obtained from the
head-mounted IMU to perform inertial localization in the environmental 3D point cloud. The corresponding sequence of actions
can also be recognized as a by-product.

com/mf-zhang/Ego-Inertial-Localization.

human bodies, IMUs can capture acceleration and angular velocity to record 3D human movements. Compared
to vision-based localization methods [28, 39], inertial localization enables user tracking in an energy-efficient and
privacy-preserving manner.
Despite the advantages, human inertial localization remains highly challenging primarily due to two reasons. The
first one is the trajectory drift caused by IMU noise. IMU
sensor noise causes small uncertainties in measurements
that accumulate over time, which can ultimately lead to
significant trajectory drift [58]. Conventional step detection methods [3, 64] struggle to generalize to the noise of
irregular movements, while recent data-driven approaches
[22, 37, 54, 66], which predict velocity from IMU signals,
can suffer from accumulated estimation errors.
The other challenge lies in the complexity of human actions. Human body-mounted IMUs capture signals not
only from displacement-related movements like walking
and stopping, but also from action-induced motions that
do not involve actual positional changes, such as headswinging during cooking and cleaning. These additional

1. Introduction
Inertial localization has emerged as a pivotal technology
for human tracking across a wide range of various applications, including personal navigation [22] and augmented
reality [51]. Inertial measurement units (IMUs) are commonly embedded in wearable devices such as smartphones,
smart glasses [12], and headsets [45]. When affixed to
∗ Corresponding author.

27209

