This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lay-Your-Scene: Natural Scene Layout Generation with Diffusion Transformers
Divyansh Srivastava1

A big boat in the ocean
and a man running on
beach under blue sky

Xiang Zhang1
1
UC San Diego

He Wen2* Chenru Wen2*
2
Tsingua University

Two men posing on street A fruit basket containing
with mountain range in
two apples, one banana,
the background
and three oranges

Zhuowen Tu1

A bathroom with a sink
and a mirror

Figure 1. Text to natural scene layout generation with Lay-Your-Scene (shorthand LayouSyn): Lay-Your-Scene demonstrates superior
scene awareness, generating layouts with high geometric plausibility and strictly adhering to numerical and spatial constraints. Object
nouns in the prompts are highlighted with corresponding colors in the layout.

1. Introduction

Abstract

With the advancement of text-to-image generative models [5, 34, 41, 42, 48], there has been a growing interest in controllable image generation [26, 51], where users
can explicitly control the spatial locations [26, 43, 46], and
counts [2, 49] of objects in the generated images. While
existing frameworks [26, 43, 46] can achieve satisfactory
control over image generation, they require users to provide
fine-grained conditioning inputs, such as plausible scene
layouts. Therefore, a text-to-layout generation framework is
necessary to reduce the manual, time-consuming, and costly
effort of obtaining such layouts.
Existing works have addressed layout generation with
various architectures for modeling inter-element relationships within scene elements: variational autoencoders [22],
GANs [25], autoregressive Transformers [15], and more recently, continuous [45] or discrete [20, 50] diffusion processes. While these methods demonstrate competitive performance across various benchmarks, they primarily focus
on unconditional layout generation, such as document layouts. Furthermore, these models often assume a fixed set
of object categories and struggle with complex text conditions, restricting their application in controlled, end-to-end,
open-vocabulary text-to-image generation pipelines.

We present Lay-Your-Scene (shorthand LayouSyn), a
novel text-to-layout generation pipeline for natural scenes.
Prior scene layout generation methods are either closedvocabulary or use proprietary large language models for
open-vocabulary generation, limiting their modeling capabilities and broader applicability in controllable image
generation. In this work, we propose to use lightweight
open-source language models to obtain scene elements from
text prompts and a novel aspect-aware diffusion Transformer architecture trained in an open-vocabulary manner
for conditional layout generation. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that LayouSyn outperforms existing methods
and achieves state-of-the-art performance on challenging
spatial and numerical reasoning benchmarks. Additionally,
we present two applications of LayouSyn: First, we show
that coarse initialization from large language models can
be seamlessly combined with our method to achieve better
results. Second, we present a pipeline for adding objects to
images, demonstrating the potential of LayouSyn in image
editing applications.
* Work done during internship at UC San Diego.

Code: https://github.com/mlpc-ucsd/Lay-Your-Scene

17909

