This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaDrive: Self-Adaptive Slow-Fast System for Language-Grounded
Autonomous Driving
Ruifei Zhang1,2 , Junlin Xie1,2 , Wei Zhang4† , Weikai Chen†‡ , Xiao Tan4 , Xiang Wan2 , Guanbin Li3,5†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
Sun Yat-sen University 4 Baidu Inc.
5
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing

Abstract
Effectively integrating Large Language Models (LLMs) into
autonomous driving requires a balance between leveraging
high-level reasoning and maintaining real-time efficiency.
Existing approaches either activate LLMs too frequently,
causing excessive computational overhead, or use fixed
schedules, failing to adapt to dynamic driving conditions.
To address these challenges, we propose AdaDrive, an
adaptively collaborative slow-fast framework that optimally
determines when and how LLMs contribute to decisionmaking. (1) When to activate the LLM: AdaDrive employs a novel adaptive activation loss that dynamically determines LLM invocation based on a comparative learning
mechanism, ensuring activation only in complex or critical
scenarios. (2) How to integrate LLM assistance: Instead
of rigid binary activation, AdaDrive introduces an adaptive fusion strategy that modulates a continuous, scaled
LLM influence based on scene complexity and prediction
confidence, ensuring seamless collaboration with conventional planners. Through these strategies, AdaDrive provides a flexible, context-aware framework that maximizes
decision accuracy without compromising real-time performance. Extensive experiments on language-grounded autonomous driving benchmarks demonstrate that AdaDrive
state-of-the-art performance in terms of both driving accuracy and computational efficiency. Code is available at
https://github.com/ReaFly/AdaDrive.

Figure 1. (a) The first generation of LLM-enhanced autonomous
driving approaches [21, 38] employ a synchronous structure,
where both LLM and planner operate at each driving step.
(b) Generation II methods implement asynchronous processing
paradigms, utilizing distinct but predetermined activation frequencies for the LLM and planner. (c) Our proposed AdaDrive also employs an asynchronous architecture but features two novel adaptive
connectors: Connector-W for adaptively determining when to activate the LLM, and Connector-H for controlling how to integrate
the LLM in driving tasks. This design enables enhanced flexibility in handling uncertain or emergency situations. Besides, we
also incorporate LS-Qformer for efficient processing of continuous streaming data.

els (LLMs) and their multimodal extensions (MLLMs), researchers have begun integrating LLMs into autonomous
driving systems to enhance cognitive reasoning and decision making [7, 8, 15–17, 24, 30]. Early approaches, such
as LMDrive [21] and AD-H [38], adopt synchronous and
highly-entangled sequential architectures where LLMs continuously influence the driving process at every step (see
Figure 1). While these models improve driving intelligence,
they introduce substantial memory overhead and latency,
making real-time deployment challenging, particularly in

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving has long been a focal point in both
academia and industry [1, 2, 5, 9, 10, 12, 20, 22, 26, 32,
34, 36, 37]. With the emergence of large language mod† Co-corresponding
authors:
zhangwei99@baidu.com,
chenwk891@gmail.com, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
‡ This paper solely reflects the author’s personal research and is not
associated with the author’s affiliated institution.

5112

