This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DrivingGPT: Unifying Driving World Modeling and Planning with Multi-modal
Autoregressive Transformers
Yuntao Chen3
1

Yuqi Wang1,2

Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2

New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
HKISI, CAS
Project page: https://rogerchern.github.io/DrivingGPT
World Modeling

Historical Observations

DrivingGPT

current

𝑶𝒕+𝟏

𝑶𝒕+𝟐

𝑶𝒕+𝟑

𝑶𝒕+𝟒

Planning

Visual Token
Action Token

𝑨𝒕+𝟏 𝑨𝒕+𝟐 𝑨𝒕+𝟑 𝑨𝒕+𝟒

Figure 1. Driving as next token prediction. Our DrivingGPT treat interleaved discrete visual and action tokens of a driving sequence as a
unified driving language and leverage multimodal autoregressive transformers to simultaneously perform world modeling and end-to-end
planning by standard next token prediction given historical driving tokens. The red rectangle in planning denotes the ego car and the blue
line is the generated trajectory while the brown line is the human driving trajectory.

Abstract
World model-based searching and planning are widely recognized as a promising path toward human-level physical
intelligence. However, current driving world models primarily rely on video diffusion models, which specialize in
visual generation but lack the flexibility to incorporate other
modalities like action. In contrast, autoregressive transformers have demonstrated exceptional capability in modeling multimodal data. Our work aims to unify both driving
model simulation and trajectory planning into a single sequence modeling problem. We introduce a multimodal driving language based on interleaved image and action tokens,
and develop DrivingGPT to learn joint world modeling and
planning through standard next-token prediction. Our DrivingGPT demonstrates strong performance in both actionconditioned video generation and end-to-end planning in
the VQ token space for the first time, outperforming strong
baselines on large-scale nuPlan and NAVSIM benchmarks.

1. Introduction

26890

Driving world models [19, 27, 31, 61, 64, 75] have gained
significant attention as model-based searching and planning
are widely considered essential paths toward human-level
physical intelligence [34]. These models serve multiple
purposes, including training data augmentation, rare scenario generation, and contingency planning. Most current
world models are developed by fine-tuning existing diffusion models [1, 47], leveraging the generalization capabilities of video generation foundation models. Control signals—such as text, layout, and driving maneuvers—are incorporated through two main approaches: cross-attention
between spatial features of diffusion models [36] and control signal features, or channel-level feature modulation
techniques like AdaLN [43] and FiLM [44].
Despite advances in driving world models, a fundamen-

