This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoOrion: Tokenizing Object Dynamics in Videos
Yicheng Feng1† Yijiang Li2† Wanpeng Zhang1 Sipeng Zheng4
Hao Luo1 Zihao Yue3 Zongqing Lu1,4‡
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, 2 University of California, San Diego,
3
Renmin University of China, 4 BeingBeyond
Object-level Details

token 1

token 2

…

Pooling
Q: What activity does the video depict?
VideoLLaMA2.1: The video shows a person
riding a three-wheeled scooter.
VideoOrion: The video depicts a person using a
red three-wheeled scooter to clean the floor
by attaching a mop to it.

Concat

…

Action-level Details
Q-Former
Q: What activity does the video depict?
VideoLLaMA2.1: The video shows a woman
performing a diving routine.
VideoOrion: The video depicts a woman in a
black swimsuit performing a backflip off a
diving board into a pool.

(a) VideoOrion capturing more details

…

Ours

(b) Performance on
finer details and object tasks

(c) Entangled v.s. disentangled
visual representation

Figure 1. With explicit modeling of object dynamics, VideoOrion can (a) grasp finer details (b) with understanding on object-related finegrained details. (c) Comparison with prior encoding including: (1) spatial pooling the whole frame into a single token; (2) concatenating
adjacent patch tokens into a single token; (3) Q-Former aggregates patch tokens with learnable queries. (4) VideoOrion with object tokens
providing disentangled semantics.

tics, VideoOrion not only offers a more natural and efficient way to derive compact, disentangled semantic representations but also enables explicit object modeling of video
content with minimal computational cost. Moreover, the introduced object tokens naturally allow VideoOrion to accomplish video-based referring tasks. Experimental results
show that VideoOrion can learn to make good use of the
object tokens, and achieves competitive results on both general video question answering and video-based referring
benchmarks.

Abstract
We present VideoOrion, a Video Large Language Model
(Video-LLM) that explicitly captures the key semantic information in videos—the spatial-temporal dynamics of objects throughout the videos. VideoOrion employs expert vision models to extract object dynamics through a detectsegment-track pipeline, encoding them into a set of object
tokens by aggregating spatial-temporal object features. Our
method addresses the persistent challenge in Video-LLMs
of efficiently compressing high-dimensional video data into
semantic tokens that are comprehensible to LLMs. Compared to prior methods which resort to downsampling the
original video or aggregating visual tokens using resamplers, leading to information loss and entangled seman-

1. Introduction

† Equal contribution.
‡ Correspondence to <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>

The remarkable performance of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [16, 48, 62] has spurred interest in extending these
models’ capabilities beyond text, which catalyzes the development of multi-modal large language models (MLLMs)
[4, 9, 36, 40, 60, 79, 81]. By integrating diverse modal-

20401

