This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S TABLE V IRTUAL C AMERA: Generative View Synthesis with Diffusion Models
Jensen (Jinghao) Zhou1,2,∗,† Hang Gao1,3,∗,†
Vikram Voleti1 Aaryaman Vasishta1 Chun-Han Yao1 Mark Boss1
Philip Torr2 Christian Rupprecht2 Varun Jampani1
1

Stability AI

2

3

University of Oxford

University of California, Berkeley

lily dragon

Abstract
We present S TABLE V IRTUAL C AMERA (S EVA), a generalist diffusion model that creates novel views of a scene,
given any number of input views and target cameras. Existing works struggle to generate either large viewpoint
changes or temporally smooth samples, while relying on
specific task configurations. Our approach overcomes these
limitations through simple model design, optimized training recipe, and flexible sampling strategy that generalize
across view synthesis tasks at test time. As a result, our
samples maintain high consistency without requiring additional 3D representation-based distillation, thus streamlining view synthesis in the wild. Furthermore, we show
that our method can generate high-quality videos lasting
up to half a minute with seamless loop closure. Extensive
benchmarking demonstrates that S EVA outperforms existing methods across different datasets and settings.

1. Introduction

x9

Figure 1. Generative view synthesis. S TABLE V IRTUAL C AM ERA generates novel views from any number of input views and
target cameras, which the user can specify anywhere. We show
three examples: single view with simple orbit camera trajectory
(top); two views with long camera trajectory (middle); and nine
views with large spatial range (bottom). Please refer to the supplementary webpage and video for the video results.

cessitating additional NeRF distillation to fuse inconsistent
results into a coherent representation [7, 8, 13]. These limitations hinder their applicability across diverse NVS tasks,
which we address in this work.
We present S TABLE V IRTUAL C AMERA1 (S EVA), a
diffusion-based NVS model that generalizes across a spectrum of view synthesis tasks without requiring NeRF distillation. With a single network, S EVA generates high-quality
novel views that strike both large viewpoint changes and
temporal smoothness while supporting any number of input and target views. Our approach simplifies the NVS
pipeline without requiring distillation from a 3D representation, thus streamlining it for real-world applications. For
the first time, we demonstrate high-quality videos lasting up
to half a minute with precise camera control and seamless
loop closure in 3D. We highlight these results in Fig. 1 and

Novel view synthesis (NVS) aims to generate realistic, 3Dconsistent images of a scene from arbitrary camera viewpoints given any number of camera-posed input views. Traditional methods, which rely on dense input views, treat
NVS as a 3D reconstruction and rendering problem [1–
3], but this approach fails with sparse inputs. Generative
view synthesis addresses this limitation by leveraging modern deep network priors [4, 5], enabling immersive 3D interactions in uncontrolled environments without the need to
capture large image sets per scene. In this work, we focus
on generative view synthesis and, unless otherwise specified, refer to it simply as NVS for clarity.
Despite recent progress [6–12], NVS in the wild remains
limited due to two key challenges: First, existing methods
struggle to generate both large viewpoint changes [9, 10]
and temporally smooth samples [6–8, 13] while being constrained by rigid task configurations, such as a fixed number
of input and target views [7, 9, 11, 12], reviewed in Tab. 1.
Second, their sampling consistency is often insufficient, ne-

12405

1 We are naming this model in tribute to the Virtual Camera [14] cinematography technology, a pre-visualization technique to simulate realworld camera movements.

