This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FDPT: Federated Discrete Prompt Tuning for Black-Box Visual-Language
Models
Jiaqi Wu1,8,10† , Simin Chen2† , Jing Tang3 , Yuzhe YANG4 , Yiming Chen5 , Lixu Wang6 , Song Lin7 ,
Zehua Wang8,9 , Wei Chen9∗ , and Zijian Tian10
1
4

Tsinghua University, 2 University of Texas at Dallas, 3 Huazhong University of Science and Technology,

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 National University of Singapore, 6 Nanyang Technological University,
7
9

Beijing Baidu Netcom Science Technology Co., Ltd., 8 University of British Columbia,

China University of Mining and Technology, 10 China University of Mining and Technology (Beijing)

wjq11346@student.ubc.ca, sxc180080@utdallas.edu, focusers@163.com, yuzheyang@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
yiming.chen@u.nus.edu, wanglixu4334@gmail.com, linsong04@baidu.com, zwang@ece.ubc.ca,
chenwdavior@163.com, Tianzj0726@126.com

Abstract

proved robustness to data heterogeneity.

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have driven significant
advancements in multimodal AI. Fine-tuning these models with user data enhances adaptability but poses privacy risks. While federated learning (FL) mitigates user
data privacy concerns, it fails to protect model properties. Existing methods relying on black-box VLM APIs often require access to prediction logits, making them vulnerable to inversion attacks. Additionally, optimizing tuning complexity and data transmission efficiency in federated VLM scenarios remains a challenge. To address these
challenges, we propose FDPT—the first federated discrete
prompt tuning method utilizing black-box VLMs. During
client optimization stage, FDPT employs an agent-driven
framework leveraging large language models (LLMs) with
enhanced reasoning capacities to systematically optimize
discrete prompt representations, and also utilizes feedback
mechanisms and chain of thought to enhance prediction accuracy. Importantly, it performs optimization by relying not
on the predicted logic vectors output by LLMs but on textual results, avoiding reverse attack risks. During global
aggregation stage, We mimic human electoral activities by
employing evolutionary computation methods underpinned
by semantic similarity computation to implement enhanced
zero-order optimization for acquiring representative global
tokens, thereby achieving knowledge aggregation. FDPT
significantly outperforms nine state-of-the-art methods in
image classification and visual question-answering, reducing communication overhead while generating highly transferable optimized prompts. Additionally, it exhibits im-

1. Introduction
General-purpose Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [45] integrate vast visual and linguistic information, advancing
various vision tasks [36]. To better adapt to user needs,
these models can undergo fine-tuning or prompt-tuning
[27], but such modifications introduce privacy risks [13, 18,
34, 38]. Federated Learning (FL) [22] addresses these concerns by decentralizing data storage, reducing single-point
breaches, and exchanging model weights or embeddings instead of raw data. Various FL-based approaches [19, 29, 39]
have been explored for tuning large models, effectively preserving user data privacy.
Despite the success of FL, protecting the privacy of
VLMs themselves remains a critical yet largely unexplored
challenge. Existing FL approaches use zero-order optimization to estimate gradients for prompt tuning on black-box
VLMs [31, 41]. For example, FedBPT [31] employs prompt
exchange and gradient-free optimization, reducing communication and memory costs by avoiding direct parameter access and backpropagation on client devices. However, several limitations remain. First, these methods remain vulnerable to security risks as they rely on prediction logits, exposing them to inversion attacks that can infer model parameters [7, 47]. Second, zero-order optimization techniques
[31, 41] often suffer from limited accuracy and adaptability
in prompt fine-tuning. Finally, soft prompt methods [15, 46]
lack interpretability and incur high communication costs in
federated settings.
To address these challenges, we propose FDPT, the first

† Equal contribution
* Corresponding author

2461

