This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoRA.rar: Learning to Merge LoRAs via Hypernetworks for
Subject-Style Conditioned Image Generation
Mete Ozay♢
Donald Shenaj♢,♠, * Ondrej Bohdal♢
♢
Samsung R&D Institute UK (SRUK)

Pietro Zanuttigh♠
Umberto Michieli♢
♠
University of Padova

Abstract
Recent advancements in image generation models have enabled personalized image creation with both user-defined
subjects (content) and styles. Prior works achieved personalization by merging corresponding low-rank adapters (LoRAs) through optimization-based methods, which are computationally demanding and unsuitable for real-time use on
resource-constrained devices like smartphones. To address
this, we introduce LoRA.rar, a method that not only improves
image quality but also achieves a remarkable speedup of
over 4000× in the merging process. We collect a dataset
of style and subject LoRAs and pre-train a hypernetwork
on a diverse set of content-style LoRA pairs, learning an
efficient merging strategy that generalizes to new, unseen
content-style pairs, enabling fast, high-quality personalization. Moreover, we identify limitations in existing evaluation
metrics for content-style quality and propose a new protocol
using multimodal large language models (MLLMs) for more
accurate assessment. Our method significantly outperforms
the current state of the art in both content and style fidelity,
as validated by MLLM assessments and human evaluations.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We address the problem of joint content-style image
generation by combining content and style LoRAs. Our method,
LoRA.rar, uses a hypernetwork to dynamically predict the merging
coefficients needed to combine content and style LoRAs. This
enables high-quality, real-time LoRA merging. To evaluate the
quality of the generated images, we propose a new MLLM protocol,
which judges the fidelity of both content preservation and style
transfer. The figure shows sample outputs generated by LoRA.rar.

The advent of text-to-image generation models based on denoising diffusion [20] allowed for significant improvements
in output quality. Furthermore, recently there has been growing interest in personalized image generation [36, 38], where
users can generate images that depict particular subjects or
styles by providing just a few reference images.
A key enabler of this personalization breakthrough is
LoRA (Low-Rank Adapter), a parameter-efficient adaptation
module introduced in [21], which enables high-quality efficient personalization using only a small number of training
samples. This innovation has spurred extensive model sharing on open-source platforms like Civitai [8] and Hugging
Face [22], making pre-trained LoRA parameters (LoRAs)
* Research completed during internship at Samsung R&D Institute UK.
Project page: https://donaldssh.github.io/LoRA.rar.

readily available. The accessibility of these models has fueled interest in combining them to create images of personal
subjects in various styles. For instance, users might apply a
concept (i.e., subject) LoRA trained on a few photos of their
pet, and combine it with a downloaded style LoRA to render
their pet in an artistic style of their choice.
Averaging LoRAs can work acceptably when subject and
style share significant visual characteristics, but fine-tuning
of merging coefficients (i.e., coefficients used to combine
LoRAs) is typically required for more distinct subjects and
styles. ZipLoRA [38] introduces an approach that directly
optimizes merging coefficients through a customized objective function tailored to each subject-style LoRA combina-

16132

