This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RobAVA: A Large-scale Dataset and Baseline Towards Video based Robotic Arm
Action Understanding
Baoli Sun1† , Ning Wang1† , Xinzhu Ma2 , Anqi Zou1 , Yihang Lu1 , Chuixuan Fan1 ,
Zhihui Wang1 ,* Kun Lu1 , Zhiyong Wang3
1
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
baoli@mail.dlut.edu.cn, nwang@dlut.edu.cn, zhwang@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Understanding the behaviors of robotic arms is essential for various robotic applications such as logistics management and automated manufacturing. However, the lack
of large-scale and diverse datasets significantly hinders
progress in video-based robotic arm action understanding.In particular, our RobAVA contains 40k video sequences with video-level fine-grained annotations, covering basic actions such as picking, pushing, and placing, as
well as their combinations in different orders and interactions with various objects. Distinguished to existing action
recognition benchmarks, RobAVA includes instances of both
normal and anomalous executions for each action category.
The main challenge in robotic arm action recognition is that
a complete action is composed of fundamental, atomic behaviors, requiring models to learn their inter-relationships.
To this end, we propose a novel baseline approach, AGPTNet, which re-defines the problem of understanding robotic
arm actions as a task of aligning video sequences with
atomic attributes. To enhance AGPT-Net’s ability to distinguish normal and anomalous action instances, we introduce a joint semantic space constraint between category and attribute semantics, thereby amplifying the separation between normal and anomalous attribute representations for each action. We conduct extensive experiments
to demonstrate AGPT-Net’s superiority over other mainstream recognition models. Please see the project page at
https://github.com/Sunbaoli/RobAVA.

based models like TAM [33], ViViT [3], and Uniformer
[28], have been primarily driven by large-scale benchmarks
such as Kinetics [5] and Something-Something [20]. For
robots, accurate perception of actions via cameras is important to make reasonable downstream planning [26, 42, 46]
and subsequent action decisions [6, 23, 32]. However,
robotic action video understanding remains relatively underexplored, mainly due to the lack of large-scale datasets.
Robotic arms, whether as standalone robotic devices or
components of larger systems, often carry out the majority
of a robot’s actions due to their versatility, precision, and
ability to perform repetitive and complex tasks. Robotic
arm video action recognition (RVAR) is the process of identifying and classifying specific activities or actions performed by robotic arms. Action recognition is crucial for
enabling robotic arms to understand their environments, interact efficiently with objects, and autonomously execute
complex, multi-step tasks. By collecting large-scale data
to train vision-based models and harnessing the powerful
fitting capabilities of neural networks, it becomes possible
to effectively recognize robotic arm behaviors. However,
the scarcity of existing datasets has hindered the progress
of RVAR. This challenge has motivated us to create a comprehensive, large-scale RVAR dataset.

1. Introduction

In this work, to facilitate the future research, we present
RobAVA: a large-scale dataset for robotic arm video action
understanding (shown in Figure 1). Specifically, RobAVA
has the following distinctive features: (1) Extensive video
instances: RobAVA includes two subsets, RobAVA-S and
RobAVA-R, sourced from simulated environments and realworld scenarios, respectively. The proposed dataset comprises approximately 40,000 video sequences, each annotated at the video-level for detailed robotic arm action
recognition. (2) Diverse action categories: The video sequences in RobAVA span a broad range of basic actions,
such as picking, placing, dragging, moving, stacking, and

The significant advancements in human action recognition,
especially the creation of numerous foundational, vision* Corresponding author. † Contributed equally to this work.

13985

