This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Learning of Hybrid Part-aware 3D Representations
of 2D Gaussians and Superquadrics
Zhirui Gao

Renjiao Yi† Yuhang Huang Wei Chen Chenyang Zhu
National University of Defense Technology
zhirui-gao.github.io/PartGS

Abstract
Low-level 3D representations, such as point clouds, meshes,
NeRFs and 3D Gaussians, are commonly used for modeling
3D objects and scenes. However, cognitive studies indicate
that human perception operates at higher levels and interprets 3D environments by decomposing them into meaningful
structural parts, rather than low-level elements like points or
voxels. Structured geometric decomposition enhances scene
interpretability and facilitates downstream tasks requiring
component-level manipulation. In this work, we introduce
PartGS, a self-supervised part-aware reconstruction framework that integrates 2D Gaussians and superquadrics to
parse objects and scenes into an interpretable decomposition,
leveraging multi-view image inputs to uncover 3D structural
information. Our method jointly optimizes superquadric
meshes and Gaussians by coupling their parameters within
a hybrid representation. On one hand, superquadrics enable
the representation of a wide range of shape primitives, facilitating flexible and meaningful decompositions. On the other
hand, 2D Gaussians capture detailed texture and geometric details, ensuring high-fidelity appearance and geometry
reconstruction. Operating in a self-supervised manner, our
approach demonstrates superior performance compared to
state-of-the-art methods across extensive experiments on the
DTU, ShapeNet, and real-world datasets.

Point cloud input

Multi-view image inputs

3D decomposition

Block-level

Kai Xu†

3D decomposition

Rendered image

Prior work (DBW)

Prior work (EMS)

Point-level

Rendered image

Ours

Figure 1. Prior works [32, 36] model the scene using primitives,
while the proposed method can further model precise geometry
details and textures. Here, EMS [32] takes point cloud inputs and
reconstructs non-textured primitives.

that decomposes objects or scenes into meaningful shapes or
parts, facilitating tasks such as physical simulation, editing,
content generation and understanding [18, 28, 52, 53, 56].
Several prior works [29, 32, 33, 37, 55, 68] have explored
part-aware reconstruction or 3D decomposition. However,
most of them rely heavily on 3D supervision and often
struggle to retain fine-grained geometric details, limiting
their practicality in real-world scenarios. Recent advances
[47, 65] have focused on extending the neural radiance field
framework for part-aware reconstruction, building upon its
remarkable success in 3D reconstruction from multi-view
images. For example, PartNeRF [47] models objects using
multiple neural radiance fields. Yet, the intricate composition
of implicit fields complicates the learning process, leading
to suboptimal rendering quality and inefficient decomposition. Recently, DBW [36] proposes a novel approach that
decomposes scenes into block-based representations using
superquadric primitives [2], optimizing both their parameters
and UV texture maps through rendering loss minimization.
While this method demonstrates effective scene decomposition into coherent components, it faces challenges in achieving accurate part-aware reconstruction of both geometry and
appearance, as illustrated in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from multi-view images is a long-standing
challenge in 3D vision and graphics [12, 17, 54]. Most reconstructed scenes are in low-level representations such as point
clouds, voxels, or meshes. However, humans tend to understand 3D scenes as reasonable parts [35]. For instance, when
observing a scene, we naturally construct high-level structural information, such as scene graphs, instead of focusing
on low-level details like point clouds or voxels. Motivated
by it, we propose a part-aware reconstruction framework
† Corresponding authors

9649

