This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Details Matter for Indoor Open-vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation
Sanghun Jung1,2† Jingjing Zheng2 Ke Zhang2 Nan Qiao2 Albert Y. C. Chen2 Lu Xia2 Chi Liu2
Yuyin Sun2 Xiao Zeng2 Hsiang-Wei Huang1 Byron Boots1 Min Sun2,3 Cheng-Hao Kuo2
1

University of Washington

2

Amazon Lab126

3

National Tsing Hua University

Abstract
Unlike closed-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation that is
often trained end-to-end, open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation (OV-3DIS) often leverages vision-language models (VLMs) to generate 3D instance proposals and classify
them. While various concepts have been proposed from existing research, we observe that these individual concepts
are not mutually exclusive but complementary. In this paper, we propose a new state-of-the-art solution for OV-3DIS
by carefully designing a recipe to combine the concepts together and refining them to address key challenges. Our
solution follows the two-stage scheme: 3D proposal generation and instance classification. We employ robust 3D
tracking-based proposal aggregation to generate 3D proposals and remove overlapped or partial proposals by iterative merging/removal. For the classification stage, we
replace the standard CLIP model with Alpha-CLIP, which
incorporates object masks as an alpha channel to reduce
background noise and obtain object-centric representation.
Additionally, we introduce the standardized maximum similarity (SMS) score to normalize text-to-proposal similarity,
effectively filtering out false positives and boosting precision. Our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance
on ScanNet200 and S3DIS across all AP and AR metrics,
even surpassing an end-to-end closed-vocabulary method.

Drink Water

Red Chair

Heat Mac & Cheese

Figure 1. Examples of open-vocabulary predictions from our
method in the ScanNet200 dataset [7]. Our method effectively
retrieves instances based on functional descriptions (e.g., drink
water, heat mac & cheese) and object attributes (e.g., red chair).

dicted proposals into open-vocabulary queries. While some
works [2, 49] directly generate 3D proposals from point
clouds using pretrained 3D networks [38, 45], other approaches [39, 57, 63] generate 3D proposals from images.
For 3D proposal generation from images, they leverage vision foundation models (VFMs) [33, 43, 66] to ground object regions in each image frame. Each object region is then
lifted to 3D point clouds and temporally aggregated across
frames to find complete 3D masks.
While there have been various efforts based on this
scheme, e.g., agglomerative clustering [39], progressive region growing [63], and graph clustering [57], these individual concepts are not mutually exclusive but complementary. This paper carefully combines the concepts and refines
each step to address key challenges, achieving state-of-theart (SoTA) performance in existing benchmarks. We generate 3D proposals from both images (i.e., image-based 3D
proposals) and aggregated point clouds (i.e., point cloudbased 3D proposals). Image-based 3D proposal generation [37, 39, 63] involves many design choices in three
steps: 1) frame-wise 2D object grounding, 2) lifting 2D
predictions to 3D point clouds, and 3) 3D proposal aggregation across frames to find complete 3D masks. Finally,
CLIP-based models [42] are used to classify the 3D proposals [39, 49, 57].
While we adopt this general paradigm, we refine each
stage to effectively handle missing details in the existing
literature. Also, we devise an additional iterative merging
and removal step at the end of the proposal generation to
suppress overlapped or partial proposals.
2D Object Grounding. We observe two representative
types of wrong object predictions from VFMs: masks cover-

1. Introduction
The task of OV-3DIS [2, 8, 9, 22, 39, 49, 57, 59, 63] aims
to predict 3D masks for individual objects in a 3D point
cloud scene given open-vocabulary text queries (Fig. 1).
OV-3DIS has diverse applications across domains, such
as robotics, augmented reality, scene understanding, and
3D visual search. For example, in robotic tasks like indoor navigation and object manipulation, interpreting openvocabulary queries and localizing corresponding objects in
a 3D environment are crucial for effective performance.
Efforts have been made to tackle the task of OV-3DIS.
A two-staged paradigm has been widely adopted across
various works [2, 39, 49, 57]. They first generate the
class-agnostic 3D proposals and then classify the pre† The work is done during the internship at Amazon Lab126.

9627

