This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Multimodal Large Language Models Against Image Corruptions
Xinkuan Qiu1,3,5 ,* Meina Kan2 , Yongbin Zhou1,4 , Shiguang Shan2
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100085, China

2
3
4

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China

School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, China
5

State Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense, Beijing, 100085, China

qiuxinkuan@iie.ac.cn, {kanmeina, sgshan}@ict.ac.cn, zhouyongbin@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

However, despite their impressive performance on standard, uncorrupted data, these models exhibit notable limitations in robustness when confronted with corrupted images
[8, 24, 33, 40]. This issue raises concerns regarding their
reliability in safety-critical applications. For instance, monitoring systems could be compromised by adverse weather
conditions such as rain or snow, while autonomous driving systems could struggle with challenges like motion blur.
Therefore, it is essential to evaluate the performance and
analyze the robustness of MLLMs under image corruption
scenarios from both theoretical and practical perspectives.
In this paper, we introduce the MLLM-IC (Multimodal Large Language Model-Image Corruption) benchmark, specifically designed to address the challenges associated with image corruption. MLLM-IC features carefully structured three-level hierarchies for both MLLM
capabilities and image corruption types, enabling multidimensional assessments of robustness and facilitating a
more granular evaluation of model performance.
We then evaluate the corruption robustness of MLLMs
using the MLLM-IC benchmark, leading to four key findings: (1) MLLMs are significantly affected by image corruption; (2) Under image corruption, MLLMs exhibit lower
absolute performance in capabilities such as spatial perception and knowledge reasoning, whereas demonstrate relatively higher performance in tasks like instance recognition, global context sensing, and logical reasoning; (3)
MLLMs perform excellently in handling geometric transformations, color perturbations, occlusion, and weather effects, but struggle with blur and compression corruptions;
(4) MLLMs exhibit varying sensitivity to increased corruption severity across corruption dimensions, whereas this
trend is not observed across capability dimensions.
To the best of our knowledge, MLLM-IC is the most
comprehensive benchmark for evaluating image corruption robustness. We hope that this benchmark, along with
our findings, will contribute to a deeper understanding of

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have made
significant strides in visual and language tasks. However,
despite their impressive performance on standard datasets,
these models encounter considerable robustness challenges
when processing corrupted images, raising concerns about
their reliability in safety-critical applications. To address
this issue, we introduce the MLLM-IC benchmark, specifically designed to assess the performance of MLLMs under
image corruption scenarios. MLLM-IC offers a more comprehensive evaluation of corruption robustness, enabling a
multi-dimensional assessment of various MLLM capabilities across a broad range of corruption types. It includes 40
distinct corruption types and 34 low-level multimodal capabilities, each organized into a three-level hierarchical structure. Notably, it is the first corruption robustness benchmark designed to facilitate the evaluation of fine-grained
MLLM capabilities. We further evaluate several prominent
MLLMs and derive valuable insights into their characteristics. We believe the MLLM-IC benchmark will provide crucial insights into the robustness of MLLMs in handling corrupted images and contribute to the development of more
resilient MLLMs. Dataset and evaluation code are available at https://github.com/EdyQiu/MLLM-IC/

1. Introduction
In recent years, Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) have achieved significant progress in visual and
language tasks, such as image captioning, visual question
answering and cross-modal retrieval, demonstrating broad
applicability across various domains [15, 27, 34, 35, 37].
* This work was carried out during Xinkuan Qiu’s visiting period at
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

9014

