This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Rectified Flow with Boundary Conditions
Xixi Hu1,2 ,* Runlong Liao1 ,* Keyang Xu2 ,
Bo Liu1 , Yeqing Li2 , Eugene Ie2 , Hongliang Fei2 and Qiang Liu1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Google
{hxixi,liaorl,bliu,lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu

{keyangxu,yeqing,eugeneie,hongliangfei}@google.com

Abstract

Left Boundary Condition

Rectified Flow offers a simple and effective approach to
high-quality generative modeling by learning a velocity
field. However, we identify a limitation in directly modeling the velocity with an unconstrained neural network:
the learned velocity often fails to satisfy certain boundary
conditions, leading to inaccurate velocity field estimations
that deviate from the desired ODE. This issue is particularly
critical during stochastic sampling at inference, as the score
function’s errors are amplified near the boundary. To mitigate this, we propose a Boundary-enforced Rectified Flow
Model (Boundary RF Model), in which we enforce boundary conditions with a minimal code modification. Boundary
RF Model improves performance over vanilla RF model,
demonstrating 8.01% improvement in FID score on ImageNet using ODE sampling and 8.98% improvement using
SDE sampling.

Noise

Velocity Field

Right Boundary Condition

Data

Predicted
Velocity

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Boundary condition violation in Rectified Flow: predicted vs. expected velocity. Vanilla Rectified Flow model learns
a velocity field v(x, t) to transform noise (left, t = 0) into data
(right, t = 1). Ideally, this learned velocity field should satisfy
defined boundary condition (top). However, as visualized, the predicted velocity at t = 1 (bottom) deviates from the expected data
distribution and violate the right boundary condition v(x, t) = x.
This highlights a critical practical limitation of vanilla RF model.
Please refer to Appendix A.2 for more examples.

Diffusion models have achieved significant success as a
powerful class of generative models, demonstrating impressive results across various domains [12, 37, 38]. More recently, flow-based generative models have emerged as a
compelling alternative for generative modeling [1, 10, 21,
25]. Within this family of flow-based models, Rectified
Flow (RF) [23, 25], also known as Flow Matching [1, 21]
stands out by formulating generative modeling as solving
an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) that transforms a
noise distribution into the target data distribution.
The core of RF lies in learning a velocity field that governs this continuous transformation. This is achieved by
modeling a linear interpolation between the noise and data
distributions along the defined trajectory. During inference,
novel data samples are synthesized through numerical integration of this learned ODE, taking advantage of the powerful generalization capabilities of deep neural networks
* Equal contribution

in high-dimensional spaces. Recent advances have showcased the remarkable scalability of RF in complex generation tasks, including text-to-image and video generation,
yielding compelling results [7, 18, 31]. Furthermore, the
inherent property of RF to encourage straighter trajectories
enables efficient numerical discretization, such as with Euler samplers, leading to accelerated sampling speeds – a crucial advantage for practical deployment.
Despite these advances, we observe a critical limitation
when training RF models in practice: the learned velocity
field often exhibits suboptimal behavior, particularly in violating a set of theoretically derived boundaries as shown
in Figure 1 (upper panel). For example, it is theoretically
expected that the velocity field reduces to the identity map

18177

