This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedPall: Prototype-based Adversarial and Collaborative Learning for Federated
Learning with Feature Drift
Yong Zhang1, 3 , Feng Liang1 *, Guanghu Yuan1 , Min Yang2 , Chengming Li1 and Xiping Hu1, 3 *
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University1
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences2
School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology3
{zhangyong2023@bit.edu.cn, fliang@smbu.edu.cn, yuangh@mail.ustc.edu.cn
min.yang@siat.ac.cn, licm@smbu.edu.cn, huxp@smbu.edu.cn}

Abstract

Client 1 Class 1
Client 2 Class 1

Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative training of a
global model in the centralized server with data from multiple parties while preserving privacy. However, data heterogeneity can significantly degrade the performance of the
global model when each party uses datasets from different
sources to train a local model, thereby affecting personalized local models. Among various cases of data heterogeneity, feature drift, feature space difference among parties, is prevalent in real-life data but remains largely unexplored. Feature drift can distract feature extraction learning in clients and thus lead to poor feature extraction and
classification performance. To tackle the problem of feature drift in FL, we propose FedPall, an FL framework that
utilizes prototype-based adversarial learning to unify feature spaces and collaborative learning to reinforce class information within the features. Moreover, FedPall leverages
mixed features generated from global prototypes and local
features to enhance the global classifier with classificationrelevant information from a global perspective. Evaluation results on three representative feature-drifted datasets
demonstrate FedPall’s consistently superior performance in
classification with feature-drifted data in the FL scenario.1

Client 1 Class 2
Client 2 Class 2

(a) Feature drift

(b) Traditional classification

(c) De-clientization

(d) Prototype contrastive

Figure 1. We show a schematic diagram of feature drift and use
different techniques to drive feature distribution to update in different directions.

privacy-preserving distributed learning paradigm to address
these challenges. In the FL paradigm, each party maintains
a local client model and collaborates with others to train a
global model on the server without sharing the original data,
effectively protecting user privacy.
Particularly, the FL paradigm faces challenges from data
heterogeneity [14]. Due to the limited local view of each
client, data distribution discrepancies arise across clients
(commonly referred to as the non-independent and identically distributed data issue, or non-independent and identically distributed(non-IID) data issue), which can increase
generalization error for local models and degrade the performance of the globally aggregated model [10]. Although
recent work on non-IID data in FL primarily addresses issues such as stability, client drift, and heterogeneous label
distributions among clients [11, 18, 31], feature drift(i.e.,

1. Introduction
Today, in computer vision, researchers often utilize large
amounts of data from various parties to improve the accuracy of algorithms. However, this raises concerns, such as
the potential for user privacy leakage caused by sharing private data [12]. Federated learning (FL) [22] is proposed as a
* Corresponding authors.
1 The code is available at https://github.com/DistriAI/

FedPall.

3111

