This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Orchid: Image Latent Diffusion for Joint Appearance and Geometry Generation
Akshay Krishnan1,2,* Xinchen Yan1 Vincent Casser3 Abhijit Kundu1
1
Google DeepMind, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology, 3 Waymo
https://orchid3d.github.io

Figure 1. We propose Orchid: a uniﬁed, multi-modal latent diffusion model that jointly generates color, depth, and surface normals. The
output color, depth, and normals are consistent with each other and can be seamlessly turned to 3D reconstructions using methods like
3DGS [24]. Orchid can generate 3D scenes from text (left), or from a single color image (center). Orchid captures joint appearance and
geometry prior which can be used to solve different 3D inverse problems e.g. inpaint incomplete 2.5D reconstructions (right).

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce Orchid, a uniﬁed latent diffusion model
that learns a joint appearance-geometry prior to generate color, depth, and surface normal images in a single
diffusion process. This uniﬁed approach is more efﬁcient
and coherent than current pipelines that use separate models for appearance and geometry. Orchid is versatile—it
directly generates color, depth, and normal images from
text, supports joint monocular depth and normal estimation with color-conditioned ﬁnetuning, and seamlessly inpaints large 3D regions by sampling from the joint distribution. It leverages a novel Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
that jointly encodes RGB, relative depth, and surface normals into a shared latent space, combined with a latent
diffusion model that denoises these latents. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate that Orchid delivers competitive
performance against SOTA task-speciﬁc methods for geometry prediction, even surpassing them in normal-prediction
accuracy and depth-normal consistency. It also inpaints
color-depth-normal images jointly, with more qualitative
realism than existing multi-step methods.
* Work done as an intern at Google DeepMind

Imagine that you are planning to paint a beautiful picture
of a café. You would not simply start painting—you would
ﬁrst sketch out the space, mapping the layout of seating areas, considering the slopes of the ﬂoor and walls, and capturing how light and shadow create the illusion of depth.
This natural, integrated understanding of appearance and
geometry underpins creative processes in almost every domain from architecture to video game development. Similarly, this joint prior of appearance and geometry is key
for deep generative models to produce seamless 3D scenes,
opening up transformative possibilities in VR [45, 50], animation [43], and robotics [1, 5, 14]. Although current 2D
diffusion models excel at creating high-quality images from
a rich appearance prior, we still face challenges in jointly
modeling appearance and geometry, largely due to the limited scale of 3D datasets.
A viable option for the task of generating images along
with its 3D geometry is to ﬁrst generate a color image using a standalone color image generation model, followed
by separate monocular depth and normal models. However,

28217

