This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CanonSwap: High-Fidelity and Consistent Video Face Swapping via Canonical
Space Modulation
Xiangyang Luo1,2∗ Ye Zhu2† Yunfei Liu2 Lijian Lin2 Cong Wan3 Zijian Cai3
Yu Li2‡ Shao-Lun Huang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA) 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University

CanonSwap

Soure Image

Figure 1. CanonSwap decouples motion information from appearance by first transforming the target video into a canonical space for face
swapping, then reintroducing its original motion. This process ensures stable, temporally consistent results while accurately preserving
motion alignment.

Abstract
Video face swapping aims to address two primary challenges: effectively transferring the source identity to the target video and accurately preserving the dynamic attributes
of the target face, such as head poses, facial expressions,
lip-sync, etc. Existing methods mainly focus on achieving
high-quality identity transfer but often fall short in maintaining the dynamic attributes of the target face, leading
to inconsistent results. We attribute this issue to the inherent coupling of facial appearance and motion in videos. To
address this, we propose CanonSwap, a novel video faceswapping framework that decouples motion information
from appearance information. Specifically, CanonSwap
first eliminates motion-related information, enabling identity modification within a unified canonical space. Subsequently, the swapped feature is reintegrated into the original
video space, ensuring the preservation of the target face’s

dynamic attributes. To further achieve precise identity
transfer with minimal artifacts and enhanced realism, we
design a Partial Identity Modulation module that adaptively
integrates source identity features using a spatial mask to
restrict modifications to facial regions. Additionally, we
introduce several fine-grained synchronization metrics to
comprehensively evaluate the performance of video face
swapping methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method significantly outperforms existing approaches
in terms of visual quality, temporal consistency, and identity preservation. Our project page are publicly available at
https://luoxyhappy.github.io/CanonSwap/.

∗ Intern at IDEA. ‡ Project lead.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding authors.

With the rapid advancement of digital media technology,
video face swapping has garnered considerable attention
across a wide range of applications, including entertainment [28], film production [1], and privacy protection [10,

10064

