This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicDrive-V2: High-Resolution Long Video Generation
for Autonomous Driving with Adaptive Control
Ruiyuan Gao1 , Kai Chen2 , Bo Xiao3 , Lanqing Hong4 , Zhenguo Li4 , Qiang Xu1
1
CUHK 2 HKUST 3 Huawei Cloud 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{rygao,qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, kai.chen@connect.ust.hk,
{xiaobo15,honglanqing,li.zhenguo}@huawei.com
Resolution Comparison

Abstract
The rapid advancement of diffusion models has greatly
improved video synthesis, especially in controllable video
generation, which is vital for applications like autonomous
driving. Although DiT with 3D VAE has become a standard
framework for video generation, it introduces challenges in
controllable driving video generation, especially for framewise geometric control, rendering existing methods ineffective. To address these issues, we propose MagicDriveV2, a novel approach that integrates the MVDiT block
and spatial-temporal conditional encoding to enable multiview video generation and precise geometric control. Additionally, we introduce an efficient method for obtaining contextual descriptions for videos to support diverse
textual control, along with a progressive training strategy using mixed video data to enhance training efficiency
and generalizability. Consequently, MagicDrive-V2 enables multi-view driving video synthesis with 3.3× resolution and 4× frame count (compared to current SOTA), rich
contextual control, and geometric controls. Extensive experiments demonstrate MagicDrive-V2’s ability, unlocking
broader applications in autonomous driving. Project page:
flymin.github.io/magicdrive-v2/

DriveDreamer
128×192

GAIA-1
225×512

MagicDrive
224×400×6

Vista
576×1024

MagicDrive-V2 848×1600×6
Vista 25 fr.
GAIA-1 26 fr.
DriveDreamer 32 fr.
MagicDrive 60 fr.

Frame Count Comparison
(1 inference only)

MagicDrive-V2 241 fr.

Figure 1. MagicDrive-V2 generates high-resolution and long
videos with multi-view and control supports, significantly exceeding the limitation of previous works [12, 13, 16, 36].

1. Introduction

The introduction of DiT [29, 47] and 3D VAE [43, 47]
has substantially alleviated these challenges. 3D VAE
reduces computational overhead by performing spatialtemporal compression, effectively decreasing the computational cost of video generation by an order of magnitude.
DiT enables quality improvements in generation with more
model parameters and extensive data. Consequently, many
text-to-video methods leverage DiT with 3D VAE for highquality generation [43, 47]. However, autonomous driving
requires multi-view generation with geometry control. How
to effectively leverage the DiT with 3D VAE to achieve such
controllable generation remains an open problem.

The rapid advancements in diffusion models and controllable generation has substantially broadened its range of applications [20, 38]. Especially for autonomous driving, controllable generation of high-resolution and long videos has
become a critical research focus [27, 42]. High resolution
facilitates the identification of fine details [22], while long
videos provide richer interaction for evaluating and improving algorithms [42]. These capabilities are indispensable for
enhancing the performance and reliability of autonomous
systems [12, 36]. However, due to limitations in model scalability and the compression capability of VAEs [2, 31], existing methods [12, 13] are significantly constrained by both
resolution and frame count, as shown in Figure 1.

28135

One of the most critical issue from controllable generation in autonomous driving is geometry control, which involves the positioning of objects and the road structures.
These geometric conditions are typically time-dependent,
meaning they correspond to individual video frames in a
one-to-one manner. With 2D VAEs [2, 31], this characteristic allows control methods designed for images [44] to be
seamlessly extended to video generation [12]. However,
3D VAE [43, 47] disrupts this alignment, as illustrated in

