This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D NUT: A Decoder-Only Model for Trajectory Prediction
Markus Knoche1
1

Daan de Geus1,2

RWTH Aachen University

2

Bastian Leibe1

Eindhoven University of Technology

vision.rwth-aachen.de/donut

Abstract

history
t0 t1 t2

Predicting the motion of other agents in a scene is highly
relevant for autonomous driving, as it allows a self-driving
car to anticipate. Inspired by the success of decoderonly models for language modeling, we propose DONUT, a
Decoder-Only Network for Unrolling Trajectories. Unlike
existing encoder-decoder forecasting models, we encode
historical trajectories and predict future trajectories with a
single autoregressive model. This allows the model to make
iterative predictions in a consistent manner, and ensures
that the model is always provided with up-to-date information, thereby enhancing performance. Furthermore, inspired by multi-token prediction for language modeling, we
introduce an ‘overprediction’ strategy that gives the model
the auxiliary task of predicting trajectories at longer temporal horizons. This allows the model to better anticipate the
future and further improves performance. Through experiments, we demonstrate that our decoder-only approach outperforms the encoder-decoder baseline, and achieves new
state-of-the-art results on the Argoverse 2 single-agent motion forecasting benchmark.

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting is a crucial task for autonomous driving. By predicting the future trajectories of agents in a
scene, a self-driving car can anticipate and adjust its behavior. To forecast agents’ motion accurately, a model needs
to take into account the geometry of the surrounding road,
the presence of other agents, and an agent’s historical behavior. For this purpose, most recent motion-forecasting
works [19, 35, 41, 51, 55] employ a model with two different modules (Fig. 1a): (1) an encoder that embeds the
historical trajectories into a latent space while considering
the road layout and agent interactions, and (2) a decoder
that takes these historical embeddings and predicts the future trajectories, again taking into account road geometry
and agent interactions. While these encoder-decoder methods obtain impressive results, we posit that a decoder-only

28903

Encoder

history
t0 t1 t2 t̂3 t̂4

Decoder

t̂3 t̂4 t̂5
prediction
(a) Encoder-decoder

DONUT

t̂3 t̂4 t̂5
prediction
(b) Decoder-only (ours)

Figure 1. Encoder-decoder vs. decoder-only methods for motion forecasting. In contrast to existing works, which use an
encoder-decoder architecture, DONUT uses a unified, autoregressive model to process agents’ historical and future trajectories.
This allows it to predict trajectories at different time steps in a
consistent manner and receive up-to-date information of relevant
scene elements, improving its performance.

model is better suited for this task, as it allows us to treat
historical and future trajectories in a unified manner.
In existing encoder-decoder methods, agents’ future trajectories are predicted by the decoder. Based on the historical embeddings generated by the encoder, the decoder typically predicts the future trajectory either (a) in its entirety,
in a single pass [19, 35, 41], or (b) recurrently [34, 37, 55].
Both of these configurations have limitations. When predicting the entire trajectory in a single pass, the network is
not adequately aware of the scene elements towards the end
of the predicted trajectories. We expect this to negatively
impact the accuracy of ‘far-future’ predictions, leading to
the use of anchors or goal points in some models to mitigate
this [22, 45, 46]. This limitation is addressed in part by using a recurrent method [55], where the decoder predicts future trajectories in an iterative manner, being updated about
relevant scene points for each future sub-prediction. However, the feature representation of input data received by this
decoder varies between different time steps, which unneces-

