This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text Embedding Knows How to Quantize Text-Guided Diffusion Models
Hongjae Lee

Myungjun Son
Dongjea Kang
Korea University

Seung-Won Jung *

{jimmy9704, sonbill, kedjk11, swjung83}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

plexity and high memory consumption.
Besides other approaches toward light-weight network
designs, such as network architecture search [8, 28], network pruning [12, 50], and knowledge distillation [23, 56],
network quantization has received particular attention due
to its simplicity, the increasing demand for low-precision
operations, and related hardware support [9, 55, 58]. Although various network quantization methods have been
proposed for convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the direct use of such methods for diffusion models has shown
significant performance degradation [45]. As tailored solutions for diffusion models, several methods have been
proposed considering the time step of diffusion models for
quantization. For example, PTQ4DM [45] performed 8-bit
quantization by constructing a calibration dataset based on
the time step. Q-Diffusion [24] introduced an advanced
method based on BRECQ [25] and performed the performance analysis of quantization methods for text-guided diffusion models. In addition, TDQ [47] performed quantization with varying activation scaling based on the diffusion time step. However, these methods do not use the text
prompt provided to the diffusion model as valuable information for quantization, leaving room for further improvement.

Despite the success of diffusion models in image generation tasks such as text-to-image, the enormous computational complexity of diffusion models limits their use in
resource-constrained environments. To address this, network quantization has emerged as a promising solution
for designing efficient diffusion models. However, existing diffusion model quantization methods do not consider
input conditions, such as text prompts, as an essential
source of information for quantization. In this paper, we
propose a novel quantization method dubbed Quantization
of Language-to-Image diffusion models using text Prompts
(QLIP). QLIP leverages text prompts to guide the selection
of bit precision for every layer at each time step. In addition, QLIP can be seamlessly integrated into existing quantization methods to enhance quantization efficiency. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of QLIP
in reducing computational complexity and improving the
quality of the generated images across various datasets.
The source code is available at our project page https:
//github.com/jimmy9704/QLIP.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in
various generative tasks, particularly in text-to-image generation [39, 40, 57]. However, the huge computational complexity of diffusion models restricts their practical applicability, especially in resource-constrained environments.
Specifically, diffusion models typically require hundreds
of denoising steps to produce high-quality samples, making them considerably slower than generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [10]. To this end, many studies introduced advanced training-free samplers to reduce the number of denoising iterations [2, 29, 31, 48]. However, the
decrease in iterations alone is insufficient since the denoising models used in each iteration possess billions of parameters [4, 37, 42], leading to increased computational com-

Meanwhile, recent studies highlight the advantages of
dynamic bit precision quantization considering input conditions [30, 52]. For example, in the case of image superresolution, CADyQ [18] and AdaBM [17] performed dynamic quantization according to the complexity of the images and the importance of layers. RefQSR [22] clustered
the image patches and assigned high-bit and low-bit precisions to the reference and query patches, respectively.
These dynamic quantization methods allow for the costeffective assignment of bit precision, enhancing quantization efficiency. However, such input-adaptive quantization
methods have not yet been explored in diffusion models.

* corresponding author

In this paper, we propose a novel quantization method,
dubbed Quantization of Language-to-Image diffusion models using text Prompts (QLIP), which determines the bit
precision of diffusion models according to the text prompt.
Figure 1 shows our observation: The quality of the gener-

15426

