This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatially-Varying Autofocus
Yingsi Qin, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan, Matthew O’Toole
Carnegie Mellon University

far depth

far depth

near depth

Conventional photo

Autofocused All-In-Focus photo

near depth

Autofocused focal surface

Conventional focal plane

(b) All-In-Focus photo and its spatially-varying autofocused focal surface (ours)

(a) Conventional photo and its confined focal plane

Figure 1. Spatially-varying autofocus to produce an optical all-in-focus image. Left: A conventional photo with a regular lens, where
objects at a single focal plane appear sharp. Right: An all-in-focus photo captured through spatially-varying autofocusing. To achieve this,
we combine (i) a programmable lens with spatially-varying control over focus, and (ii) a spatially-varying autofocus algorithm to drive the
focus of this lens. Note that this is an optically-captured image of a real scene with no post-capture processing used.

Abstract
A lens brings a single plane into focus on a planar sensor;
hence, parts of the scene that are outside this planar focus plane are resolved under defocus. Can we break this
precept by enabling a “lens” that can change its depth of
field arbitrarily? This work investigates the design and implementation of such a computational lens with spatiallyselective focusing. Our design uses an optical arrangement
of a Lohmann lens and a phase-only spatial light modulator
to allow each pixel to focus at a different depth. We extend
classical autofocusing techniques to the spatially-varying
scenario where the depth map is iteratively estimated using
contrast and disparity cues, enabling the camera to progressively shape its depth-of-field to the scene’s depth. By
obtaining an all-in-focus image optically, our technique advances upon prior work in two key aspects: the ability to
bring an entire scene in focus simultaneously, and the ability to maintain the highest possible spatial resolution.

form a focused image on a sensor. The focusing ability of
a lens, however, only applies to a single plane in the scene.
To form a focused image, the subject should be positioned
at the focal plane, i.e., at a fixed depth from the camera.
Points that do not lie on this focal plane appear blurry, and
the amount of defocus increases progressively as the points
move further away from the plane.
Reducing the size of a lens’ aperture decreases the
amount of defocus and increases the depth of field (i.e.,
the region near the focal plane where points appear to be
in sharp focus). However, this comes at the cost of reduced
light throughput. Furthermore, smaller apertures increase
diffractive blur [8], making content within the depth of field
less sharp. These restrictions on focus are attributed to the
traditional design of a lens, which offers the ability to move
the focal plane (e.g., by adjusting a focus ring) but maintains its shape. Hence, we raise the question: in placeof a
single focal plane, is it possible to optically program a focal
surface that can adapt to any scene geometry?
This paper advances the design and implementation of
a computational lens capable of spatially-varying focus—
one that allows a scene in its entirety to be simultaneously
in focus on an image sensor even when the scene is highly
non-planar. Our approach relies on adapting the so-called
Lohmann lens [21], which is a focus-tunable lens produced

1. Introduction
Core to any imaging system is the lens: an optical component designed to gather rays of light from a scene and

24645

