This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CleanPose: Category-Level Object Pose Estimation via Causal Learning and
Knowledge Distillation
Xiao Lin1
Yun Peng1
Liuyi Wang1
Xianyou Zhong1
Minghao Zhu1
1
1
1,2 *
Qijun Chen1,2 *
Yi Feng
Jingwei Yang
Chengju Liu
1
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems
{linx xx, pengyun, wly, zhongxianyou, zmhh h, jw yang,
fengyi0109, liuchengju, qjchen}@tongji.edu.cn

(a) E

(a) Existing approaches affected by data bias

Abstract

Repeated Samples
&
Training
Limited Variety

Data Bias
(Confounders)

···

In the effort to achieve robust and generalizable categoryset
Inference
level object pose estimation, recent methods primarily focus
Traning
on learning fundamental representations from data. HowCOPE
COPE
Model
Model
ever, the inherent biases within the data are often overPose & Size
looked: the repeated training samples and similar envi(b) Our proposed causal learning pipeline
ronments may mislead the models to over-rely on specific patterns, hindering models’ performance on novel in

do
Inference
stances. In this paper, we present CleanPose, a novel






method that mitigates the data biases to enhance categoryCausal
Causal
Model
Model
Causal Inference
level pose estimation by integrating causal learning and
Unbiased
knowledge distillation. By incorporating key causal variEstimation
Causal
ables (structural information and hidden confounders) into
Supervision
3D Foundation
causal modeling, we propose the causal inference modModel
Pose & Size
ule based on front-door adjustment, which promotes unbiased estimation by reducing potential spurious correlaFigure 1. Comparison of (a) existing pose estimation approaches
tions. Additionally, to further confront the data bias at
and (b) the proposed causal learning pipeline. The causal inference
the feature level, we devise a residual-based knowledge
is employed to mitigate the negative
effect raised by bias, and 3D
Front-door
distillation approach to transfer unbiased semantic knowlsemantic knowledge distilledAdjustment
from foundation model is leveraged
edge from 3D foundation model, providing comprehensive
to provide comprehensive causal guidance.
Front-door
causal supervision. Extensive experiments across multi- Adjustment
ple benchmarks (REAL275, CAMERA25 and HouseCat6D)
of novel objects instead of a single instance. The complex
hightlight the superiority of proposed CleanPose over stateintra-category variations have long been regarded as main
of-the-art methods. Code will be available at https:
challenge of COPE, thus recent methods [1, 3, 4, 17, 19,
//github.com/chrislin0621/CleanPose.
20, 22, 23, 56] mainly focus on model designing to capture
robust category features from data. Despite remarkable development, the performance of COPE models remains lim1. Introduction
ited [20, 23], suggesting that feature learning may not be the
fundamental issue. This prompts us to identify the key hinCategory-level object pose estimation (COPE) [42] aims to
drance blocking further progress. We observe that inherent
predict the 9Dof pose for arbitrary objects within predebiases are pervasive in current datasets [42], e.g., repeated
fined categories. This task, unlike instance-level pose estraining samples and limited pose variety, which may mistimation [8, 11, 21, 41, 58], does not require high-quality
lead COPE models to overfit to familiar object’s appearance
CAD models, making it feasible to perceive a broader range
and poses during data fitting, as shown in Fig. 1(a). How* Corresponding authors.
ever, existing efforts often overlook these underlying data

(b) O
3D

···

5990

Co
Ide

