This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G2 D: Boosting Multimodal Learning with Gradient-Guided Distillation
Mohammed Rakib, Arunkumar Bagavathi
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma, United States
{mohammed.rakib, abagava}@okstate.edu

Abstract

vergence [47]. An example of a modality imbalance with
the multimodal dataset CREMA-D [4] is given in Figure 1.
It is evident that the audio features(Figure 1a) dominate the
video features(Figure 1b) when optimized in a multimodal
fashion. However, video features give better performance
with unimodal training. This results in sub-par performance
with the joint multimodal training, shown in Figure 1c.
In this work, our goal is to (i) increase the performance
of weak modalities in multimodal settings and (ii) increase
the overall performance of the multimodal model in downstream supervised tasks.

Multimodal learning aims to leverage information from diverse data modalities to achieve more comprehensive performance. However, conventional multimodal models often
suffer from modality imbalance, where one or a few modalities dominate model optimization, leading to suboptimal
feature representation and underutilization of weak modalities. To address this challenge, we introduce GradientGuided Distillation (G2 D), a knowledge distillation framework that optimizes the multimodal model with a custombuilt loss function that fuses both unimodal and multimodal
objectives. G2 D further incorporates a dynamic sequential modality prioritization (SMP) technique in the learning process to ensure each modality leads the learning process, avoiding the pitfall of stronger modalities overshadowing weaker ones. We validate G2 D on multiple realworld datasets and show that G2 D amplifies the significance
of weak modalities while training and outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in classification and regression tasks. Our
code is available here.

In recent years, many methods have been proposed to
address modality imbalance in multimodal learning [8–
10, 17, 21, 24, 35, 36, 38, 41, 42, 45]. Gradient modulation
is one of the popular approaches in state-of-the-art methods to dynamically modify multimodal optimization gradients and maximize equal contributions from all modalities.
A common form of gradient modulation is dynamically increasing the gradients of weak modalities only for late fusion [24, 42, 44] or for any type of fusion methods [9, 21]
during the training process. Multiple variations of these
gradient modulations also exist, for example, alternating
gradients of each modality [45] and controlling the dominant modality gradients [10]. Although there exist multiple
gradient modulation methods, there are very few methods
that optimize both unimodal and multimodal learning objectives [8, 36] to add the benefits of both worlds. We aim
to follow this trend in this work and introduce a novel optimization strategy by incorporating knowledge distillation.

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning is one of the most prominent multidisciplinary research areas due to the increasing demand to develop intelligent agents that perceive information from diverse sensory modalities. One of the primary challenges
of multimodal learning models is the modality imbalance
phenomenon [21, 24, 36, 41], also known as the modality competition [17, 18, 21] or modality laziness [8, 45].
Modality imbalance occurs when one modality dominates
and other modalities are underutilized in the optimization of multimodal learning models. This causes (i) inferior multimodal performance compared to unimodal models [24, 29, 35], or (ii) a larger gap in individual modality when they are optimized jointly but still improve the
model performance [9, 21]. This imbalance occurs due to
poor alignment of the modalities, model overfitting to the
modalities [35], and differences in the rate of model con-

In this work, we aim to utilize the full potential of both
unimodal and multimodal learning for the given multimodal
downstream task. We propose a framework GradientGuided Distillation (G2 D) that transfers knowledge from
multiple unimodal teachers to multimodal student models.
Novelty of G2 D is its use of knowledge distillation with a
new learning objective and gradient modulation technique
to mitigate modality imbalance and produce state-of-the-art
results in multimodal learning. As depicted in Figure 1,
G2 D improves the feature quality of multimodal encoder,
allowing both the audio and video encoders to approach

4059

