This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenM3D: Open Vocabulary Multi-view Indoor 3D Object Detection
without Human Annotations
Peng-Hao Hsu1 *, Ke Zhang2 *, Fu-En Wang2 , Tao Tu3 , Ming-Feng Li4 , Yu-Lun Liu5 ,
Albert Y. C. Chen2 , Min Sun1,2†, Cheng-Hao Kuo2†
1
National Tsing Hua University 2 Amazon 3 Cornell University
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Abstract

across the 2D image and free-form-text spaces have become
available. These VLMs demonstrate impressive generalization ability to zero-shot object classification tasks. A
line of work [10, 11, 51] combines existing class-agnostic
2D object proposals with the zero-shot ability of VLMs to
classify 2D object proposals into a large number of object
classes. These methods open the door for Open-Vocabulary
(OV) 2D object detection and segmentation, handling freeform text descriptions for objects at inference time. For
robotics applications, another line of work explores OV 3D
indoor scene understanding [13, 16, 28, 32, 45] based on
lifting image features from VLMs to 3D. However, all these
methods require high-quality 3D point cloud as inputs. This
reliance on expensive 3D sensors (e.g., depth cameras, stereo
cameras, or laser scanners) is the bottleneck. On the other
hand, for fixed-vocabulary, several multi-view image-based
methods [41, 48, 50] have achieved significantly improved
3D object detection performance. Unlike point cloud-based
methods, image-based methods do not require expensive 3D
sensors at inference time.
We propose OpenM3D, a novel OV multi-view indoor
3D object detector that trained without human annotations.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work generalizing the OV capability to multi-view 3D object detection.
OpenM3D is a single-stage 3D detector adapting the 2Dinduced voxel features from the ImGeoNet model. The
voxel feature is aggregated from multiple RGB features. To
support OV, we need to enable it to localize all objects and
classify them according to OV descriptions. Hence, it is
jointly trained with a class-agnostic 3D localization loss requiring high-quality 3D pseudo boxes and a voxel-semantic
alignment loss requiring diverse pretrained CLIP features.
We follow the training setting of OV-3DET where posed
RGB-D images are given but no human annotations of 3D
boxes or classes are available. We proposed a 3D Pseudo
Box Generation method using a graph embedding technique
that combines 2D segments into coherent 3D structures during training (See Fig. 1). Specifically, we apply SAM [19]
on multi-view images to obtain class-agnostic 2D segments.

Open-vocabulary (OV) 3D object detection is an emerging field, yet its exploration through image-based methods
remains limited compared to 3D point cloud-based methods. We introduce OpenM3D, a novel open-vocabulary
multi-view indoor 3D object detector trained without human annotations. In particular, OpenM3D is a single-stage
detector adapting the 2D-induced voxel features from the
ImGeoNet model. To support OV, it is jointly trained with a
class-agnostic 3D localization loss requiring high-quality
3D pseudo boxes and a voxel-semantic alignment loss requiring diverse pre-trained CLIP features. We follow the
training setting of OV-3DET where posed RGB-D images
are given but no human annotations of 3D boxes or classes
are available. We propose a 3D Pseudo Box Generation
method using a graph embedding technique that combines
2D segments into coherent 3D structures. Our pseudo-boxes
achieve higher precision and recall than other methods, including the method proposed in OV-3DET. We further sample diverse CLIP features from 2D segments associated with
each coherent 3D structure to align with the corresponding
voxel feature. The key to training a highly accurate singlestage detector requires both losses to be learned toward
high-quality targets. At inference, OpenM3D, a highly efficient detector, requires only multi-view images for input
and demonstrates superior accuracy and speed (0.3 sec. per
scene) on ScanNet200 and ARKitScenes indoor benchmarks
compared to existing methods. We outperform a strong twostage method that leverages our class-agnostic detector with
a ViT CLIP-based OV classifier and a baseline incorporating
multi-view depth estimator on both accuracy and speed.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the recent breakthrough of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [9, 17, 37], general representations aligned
* Equal contribution.
† Equal advisory contribution.

8688

