This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConceptSplit: Decoupled Multi-Concept Personalization of Diffusion Models
via Token-wise Adaptation and Attention Disentanglement
Habin Lim1
1

Yeongseob Won2

Juwon Seo2
2

Korea University

{ha001211, gm-park}@korea.ac.kr,

Gyeong-Moon Park1 *

Kyung Hee University

{wysgene19, jwseo001}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
In recent years, multi-concept personalization for text-toimage (T2I) diffusion models to represent several subjects
in an image has gained much more attention. The main
challenge of this task is “concept mixing”, where multiple
learned concepts interfere or blend undesirably in the output image. To address this issue, in this paper, we present
ConceptSplit, a novel framework to split the individual concepts through training and inference. Our framework comprises two key components. First, we introduce Token-wise
Value Adaptation (ToVA), a merging-free training method
that focuses exclusively on adapting the value projection in
cross-attention. Based on our empirical analysis, we found
that modifying the key projection, a common approach in
existing methods, can disrupt the attention mechanism and
lead to concept mixing. Second, we propose Latent Optimization for Disentangled Attention (LODA), which alleviates attention entanglement during inference by optimizing the input latent. Through extensive qualitative and
quantitative experiments, we demonstrate that ConceptSplitachieves robust multi-concept personalization, mitigating unintended concept interference. Code is available at
https://github.com/KU-VGI/ConceptSplit.

This necessity has led to the emergence of multi-concept
personalization, which aims to enable T2I models to coherently blend multiple personalized subjects while maintaining high fidelity and consistency.
Recently, numerous methods have been proposed to
tackle this appealing task, aiming to ensure robust and disentangled multi-concept personalization [9, 15, 16, 19, 20,
29–31, 39]. However, existing studies face a critical challenge in handling multi-concept personalization, a concept
mixing problem [16], where multiple learned concepts interfere with or influence unintended ones. For example, as
shown in Figure 1 (b), the learned concept of a dog can
influence the concept of a cat during the personalization,
causing the generated image of the single dog to resemble
features of the cat, i.e., two concepts are undesirably mixed.
To deal with this issue, there are two main approaches:
(1) adapter-based approaches to learn each concept independently [9, 15, 29–31] and (2) text embedding-based approaches to selectively modify text embeddings of desired
tokens [6, 20, 21, 33, 34, 37].
However, existing adapter-based approaches typically
require a merging of adapters at inference time, which
causes interference between learned concepts and ultimately leads to concept mixing (Figure 1 (a)). Moreover,
we argue that existing text embedding-based approaches interfere with the token-attention binding capacity, the ability
to correctly map each token to its corresponding latent region [11, 17], resulting in an attention disruption problem.
We further analyze this problem in Figure 3 and 4.
Based on the limitations of existing works, we present
three major issues that should be considered to perform
multi-concept personalization effectively. (1) Merging-free
personalization: when learning a new concept, the training strategy needs to be designed in a merging-free manner to avoid unwanted influence during inference. (2) Preserving token-attention binding capacity: since personalization often proceeds on very few images, leveraging
the pre-trained model’s token-attention binding capacity is
crucial for efficiently learning new concepts without mix-

1. Introduction
With recent significant advancements in Text-to-Image
(T2I) diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion [5, 23, 25],
personalization has gained increasing attention, becoming
the mainstream approach for customized T2I models.
Traditional personalization techniques primarily focus
on general-purpose methods for single-concept personalization, such as DreamBooth [26] and Textual Inversion
[6]. However, real-world applications often require the simultaneous integration of multiple concepts, such as several custom subjects interacting with a unique background.
* Corresponding author

18421

