This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bring Your Rear Cameras
for Egocentric 3D Human Pose Estimation
Hiroyasu Akada

(a) Reference view

(b)

Jian Wang
Vladislav Golyanik
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC

Egocentric fisheye images
front and rear views

(c)

Christian Theobalt

EgoPoseFormer
EgoPoseFormer
Our method
Character animation
(d)
(e)
(f)
2 front views
2 front / 2 rear views
2 front / 2 rear views
(future application)

Figure 1. 3D human pose estimation of EgoPoseFormer [54] and our method with a possible future application of 3D virtual
character animation. Predictions and ground truths are colored in red and green, respectively. See our video for dynamic visualizations.

Abstract

achieves significant improvement over the current state of
the art (>10% on MPJPE). The source code, trained models, and datasets are available on our project page 1 .

Egocentric 3D human pose estimation has been actively
studied using cameras installed in front of a head-mounted
device (HMD). While frontal placement is the optimal and
the only option for some tasks, such as hand tracking, it remains unclear if the same holds for full-body tracking due
to self-occlusion and limited field-of-view coverage. Notably, even the state-of-the-art methods often fail to estimate accurate 3D poses in many scenarios, such as when
HMD users tilt their heads upward—a common motion in
human activities. A key limitation of existing HMD designs
is their neglect of the back of the body, despite its potential
to provide crucial 3D reconstruction cues. Hence, this paper investigates the usefulness of rear cameras for full-body
tracking. We also show that simply adding rear views to
the frontal inputs is not optimal for existing methods due to
their dependence on individual 2D joint detectors without
effective multi-view integration. To address this issue, we
propose a new transformer-based method that refines 2D
joint heatmap estimation with multi-view information and
heatmap uncertainty, thereby improving 3D pose tracking.
Also, we introduce two new large-scale datasets, Ego4ViewSyn and Ego4View-RW, for a rear-view evaluation. Our
experiments show that the new camera configurations with
back views provide superior support for 3D pose tracking
compared to only frontal placements. The proposed method

1. Introduction
Egocentric 3D human pose estimation has been explored
with cameras installed in front of head-mounted devices
(HMDs) [2, 3, 17, 20, 21, 30, 33, 36, 37, 39, 42, 46, 47,
49, 50, 52–54, 57, 61, 62]. This design choice is driven
by several factors, particularly the specific tasks for which
HMDs are primarily optimized. For instance, front cameras are the most practical (and only) option for hand tracking [6, 13, 14, 25, 29, 64]. However, it remains unclear if
this camera placement is the best choice for all tasks, such
as 3D full-body tracking. Notably, Apple Vision Pro [4],
a high-end HMD, has many sensors (eight cameras and
more) placed only in the front for various tasks, yet does
not officially offer full-body tracking (potentially due to
low accuracy with only frontal inputs). We also observe
that due to self-occlusion and limited field-of-view coverage with the existing HMD designs, even the state-of-theart method [54] fails to estimate accurate 3D poses in many
scenarios, such as when HMD users tilt their heads upward
(Fig 1-(c))—a common human motion when exercising.
1 https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/EgoRear/

9497

