This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2VDM: Text to Vector Displacement Maps
for Expressive and Interactive 3D Sculpting
Hengyu Meng1
Duotun Wang1
Zhijing Shao1
Ligang Liu2
Zeyu Wang1,3 *
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

“A broken brick “A cloth surface
“A broken glass
wall surface”
with rose pattern” surface like spider
web”

“A horn of deer” “A skeleton hand”

“A dragon wing”

“A lion fur
surface”

“A beard of a man”

(a) Generated VDM Brushes

(b) Sculpted Models in Blender

Figure 1. Example VDM brushes generated by Text2VDM and sculpted models in Blender. Text2VDM can produce high-quality
brushes for surface details (top row) and geometric structures (bottom row) from text input. Users can rapidly create an expressive model
from a plain shape by directly applying these brushes in Blender. Yellow underlined text highlights semantics enhanced by our framework.

Abstract
Professional 3D asset creation often requires diverse
sculpting brushes to add surface details and geometric
structures. Despite recent progress in 3D generation, producing reusable sculpting brushes compatible with artists’
workflows remains an open and challenging problem. These
sculpting brushes are typically represented as vector displacement maps (VDMs), which existing models cannot
easily generate compared to natural images. This paper
presents Text2VDM, a novel framework for text-to-VDM
brush generation through the deformation of a dense planar mesh guided by score distillation sampling (SDS). The
original SDS loss is designed for generating full objects
and struggles with generating desirable sub-object structures from scratch in brush generation. We refer to this issue as semantic coupling, which we address by introducing
weighted blending of prompt tokens to SDS, resulting in a
* Corresponding author.

more accurate target distribution and semantic guidance.
Experiments demonstrate that Text2VDM can generate diverse, high-quality VDM brushes for sculpting surface details and geometric structures. Our generated brushes can
be seamlessly integrated into mainstream modeling software, enabling various applications such as mesh stylization and real-time interactive modeling.

1. Introduction
Sculpting brushes are essential tools in 3D asset creation,
as artists often require a variety of brushes to create surface
details and geometric structures. In modeling software, 3D
sculpting brushes are typically defined as vector displacement maps (VDMs). A VDM is a 2D image where each
pixel stores a 3D displacement vector. Through these vectors, VDM brushes can create complex surface details, such
as cracks and wood grain, or generate geometric structures

16882

