This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RayPose: Ray Bundling Diffusion for Template Views
in Unseen 6D Object Pose Estimation
Junwen Huang1,2
1

Shishir Reddy Vutukur1,2
Peter KT Yu3
1
Slobodan Ilic
Benjamin Busam1,2

Technical University of Munich

2

Munich Center for Machine Learning

Abstract

Nassir Navab1,2
3

XYZ Robotics

Query Image
Query Pose

Typical template-based object pose pipelines estimate the
pose by retrieving the closest matching template and aligning it with the observed image. However, failure to retrieve the correct template often leads to inaccurate pose
predictions. To address this, we reformulate template-based
object pose estimation as a ray alignment problem, where
the viewing directions from multiple posed template images
are learned to align with a non-posed query image. Inspired by recent progress in diffusion-based camera pose estimation, we embed this formulation into a diffusion transformer architecture that aligns a query image with a set of
posed templates. We reparameterize object rotation using
object-centered camera rays and model object translation
by extending scale-invariant translation estimation to dense
translation offsets. Our model leverages geometric priors from the templates to guide accurate query pose inference. A coarse-to-fine training strategy based on narrowed
template sampling improves performance without modifying the network architecture. Extensive experiments across
multiple benchmark datasets show competitive results of
our method compared to state-of-the-art approaches in unseen object pose estimation.

Clean Rays

Conditioning

Multiview Posed Templates

RayPose Diffusion

Noisy Rays

Figure 1. Given a novel object query image, our method accurately predicts the object’s 6D pose using a multiview diffusion
model conditioned on a set of template images with known poses.
Leveraging our proposed structured 2D pose maps, represented as
bundles of rays, the diffusion model recovers the query object’s
pose by progressively denoising these ray bundles.

available and the system needs to function even with a single monocular RGB image.
In object pose estimation literature, much effort has been
put into learning other constraints, such as object appearance from visual data during training. Instance-based approaches [48, 53] therefore get their constraint from access
to model appearance during training while category-level
approaches [7, 22, 28, 54] use object shape and semantic priors. Despite the excellent results that benefit from
deep learning, these approaches require training for every
new object or object category from scratch and creating
synthetic training data from a CAD model is also computationally expensive. To overcome per-object training, researchers have been working on unseen object pose estimation with access to textured CAD models during inference
[6, 19, 26, 40, 42, 56, 60]. These advancements promise
to overcome the scalability and flexibility hurdles of objectspecific approaches.
These approaches are unable to access multiple views
by input design and template approaches typically solve a

1. Introduction
Multi-view vision is a core element for 3D perception [12].
Spatial understanding and measurements often depends on
multiple cameras or temporally-varied perspectives over
time to reason about the surrounding in 3D. Also for the
task of object pose estimation – the prediction of rotation
and translation of objects in space, multi-view constraints
can be beneficial [25]. In many computer vision applications, like robotic bin picking, augmented reality, and autonomous driving, multiple cameras or acquisitions are not
Project page: https://demianhj.github.io/projects/RayPose
{frstname.lastname}@tum.de

9102

