This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vid-Group: Temporal Video Grounding Pretraining
from Unlabeled Videos in the Wild
Peijun Bao1 , Chenqi Kong1† , Siyuan Yang1 , Zihao Shao2 ,
Xinghao Jiang3 , Boon Poh Ng1 , Meng Hwa Er1 , Alex Kot1,4 ,
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Peking University
3
Shanghai Jiaotong University 4 Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
peijun001@e.ntu.edu.sg chenqi.kong@ntu.edu.sg

1. Introduction
Given a natural language query and an untrimmed video,
the task of Temporal Video Grounding (TVG) [8, 15] aims
to temporally localize the video moment described by the
language query. TVG is one of the most fundamental tasks
in video understanding and has a wide range of real-world

training

labeling

TVG
model

manual annotations
i) labor-intensive ii) limited data size
a) Traditional TVG datasets
in-the-wild
pretraining
pretraining
video database
dataset
automatic
labeling
TVG
model
pseudo self-correction
annotations
i) labor-free ii) large-scale data volume
b) Our Vid-Group dataset
TACoS

Charades-STA

DiDeMO

5.2K

5K

Manual Annotation Time (h)

Given a natural language query, temporal video grounding aims to localize the described temporal moment in an
untrimmed video. A major challenge of this task is its
heavy dependence on labor-intensive annotations for training. Unlike existing works that directly train models on
manually curated data, we propose a novel paradigm to reduce annotation costs: pretraining the model on unlabeled,
real-world videos. To support this, we introduce Temporal
Video Grounding Pretraining (Vid-Group), a large-scale
dataset collected in a scalable manner with minimal human
intervention, consisting of over 50K videos captured in the
wild and 200K pseudo annotations. Direct pretraining on
these imperfect pseudo annotations, however, presents significant challenges, including mismatched sentence-video
pairs and imprecise temporal boundaries. To address these
issues, we propose the ReCorrect algorithm, which comprises two main phases: semantics-guided refinement and
memory-consensus correction. The semantics-guided refinement enhances the pseudo labels by leveraging semantic similarity with video frames to clean out unpaired data
and make initial adjustments to temporal boundaries. In the
following memory-consensus correction phase, a memory
bank tracks the model predictions, progressively correcting the temporal boundaries based on consensus within the
memory. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate ReCorrect’s strong generalization abilities across multiple downstream settings. The code, dataset, and pretrained models
are available at https://github.com/baopj/Vid-Group.

training
dataset

manually cleaned
video database manual

Abstract

4.6K

4K

#Queries

3K
2K
1K
0K

1.4K

Anet-Caps
#Videos
80%
60%
40%
20%

Vid-Group

Total
Duration

1.7K
0

TACoS Charades-STA DiDeMO Anet-Caps Vid-Group

#Token

#Vocabulary

c) Comparison of manual annotation time and dataset size
(dataset size metrics normalized by Vid-Group)
Figure 1. a) A crucial challenge in temporal video grounding is its
reliance on massive datasets with labor-intensive annotations. b)
To overcome this, we introduce a large-scale dataset for Temporal
Video Grounding Pretraining (Vid-Group), collected in a scalable
way with minimal human involvement. c) Compared to previous
TVG datasets, Vid-Group achieves a substantially larger dataset
size while maintaining zero manual annotation cost.

†: Corresponding author.

20541

