This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ILLUME: Illuminating Your LLMs to See, Draw, and Self-Enhance
Chunwei Wang1∗ , Guansong Lu1∗ , Junwei Yang1∗ , Runhui Huang2 ,
Jianhua Han1 , Lu Hou1 , Wei Zhang1 , Hang Xu1†
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract

GenEval

In this paper, we introduce ILLUME, a unified multimodal large language model (MLLM) that seamlessly integrates multimodal understanding and generation capabilities within a single large language model through a unified next-token prediction formulation. To address the large
dataset size typically required for image-text alignment, we
propose to enhance data efficiency through the design of
a vision tokenizer that incorporates semantic information
and a progressive multi-stage training procedure. This approach reduces the dataset size to just 15M for pretraining –
over four times fewer than what is typically needed – while
achieving competitive or even superior performance with
existing unified MLLMs, such as Janus. Additionally, to promote synergistic enhancement between understanding and
generation capabilities, which is under-explored in previous works, we introduce a novel self-enhancing multimodal
alignment scheme. This scheme supervises the MLLM to
self-assess the consistency between text descriptions and selfgenerated images, facilitating the model to interpret images
more accurately and avoid unrealistic and incorrect predictions caused by misalignment in image generation. Based on
our extensive experiments, our proposed ILLUME stands out
and competes with state-of-the-art unified MLLMs and specialized models across various benchmarks for multimodal
understanding, generation, and editing.

MJHQ30K
GenAI-bench

POPE
Emu-Edit
MMMU

ChartQA
MMB
DocVQA
SEED
InfoVQA
AI2D

VQA-text

LLaVA-1.5

Emu3

Janus

LLaVA-NeXT

Show-o

ILLUME (Ours)

Figure 1. Performance on various visual understanding (blue for
general tasks and green for document-oriented tasks), generation
(red), and editing (gray) benchmarks. ILLUME achieves competitive results with state-of-the-art works.

1. Introduction

are propelling the community towards the creation of versatile Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) that can
seamlessly integrate visual understanding and generation
capabilities. This integration not only extends LLMs across
a wide range of multimodal applications, but also unlock
new possibilities for improving the synergy between vision
and language tasks.
Previous works have explored several methods that empower MLLMs to “draw” images. In [24, 50], image generation models are deployed as tools, with text commands
as input to create images. This decoupled architecture inherently limits the models’ potential. In contrast, Emu [45],
Emu2 [46], and X-VILA [55] introduce a unified autoregressive model that alternatively predicts the next element by regressing visual embeddings or classifying text tokens. While
these models have shown promising results, joint training of
LLMs and diffusion models requires substantial engineering
costs and well-designed training strategy to ensure stability. To avoid these complexities, recent innovations like

Recent research efforts [1, 9, 27, 29] have equipped Large
Language Models (LLMs) with the capability to “see" images by utilizing vision adapters to map features from CLIPlike encoders into LLM’s input spaces. Works like the
LLaVA series [27, 28] have demonstrated exceptional results on visual comprehension tasks. Meanwhile, the field of
text-to-image generation has achieved remarkable progresses
in developing both diffusion-based [37, 38] and more recent
autoregressive models [17, 44]. These technological strides
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

21612

