This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Splat-LOAM: Gaussian Splatting LiDAR Odometry and Mapping
Emanuele Giacomini1

Luca Di Giammarino1
Lorenzo De Rebotti1
Giorgio Grisetti1
Martin R. Oswald2
1
Sapienza University of Rome, 2 University of Amsterdam, Netherlands

Abstract
LiDARs provide accurate geometric measurements, making
them valuable for ego-motion estimation and reconstruction tasks. Although its success, managing an accurate and
lightweight representation of the environment still poses
challenges. Both classic and NeRF-based solutions have
to trade off accuracy over memory and processing times.
In this work, we build on recent advancements in Gaussian
Splatting methods to develop a novel LiDAR odometry and
mapping pipeline that exclusively relies on Gaussian primitives for its scene representation. Leveraging spherical projection, we drive the refinement of the primitives uniquely
from LiDAR measurements. Experiments show that our approach matches the current registration performance, while
achieving SOTA results for mapping tasks with minimal
GPU requirements. This efficiency makes it a strong candidate for further exploration and potential adoption in realtime robotics estimation tasks.

1. Introduction
LiDAR sensors provide accurate spatial measurements of
the environment, making them valuable for ego-motion estimation and reconstruction tasks. Since the measurements
already capture the 3d structure, many LiDAR Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM) pipelines do not
explicitly refine the underlying point representation [2, 3,
7, 9, 12, 37]. Moreover, a global map can be obtained
by directly stacking the measurements together. However,
this typically leads to extremely large point clouds that cannot be explicitly used for online applications. Several approaches attempted to use surfels [1, 31] and meshes [32].
Although these approaches manage to simultaneously estimate the sensor’s ego-motion while optimizing the map
representation, they result in a trade-off between accuracy,
memory usage, and runtime.
The recent advent of NeRF [26] sparked fresh interest
in Novel View Synthesis (NVS) tasks. Specifically, given
a set of input views and triangulated points (i.e. obtainable via COLMAP [35, 36]), NeRF learns a continuous

Figure 1. Performance overview of Splat-LOAM. F1 score to
Active Memory (MB) and Runtime (s). The plots provide a quantitative comparison between state-of-the-art mapping pipelines,
while PIN-SLAM and ours also perform online odometry.

volumetric scene function. Color and density information
is propagated throughout the radiance field by ray-casting
pixels from the view cameras and, through a Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP), the method learns a representation that
ensures multi-view consistency. Concurrently, NeRFs inspired the computer vision community to tackle the problem
of dense visual SLAM through implicit methods. The pioneering work in this context was iMAP [40], which stores
the global appearance and geometry of the scene through a
single MLP. Despite its success in driving a new research
direction, the method suffered from issues related to the
limited capacity of the model, leading to low reconstruction quality and catastrophic forgetting during the exploration of larger areas. These issues were later handled by
shifting the paradigm and by moving some of the appearance and geometric information over a hierarchical feature
grid [54] or neural point clouds [22, 33]. Similarly, these
techniques were employed on LiDAR measurements to provide more accurate and lighter explicit dense representations [8, 16, 30, 39, 52]. However, these methods still require tailored sampling techniques to estimate the underlying Signed Distance Function (SDF) accurately. This bottleneck still poses problems for online execution.
A recent, explicit alternative to NeRFs is 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20]. This approach leverages 3D

27630

