This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstaScene: Towards Complete 3D Instance Decomposition and
Reconstruction from Cluttered Scenes
Zesong Yang1,2 *
Liyuan Cui1
1

Bangbang Yang2
Yuewen Ma2

Wenqi Dong1,2
Zhaopeng Cui1

State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University

Chenxuan Cao1
Hujun Bao1†
2

ByteDance

Project Page: https://zju3dv.github.io/instascene/

Gaussian Points

Scene Decomposition

Incomplete
Reconstruction!

Scene-Aligned
Instance Completion

Physical Align!

Instance Segmentation

Figure 1. InstaScene allows users to pick up and decompose arbitrary instances from cluttered environments, while automatically reconstructing them into complete objects with intact geometry and appearance that align with the physical world.

Abstract

1. Introduction
As humans, we possess an innate ability to understand cluttered 3D scenes and interact with diverse objects without
deliberate observation. Imagine walking into a crowded
kitchen: we can immediately recognize each piece of furniture and every dish, and without a second thought you
might reach out to pick up a specific utensil from a busy
countertop. Over the years, numerous efforts have been
made in computer vision and robotics to achieve similar
skills [18], developing series of capabilities like efficient
reconstruction and rendering [14], 3D scene understanding [33], and 3D object generation [9, 34, 61]. However,
the gap for downstream scene editing and simulation applications [13, 43, 55, 63] still remains.

Humans can naturally identify and mentally complete occluded objects in cluttered environments. However, imparting similar cognitive ability to robotics remains challenging
even with advanced reconstruction techniques, which models scenes as undifferentiated wholes and fails to recognize
complete object from partial observations. In this paper, we
propose InstaScene, a new paradigm towards holistic 3D
perception of complex scenes with a primary goal: decomposing arbitrary instances while ensuring complete reconstruction. To achieve precise decomposition, we develop a
novel spatial contrastive learning by tracing rasterization
of each instance across views, significantly enhancing semantic supervision in cluttered scenes. To overcome incompleteness from limited observations, we introduce in-situ
generation that harnesses valuable observations and geometric cues, effectively guiding 3D generative models to reconstruct complete instances that seamlessly align with the
real world. Experiments on scene decomposition and object
completion across complex real-world and synthetic scenes
demonstrate that our method achieves superior decomposition accuracy while producing geometrically faithful and
visually intact objects.

Several key limitations in existing approaches hinder
this goal. First, most generic 3D reconstruction methods [14, 28, 39, 47] usually treat the scene as a whole model,
which hinders delicate instance-level tasks such as manipulation and rearrangement; Second, open-set scene understanding methods [33, 46] enables object-level query and
segmentation but fails to produce complete instances from
cluttered environments; Third, category-specific generative
approaches can predict complete 3D shapes from partial observations, but they often struggle to generalize to diverse
objects in cluttered scenes, or ensure physical and visual
alignment with the real world [21], i.e., matching the object’s actual size, shape, and texture, leading to physical and

* Work done during an internship at PICO, ByteDance.
† Corresponding author.

7771

