This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You Share Beliefs, I Adapt: Progressive Heterogeneous Collaborative Perception
Hao Si

Ehsan Javanmardi
Manabu Tsukada *
The University of Tokyo

{si-hao, ejavanmardi, mtsukada}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
I have some information.

Collaborative perception enables vehicles to overcome individual perception limitations by sharing information, allowing them to see further and through occlusions. In real-world
scenarios, models on different vehicles are often heterogeneous due to manufacturer variations. Existing methods for
heterogeneous collaborative perception address this challenge by fine-tuning adapters or the entire network to bridge
the domain gap. However, these methods are impractical
in real-world applications, as each new collaborator must
undergo joint training with the ego vehicle on a dataset
before inference, or the ego vehicle stores models for all
potential collaborators in advance. Therefore, we pose a
new question: Can we tackle this challenge directly during
inference, eliminating the need for joint training? To answer
this, we introduce Progressive Heterogeneous Collaborative Perception (PHCP), a novel framework that formulates
the problem as few-shot unsupervised domain adaptation.
Unlike previous work, PHCP dynamically aligns features
by self-training an adapter during inference, eliminating
the need for labeled data and joint training. Extensive experiments on the OPV2V dataset demonstrate that PHCP
achieves strong performance across diverse heterogeneous
scenarios. Notably, PHCP achieves performance comparable to SOTA methods trained on the entire dataset while
using only a small amount of unlabeled data.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) have improved the capability of autonomous driving systems[12,
40, 42]. V2X enables vehicles to interact with the surrounding environment, creating a more intelligent and interconnected traffic ecosystem. With the support of V2X, Collaborative Perception allows vehicles to share perception
information[23, 25, 32], thus expanding the range of perception and empowering the ability to see through occlusion[9].
This achieves a more precise and robust environmental per* Corresponding author

I don’t understand, but if
we train together, I will.

Fully collaborative training

I have some information.

I don’t understand. But you
send thoughts, I can infer.

Few-shot self training

I’ll send more.

I’ll send more.

Now I understand!

Now I understand!

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of different heterogeneous collaborative perception patterns. Fig.1a corresponds to existing methods requiring
joint training before collaboration. Fig.1b shows our PHCP process.
It utilizes a small amount of unlabeled data from other agents to
complete self-training and collaborate with others.

ception in complex urban traffic environments.
Despite the potential of collaborative perception in improving the performance of autonomous driving systems, it
faces a major challenge in the real world: heterogeneity[14,
19, 20, 22, 36, 39]. Autonomous vehicles produced by different manufacturers typically adopt different sensor configurations and perception models, resulting in significant differences in the encoded intermediate features in the semantic
space (domain gap)[36]. This problem makes collaborative
perception between intelligent agents difficult and may lead
to ineffective information sharing and feature fusion.
Many existing methods enhance heterogeneous collaborative perception by training feature encoders and detection
heads[19, 36] or by learning adapters[20] for new collaborators. While these approaches improve performance, they

27521

