This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motal: Unsupervised 3D Object Detection by Modality
and Task-speciﬁc Knowledge Transfer
Hai Wu1,2 Hongwei Lin1 Xusheng Guo1 Xin Li3
Mingming Wang4,5 Cheng Wang1 Chenglu Wen1 *
1
Xiamen University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory 3 Texas A&M University
4
Tsinghua University 5 Guangzhou Automobile Group Co. R&D Center
Extend cls. label

Abstract
Cls. seed ab
label

The performance of unsupervised 3D object classiﬁcation
and bounding box regression relies heavily on the quality
of initial pseudo-labels. Traditionally, the labels of classiﬁcation and regression are represented by a single set of
candidate boxes generated by motion or geometry heuristics. However, due to the similarity of many objects to the
background in shape or lack of motion, the labels often fail
to achieve high accuracy in two tasks simultaneously. Using these labels to directly train the network results in decreased detection performance. To address this challenge,
we introduce Motal that performs unsupervised 3D object detection by Modality and task-speciﬁc knowledge
transfer. Motal decouples the pseudo-labels into two sets
of candidates, from which Motal discovers classiﬁcation
knowledge by motion and image appearance prior, and discovers box regression knowledge by geometry prior, respectively. Motal ﬁnally transfers all knowledge to a single
student network by a TMT (Task-speciﬁc Masked Training)
scheme, attaining high performance in both classiﬁcation
and regression. Motal can greatly enhance various unsupervised methods by about 2× mAP. For example, on the
WOD test set, Motal improves the state-of-the-art CPD
by 21.56% mAP L1 (from 20.54% to 42.10%) and 19.90%
mAP L2 (from 18.18% to 38.08%). These achievements
highlight the signiﬁcance of our method.

ऐ௦௧௨

Box seed label

Extend box label

ࣦ௖௟௦

ࣦ௥௘௚

Figure 1. Motal discovers classiﬁcation knowledge by motion
and image appearance priors, discovers box regression knowledge
by geometry prior, and transfers the knowledge to a student network for unsupervised 3D object detection.

posed [5, 27, 47]. These methods reduce the labeling cost to
a certain extent but still rely on partial human annotations.
Several studies have explored more ideal approaches that
automatically classify 3D objects and regress their bounding boxes without relying on human annotations [13, 44,
45]. This detection paradigm is commonly known as unsupervised 3D object detection. The mainstream unsupervised methods adopt a pseudo-label generation and deep
nets training framework. The success of this framework
depends primarily on generating high-quality pseudo-labels
and effectively leveraging these labels to train the detector.
Traditional methods generate a single set of boxes to
serve as classiﬁcation and regression labels [33, 44]. The
boxes are typically selected either based on motion [7, 20,
42] or geometry [33, 44] heuristics. However, stationary
objects often have ambiguous classes, though their shape
and position can be estimated from consecutive frames. In
contrast, moving objects can be separated from the background but may have inaccurate shapes and positions. Consequently, many labels cannot achieve high accuracy in both
classiﬁcation and regression simultaneously. An example
from Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) [26] is presented in
Fig 2 (a). Directly using the pseudo labels to train the detec-

1. Introduction
In recent years, 3D object detection has gained increasing attention. This task requires accurately distinguishing objects from the background and precisely regressing their 3D bounding boxes. Previous detectors follow
a fully supervised detection paradigm but suffer from the
high annotation cost [6, 30–32, 34]. To alleviate this issue,
many weakly or semi-supervised approaches have been pro* Corresponding author

6284

