This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AMDANet: Attention-Driven Multi-Perspective Discrepancy Alignment for
RGB-Infrared Image Fusion and Segmentation
Haifeng Zhong1,2 , Fan Tang3 , Zhuo Chen4 , Hyung Jin Chang4 , Yixing Gao1,2, *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University,
2
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence,
Ministry of Education, China, 3 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
4
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
zhonghf23@mails.jlu.edu.cn, gaoyixing@jlu.edu.cn, tangfan@ict.ac.cn,
zxc417@student.bham.ac.uk, H.J.Chang@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
The challenge of multimodal semantic segmentation lies in
establishing semantically consistent and segmentable multimodal fusion features under conditions of significant visual feature discrepancies. Existing methods commonly
construct cross-modal self-attention fusion frameworks or
introduce additional multimodal fusion loss functions to
establish fusion features. However, these approaches often overlook the challenge caused by feature discrepancies between modalities during the fusion process. To
achieve precise segmentation, we propose an AttentionDriven Multimodal Discrepancy Alignment Network (AMDANet). AMDANet reallocates weights to reduce the
saliency of discrepant features and utilizes low-weight features as cues to mitigate discrepancies between modalities,
thereby achieving multimodal feature alignment. Furthermore, to simplify the feature alignment process, a semantic consistency inference mechanism is introduced to reveal the network’s inherent bias toward specific modalities, thereby compressing cross-modal feature discrepancies from the foundational level. Extensive experiments
on the FMB, MFNet, and PST900 datasets demonstrate
that AMDANet achieves mIoU improvements of 3.6%,
3.0%, and 1.6%, respectively, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/Zhonghaifeng6/AMDANet

Figure 1. Comparison with advanced SegMiF [60] and MRFS [25]
in image fusion and semantic segmentation is presented. As shown
in the figure, when there is a significant difference between the
infrared and visible images, it is difficult for other methods to align
cross-modal features, leading to suboptimal results. In contrast,
our method not only compresses the difference features between
cross-modality by weight adjustment but also achieves semantic
consistency alignment, thus achieving better results.

1. Introduction

incomplete scene descriptions can hinder the accuracy of
semantic understanding. Some studies [25, 38, 41, 48, 49,
60, 68] have leveraged the unique thermal imaging capabilities of infrared sensors, incorporating infrared images as
a complementary modality in segmentation to enable more
effective perception for complex environments.
Existing methods [8, 25, 51, 60, 68] predominantly focus
on leveraging semantic consistency among multimodal features to construct segmentable feature representations, with
the key challenge lying in identifying and integrating semantically consistent features across modalities. Current research addresses this from two perspectives: designing multimodal fusion loss functions [45, 65] to jointly optimize
fusion and segmentation tasks, or employing cross-modal
self-attention mechanisms [25, 60, 68] to align semantic

Current semantic segmentation methods [5, 13, 15, 55]
mostly depend on visible light sensors for scene understanding. In certain challenging environments, such as nighttime,
* Corresponding author.

10645

