This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gait- : Exploring X modality for Generalized Gait Recognition
Zengbin Wang1
Saihui Hou2
Junjie Li1
Xu Liu3
Chunshui Cao3
Yongzhen Huang2,3
Siye Wang1
Man Zhang1,4 *
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 Beijing Normal University
3
WATRIX.AI 4 Qinghai Institute of Technology

Modality exploration has been repeatedly mentioned in gait
recognition, evolving from silhouette to parsing, mesh, point
clouds, etc. These latest modalities agree that silhouette is
less affected by background and clothing noises, but argue
it loses too much valuable discriminative information. They
seek to retain the strengths of silhouette while extracting
more semantic or structural information through upstream
estimation for better recognition. We agree with this principle but argue that these upstream estimations are usually
unstable and the resulted modalities rely on pre-defined design. Moreover, the crucial aspect of modality generalization remains underexplored. To address this, we propose
Gait-X to explore how to flexibly and stably develop a gaitspecific generalized X modality from a frequency perspective. Specifically, 1) We replace upstream estimation with
stable frequency decomposition and conduct a comprehensive analysis of how different frequencies impact modality and within-/cross-domain performance; 2) To enable
flexible modality customization and mitigate the influence
of noise and domain variations, we propose to remove irrelevant low-frequency noise and suppress high-frequency
domain-specific information to form our X modality; 3) To
further improve model generalization, we expand the representation across multiple frequencies to guide the model in
balancing whole frequencies for enhanced generalization.
Extensive experiments on CCPG, SUSTech1K, and CASIAB datasets show superior generalization.

Frequency
Decomposition

Abstract

Color

L

Brightness
Texture
Semantic

H

Background
···

Frequency-domain Guidance

Gait Issues

Figure 1. Motivation. Frequency decomposition is a stable tool
to transform RGB image into discrete frequency representations
in a near-lossless manner. They are closely related to current gait
issues and can serve as guidance to selectively process irrelevant
frequencies and balance them for better recognition and further
generalization. L and H indicate low and high frequency.

1. Introduction

binary silhouette modality as input [2, 6, 35, 53]. The main
advantage is its ability to eliminate background and clothing
texture noise, allowing researchers to focus on body shape
and shape variations across frames for recognition. Some
early studies have also explored RGB modality as input,
leveraging its rich information and ability to feature disentanglement [24, 78, 79]. With cloth-changing becoming the
key challenge in gait recognition, they all have recognized
limitations in their input modalities: 1) Silhouette-based
methods are sensitive to shape variations caused by clothing changes, while the simplistic binary silhouette lacks additional discriminative features [51, 64, 68, 82], making the
cloth-changing task more challenging; 2) RGB-based methods can be confused by clothing colors and textures, and
have proven to rely on limited unchanged features like head
or shoes [13, 33] for recognition.
Recently, gait recognition has turned to more promising
modalities, such as parsing [64, 65, 82, 83], 3D mesh [68,
81], point cloud [14, 51], and optical flow [15, 39]. 1)
Compared with silhouette, researchers argue that binary silhouette has low information entropy [82], while the added
semantics or structural information of these modalities can
provide additional discriminative features to improve recognition [51, 64, 81, 82]. 2) Compared with RGB, these
modalities help reduce clothing or background noise, and
guide the model to focus on more discriminative features
like semantics or structure. Additionally, recent stud-

Gait recognition identifies individuals through their appearance and unique walking patterns, which has obtained explosive growth in recent years. The long-distance and noninvasive nature of gait sequence data collection makes it reliable and suitable for public security applications [47, 50].
Early appearance-based gait recognition widely adopted
* Corresponding author (zhangman@bupt.edu.cn).

13259

