This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ForCenNet: Foreground-Centric Network for Document Image Rectification
Peng Cai1 , Qiang Li1 , Kaicheng Yang2 , Dong Guo1 , Jia Li1 , Nan Zhou1
Xiang An2 , Ninghua Yang2 , Jiankang Deng3 *
1
2
3
Qihoo Technology
DeepGlint
Imperial College London
{caipeng1,liqiang-s}@360.cn

Abstract
Document image rectification aims to eliminate geometric
deformation in photographed documents to facilitate text
recognition. However, existing methods often neglect the
significance of foreground elements, which provide essential
geometric references and layout information for document
image correction. In this paper, we introduce ForegroundCentric Network (ForCenNet) to eliminate geometric distortions in document images. Specifically, we initially propose a foreground-centric label generation method, which
extracts detailed foreground elements from an undistorted
image. Then we introduce a foreground-centric mask mechanism to enhance the distinction between readable and
background regions. Furthermore, we design a curvature
consistency loss to leverage the detailed foreground labels
to help the model understand the distorted geometric distribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ForCenNet
achieves new state-of-the-art on four real-world benchmarks, such as DocUNet, DIR300, WarpDoc, and DocReal.
Quantitative analysis shows that the proposed method effectively undistorts layout elements, such as text lines and
table borders. The resources for further comparison are
provided at https://github.com/caipeng328/
ForCenNet.

Figure 1. Visualization of Deformation Degree. We compute the
deformation displacement for each pixel and visualize it using a
heatmap. Blue represents minor deformation, while red indicates
significant displacement.

1. Introduction

a significant challenge in the field of document analysis and
recognition.
With advances in deep learning, data-driven approaches [7, 9, 43] have been developed for geometric correction of distorted document images. Unlike traditional
computer vision tasks such as image classification [16] and
object detection [14], acquiring fine-grained annotations for
document dewarping poses significant challenges. The limited availability of training data restricts the models’ generalization capabilities. Certain methods [27, 30, 49] introduce random perturbations to distorted images and assess
the consistency between the corrected images and synthetic
deformation patterns. While these weakly-supervised methods achieve satisfactory results in terms of image similarity
when compared to contemporary studies, they often fail to
preserve document readability. This observation highlights
the need to reassess the data scale and motivates the exploration of more diverse synthetic deformation fields to better
approximate the true distribution.

With the widespread adoption of mobile devices and advancements in camera technology, document digitization
has become essential. Smartphones and portable cameras,
offering greater flexibility than traditional scanners, often
capture images that suffer from perspective distortion and
geometric deformation due to variable shooting angles and
document conditions. These distortions negatively impact
visual quality and hinder downstream tasks such as OCR
and document structure analysis. Therefore, accurate rectification of documents captured by camera sensors remains
* Corresponding Author

15137

