This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bidirectional Likelihood Estimation with
Multi-Modal Large Language Models for Text-Video Retrieval
Dohwan Ko1∗

Ji Soo Lee1∗
1

Minhyuk Choi1
2

Korea University

Zihang Meng2

Meta GenAI

{ikodoh, simplewhite9, sodlqnf123}@korea.ac.kr

3

KAIST

zihang@meta.com

Abstract

Hyunwoo J. Kim3†

hyunwoojkim@kaist.ac.kr

Text-Video Retrieval aims to find the most relevant text (or
video) candidate given a video (or text) query from largescale online databases. Recent work leverages multi-modal
large language models (MLLMs) to improve retrieval, especially for long or complex query-candidate pairs. However, we observe that the naive application of MLLMs, i.e.,
retrieval based on candidate likelihood, introduces candidate prior bias, favoring candidates with inherently higher
priors over those more relevant to the query. To this end,
we propose a novel retrieval framework, Bidirectional Likelihood Estimation with MLLM (BLiM), which leverages
both query and candidate likelihoods by training the model
to generate text from a given video as well as video features from a given text. Furthermore, we introduce Candidate Prior Normalization (CPN), a simple yet effective
training-free score calibration module designed to mitigate
candidate prior bias in candidate likelihood. On four TextVideo Retrieval benchmarks, our BLiM equipped with CPN
outperforms previous state-of-the-art models by 6.4 R@1
on average, effectively alleviating candidate prior bias
and emphasizing query-candidate relevance. Our in-depth
analysis across various multi-modal tasks beyond retrieval
highlights the broad applicability of CPN which enhances
visual understanding by reducing reliance on textual priors.
Code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/BLiM.

single embeddings, enabling efficient retrieval via similarity between two embeddings. While computationally
efficient, its reliance on shallow similarity-based interactions restricts token-level alignment between queries and
candidates, often leading to suboptimal retrieval performance. To overcome this limitation, multi-modal large
language models (MLLMs)-based [10–18] retrieval systems have been recently introduced [19–21]. Unlike dualencoders, MLLM-based retrievers process concatenated
query-candidate pairs, enabling deep token-level interactions, resulting in superior retrieval performance, particularly for long and complex query-candidate pairs.

1. Introduction

However, we observe that naively maximizing candidate likelihood leads to candidate prior bias, where candidates with higher prior probabilities are favored over those
truly relevant to the query. For instance, in Fig. 1b, given
a video query v and text candidates t in video-to-text retrieval, an MLLM retriever based on candidate likelihood
P (t|v) tends to prioritize text candidates with frequently
occurring patterns over those that are more semantically
aligned with the video query. In this example, such bias
arises because MLLMs, due to their autoregressive nature,
inherently assign higher probabilities to long and repetitive
text, overlooking the actual content of the video query [22].
This prior bias is also prevalent in other multi-modal tasks,
including visual question answering and captioning, where
models tend to rely more on textual content than visual information when generating text responses [23–26]. Similarly, in text-to-video retrieval, MLLMs often favor videos
with static scenes over those exhibiting dynamic transitions.

Text-Video Retrieval [1–5] aims to retrieve the most relevant text (or video) candidate given a video (or text) query.
To scale retrieval systems, previous works [6, 7] have primarily adopted dual-encoder architectures, leveraging encoder models such as BERT [8] and CLIP [9]. These
models encode each query and candidate separately into
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

22263

To address candidate prior bias in MLLM-based retrieval systems, we propose a novel framework, Bidirectional Likelihood Estimation with MLLM (BLiM), which
considers query likelihood as well as candidate likelihood.
Specifically, BLiM aims to generate text from a given video
(P (t|v)) and video features from a given text (P (v|t)).
During inference, as in Fig. 1, jointly considering both
likelihoods allows BLiM to mitigate candidate prior bias

