This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoTracker3: Simpler and Better Point Tracking by Pseudo-Labeling Real Videos
Nikita Karaev1,2
1

Yuri Makarov1
Andrea Vedaldi1

Meta AI

Jianyuan Wang1,2
Christian Rupprecht2

Natalia Neverova1

2

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
nikita@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1. Scaling point trackers with unsupervised videos. Left: We compare our CoTracker3 to other point trackers. Each model is
pre-trained on synthetic data (Kubric) and then fine-tuned on real videos using our simple unsupervised training protocol. Our model and
training protocol outperform SoTA by a large margin using only 0.1% of the real training data. Right: CoTracker3 is robust to occlusions.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Tracking points is a key step in video analysis, particularly for tasks like 3D reconstruction and video editing that
require precise recovery of correspondences. Point trackers have evolved significantly in recent years, with designs
based on transformer neural networks inspired by PIPs [12].
Notable examples include TAP-Vid [6], which introduced a
new benchmark for point tracking, and TAPIR [7], which
extended PIPs’ design with a global matching stage. CoTracker [16] proposed a transformer architecture that tracks
multiple points jointly, achieving further gains in tracking
quality, particularly for points that are partially occluded in
the video.
In this paper, we introduce a new point tracking model,
CoTracker3, that builds on the ideas of recent trackers but
is significantly simpler, more data-efficient, and more flex-

We introduce CoTracker3, a new state-of-the-art point
tracker. With CoTracker3, we revisit the design of recent
trackers, removing components and reducing the number of
parameters while also improving performance. We also explore the interplay of synthetic and real data. Recent trackers are trained on synthetic videos due to the difficulty of
collecting tracking annotations for real data. However, this
can result in suboptimal performance due to the statistical
gap between synthetic and real videos. We thus suggest using off-the-shelf trackers as teachers to annotate real videos
with pseudo-labels. Compared to other recent attempts at
using real data for learning trackers, this scheme is much
simpler and achieves better results using 1,000 times less
data. CoTracker3 is available here in online (causal) and
offline variants.

6013

