This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAME: Learning Generic Language-Guided Visual Navigation
with State-Adaptive Mixture of Experts
Gengze Zhou1 Yicong Hong2 Zun Wang3 Chongyang Zhao4 Mohit Bansal3 Qi Wu1
1
The University of Adelaide 2 Adobe Research 3 UNC, Chapel Hill 4 UNSW Sydney
{gengze.zhou, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au
https://github.com/GengzeZhou/SAME

Abstract

structions [33, 66, 97], and episodic vision-language alignment for instruction following [31, 42, 100, 105]. Subsequent works leverage generic vision-language representations [21, 61, 63, 98, 99] to pretrain vision-language-action
policies [17, 19, 35, 37, 40, 62, 75, 82] (Figure 1b), finetuning parameters for specific tasks while maintaining the same
model architecture. In this paper, we argue that the essential
difference between these tasks lies in the granularity of instruction, and a single model’s capability should not be constrained by the user’s instruction format from the practical
perspective. We propose unifying these learning problems
under the broader concept of language-guided visual navigation, extending the multi-task learning problem in Visionand-Language Navigation (VLN) [125] to encompass O B JECT NAV [8] in visual semantic navigation. Our overarching goal is to create a versatile system that can interpret and
execute arbitrary language instructions (Figure 1c).
An intuitive approach towards this is to integrate distinct navigational datasets and use them to train an existing agent for multitasking; however, our study reveals that
simply mixing data yields inconsistent performance variation across tasks due to conflicting learning objectives
(§2.2). Previous work has also identified this challenge
and explored generic zero-shot LLM systems without training [71], but such approaches achieved limited results on
VLN [12, 13, 15, 16, 64, 70, 84, 110, 126]. Therefore, we
aim to build an effective learning paradigm that facilitates
training an agent on a larger amount of data covering wider
skill sets. As a result, we resort to a more adaptive framework capable of sharing general knowledge and retrieving
task-specific skills to infer appropriate navigation decisions.
Inspired by recent success in the Mixture of Experts
(MoE) [45, 47, 95] approach for natural language processing, in particular, enhancing the transformer-based Large
Language Models [24, 46, 114], we incorporate MoE to
build our generalizable navigation agent. Unlike previous works that typically implement task-wise or token-wise
MoE, which we found ineffective in multi-task navigation
learning, we propose a novel MoE formulation for sequen-

The academic field of learning instruction-guided visual
navigation can be generally categorized into high-level
category-specific search and low-level language-guided
navigation, depending on the granularity of language instruction, in which the former emphasizes the exploration
process, while the latter concentrates on following detailed
textual commands. Despite the differing focuses of these
tasks, the underlying requirements of interpreting instructions, comprehending the surroundings, and inferring action decisions remain consistent. This paper consolidates
diverse navigation tasks into a unified and generic framework – we investigate the core difficulties of sharing general knowledge and exploiting task-specific capabilities in
learning navigation and propose a novel State-Adaptive
Mixture of Experts (SAME) model that effectively enables
an agent to infer decisions based on different-granularity
language and dynamic observations. Powered by SAME, we
present a versatile agent capable of addressing seven navigation tasks simultaneously, achieving highly comparable
performance to task-specific agents.

1. Introduction
Acquiring the capability to understand natural language
commands and navigate in unfamiliar environments constitutes a fundamental competency for embodied intelligence. In recent years, a great variety of navigational
tasks has emerged, each defined by distinct navigation objectives, from broad, high-level goals [8, 130] to detailed,
low-level directives [6, 54, 81, 101, 129], highlighting exploration and instruction-following, respectively. However,
these tasks are mostly formulated as isolated research problems, and the specialized methods developed for each are
typically not generalizable to others (Figure 1a). For example, structured memory tailored for efficient target object
exploration [10, 11, 88], contextual guidance for vague in-

7794

