This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Room Acoustic Rendering with Multi-View Vision Priors
Derong Jin
University of Maryland, College Park

Ruohan Gao
University of Maryland, College Park

djin77@umd.edu

rhgao@umd.edu

Abstract
An immersive acoustic experience enabled by spatial audio is just as crucial as the visual aspect in creating realistic virtual environments. However, existing methods
for room impulse response estimation rely either on datademanding learning-based models or computationally expensive physics-based modeling. In this work, we introduce Audio-Visual Differentiable Room Acoustic Rendering (AV-DAR), a framework that leverages visual cues extracted from multi-view images and acoustic beam tracing for physics-based room acoustic rendering. Experiments across six real-world environments from two datasets
demonstrate that our multimodal, physics-based approach
is efficient, interpretable, and accurate, significantly outperforming a series of prior methods. Notably, on the
Real Acoustic Field dataset, AV-DAR achieves comparable performance to models trained on 10 times more
data while delivering relative gains ranging from 16.6%
to 50.9% when trained at the same scale. Project Page:
https://humathe.github.io/avdar/.

Figure 1. Our differentiable room acoustic rendering framework
combines multi-view visual observations and acoustic beam tracing for efficient and accurate room impulse response (RIR) prediction. By analyzing the visual cues of surfaces (e.g., fabric vs.
wood), it infers acoustic reflection responses for accurately rendering RIRs through physics-based, end-to-end optimization.

1. Introduction

ted sound propagates through space—including reflections
and diffractions—before reaching a listener. Accurately estimating RIR for every possible source-listener pair would,
in principle, enable realistic spatial acoustic rendering.
Existing methods for estimating RIRs generally fall into
two broad categories: learning-based and physics-based.
Learning-based approaches [5, 37, 39, 40, 49, 59] treat RIR
estimation as a regression task trained on densely measured
ground-truth RIRs. Although effective for fitting simulated
scenes and offering efficient inference, they can be difficult
to deploy in real-world settings due to high data requirements and the lack of physically grounded guarantees. In
contrast, physics-based approaches [33, 65] rely on explicit
acoustic models such as the image-source method [65] or
volume rendering [33]. However, both are impractical for
large scenes with sparse training samples: the image-source
method requires significant computation to enumerate reflection paths and becomes prohibitively expensive in com-

Spatial audio is a fundamental component of immersive
multimedia experiences and is often regarded as “half the
experience” in virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR) applications. For example, spatialized sound can help users
navigate real environments [58], and precise spatial positioning of audio sources enhances natural remote communication and engagement [48]. Accurately modeling spatial
audio unlocks a wide range of immersive applications, from
entertainment and gaming to education and telepresence.
Recreating the spatial acoustic experience is analogous
to novel-view synthesis [42, 44] in vision, where the goal
is to learn from sparse images to synthesize photorealistic
images from arbitrary viewpoints. Similarly, novel-view
acoustic synthesis [33, 38, 40, 59, 65] aims to render the
received sound at any listener location within a scene. A
widely used representation for this task is the Room Impulse Response (RIR) [6, 55], which describes how an emit-

37

