This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeMorph: Tuning-Free Generalized Image Morphing with Diffusion Model
Yukang Cao1∗ Chenyang Si2∗‡ Jinghao Wang3 Ziwei Liu1†
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 2 Nanjing University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://yukangcao.github.io/FreeMorph/
Generated transitions

Input source

Input target

Figure 1. Examples of image morphing obtained via FreeMorph. Given two input images, FreeMorph effectively generates smooth
transitions between them within 30 seconds.

Abstract
We present FreeMorph, the first tuning-free method for image morphing that accommodates inputs with different semantics or layouts. Unlike existing methods that rely on finetuning pre-trained diffusion models and are limited by time
constraints and semantic/layout discrepancies, FreeMorph
delivers high-fidelity image morphing without requiring perinstance training. Despite their efficiency and potential,
tuning-free methods face challenges in maintaining highquality results due to the non-linear nature of the multi-step
denoising process and biases inherited from the pre-trained

diffusion model. In this paper, we introduce FreeMorph to
address these challenges by integrating two key innovations.
1) We first propose a guidance-aware spherical interpolation design that incorporates explicit guidance from the input
images by modifying the self-attention modules, thereby addressing identity loss and ensuring directional transitions
throughout the generated sequence. 2) We further introduce
a step-oriented variation trend that blends self-attention
modules derived from each input image to achieve controlled
and consistent transitions that respect both inputs. Our extensive evaluations demonstrate that FreeMorph outperforms
existing methods, being 10× ∼ 50× faster and establishing
a new state-of-the-art for image morphing.

∗ Equal contributions, ‡ Project lead, † Corresponding author.
Jinghao was a Master student at NTU during this work.

18111

