This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Inference Adaptively for Multimodal Large Language Models
Zhuoyan Xu1 ,* Khoi Duc Nguyen1 ,* Preeti Mukherjee2 ,
Saurabh Bagchi2 , Somali Chaterji2 , Yingyu Liang1,3 , Yin Li1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Purdue University 3 The University of Hong Kong
Abstract
VQAv2

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have shown
impressive capabilities in visual reasoning, yet come with
substantial computational cost, limiting their deployment in
resource-constrained settings. Despite recent effort on improving the efficiency of MLLMs, prior solutions fall short
in responding to varying runtime conditions, in particular
changing resource availability (e.g., contention due to the
execution of other programs on the device). To bridge this
gap, we introduce AdaLLaVA, an adaptive inference framework that learns to dynamically reconfigure operations in
an MLLM during inference, accounting for the input data
and a latency budget. We conduct extensive experiments
across benchmarks involving question-answering, reasoning, and hallucination. Our results show that AdaLLaVA effectively adheres to input latency budget, achieving varying accuracy and latency tradeoffs at runtime. Further, we
demonstrate that AdaLLaVA adapts to both input latency
and content, can be integrated with token selection for enhanced efficiency, and generalizes across MLLMs. Our
project webpage with code release is at https://zhuoyanxu.github.io/ada-llava/.

VizWiz

SQA-IMG

LLaVA-WILD

TextVQA

MM-Vet

POPE

SEED-Bench

MME

GQA

MMBench

What is the image showing?

LLaVA
The image shows a snowman holding
8 TFLOPs
a colorful egg.

60% latency budget

AdaLLaVA

The image is showing a painting or
4.8 TFLOPs
drawing of a snowy winter scene.
85% latency budget
The image shows a snowman holding
6.8 TFLOPs
a colorful ball.
100% latency budget

Input image

1. Introduction

The image shows a snowman holding
8 TFLOPs
a colorful egg.

Figure 1. Top: AdaLLaVA empowers a base LLaVA model with
the ability to adapt to varying compute budgets at inference time
while maintaining minimal performance loss. Bottom: Given an
image, a text query and a latency budget, AdaLLaVA learns to reconfigure operations within a base MLLM, generating appropriate
responses while sticking to the budget.

Large language models (LLMs) [2, 43] have recently been
extended to connect visual and textual data, giving rise to
multimodal large language models (MLLMs). Exemplified
by LLaVA [35, 36] and other works [1, 30, 32, 37, 54, 69],
MLLMs have shown impressive visual reasoning capabilities, but come with significant computational costs. Several
efforts have sought to improve the efficiency of MLLMs by
exploring lightweight architectures, mixture of experts, or
token selection techniques [8, 34, 49, 63, 69]. However,
prior approaches typically exhibit a fixed accuracy and latency footprint during inference, rendering them incapable
of adapting to varying compute budget or input content.
We argue that MLLMs with fixed computational foot-

prints are insufficient for real-world deployment. Consider
an example of deploying an MLLM on a server farm. Different requests may have different latency requirements,
e.g., requests from a mobile application require instant feedback to users, while asynchronous processing tasks such
as video summarization can tolerate higher latency due to
their non-interactive nature. Further, the available computing resources may vary over time as the overall load on the
system fluctuates. Similarly, when deployed on an edge

* Equal contribution

3552

