This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ImHead: A Large-scale Implicit Morphable Model for Localized Head Modeling
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias, Stathis Galanakis, Jiankang Deng
Athanasios Papaioannou, Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London
https://rolpotamias.github.io/imHead/

Figure 1. We propose imHead, a large scale implicit 3D morphable model composed from 4,000 distinct identities under diverse expressions. imHead enables compact latent representations and localized editing.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the era of digital avatars and immersive reality, face modeling lies in the core of human modeling, with numerous
applications in the context of gaming, graphics, and virtual
reality [3, 24, 48]. Over the past decades, 3D morphable
models (3DMMs) [4] have revolutionized 3D face modeling. Traditionally, 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) utilize
linear Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to capture the
statistical variations of 3D facial geometry in a shared, lowdimensional latent space, enabling efficient data compression and improved generalization capabilities [13, 41].
Despite their wide range of downstreaming applications,
from 3D reconstruction [39] to animation [40], PCA-based
models suffer from inherent limitations. Firstly, 3DMMs, as
linear models, fail to capture complex local variations of the
human face, resulting in overly-smooth surfaces that lack
high frequency details. Although non-linear models have
been introduced to enhance the expressivity of 3DMMs
[7, 16, 33, 35, 47], their representations still lack the necessary details required for realistic face modeling. Secondly, 3DMMs require consistent topology and precise correspondences across the dataset to effectively capture statistical variations from a shared template. This can significantly constrain the modeling process, as establishing accurate correspondences between the scans and a unified topology template is a labor-intensive and error-prone task [13],

Over the last years, 3D morphable models (3DMMs) have
emerged as a state-of-the-art methodology for modeling
and generating expressive 3D avatars. However, given their
reliance on a strict topology, along with their linear nature,
they struggle to represent complex full-head shapes. Following the advent of deep implicit functions, we propose
imHead, a novel implicit 3DMM that not only models expressive 3D head avatars but also facilitates localized editing of the facial features. Previous methods directly divided
the latent space into local components accompanied by an
identity encoding to capture the global shape variations,
leading to expensive latent sizes. In contrast, we retain a
single compact identity space and introduce an intermediate region-specific latent representation to enable local edits. To train imHead, we curate a large-scale dataset of
4K distinct identities, making a step-towards large scale 3D
head modeling. Under a series of experiments we demonstrate the expressive power of the proposed model to represent diverse identities and expressions outperforming previous approaches. Additionally, the proposed approach provides an interpretable solution for 3D face manipulation,
allowing the user to make localized edits. Data and models
are available on our project page.

10196

