This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Effective Foundation Model Adaptation for Extreme Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Learning
Fei Zhou1

Peng Wang2 Lei Zhang1 * Wei Wei1 Chen Ding3 Guosheng Lin4 Yanning Zhang1
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
School of Computer Science, Xi’an University of Posts & Telecommunications
4
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
zhoufei@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
gslin@ntu.edu.sg

wangpeng8619@gmail.com

dingchen@xupt.edu.cn

{nwpuzhanglei,weiweinwpu,ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained foundation models have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities across diverse
computer vision tasks through ﬁne-tuning. However, existing ﬁne-tuning approaches often encounter challenges in
extreme cross-domain few-shot learning scenarios, primarily due to the signiﬁcant domain shift between pre-training
data and target tasks, as well as the scarcity of annotated
target samples. To mitigate this issue, we propose a novel absorption adaptation learning framework which meticulously
regularizes the ﬁne-tuning procedure of foundation model
using an expert model with the same architecture but trained
from scratch on the targeted data in two aspects. On one
hand, we ﬁrst design a masked cross-model unidirectional
reconstruction scheme, which forces the foundation model
to recover the intermediate feature of the expert model in
a randomly masked manner. On the other hand, a decision
graph association loss is developed to encourage the consistency of token similarity matrix between these two models.
By doing these, the task-relevant semantic knowledge in the
expert model from both intermediate feature and the ﬁnal
decision levels are appropriately extracted and absorbed by
the foundation model during its ﬁne-tuning, thus mitigating
the performance drop caused by domain gap and limited
annotation. Sufﬁcient experiments with further observations
and analyses underpin our observation and argument. The
code is available at https://github.com/NWPUZhoufei/FMA.

(a) Comparing the performance of foundation models on both indomain (e.g., mini-ImageNet, CIFAR-FS) and extreme cross-domain
(e.g., ISIC, Chest) FSL.

(b) Comparing the performance of ours with existing adaptation
approaches on extreme cross-domain (e.g., ISIC) FSL.

Figure 1. Performance of foundation models on extreme CD-FSL.

rooted in pre-training massive-scale learnable parameters on
extensive datasets, endowing these models with rich semantic knowledge adaptable to multiple domains—especially
those aligned with the pre-training distribution. Even
straightforward ﬁne-tuning of these models has demonstrated superior performance in downstream tasks. Consequently, there has been a burgeoning interest in developing
advanced ﬁne-tuning methodologies [5–9], aiming to enhance the adaptability and efﬁciency of foundation models
in specialized scenarios.
Insight and motivation. While effective in many computer vision tasks, existing ﬁne-tuning strategies encounter
signiﬁcant limitations in extreme cross-domain few-shot

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in foundation models [1–4] have exhibited compelling generalization performance across diverse computer vision tasks. Their efﬁcacy is fundamentally
* Corresponding author.

4582

