This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing the Trees for the Forest: Rethinking Weakly-Supervised
Medical Visual Grounding
Ta Duc Huy1
Duy Anh Huynh1
Yutong Xie 2
Yuankai Qi3
Qi Chen1
4
5
Phi Le Nguyen
Sen Kim Tran
Son Lam Phung
Anton van den Hengel1
Zhibin Liao1
Minh-Son To6
Johan W. Verjans1
1*
Vu Minh Hieu Phan
1
3

2

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
Macquarie University

4

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

Hanoi University of Science and Technology 5 University of Wollongong

Abstract

6

Flinders University

ChexZero

0.4

Visual grounding (VG) is the capability to localize specific regions in an image associated with a particular
text description. In medical imaging, VG enhances interpretability and cross-modal alignment of multimodal models by highlighting relevant pathological features corresponding to textual descriptions. Current vision-language
models struggle to associate textual descriptions with disease regions due to inefficient attention mechanisms and a
lack of fine-grained token representations. In this paper,
we empirically demonstrate two key observations. First,
current VLMs assign high norms to background tokens, diverting the model’s attention from regions of disease. Second, the global tokens used for cross-modal learning are
not representative of local disease tokens. This hampers
identifying correlations between the text and disease tokens. To address this, we introduce simple, yet effective
Disease-Aware Prompting (DAP) process, which uses the
explainability map of a VLM to identify the appropriate image features. This simple strategy amplifies disease-relevant
regions while suppressing background interference. Without any additional pixel-level annotations, DAP improves
visual grounding accuracy by 20.74% compared to stateof-the-art methods across three major chest X-ray datasets.

Ours

w/o prompt
Disease
Non-disease

SelfEQ

Ours
Norm

0.5

0.3
0.2

0.0

VG

0.1

.
.
o.
Ate Cardi dema Opa. l. Ef. Pneu
P
E

.
.
o.
Ate Cardi dema Opa. l. Ef. Pneu
P
E

Figure 1. Left: Average cosine similarity between disease patch tokens and the corresponding disease texts of CheXzero [53] on MSCXR [6] dataset. Without disease-aware prompting, the current
VLM shows undifferentiated alignment scores between disease
and non-disease patches with text. Right: Local feature norms,
and visual grounding of CheXzero [53], Self-EQ [23], and our
disease-aware prompted model.

1. Introduction

gions enhances interpretability [56], aiding radiologists in
assessing model decisions. Additionally, VG integrates effectively with large language models (LLMs) to enhance
multimodal understanding, e.g., refining 3D object localization through interleaved reasoning and grounding [68],
summarizing long text with LLM to improve VG [69], and
introducing iterative vision-language interaction with novel
tokens for object detection (VG) and text generation [35].
In summary, VG enables transparency, assists localization,
and enhances multi-modal interactions on the patch level of
the emerging medical multi-modal models [12, 20, 41].
Many methods [11, 22, 26, 41] perform supervised visual grounding on medical imaging. They rely on text-andregion correspondence annotations to train a cross-modal
fusion module to ground text to specific disease regions.
However, supervised approaches require dense annotations
at the pixel level, which is expensive in the medical settings. Another work [5] proposes weakly-supervised VG
for a pneumonia by using a pre-trained object detector.
Recently, weakly-supervised visual grounding methods [9, 30, 37–40, 46, 52] have leveraged strong visionlanguage models (VLMs) such as CLIP [45], as a backbone,

Visual grounding is a prominent research area at the visionlanguage intersection [15, 18, 33], enabling applications
like visual question answering [24, 55], human-robot interaction [50, 54], and data annotation [26, 59]. Beside
concept-based approaches [25], the ability of linking textual mentioned diseases to specific pathological image re* Lead author.

24445

