This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Heatmap Regression without Soft-Argmax
for Facial Landmark Detection
Chiao-An Yang Raymond A. Yeh
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
Abstract
Facial landmark detection is an important task in computer
vision with numerous applications, such as head pose estimation, expression analysis, face swapping, etc. Heatmap
regression-based methods have been widely used to achieve
state-of-the-art results in this task. These methods involve
computing the argmax over the heatmaps to predict a landmark. Since argmax is not differentiable, these methods use
a differentiable approximation, Soft-argmax, to enable endto-end training on deep-nets. In this work, we revisit this
long-standing choice of using Soft-argmax and demonstrate
that it is not the only way to achieve strong performance.
Instead, we propose an alternative training objective based
on the classic structured prediction framework. Empirically,
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three
facial landmark benchmarks (WFLW, COFW, and 300W),
converging 2.2→ faster during training while maintaining
better/competitive accuracy. Our code is available here1 .

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection, i.e., finding a set of pre-defined
landmarks on a given facial image, is an important and classic problem in computer vision. The detected landmarks
can aid numerous downstream applications [1, 6, 9, 16, 19,
20, 25, 29, 33, 36, 40, 51, 55, 64, 82, 96], e.g., face recognition, face alignment, face synthesis, head pose estimation, expression analysis, face swapping, etc. Research in
facial landmark detection has a long history, from earlier
works [3, 12–15, 26, 38, 56, 58, 67, 68, 88] to deep learning based methods [52, 71, 86]. Notably, methods based on
heatmap regression [17, 18, 22, 29, 35, 37, 41, 43, 48, 50,
57, 63, 80, 81, 84, 92, 98] have found success and gained
popularity.
As the name suggests, heatmap regression methods leverage an intermediate representation of heatmaps, one for each
landmark. To predict a landmark, these methods compute the
1 https : / / github . com / ca - joe - yang / regression without-softarg

argmax over the coordinates of a given heatmap, i.e., it returns the coordinate that contains the maximum value in the
heatmap. However, argmax is not differentiable, hence, Nibali et al. [61] propose Soft-argmax to relax the argmax
for end-to-end training. Regression losses, e.g., ω2 -loss, on
the predicted coordinate is used to train the model. Next,
another challenge in landmark detection is the semantic ambiguity in the annotations [23, 24, 35, 41, 54, 84], meaning
that there is some degree of uncertainty in the annotations
during the labeling process. To address this issue, several
works have studied how to design more robust loss functions [28, 35, 81], e.g., Zhou et al. [98] propose STAR loss,
a self-adaptive loss to address the semantic uncertainty.
In this work, we revisit the idea of Soft-argmax and
find that it may be unnecessary. Instead, we propose an
alternative training objective based on the framework of
structured prediction that does not require a differentiable
coordinate prediction. To address the semantic ambiguity,
we propose image-aware label smoothing, which blurs the
annotation along the edges of the facial image to simulate
label uncertainty. With these two techniques, we achieve a
heatmap regression-based method without Soft-argmax
or a complex loss design.
We evaluate our approach on three established benchmarks, namely, WFLW [84], COFW [7], and 300W [66].
Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance with a
faster training convergence speed while being intuitive and
principled. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose to train heatmap regression-based models using a training objective derived from the structured prediction framework and show that the common choice of
Soft-argmax may not be necessary.
• We introduce an image-aware label smoothing technique
to better capture annotation uncertainty.
• Extensive experiments and ablation studies demonstrate
our method’s competitive performance to state-of-the-art
while achieving a 2.2→ faster training convergence.

2. Related Work
We provide a high-level description of related works on
facial landmark detection, structured prediction, and label

28729

