This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controlling Multimodal LLMs via Reward-guided Decoding
Oscar Mañas1,2,4 , Pierluca D’Oro1,2,4 , Koustuv Sinha4 ,
Adriana Romero-Soriano1,3,4,5 , Michal Drozdzal4 , Aishwarya Agrawal1,2,5
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 McGill University,
4
Meta FAIR, 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair
oscar.manas@mila.quebec

Abstract

to generate those outputs. For instance, a user with visual impairment using the system to understand their surroundings may want the MLLM to respond with highly precise outputs (as hallucinations might be highly undesirable),
while avoiding overly high latency on limited compute (e.g.,
on a smartphone); instead, a user leveraging the MLLM
to generate synthetic captions to train downstream models
may prioritize more diverse and detailed outputs (even if it
means tolerating lower precision) while having the flexibility to spend more compute.
In this paper, we tackle this problem and propose a method for inference-time alignment of MLLMs.
Our method, called multimodal reward-guided decoding
(MRGD), employs two reward functions, one tailored for
hallucination reduction [3] and one tailored for improving
object recall. Using these reward functions as criteria for
searching for better outputs, our method gives control over
the two axes mentioned above: by giving the option to set a
relative weight for each reward, it allows to smoothly control the trade-off between object precision and recall of the
MLLM’s outputs; by varying the breadth of the search, we
can control the trade-off between the amount of test-time
compute and the degree of visual grounding (which encompasses both object precision and recall).
Previous works explored reducing hallucinations in
MLLMs by using methods such as prompting [53], supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [26] and RLHF fine-tuning [42,
49, 56]. However, these methods do not allow fine-grained
inference-time controllability of the MLLM’s behavior:
prompting relies on very coarse control by means of prompt
engineering, while SFT and RLHF allow no controllability
at all during inference. For text-only LLMs, reward-guided
decoding has been shown to be an effective way of obtaining fine-grained controllability [13, 19, 32, 40], but there
is a lack of such techniques for MLLMs. Compared to the
text-only case, for which a reward model processes data
from a single modality, reward models guiding MLLMs
face unique challenges, as they need to process both visual

As Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) gain
widespread applicability, it is becoming increasingly desirable to adapt them for diverse user needs. In this paper,
we study the adaptation of MLLMs through controlled decoding. To achieve this, we introduce the first method for
reward-guided decoding of MLLMs and demonstrate its application in improving their visual grounding. Our method
involves building reward models for visual grounding and
using them to guide the MLLM’s decoding process. Concretely, we build two separate reward models to independently control the degree of object precision and recall in
the model’s output. Our approach enables on-the-fly controllability of an MLLM’s inference process in two ways:
first, by giving control over the relative importance of each
reward function during decoding, allowing a user to dynamically trade off object precision for recall in image captioning tasks; second, by giving control over the breadth
of the search during decoding, allowing the user to control
the trade-off between the amount of test-time compute and
the degree of visual grounding. We evaluate our method
on standard object hallucination benchmarks, showing that
it provides significant controllability over MLLM inference,
while consistently outperforming existing hallucination mitigation methods.

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have shown
great potential to solve a wide range of visiolinguistic tasks,
while offering a general language interface to users [5, 9].
As the adoption of MLLMs increases [1, 14, 43], the demand to easily control their behavior to satisfy diverse user
needs is emerging. Two needs, in particular, arise among
the most important for users of MLLMs: a) control over
the precision and thoroughness of their output (e.g., object
recall), and b) control over the amount of compute spent

1391

