This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Enhancement to Understanding: Build a Generalized Bridge for Low-light
Vision via Semantically Consistent Unsupervised Fine-tuning
Sen Wang1 * Shao Zeng2 * Tianjun Gu1 Zhizhong Zhang1 Ruixin Zhang2† Shouhong Ding2
Jingyun Zhang3 Jun Wang3 Xin Tan1† Yuan Xie1 Lizhuang Ma1
1

East China Normal University

2

Tencent Youtu Lab

Abstract

3

Tencent WeChat Pay Lab 33

Low-light Enhancement

Low-level enhancement and high-level visual understanding in low-light vision have traditionally been treated separately. Low-light enhancement improves image quality
for downstream tasks, but existing methods rely on physical or geometric priors, limiting generalization. Evaluation mainly focuses on visual quality rather than downstream performance. Low-light visual understanding, constrained by scarce labeled data, primarily uses task-specific
domain adaptation, which lacks scalability. To address
these challenges, we build a generalized bridge between
low-light enhancement and low-light understanding, which
we term Generalized Enhancement For Understanding
(GEFU). This paradigm improves both generalization and
scalability. To address the diverse causes of low-light
degradation, we leverage pretrained generative diffusion
models to optimize images, achieving zero-shot generalization performance. Building on this, we propose Semantically Consistent Unsupervised Fine-tuning (SCUF). Specifically, to overcome text prompt limitations, we introduce
an illumination-aware image prompt to explicitly guide
image generation and propose a cycle-attention adapter
to maximize its semantic potential. To mitigate semantic
degradation in unsupervised training, we propose caption
and reflectance consistency to learn high-level semantics
and image-level spatial semantics. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms current
state-of-the-art methods in traditional image quality and
GEFU tasks including classification, detection, and semantic segmentation. The code is available at GEFU.

Poor Generalization

Low-light Understanding

Task-specific

Generalized Enhancement For Understanding

Enhancer

Good Generalization

Versatile

Figure 1. We propose “Generalized Enhancement For Understanding,” to build a generalized bridge between low-light enhancement
and understanding. Face images from [62].

1. Introduction

tasks such as classification [23], segmentation [9, 56] and
detection [31]. Research in low-light vision focuses on
two main approaches: low-level enhancement and highlevel visual understanding. The first approach enhances images based on the physical priors of imaging, but is limited by physical regularization [11, 30, 35] and dataset constraints [13, 54], which leads to poor generalization. Additionally, this method focuses on the quality of the image
itself, such as the peak signal-to-noise ratio, and evaluation
of downstream tasks often requires training visual models
from scratch [2, 30, 35], that is, “Enhance Then Understand
(ETU).” The second approach involves unsupervised domain adaptation [6, 23, 33], transferring knowledge learned
from daytime images to label-poor low-light images for visual tasks. However, this end-to-end learning framework is
task-specific and lacks scalability.
Addressing these challenges, we propose a simple yet
effective paradigm, “Generalized Enhancement For Understanding (GEFU),” which bridges the gap between lowlevel enhancement and high-level understanding. As shown
in Fig. 1, this approach includes a robust enhancer that

Low-light conditions are unavoidable in the application of
visual models, significantly impacting their performance in
* Equal contribution. This work was done by Sen Wang during an internship at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author.

13804

