This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdsQA: Towards Advertisement Video Understanding
Guoli Jia1
Jingxuan Li2
Sa Yang3
Xinwei Long1
Kai Tian1 * Peng Xu1B
Yihua Shao4
Kaiyan Zhang1
Che Jiang1
Hao Xu5
Yang Liu2
2
1,6B
Jiaheng Ma
Bowen Zhou
1
2
Tsinghua University, Independent Researcher, 3 Peking University, 4 CASIA
5
Harvard University,6 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Lab
{longxw22, tk23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {peng xu, zhoubowen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Project page: https://github.com/TsinghuaC3I/AdsQA
MARS2 workshop & challenge: https://lens4mllms.github.io/mars2-workshop-iccv2025/

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have taken a great step
towards AGI. Meanwhile, an increasing number of domainspecific problems such as math and programming boost
these general-purpose models to continuously evolve via
learning deeper expertise. Now is thus the time further to
extend the diversity of specialized applications for knowledgeable LLMs, though collecting high quality data with
unexpected and informative tasks is challenging. In this
paper, we propose to use advertisement (ad) videos as a
challenging test-bed to probe the ability of LLMs in perceiving beyond the objective physical content of common visual domain. Our motivation is to take full advantage of the
clue-rich and information-dense ad videos’ traits, e.g., marketing logic, persuasive strategies, and audience engagement. Our contribution is three-fold: (1) To our knowledge,
this is the first attempt to use ad videos with well-designed
tasks to evaluate LLMs. We contribute AdsQA, a challenging ad Video QA benchmark derived from 1,544 ad videos
with 10,962 clips, totaling 22.7 hours, providing 5 challenging tasks. (2) We propose ReAd-R, a Deepseek-R1 styled
RL model that reflects on questions, and generates answers
via reward-driven optimization. (3) We benchmark 14 toptier LLMs on AdsQA, and our ReAd-R achieves the stateof-the-art outperforming strong competitors equipped with
long-chain reasoning capabilities by a clear margin.

mains [13, 93] are increasingly studied to boost these
general-purpose LLMs to evolve continuously. The specialized domains contribute significantly in optimizing and
evaluating generalist models towards specialized reasoning
like domain experts [18, 52]. Recently, a clear phenomenon
[20, 84] has been observed that LLMs are already good at
reasoning a kind of step-wise problems represented by math
and programming. As has been widely discussed [20, 84],
the step-wise problems based on explicit theorems and programming syntax are compatible with the chain-style reasoning approach ‘‘if A, then B’’. To further extend
the diversity of specialized reasoning for LLMs, it would
be better to exploit other novel domains where the domainspecific reasoning is unmanageable for “if A, then B”.
Therefore, we, for the first time, propose to use advertisement videos to probe the reasoning boundary of
LLMs in perceiving implicit multimodal reasoning. The
domain-unique features of clue-rich and information-dense
ad videos can be summarized as key words implicit, nonphysical, mental, heuristic, etc. Different from useruploaded videos on social media, ads are typically meticulously crafted by commercial or non-commercial organizations, making them entertaining, creative, aesthetically appealing, and capable of offering enjoyment and attracting
viewer engagement.

1. Introduction

Based on these domain-specific advantages of ad videos,
we introduce AdsQA, a comprehensive and carefully curated VideoQA benchmark derived from 1,544 ad videos
containing 10,962 clips, spanning a total of 22.7 hours of
video content. The AdsQA introduces five tasks, each requiring different types and levels of reasoning: (1) Visual
Concept Understanding: Identify and analyze visual elements in ads. (2) Emotion Recognition: Detect emotions
and infer their roles in ads. (3) Theme and Core Message
Extraction: Summarize the central theme and key messages

A recent milestone flagged by OpenAI o1 [25] and
DeepSeek-R1 [21] has been in the spotlight, and already
opened up an era of large reasoning models. Meanwhile, going beyond general domains, the specialized do* Kai Tian has equal contribution with Xinwei Long.

23396

