This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consensus-Driven Active Model Selection
Justin Kay*
MIT

Grant Van Horn
UMass Amherst

Subhransu Maji
UMass Amherst

Daniel Sheldon
UMass Amherst

Sara Beery
MIT

Abstract
The widespread availability of off-the-shelf machine
learning models poses a challenge: which model, of the
many available candidates, should be chosen for a given
data analysis task? This question of model selection is
traditionally answered by collecting and annotating a validation dataset—a costly and time-intensive process. We
propose a method for active model selection, using predictions from candidate models to prioritize the labeling of
test data points that efficiently differentiate the best candidate. Our method, CODA, performs consensus-driven
active model selection by modeling relationships between
classifiers, categories, and data points within a probabilistic framework. The framework uses the consensus and disagreement between models in the candidate pool to guide
the label acquisition process, and Bayesian inference to update beliefs about which model is best as more information
is collected. We validate our approach by curating a collection of 26 benchmark tasks capturing a range of model
selection scenarios. CODA outperforms existing methods
for active model selection significantly, reducing the annotation effort required to discover the best model by upwards
of 70% compared to the previous state-of-the-art. Code and
data are available at: https://github.com/justinkay/coda.

Figure 1. We introduce CODA, a consensus-driven method for
active model selection. This figure shows the number of labels
needed to converge to the optimal or near-optimal (within 1% accuracy) model in a benchmark suite of 26 model selection tasks.
CODA is significantly more label-efficient than prior work, identifying a near-optimal model with fewer than 25 labeled examples
over 50% of the time, and with fewer than 100 labeled examples
over 80% of the time.

evaluating the performance of each model on that subset.
To ensure results are robust, these datasets need to be large,
representing significant human effort for each new dataset.
While reducing human effort during training has been
well-studied [35, 59], efficient model selection at test time
is relatively unexplored. Progress on this challenge will
be beneficial for both users of pre-trained models and for
researchers designing label-efficient algorithms. In particular, the field of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
proposes to adapt algorithms to new data without any human labels whatsoever, yet successful UDA methods are
highly dependent on the use of human-labeled validation
sets for model selection [15, 24, 28, 29, 42]. This contradiction has motivated work in unsupervised model selection [43, 56, 70], but so far these methods have proven to
be unreliable, especially in challenging real-world conditions [15, 24, 28, 42].
Recently, methods for active model selection have been

1. Introduction
The availability of off-the-shelf machine learning models
is growing rapidly. As of this writing there are over 1.9M
pre-trained models available for download from the HuggingFace Models repository [22], ranging from small specialized models to large general-purpose foundation models. Application-specific model zoos are growing as well,
curating sets of models for everything from wildlife monitoring [18] to medicine [8, 46]. These zoos potentially enable accurate data analysis without the need for custom ML
development, but introduce a new challenge: which model,
of the many available, performs best for a given set of
data? Traditionally model selection decisions are made by
collecting labels for a subset of the data in question and
* Correspondence to: kayj@mit.edu

4594

