This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CompleteMe: Reference-based Human Image Completion
Yu-Ju Tsai1∗ Brian Price2 Qing Liu2 Luis Figueroa2
Daniil Pakhomov2 Zhihong Ding2 Scott Cohen2 Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
University of California, Merced 2 Adobe Research
Non-reference Methods

Occluded Input

LOHC

Reference-based Methods

BrushNet

Reference Image

MimicBrush

CompleteMe

Figure 1. Given occluded human image, non-reference methods, LOHC [43] and BrushNet [12], can generate plausible results but lack the
unique information of the person like special clothing and tattoo pattern (highlighted in Red box). Such information can be only acquired by
additional reference images. Given the reference image, MimicBrush [3] fails to find the corresponding parts between input and reference.
Our CompleteMe can preserve identical and fine-detail information from the reference image and generate a consistent result.

Abstract
Recent methods for human image completion can reconstruct plausible body shapes but often fail to preserve unique details, such as specific clothing patterns
or distinctive accessories, without explicit reference images. Even state-of-the-art reference-based inpainting approaches struggle to accurately capture and integrate finegrained details from reference images. To address this limitation, we propose CompleteMe, a novel reference-based
human image completion framework. CompleteMe employs
a dual U-Net architecture combined with a Region-focused
Attention (RFA) Block, which explicitly guides the model’s
attention toward relevant regions in reference images. This
approach effectively captures fine details and ensures accurate semantic correspondence, significantly improving the
fidelity and consistency of completed images. Addition*Work was done when Yu-Ju Tsai was an intern at Adobe Research.

ally, we introduce a challenging benchmark specifically designed for evaluating reference-based human image completion tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
proposed method achieves superior visual quality and semantic consistency compared to existing techniques.

1. Introduction
Human image completion [31, 43–45] is an essential task
in computer vision, with a wide range of applications, including photo editing [13, 29], virtual try-on [5, 7, 14, 20],
animation [9, 36], and 3D avatar [23, 47]. The ability to accurately reconstruct missing parts of human images has significant implications for enhancing user experience in these
areas. Traditional inpainting methods [39, 40] have made
strides in generating plausible image completions, but they
often fall short in maintaining consistency of complex features like clothing, pose, and human anatomy. These challenges become even more pronounced when dealing with

18252

