This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-Aware Diffusion-Guided Refinement of 3D Scenes
Sarosij Bose, Arindam Dutta, Sayak Nag, Junge Zhang, Jiachen Li,
Konstantinos Karydis, Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury
University of California, Riverside, USA
{sbose007,adutt020,snag005,jzhan744,jiachen.li}@ucr.edu, {kkarydis,amitrc}@ece.ucr.edu

Input View

Flash3D

UAR-Scenes

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Overview: We introduce UAR-Scenes, a diffusion-guided refinement pipeline that enhances outputs from pre-trained singleimage to 3D scene reconstruction models, such as Flash3D [1], which yield imperfect renderings (red box) under slight viewpoint variations
(2nd column from left). By harnessing the generative power of a latent video diffusion model (LVDM) [2], our approach can sample plausible
explanations for unseen regions (green box) to produce refined, high-quality novel views of 3D scenes (3rd column from left).

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D scenes from a single image is a fundamentally ill-posed task due to the severely under-constrained
nature of the problem. Consequently, when the scene is rendered from novel camera views, existing single image to 3D
reconstruction methods render incoherent and blurry views.
This problem is exacerbated when the unseen regions are far
away from the input camera. In this work, we address these
inherent limitations in existing single image-to-3D scene
feedforward networks. To alleviate the poor performance
due to insufficient information beyond the input image’s view,
we leverage a strong generative prior, in the form of a pretrained latent video diffusion model, for iterative refinement
of a coarse scene represented by optimizable Gaussian parameters. To ensure that the style and texture of the generated
images align with that of the input image, we incorporate
on-the-fly Fourier-style transfer between the generated images and the input image. Additionally, we design a semantic

uncertainty quantification module that calculates the perpixel entropy and yields uncertainty maps used to guide the
refinement process from the most confident pixels while discarding the remaining highly uncertain ones. We conduct
extensive experiments on real-world scene datasets, including in-domain RealEstate-10K and out-of-domain KITTIv2, showing that our approach can provide more realistic
and high-fidelity novel view synthesis results compared to
existing state-of-the-art methods. The project page is available at: https://github.com/UCR-Vision-andLearning-Group/UAR-Scenes

1. Introduction

28271

3D Scene Reconstruction is a long standing challenging task,
playing a crucial role in holistic scene understanding [3, 4],
generative content creation, mixed reality [5], robot navigation and path planning [6–9]. Reconstructing 3D scenes
involves Novel View Synthesis (NVS), wherein the scene is

