This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlocking the Potential of Diffusion Priors in Blind Face Restoration
Yunqi Miao1 Zhiyu Qu3 Mingqi Gao2 Changrui Chen1
Jifei Song3 Jungong Han2 Jiankang Deng4
1
2
University of Warwick
University of Sheffield 3 University of Surrey 4 Imperial College London
{yunqimiao709, im.mingqi, jungonghan77, jiankangdeng}@gmail.com, changrui.chen@warwick.ac.uk, z.qu@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Although diffusion prior is rising as a powerful solution for blind face restoration (BFR), the inherent gap between the vanilla diffusion model and BFR settings hinders its seamless adaptation. The gap mainly stems from
the discrepancy between 1) high-quality (HQ) and lowquality (LQ) images and 2) synthesized and real-world images. The vanilla diffusion model is trained on images
with no or less degradations, whereas BFR handles moderately to severely degraded images. Additionally, LQ images used for training are synthesized by a naive degradation model with limited degradation patterns, which fails to
simulate complex and unknown degradations in real-world
scenarios. In this work, we use a unified network FLIPNET
that switches between two modes to resolve specific gaps.
In restoration mode, the model gradually integrates BFRoriented features and face embeddings from LQ images to
achieve authentic and faithful face restoration. In degradation mode, the model synthesizes real-world like degraded
images based on the knowledge learned from real-world
degradation datasets. Extensive evaluations on benchmark
datasets show that our model 1) outperforms previous diffusion prior based BFR methods in terms of authenticity and
fidelity, and 2) outperforms the naive degradation model in
modeling the real-world degradations.

(a) LQ

(b) SwinIR

(d) WaveFace(w/o SwinIR) (e) Ours(w/ SwinIR)

(c) DiffBIR

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Restoration results of WIDER [39]. Pre-processing
module (i.e., SwinIR) based methods (i.e., DiffBIR) fail to render
fine-grained details. Methods with condition-concatenated inputs
(i.e., WaveFace) unable to handle unknown and complex degradation in real-world scenarios, leading to over-smoothed results.

and the BFR setting hinders its seamless adaptation. The
gap arises mainly from the distribution mismatch between:
1) HQ images and low-quality (LQ) images and 2) synthesized images and real-world images.

1. Introduction

The vanilla DMs are trained on natural images with
minor or no degradation, making them unfit the BFR
task, which primarily targets moderately to severely degraded face images. To bridge the gap, previous attempts [21, 23] brutally remove the severe degradations
via a pre-processing module [20], followed by a DM to
render facial details. However, the pre-processing module also removes discriminative details such as wrinkle
and freckle (Fig. 1(b)), thus compromising the fidelity of
restoration (Fig. 1(c)). Some approaches [22] bypass the
pre-processing module by concatenating the degraded images, acting as the condition, to HQ inputs. Although the
first gap is mitigated by gradually introducing LQ features
throughout denoising, they fail to deliver adequate results
on real-world data (Fig. 1(d)) as the degradation model used
for training set synthesizing fails to simulate real-world

Blind face restoration (BFR) aims to recover high-quality
(HQ) facial images from various degradations. The illposed nature of this task stems from the complexity and
uncertainty of degradations in real-world scenarios. Versatile facial priors have been used to help BFR, such as facial
landmarks [4], referential HQ images or features [31, 35],
and the pretrained StyleGAN [33, 40]. The success of diffusion models (DMs) [7, 28] in generation tasks has recently
excited the restoration field, as their ability to generate HQ
content from noise aligns perfectly with the restoration objective [21, 22, 36, 38]. Despite its powerful generative ability, the inherent gap between the vanilla diffusion process

13471

