This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Devil is in the Spurious Correlations:
Boosting Moment Retrieval with Dynamic Learning
Xinyang Zhou1⋆
1

Fanyue Wei2⋆

Lixin Duan1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Angela Yao2
2

†

Wen Li1

National University of Singapore

{x.y.zhou2020, lxduan, liwenbnu}@gmail.com
{wfanyue, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg
Query: “The blonde woman works out in a gym with red lighting.”

✓Complete video clips with real ground truth

40.0s

GT
QD-DETR[26]
UVCOM[42]

Ours
CG-DETR[25]
BAM-DETR[16]

× Incomplete video clips with masked ground truth

Time

Masked target moment
76.0s

Ours

148.0s

Baselines
Time

Figure 1. (a)

Standard mAP

22.0s

BAM-DETR[16]

Ours

CG-DETR[25]

UVCOM[42]
QD-DETR[26]
Spurious mAP (desc)

Figure 1. (b)

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of moment retrieval models under normal and spurious correlation videos by masking the content of target clips
of video. We found the existing works are suffering from a crucial reason stems from the spurious correlation between the text queries and
the moment context. Baselines predict the Spurious GT even if the target moments are masked. In contrast, TD-DETR predicts the segment
near the mask with lower confidence. (b) To verify the issue of spurious correlation, we introduce the Spurious mAP as the metric. Our
model achieves the best ratio of mAP to Spurious mAP.

Abstract
Given a textual query along with a corresponding video, the
objective of moment retrieval aims to localize the moments
relevant to the query within the video. While commendable
results have been demonstrated by existing transformerbased approaches, predicting the accurate temporal span
of the target moment is still a major challenge. This paper reveals that a crucial reason stems from the spurious
correlation between the text query and the moment context.
Namely, the model makes predictions by overly associating
queries with background frames rather than distinguishing
target moments. To address this issue, we propose a dynamic learning approach for moment retrieval, where two
strategies are designed to mitigate the spurious correlation.
First, we introduce a novel video synthesis approach to con-

struct a dynamic context for the queried moment, enabling
the model to attend to the target moment of the corresponding query across dynamic backgrounds. Second, to alleviate
the over-association with backgrounds, we enhance representations temporally by incorporating text-dynamics interaction, which encourages the model to align text with target
moments through complementary dynamic representations.
With the proposed method, our model significantly alleviates the spurious correlation issue in moment retrieval and
establishes new state-of-the-art performance on two popular benchmarks, i.e., QVHighlights and Charades-STA. In
addition, detailed ablation studies and evaluations across
different architectures demonstrate the generalization and
effectiveness of the proposed strategies. Our code is available at https://github.com/xyangzhou/TDDETR.

⋆ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

20981

