This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IntrinsicControlNet: Cross-distribution Image Generation with Real and Unreal
Zixuan Xie2
Zhizhen Wu1
Dianbing Xi1
Rengan Xie1 *
Jiayuan Lu1 *
Qi Ye3
Rui Wang1
Hujun Bao1
Yuchi Huo1,4†
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Zhejiang Lab
2

eehyc0@gmail.com

xiezixuan211@mails.ucas.ac.cn

bao@cad.zju.edu.cn

{12321082, rgxie, zhizhenwu, db.xi, qi.ye, ruiwang}@zju.edu.cn

Synthetic

Synthetic

Real

Synthetic

Real

Synthetic

Remove Light

Change Light

Real

Figure 1. We propose an intrinsic controllable generative framework that synthesizes realistic images from 3D assets, similar to a rendering
engine, using intrinsic images like material, geometric, and lighting information as network inputs. This approach greatly simplifies
intrinsic editing tasks for real images, such as object insertion and removal, while achieving better results compared to existing methods.

Abstract
Realistic images are usually produced by simulating light
transportation results of 3D scenes using rendering engines.
This framework can precisely control the output but is usually weak at producing photo-like images. Alternatively,
diffusion models have seen great success in photorealistic
image generation by leveraging priors from large datasets
of real-world images but lack affordance controls. Promisingly, the recent ControlNet enables flexible control of the
diffusion model without degrading its generation quality.
In this work, we introduce IntrinsicControlNet, an intrinsically controllable image generation framework that enables easily generating photorealistic images from precise
and explicit control, similar to a rendering engine, by using intrinsic images such as material properties, geometric
details, and lighting as network inputs. Beyond this, we notice that there is a domain gap between the synthetic and

real-world datasets, and therefore, naively blending these
datasets yields domain confusion. To address this problem, we present a cross-domain control architecture that extracts control information from synthetic datasets, and control and content information from real-world datasets. This
bridges the domain gap between real-world and synthetic
datasets, enabling the blending or editing of 3D assets and
real-world photos to support various interesting applications. Experiments and user studies demonstrate that our
method can generate explicitly controllable and highly photorealistic images based on the input intrinsic images.

1. Introduction

27315

Generating photorealistic images using 3D models is still a
challenging and costly task due to the complexity of modeling diverse material properties [3, 28] and simulating light
propagation to solve the rendering equation [16]. Tradi-

