This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind the Gap: Aligning Vision Foundation Models to Image Feature Matching
Yuhan Liu

Jingwen Fu Yang Wu Kangyi Wu Pengna Li
Jiayi Wu Sanping Zhou Jingmin Xin†
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{liuyuhan200095, wuyang cc, wukangyi747600, sauerfisch}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jwfu99@gmail.com
jiayi.wu@xjtu.edu.cn, spzhou@xjtu.edu.cn, jxin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Leveraging the vision foundation models has emerged as
a mainstream paradigm that improves the performance of
image feature matching. However, previous works have ignored the misalignment when introducing the foundation
models into feature matching. The misalignment arises
from the discrepancy between the foundation models focusing on single-image understanding and the cross-image understanding requirement of feature matching. Specifically,
1) the embeddings derived from commonly used foundation
models exhibit discrepancies with the optimal embeddings
required for feature matching; 2) lacking an effective mechanism to leverage the single-image understanding ability
into cross-image understanding. A significant consequence
of the misalignment is they struggle when addressing multiinstance feature matching problems. To address this, we introduce a simple but effective framework, called IMD (Image feature Matching with a pre-trained Diffusion model)
with two parts: 1) Unlike the dominant solutions employing contrastive-learning based foundation models that emphasize global semantics, we integrate the generative-based
diffusion models to effectively capture instance-level details. 2) We leverage the prompt mechanism in generative
model as a natural tunnel, propose a novel cross-image interaction prompting module to facilitate bidirectional information interaction between image pairs. To more accurately measure the misalignment, we propose a new benchmark called IMIM, which focuses on multi-instance scenarios. Our proposed IMD establishes a new state-of-the-art
in commonly evaluated benchmarks, and the superior improvement 12% in IMIM indicates our method efficiently
mitigates the misalignment.

Encoder

Abstract

Only Global
Maximum Semantic
Similarity

(a) Contrastive-Learning based Foundation model for Matching

Diffusion UNet

Prompts
from input images

Explicit Representation
for every objects

(b) IMD: Generative based Diffusion model for Matching

Figure 1. The main idea of our proposed IMD. Previous works
[15, 28] failed in multi-instance scenarios due to the misalignment.
Our IMD leverages the explicit representation of specific instances
within the diffusion model with an interaction module, accurately
matching the specific instance.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

Image feature matching serves as the foundation for many
computer vision tasks, finds extensive applications in areas as image stitching [25, 33], 3D reconstruction [45, 46]
and visual localization [6, 41, 43]. Over the past decade,
image feature matching has evolved from hand-crafted approaches [4, 39] to learning-based methods [12, 35, 37]. Recently, numerous learnable image matchers [14, 27, 49, 52]
trained on real-world datasets [11, 24] have been proposed
achieving ever-improving performance. It has been observed that such methods tend to overfit to a specific training distribution or domain and fail to generalize on unseen
data fail to generalize on unseen data [21]. Recent approaches [8, 15, 21] have demonstrated that integrating vision foundation models pre-trained on large-scale datasets
can effectively solve this issue, achieving superior generalization ability. However, our investigation identifies a non-

20313

