This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamCube: RGB-D Panorama Generation via Multi-plane Synchronization
Yukun Huang1 Yanning Zhou2 Jianan Wang3 Kaiyi Huang1 Xihui Liu1†
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent 3 Astribot
https://yukun-huang.github.io/DreamCube/

Panoramic Depth Estimation

RGB-D Panorama Generation from Single View

3D Gaussian Scene Generation

Figure 1. In this work, we introduce Multi-plane Synchronization to generalize 2D diffusion models to multi-plane omnidirectional
representations (i.e., cubemaps), and DreamCube for RGB-D cubemap generation. The proposed approaches can be applied to different
tasks including RGB-D panorama generation, panorama depth estimation, and 3D scene generation.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Humans live in a fully immersive 3D environment. Simulating this immersive experience is crucial for applications
such as virtual reality, gaming, and robotics [41, 51, 57].
As a fundamental technology for building 3D world, omnidirectional content synthesis aims to generate visual content
that covers a full 360◦ × 180◦ field of view, encompassing
both appearance and geometry. Despite this necessity, modern generative models [7, 24, 35] require large amounts of
training data, yet the scale of currently available omnidirectional assets remains relatively small compared to conventional perspective images.

3D panorama synthesis is a promising yet challenging
task that demands high-quality and diverse visual appearance and geometry of the generated omnidirectional content. Existing methods leverage rich image priors from pretrained 2D foundation models to circumvent the scarcity
of 3D panoramic data, but the incompatibility between 3D
panoramas and 2D single views limits their effectiveness.
In this work, we demonstrate that by applying multi-plane
synchronization to the operators from 2D foundation models, their capabilities can be seamlessly extended to the omnidirectional domain. Based on this design, we further introduce DreamCube, a multi-plane RGB-D diffusion model
for 3D panorama generation, which maximizes the reuse
of 2D foundation model priors to achieve diverse appearances and accurate geometry while maintaining multi-view
consistency. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in panoramic image generation,
panoramic depth estimation, and 3D scene generation.

† Corresponding author.

Leveraging the rich image priors from pre-trained 2D
diffusion models [35], previous works [1, 8, 19, 26, 44–
46, 53, 54] explore repurposing diffusion-based image generators to create 360◦ panoramas, which circumvents the
problem of insufficient panoramic data. While most of these
works [1, 8, 45, 46, 53, 54] adopt equirectangular projection
(ERP) for panoramas for simplicity, this approach introduces significant challenges. The ERP causes severe spatial
distortions near the poles, resulting in a pixel distribution
fundamentally different from that of perspective images on

24922

