This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Your Text Encoder Can Be An Object-Level Watermarking Controller
Naresh Kumar Devulapally1† Mingzhen Huang1 Vishal Asnani2
Shruti Agarwal2 Siwei Lyu1 Vishnu Suresh Lokhande1†
1
University at Buffalo, SUNY 2 Adobe Research
{devulapa, mhuang33, siweilyu, vishnulo}@buffalo.edu

{vasnani, shragarw}@adobe.com

Figure 1. Text prompt–controlled object-level watermarking: (Left Image): Our method embeds a watermarking token W∗ into textto-image generation, allowing users to watermark a full image or selected objects in an image. By leveraging cross-attention maps, any
subset of prompt tokens {Pi , Pj , ...} can be targeted while preserving non-watermarked regions. (Right Image): We also demonstrate
personalized object watermarking using Styled UNet and Textual Inversion.

Abstract
Invisible watermarking of AI-generated images can help
with copyright protection, enabling detection and identification of AI-generated media. In this work, we present a
novel approach to watermark images of T2I Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs). By only fine-tuning text token embeddings W∗ , we enable watermarking in selected objects
or parts of the image, offering greater flexibility compared
to traditional full-image watermarking. Our method leverages the text encoder’s compatibility across various LDMs,
allowing plug-and-play integration for different LDMs.
Moreover, introducing the watermark early in the encoding
stage improves robustness to adversarial perturbations in
later stages of the pipeline. Our approach achieves 99% bit
accuracy (48 bits) with a 105 × reduction in model parameters, enabling efficient watermarking. Code can be found
at github.com/naresh-ub/object_watermark.

[33]. With generative AI models producing indistinguishable images from human-made art, maintaining authorship
provenance in digital media is crucial. Efforts are underway, from legislative measures like the Executive Order on
Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence [1], to
industry initiatives that aim to watermark all AI-generated
content [24] [30]. These developments highlight the growing importance of watermarking as a key area of study.
As a result, multiple Generative AI (GenAI) watermarking methods have been proposed [7, 9, 33] to invisibly watermark the entire image while generating the image. However, lots of current watermark methods [3, 6] can only encode a watermark to an open-box generative model as they
need to access the latent space. Moreover, similar to other
invisible watermarking techniques [2, 6, 7], these methods also suffer with the inherent trade-off between quality and robustness of the embedded signal. Owing to the
high imperceptibility requirements for the high-quality image generation, these watermarks more often lacks robustness [9, 35]. To improve the watermark imperceptibility,
partial watermarking has been proposed to limit the watermark related changes only to selected “non-salient” objects
or regions in the image [22]. In our paper, we bring such

1. Introduction
As debates around copyright and intellectual property intensify, the need for effective watermarking solutions increases
† Corresponding authors: N. K. Devulapally and V. S. Lokhande.

16576

