This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SC-Captioner: Improving Image Captioning with Self-Correction by
Reinforcement Learning
Lin Zhang1 *, Xianfang Zeng2p , Kangcong Li1 , Gang Yu2 , Tao Chen1,3†
1
College of Future Information Technology, Fudan University
2
StepFun
3
Shanghai Innovation Institute
22110720068@m.fudan.edu.cn, eetchen@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose SC-Captioner, a reinforcement learning
framework that enables the self-correcting capability of image caption models. Our crucial technique lies in the design
of the reward function to incentivize accurate caption corrections. Speciﬁcally, the predicted and reference captions
are decomposed into object, attribute, and relation sets using scene-graph parsing algorithms. We calculate the set
difference between sets of initial and self-corrected captions
to identify added and removed elements. These elements are
matched against the reference sets to calculate correctness
bonuses for accurate reﬁnements and mistake punishments
for wrong additions and removals, thereby forming the ﬁnal reward. For image caption quality assessment, we propose a set of metrics reﬁned from CAPTURE that alleviate
its incomplete precision evaluation and inefﬁcient relation
matching problems. Furthermore, we collect a ﬁne-grained
annotated image caption dataset, ReﬁnedCaps, consisting
of 6.5K diverse images from COCO dataset. Experiments
show that applying SC-Captioner on large visual-language
models can generate better image captions across various
scenarios, signiﬁcantly outperforming the direct preference
optimization training strategy. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/zl2048/SC-Captioner

Figure 1. Comparisons of Qwen2-VL-7B baseline, Supervised
Fine-Tuning (SFT), Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), and
our method on DOCCI500. All models are trained on ReﬁnedCaps. Our proposed method outperforms DPO and SFT baseline.

1. Introduction

can produce more precise and detailed image captions since
they have larger parameter numbers and more extensive
training data compared with traditional architectures.
However, image captioning with LVLMs still faces two
challanges which can be summarized as precision and recall. Precision refers to the proportion of the content in the
generated caption that actually exists in the image. LVLMs
sometimes give statements about contents not exists in the
images. The phenomenon is also called “hallucination”.
Recall measures the extent to which the generated caption
captures all the relevant details and objects present in the
image. While longer captions can achieve higher recall,
they are more likely to contain hallucinations. A balance between precision and recall is necessary to avoid both missing important details and introducing incorrect information.
When generating image captions, providing humans
with initial caption for post-editing is often more efﬁcient
than creating a caption from scratch. Inspired by this human

Image captioning is a fundamental task in computer vision
and has been studied for years [6, 18, 28, 30, 48, 49]. This
technique is widely used in auto generation of ﬁlm captions
and data auto-labeling in recent text-to-image generation
training. In recent years, large language models (LLMs)
and large vision-language models (LVLMs) have emerged
and injected new vitality into this ﬁeld. LVLMs [24, 29, 50]
* Work was done when interned at StepFun. † Corresponding author.
pProject leader.

23145

