This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Region-based Cluster Discrimination for Visual Representation Learning
Yin Xie†1 Kaicheng Yang†1 Xiang An†1 Kun Wu1 Yongle Zhao1
Zimin Ran2 Yumeng Wang1 Ziyong Feng1 Roy Miles 3 Ismail Elezi 3

Weimo Deng1
Jiankang Deng 4 *

1

3

DeepGlint 2 University of Technology Sydney
Huawei London Research Center 4 Imperial College London

{yinxie,kaichengyang,xiangan}@deepglint.com,jiankangdeng@gmail.com

Abstract

more advanced MLLMs that integrate visual understanding
with advanced language reasoning [32, 33, 38].
However, these models generally struggle to capture the
underlying semantic structure of the training data (as shown
in Fig. 1). This shortcoming arises from instance-wise contrastive learning, which treats samples from different instances as negative pairs, regardless of their semantic similarity. Furthermore, in vision-language contrastive learning,
pairs that involve Optical Character Recognition (OCR) often cause the visual encoder to focus primarily on spotting
text. As a result, high-level visual semantics in the images are overshadowed, leading to reduced performance on
downstream zero-shot tasks that require object-centric and
scene-centric understanding [49].
To overcome the limitations of instance discrimination,
cluster discrimination methods such as DeepCluster [10],
SeLa [5], SwAV [11], UNICOM [3], and MLCD [4] have
been proposed. These approaches jointly learn cluster assignments and image embeddings, encouraging similar instances to be grouped together, and thereby better capturing the underlying semantic structure of the data. However,
most cluster discrimination methods rely on assigning one
or multiple pseudo-labels to each image, which limits their
ability to learn localized region-level representations.
Recent works have sought to achieve vision-language
alignment at the local region level to support dense prediction tasks. RegionCLIP [83] leverages the CLIP model
to match image regions with template captions, pretraining
the model to align region-text pairs in the feature space.
CLIM [70] creates mosaics by combining multiple images,
treating each image as a pseudo region, and then extracts
features for each region. A contrastive loss is applied to
ensure that features of each pseudo region are similar to
their corresponding text embeddings and dissimilar to others. Nevertheless, these approaches rely on the availability
of descriptive text for regions, which introduces additional
constraints and limits scalability to larger datasets.
In this work, we construct region-specific datasets tai-

Learning visual representations is foundational for a broad
spectrum of downstream tasks. Although recent visionlanguage contrastive models, such as CLIP and SigLIP,
have achieved impressive zero-shot performance via largescale vision-language alignment, their reliance on global
representations constrains their effectiveness for dense prediction tasks, such as grounding, OCR, and segmentation. To address this gap, we introduce Region-Aware Cluster Discrimination (RICE), a novel method that enhances
region-level visual and OCR capabilities. We first construct
a billion-scale candidate region dataset and propose a Region Transformer layer to extract rich regional semantics.
We further design a unified region cluster discrimination
loss that jointly supports object and OCR learning within a
single classification framework, enabling efficient and scalable distributed training on large-scale data. Extensive experiments show that RICE consistently outperforms previous methods on tasks, including segmentation, dense detection, and visual perception for Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs). The pre-trained models have been released at https://github.com/deepglint/MVT.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of large-scale image-text data on the Internet has driven remarkable advances in visual representation learning. Pioneering models such as CLIP [50],
DNF5B [21], OpenCLIP [27], EVA-CLIP [60], AIM [19],
ViTamin [12], and SigLIP [80] have effectively leveraged
image-text alignment at scale to learn highly robust and
generalizable visual features. As a result, these visual encoders have become foundational components in a wide
range of computer vision applications, paving the way for
* corresponding author, † equal contribution

1793

