This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRCE: Towards Reliable Malicious Concept Erasure
in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

ESD

RECE

TRCE(Ours)

Concept Erasure Effectiveness (ASR

Stable Diffusion
Erase
"sexual"

X
X

normal
prompt

X

Erase
"sexual"

X

X
X

adv
prompt

)

Ruidong Chen1 , Honglin Guo1 , Lanjun Wang2→ , Chenyu Zhang2 , Weizhi Nie1 , An-An Liu1→
1
The School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
2
The School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University

X
X

ESD
SLD

SPM

Safree
UCE
SafeGEN

RECE
MACE

TRCE
(Ours)

Model Knowledge Preservation (FID

Figure 1. We propose TRCE to achieve reliable malicious concept erasure in text-to-image diffusion models. Left ) TRCE effectively
erases malicious concepts (e.g., “sexual”) , even under adversarial prompts [8, 44, 46, 51]. Right ) Compared to previous methods [11–
13, 21, 23, 24, 40, 47], TRCE reaches an outperform trade-off between erasure effectiveness and knowledge preservation, effectively
removing malicious concepts while minimizing the impact on the irrelevant content.

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models enable
photorealistic image generation, but they also risk producing malicious content, such as NSFW images. To mitigate risk, concept erasure methods are studied to facilitate the model to unlearn specific concepts. However, current studies struggle to fully erase malicious concepts implicitly embedded in prompts (e.g., metaphorical expressions or adversarial prompts) while preserving the model’s
normal generation capability. To address this challenge,
our study proposes TRCE, using a two-stage concept erasure strategy to achieve an effective trade-off between reliable erasure and knowledge preservation. Firstly, TRCE
starts by erasing the malicious semantics implicitly embedded in textual prompts. By identifying a critical mapping
objective(i.e., the [EoT] embedding), we optimize the crossattention layers to map malicious prompts to contextually
similar prompts but with safe concepts. This step prevents
the model from being overly influenced by malicious semantics during the denoising process. Following this, considering the deterministic properties of the sampling trajectory of

the diffusion model, TRCE further steers the early denoising prediction toward the safe direction and away from the
unsafe one through contrastive learning, thus further avoiding the generation of malicious content. Finally, we conduct
comprehensive evaluations of TRCE on multiple malicious
concept erasure benchmarks, and the results demonstrate
its effectiveness in erasing malicious concepts while better
preserving the model’s original generation ability. The code
is available at: http://github.com/ddgoodgood/TRCE.
CAUTION: This paper includes model-generated content
that may contain offensive material.

1. Introduction

→ Corresponding author: Lanjun Wang{wang.lanjun}@outlook.com,
An-An Liu{anan0422}@gmail.com

Recently, large-scale text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models (DMs) [10, 30, 36, 38] have attracted widespread attention due to their capabilities to generate highly realistic
images. Trained on extensive internet-sourced data, these
models acquire the ability to produce diverse visual concepts from textual prompts. However, due to the existence
of toxic training data, these models also learn to generate inappropriate content. Consequently, they may be misused to
produce NSFW (Not Safe For Work) images with prompts
containing inappropriate concepts. To address these safety

18927

