This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Invisible Watermarks, Visible Gains:
Steering Machine Unlearning with Bi-Level Watermarking Design
Yuhao Sun1,2 , Yihua Zhang3 , Gaowen Liu4 , Hongtao Xie1 *†, Sijia Liu3∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center,
3
Michigan State University, 4 Cisco Research
Pr ior A r t: D irect Unlear ning

Abstract
With the increasing demand for the right to be forgotten,
machine unlearning (MU) has emerged as a vital tool for
enhancing trust and regulatory compliance by enabling the
removal of sensitive data influences from machine learning
(ML) models. However, most MU algorithms primarily rely
on in-training methods to adjust model weights, with limited exploration of the benefits that data-level adjustments
could bring to the unlearning process. To address this gap,
we propose a novel approach that leverages digital watermarking to facilitate MU. By integrating watermarking, we
establish a controlled unlearning mechanism that enables
precise removal of specified data while maintaining model
utility for unrelated tasks. We first examine the impact of
watermarked data on MU, finding that MU effectively generalizes to watermarked data. Building on this, we introduce
an unlearning-friendly watermarking framework, termed
WATER 4MU, to enhance unlearning effectiveness. The core
of WATER 4MU is a bi-level optimization (BLO) framework:
at the upper level, the watermarking network is optimized
to minimize unlearning difficulty, while at the lower level,
the model itself is trained independently of watermarking.
Experimental results demonstrate that WATER 4MU is effective in MU across both image classification and image
generation tasks. Notably, it outperforms existing methods in
challenging MU scenarios, known as “challenging forgets”.

Unl ear ning

O urs: Water m arking for M U via Bi- L evel O ptim ization

Upper -Level
Message
0 1 1 1 0 ...

WMEncoder

WMDecoder

Lower -Level
Unl ear ning

Figure 1. An overview of the watermarking for machine unlearning
framework via bi-level optimization proposed in this work.

to diverse contexts and requirements [1–4]. For example,
MU is widely used to enhance model privacy, aligning with
the right to be forgotten by removing private or copyrighted
information from models to prevent privacy breaches [5–9].
It has also been applied to improve model generalization
in transfer learning by removing the influence of undesired
source data in pre-trained models, where removing nonsalient source data to downstream tasks improves fine-tuning
performance [10, 11]. Furthermore, MU shows promise in
enhancing model robustness, for instance, by removing the
influence of backdoored training data to defend against backdoor attacks [12, 13] or eliminating harmful data to improve
the model’s trust [14–16].
The expanding applications of MU across diverse domains and model types–including discriminative and generative models [17, 18]–are driven by its effectiveness in
erasing specific data influence within ML models. That is,
a key aspect of MU involves characterizing the influence of
specific data on the model and leveraging this data-model

1. Introduction
Machine unlearning (MU), which aims to remove the influence of unwanted data from a pre-trained model while
preserving the model’s utility on data unrelated to the unlearning request, has emerged as a promising approach for
customizing and adapting machine learning (ML) models
* Equal advising
† Corresponding author

2417

