This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicHOI: Leveraging 3D Priors for Accurate Hand-object Reconstruction
from Short Monocular Video Clips
Shibo Wang1

Haonan He1 Maria Parelli3,† Christoph Gebhardt1 Zicong Fan3,4 Jie Song1,2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
ETH Zürich, Switzerland 4 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
1

Figure 1. MagicHOI: Given a short-form monocular video capturing hand-object interaction, our method reconstructs high-quality 3D
hand and object surfaces, including occluded object regions caused by hand interaction or object self-occlusion. (a) Input images and
corresponding reconstructed surfaces of the hand and object. (b, c) Comparison of our method with and without a novel view synthesis
(NVS) prior from the object’s front and back views, demonstrating improved reconstruction in occluded areas. Best viewed in color.

despite the scarcity of paired 3D hand-object data, largescale novel view synthesis diffusion models offer rich object
supervision. This supervision serves as a prior to regularize
unseen object regions during hand interactions. Leveraging this insight, we integrate a novel view synthesis model
into our hand-object reconstruction framework. We further
align hand to object by incorporating visible contact constraints. Our results demonstrate that MagicHOI significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art hand-object reconstruction methods. We also show that novel view synthesis diffusion priors effectively regularize unseen object
regions, enhancing 3D hand-object reconstruction.

Abstract
Most RGB-based hand-object reconstruction methods
rely on object templates, while template-free methods typically assume full object visibility. This assumption often
breaks in real-world settings, where fixed camera viewpoints and static grips leave parts of the object unobserved,
resulting in implausible reconstructions. To overcome this,
we present MagicHOI, a method for reconstructing hands
and objects from short monocular interaction videos, even
under limited viewpoint variation. Our key insight is that,
† Prior to joining University of Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center

5957

