This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UIPro: Unleashing Superior Interaction Capability For GUI Agents
Hongxin Li1,2,3,7

Jingran Su5

Jingfan Chen5 Zheng Ju1,2,3 Yuntao Chen4B Qing Li5
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,6B
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
2
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), CASIA
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA
4
Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, CASIA
5
PolyU 6 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 7 StepFun
Code: https://github.com/ZJULiHongxin/UIPro

Abstract
1

Building autonomous agents that perceive and operate
graphical user interfaces (GUIs) like humans has long been
a vision in the field of artificial intelligence. Central to
these agents is the capability for GUI interaction, which
involves GUI understanding and planning capabilities. Existing methods have tried developing GUI agents based on
the multi-modal comprehension ability of vision-language
models (VLMs). However, the limited scenario, insufficient
size, and heterogeneous action spaces hinder the progress
of building generalist GUI agents. To resolve these issues,
this paper proposes UIPro, a novel generalist GUI agent
trained with extensive multi-platform and multi-task GUI
interaction data, coupled with a unified action space. We
first curate a comprehensive dataset encompassing 20.6 million GUI understanding tasks to pre-train UIPro, granting
it a strong GUI grounding capability, which is key to downstream GUI agent tasks. Subsequently, we establish a unified
action space to harmonize heterogeneous GUI agent task
datasets and produce a merged dataset to foster the action
prediction ability of UIPro via continued fine-tuning. Experimental results demonstrate UIPro’s superior performance
across multiple GUI task benchmarks on various platforms,
highlighting the effectiveness of our approach.

3

A1: [loc2]
A2: This element goes to the home page.
Plan & Action:
1. TYPE [Houston] at [loc3]
2. CLICK at [loc4]

Figure 1. Examples of GUI interaction by a GUI agent.

complex activities like comparing prices across e-commerce
platforms and collecting the latest news on stock markets.
To achieve proficient GUI interaction, an agent relies on
two fundamental capabilities. Firstly, a foundational visual
understanding of GUI elements is essential. This includes
the ability to recognize and interpret various components
like buttons, text fields, and images, which are integral to
navigating and manipulating GUIs effectively. The second
capability involves both planning and executing tasks in
alignment with user goals, requiring the agent to efficiently
translate plans into actionable steps.
Although existing methods [10, 12, 20, 54] have sought
to enhance GUI interaction by leveraging the multi-modal
comprehension abilities of vision-language models (VLMs),
significant challenges persist: (a) Data scale. Effective de-

The concept of autonomous GUI agents capable of clicking, typing, and scrolling on behalf of humans as personal
assistants is an enticing prospect (Fig. 1). Imagine a GUI
agent navigating the Internet to perform daily tasks such as
using search engines and managing emails, as well as more
E-mails:

4

GUI Understanding
Q1: I want to purchase estates. Where should I interact?
Q2: What is the functionality of the element at [loc1]
GUI Agent Task
Task: Find a house in Houston that works for family of 4.

1. Introduction

B Equally advising corresponding authors.
ang.zhang@ia.ac.cn, chenyuntao08@gmail.com.

2

zhaoxi-

1613

