This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Emulating Self-attention with Convolution for Efficient Image Super-Resolution
Dongheon Lee,
Seokju Yun,
Youngmin Ro*
Machine Intelligence Laboratory, University of Seoul, Korea
{dslisleedh, wsz871, youngmin.ro}@uos.ac.kr
Code: https://github.com/dslisleedh/ESC

Abstract
Memory Usage

In this paper, we tackle the high computational overhead
of Transformers for efficient image super-resolution (SR).
Motivated by the observations of self-attention’s inter-layer
repetition, we introduce a convolutionized self-attention
module named Convolutional Attention (ConvAttn) that emulates self-attention’s long-range modeling capability and
instance-dependent weighting with a single shared large
kernel and dynamic kernels. By utilizing the ConvAttn module, we significantly reduce the reliance on self-attention
and its involved memory-bound operations while maintaining the representational capability of Transformers. Furthermore, we overcome the challenge of integrating flash
attention into the lightweight SR regime, effectively mitigating self-attention’s inherent memory bottleneck. We scale up
the window size to 32⇥32 with flash attention rather than
proposing an intricate self-attention module, significantly
improving PSNR by 0.31dB on Urban100⇥2 while reducing latency and memory usage by 16⇥ and 12.2⇥. Building on these approaches, our proposed network, termed
Emulating Self-attention with Convolution (ESC), notably
improves PSNR by 0.27 dB on Urban100⇥4 compared to
HiT-SRF, reducing the latency and memory usage by 3.7⇥
and 6.2⇥, respectively. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our ESC maintains the ability for long-range modeling,
data scalability, and the representational power of Transformers despite most self-attention being replaced by the
ConvAttn module.

200mb 350mb

700mb

Architecture
Proposed Method
CNNs
Transformers
State-Space Models

Figure 1. Comparison of performance, latency, and memory usage. Our methods are evaluated against representative SR models,
including CNNs, Transformers, and SSMs.

1. Introduction

SR tasks, motivating numerous SR studies to enhance performance while reducing computational complexity (FLoating point OPerations; FLOPs) and parameter size.
Therefore, Transformers have gained significant attention in the SR task since they have achieved superior performance over Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) while
requiring lower FLOPs and fewer parameters. By capturing
long-range dependencies and performing input-dependent
weighting through self-attention, Transformers exhibit high
representational capacity with enhanced performance, especially as the training data volume increases [5, 15]. Accordingly, numerous transformer-based methods have been
proposed [47, 56, 75] to capitalize on the advantages of selfattention while reducing FLOPs and parameter counts.
However, many of these works overlook the excessive
memory access caused by self-attention, which arises from
materializing the score matrix (S = QK T ) [10] and leveraging memory-bound operations such as tensor reshaping
and window masking [39, 68]. The memory access issue is
further worsened in the SR architecture, which deals with
large feature maps without patchify stem or downsampling
stage. For example, SwinIR-light [36] exhibits 4.7⇥ slower
latency and 2⇥ higher memory usage than CNNs [77] reconstructing an HD image at the ⇥2 scale, even though it

Image Super-Resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct highresolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR) inputs
and remains an active area of research in computer vision.
Recently, the demand for multimedia content and generative
models has increased significantly, making SR particularly
noteworthy as it enables users to enjoy high-quality content
under resource-constrained conditions. Consequently, practical deployment has emerged as a critical consideration in
* Corresponding author.

24467

