This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionStreamer: Streaming Motion Generation via Diffusion-based
Autoregressive Model in Causal Latent Space
Lixing Xiao1 Shunlin Lu2 Huaijin Pi3
Yueer Zhou1 Ziyong Feng5 Xiaowei Zhou1
1

Ke Fan4 Liang Pan3
†
Sida Peng1
Jingbo Wang6

2
Zhejiang University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
6
DeepGlint
Shanghai AI Laboratory
lixingxiao0@gmail.com, pengsida@zju.edu.cn

A man is performing
a cartwheel.

He walks
forward excitedly.

 He

 
squats down
 jumps


and
up quickly.

He extends
his arms.

He raises his
hands to cheer up.

Figure 1. Visualization of streaming motion generation process. Texts are incrementally inputted and motions are generated online.

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of text-conditioned
streaming motion generation, which requires us to predict
the next-step human pose based on variable-length historical motions and incoming texts. Existing methods struggle to achieve streaming motion generation, e.g., diffusion models are constrained by pre-deﬁned motion lengths,
while GPT-based methods suffer from delayed response
and error accumulation problem due to discretized noncausal tokenization. To solve these problems, we propose MotionStreamer, a novel framework that incorporates a continuous causal latent space into a probabilistic autoregressive model. The continuous latents mitigate information loss caused by discretization and effectively reduce error accumulation during long-term autoregressive generation. In addition, by establishing temporal
causal dependencies between current and historical motion latents, our model fully utilizes the available information to achieve accurate online motion decoding. Experiments show that our method outperforms existing approaches while offering more applications, including multi† Corresponding author

10086

round generation, long-term generation, and dynamic motion composition. Project Page: https://zju3dv.
github.io/MotionStreamer/

1. Introduction
Streaming motion generation aims to incrementally synthesizing human motions while dynamically adapting to online text inputs and maintaining semantic coherence. Generating realistic and diverse human motions in a streaming
manner is essential for various real-time applications, such
as video games, animation, and robotics. Streaming motion
generation presents a signiﬁcant challenge due to two fundamental requirements. Firstly, the framework must incrementally process sequentially arriving textual inputs while
maintaining online response. Secondly, the model should be
able to continuously synthesize motion sequences that exhibit contextual consistency by effectively integrating historical information with incoming textual conditions, ensuring alignment between progressive text semantics and kinematic continuity across extended timelines.
Conventional diffusion-based motion generation models

