This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Timestep-Aware Diffusion Model for Extreme Image Rescaling
Ce Wang, Zhenyu Hu, Wanjie Sun,* Zhenzhong Chen
Wuhan University
{cewang, zhenyuhu, sunwanjie, zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image rescaling aims to learn the optimal low-resolution
(LR) image that can be accurately reconstructed to its original high-resolution (HR) counterpart, providing an efficient image processing and storage method for ultra-high
definition media. However, extreme downscaling factors
pose significant challenges to the upscaling process due to
its highly ill-posed nature, causing existing image rescaling methods to struggle in generating semantically correct
structures and perceptual friendly textures. In this work,
we propose a novel framework called Timestep-Aware Diffusion Model (TADM) for extreme image rescaling, which
performs rescaling operations in the latent space of a pretrained autoencoder and effectively leverages powerful natural image priors learned by a pre-trained text-to-image
diffusion model. Specifically, TADM adopts a pseudoinvertible module to establish the bidirectional mapping between the latent features of the HR image and the targetsized LR image. Then, the rescaled latent features are enhanced by a pre-trained diffusion model to generate more
faithful details. Considering the spatially non-uniform
degradation caused by the rescaling operation, we propose a novel time-step alignment strategy, which can adaptively allocate the generative capacity of the diffusion model
based on the quality of the reconstructed latent features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of TADM
over previous methods in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations. The code will be available at: https:
//github.com/wwangcece/TADM .

to low-resolution (LR) images for storage, transmission, or
display. When HR images are needed, an upscaling process
is employed to restore the downscaled images to their original resolution. Unlike image super-resolution (SR), image
rescaling allows for joint optimization of both downscaling and upscaling processes, preserving detailed information crucial for effective upscaling.

1. Introduction

Recently proposed image rescaling methods can be classified into two main categories: encoder-decoder architecture [12, 25] and invertible neural networks [17, 37]. The
encoder-decoder architecture employs two neural networks
to perform downscaling and upscaling. While, invertible
neural networks view image rescaling as a reversible process, using the forward and backward passes of an invertible neural network to simulate the downscaling and upscaling. Despite the significant improvements in reconstruction
quality achieved by these methods, they are limited to small
rescaling factors, such as 2× or 4×.

With the explosive growth of ultra high-resolution (HR)
images, image rescaling has become essential for enhancing data storage and transmission efficiency [39], optimizing resource usage in real-time applications [22], and ensuring proper display on devices with varying resolutions
[21]. During image rescaling, HR images are downscaled
* Corresponding author

15594

However, with the advancement of ultra HR imaging devices, there is an increasing need for extreme rescaling factors (e.g., 16× or 32×) to achieve more efficient storage and
transmission of ultra HR data [7, 47]. Existing image rescaling methods often struggle to generate sufficient detail under extreme rescaling factors. Therefore, some approaches
propose using pre-trained GANs as priors to constrain the
solution space of the reconstructed results. GRAIN [47]
and BDFlow [14] use pre-trained StyleGAN [9, 10] to generate high-quality upscaled face images. VQIR [34] leverages the high-quality visual embeddings encapsulated in
pre-trained VQGAN [3] to achieve extreme rescaling on
natural images. Although these methods have made significant progress in perceptual metrics, their reconstruction
results still suffer from incorrect semantics and structure.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a
novel framework named Timestep-Aware Diffusion Model
(TADM) for extreme image rescaling, which performs image rescaling in the latent space of a pre-trained autoencoder
and leverages the natural image priors stored in large textto-image diffusion models to restore HR images. Specifically, first, the HR images are encoded by the via the VAE
encoder to obtain the latent features. Then, we use an au-

