This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DualReal: Adaptive Joint Training for Lossless Identity-Motion Fusion
in Video Customization
Wenchuan Wang, Mengqi Huang, Yijing Tu, Zhendong Mao*
University of Science and Technology of China
{wenc k, huangmq, tuyijing}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zdmao@ustc.edu.cn

Identity

Motion

Customized Video

A cat *

A person is
doing TaiChi

A cat * wrapped in woolen scarf is doing TaiChi on glacier plateau

plushie grey
sloth *

A person is
lifting

A plushie grey sloth * wearing rain boots is lifting a barbell in a stormy wetland

A dog *

A person is
playing guitar

A dog * sporting round sunglasses on a sandy beach is playing guitar

Figure 1. Generated customization results of our proposed novel paradigm DualReal. Given identity images and motion videos, DualReal
generates high-quality customized identity and motion simultaneously, without compromising the consistency of either dimension.

Abstract
Customized text-to-video generation with pre-trained largescale models has recently garnered significant attention by
focusing on identity and motion consistency. Existing works
typically follow the isolated customized paradigm, where
the subject identity or motion dynamics are customized exclusively. However, this paradigm completely ignores the
intrinsic mutual constraints and synergistic interdependencies between identity and motion, resulting in identitymotion conflicts throughout the generation process that systematically degrade. To address this, we introduce DualReal, a novel framework that employs adaptive joint training to construct interdependencies between dimensions collaboratively. Specifically, DualReal is composed of two

units: (1) Dual-aware Adaptation dynamically switches the
training step (i.e., identity or motion), learns the current
information guided by the frozen dimension prior, and employs a regularization strategy to avoid knowledge leakage;
(2) StageBlender Controller leverages the denoising stages
and Diffusion Transformer depths to guide different dimensions with adaptive granularity, avoiding conflicts at various stages and ultimately achieving lossless fusion of identity and motion patterns. We constructed a more comprehensive evaluation benchmark than existing methods. The
experimental results show that DualReal improves CLIPI and DINO-I metrics by 21.7% and 31.8% on average,
and achieves top performance on nearly all motion metrics.
Page: https:// wenc-k.github.io/dualreal-customization

* Corresponding author

16565

