This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaMorph: Multimodal Understanding and Generation via Instruction Tuning
Shengbang Tong1,2 David Fan1 Jiachen Zhu1,2 Yunyang Xiong3 Xinlei Chen1 Koustuv Sinha1
Michael Rabbat1 Yann LeCun1,2 Saining Xie2 Zhuang Liu1,4
1
FAIR, Meta 2 New York University 3 Meta Reality Labs 4 Princeton University
Abstract
In this work, we propose Visual-Predictive Instruction Tuning (VPiT)—a simple and effective extension to visual instruction tuning that enables a pretrained LLM to quickly
morph into an uniﬁed autoregressive model capable of generating both text and visual tokens. VPiT teaches an LLM
to predict discrete text tokens and continuous visual tokens
from any input sequence of image and text data curated
in an instruction-following format. Our empirical investigation reveals several intriguing properties of VPiT: (1)
visual generation ability emerges as a natural byproduct of
improved visual understanding, and can be unlocked efﬁciently with a small amount of generation data; (2) while we
ﬁnd understanding and generation to be mutually beneﬁcial,
understanding data contributes to both capabilities more effectively than generation data. Building upon these ﬁndings,
we train our MetaMorph model and achieve competitive
performance on both visual understanding and generation.
In visual generation, MetaMorph can leverage the world
knowledge and reasoning abilities gained from LLM pretraining, and overcome common failure modes exhibited by
other generation models. Our results suggest that LLMs may
have strong “prior” vision capabilities that can be efﬁciently
adapted to both visual understanding and generation with a
relatively simple instruction tuning process.

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have advanced considerably in visual understanding, progressing from basic image captioning to complex visual inferences [4, 14, 36]. These models process multimodal inputs—
primarily images and language—and generate text tokens.
Multimodal LLMs often leverage a pretrained vision encoder [16, 52], a pretrained language model [3, 66], and align
these modalities through connectors such as MLP [36, 37]
or cross-attention modules [4, 14]. Among MLLM training
methods, visual instruction tuning [36] has become widely
used [2, 67]. It treats output embeddings of pretrained vision
encoders as continuous-valued “visual tokens” and directly
feeds them as inputs to pretrained LLMs.

One beneﬁt of visual instruction tuning is that it is data
and compute efﬁcient. A pretrained LLM can be repurposed
as a Multimodal LLM by instruction tuning with modest
compute and data on the order of millions of image-text
question-answer pairs [32, 63]. The effectiveness of visual
instruction tuning indicates that LLMs already possess a considerable amount of inherent visual knowledge which allows
them to learn and develop visual understanding during the
instruction tuning process [85]. Inspired by this, we investigate whether LLMs can also be ﬁnetuned to generate visual
information with comparable efﬁciency and effectiveness.
Current attempts toward “uniﬁed” models—models capable of both multimodal understanding and generation—
often treat visual generation as an orthogonal capability
to visual understanding. They tend to require substantial
changes to the original MLLM architecture and signiﬁcant
multimodal pretraining and/or ﬁnetuning. Designing such
methods is challenging, and past research takes different approaches including tokenizing visual inputs into discrete tokens [39, 62, 73], incorporating diffusion objectives [75, 86],
and decoupling vision into separate understanding and generation modes [71]. For example, approaches like LWM [39],
Show-o [75], and Chameleon [62] require billions of imagetext pairs [17, 56] for extensive pretraining and ﬁnetuning.
In this work, we propose Visual-Predictive Instruction
Tuning (VPiT)—a simple extension to visual instruction
tuning which builds upon the existing paradigm of passing
continuous visual tokens as input to the LLM. VPiT trains
an LLM to output both continuous visual tokens and discrete text tokens in the ﬁnetuning stage. The model takes
pretrained vision encoder embeddings as well as text tokens
as input, and outputs a combination of text tokens and continuous visual tokens. To visualize the generated visual tokens,
we ﬁnetune a diffusion model to map the embeddings back
into pixel space (see Fig. 1 for an example). This framework
allows us to study the synergy between visual understanding, visual generation, and pretrained LLMs, which leads to
several intriguing ﬁndings outlined below.

17001

First, we show that the ability to predict visual tokens
emerges from understanding visual inputs and requires minimal additional training. Similar to visual instruction tuning,

