This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure-aware Semantic Discrepancy and Consistency for 3D Medical Image
Self-supervised Learning
Tan Pan1,2 , Zhaorui Tan2 , Kaiyu Guo3,2 , Dongli Xu2 , Weidi Xu,
Chen Jiang1,2 ,* Xin Guo1,2 ,Yuan Qi1,2,4 , Yuan Cheng1,2 *
1
AI3 , Fudan University 2 Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science
3
The University of Queensland 4 Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University
pant23@m.fudan.edu.cn, jiangchen@sais.com.cn, cheng yuan@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
3D medical image self-supervised learning (mSSL) holds
great promise for medical analysis. Effectively supporting broader applications requires considering anatomical
structure variations in location, scale, and morphology,
which are crucial for capturing meaningful distinctions.
However, previous mSSL methods partition images with
fixed-size patches, often ignoring the structure variations.
In this work, we introduce a novel perspective on 3D medical images with the goal of learning structure-aware representations. We assume that patches within the same
structure share the same semantics (semantic consistency)
while those from different structures exhibit distinct semantics (semantic discrepancy). Based on this assumption,
we propose an mSSL framework named S 2 DC, achieving
Structure-aware Semantic Discrepancy and Consistency
in two steps. First, S 2 DC enforces distinct representations for different patches to increase semantic discrepancy by leveraging an optimal transport strategy. Second, S 2 DC advances semantic consistency at the structural level based on neighborhood similarity distribution.
By bridging patch-level and structure-level representations,
S 2 DC achieves structure-aware representations. Thoroughly evaluated across 10 datasets, 4 tasks, and 3 modalities, our proposed method consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods in mSSL. The code is available at
https://github.com/Ashespt/S2DC/.

Figure 1. A. Two views of mSSL. B. Similarity heatmaps on
CT and MRI images across different methods. We sample an
anchor patch (red dots) and compute feature similarities with all
other patches. In the first row, the liver anchor should show low
similarity with non-liver patches, while in the second row, the
white matter anchor should exhibit high similarity with other white
matter patches. Current SOTA contrastive-based [41] (b) and
reconstruction-based [40] (c) methods struggle with both patch
feature discrepancy in different structures and consistency in the
same structure. In contrast, our method (d) advances both discrepancy and consistency.

1. Introduction

tions frequently focus on different specific anatomical structures (i.e., organ segmentation), each distinguished across
anatomy due to location, scale, morphology, and other variances [4, 9, 10, 29]. For example, the liver is a large, welldefined solid organ with relatively homogeneous intensity
and distinct anatomical boundaries. In contrast, veins are
thin, tubular structures with varying diameters, lower contrast, and complex branching patterns.
Current medical image SSL (mSSL) methods can be
classified into contrastive-based and reconstruction-based
methods [14, 17, 40, 41]. For example, Wang et al. utilizes
multi-view reconstruction to encourage dense representations, while Wu et al. incorporates overlapped patch ratio
as soft contrastive constraint to improve semantic consistency. However, these methods use fixed-size image partition, treating all segmented patches uniformly across struc-

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is widely used in medical image analysis to build strong representations that improve performance on various applications and maximize
the use of unlabeled data [23, 33, 40, 41]. These applica* Corresponding authors. This research was conducted during an internship at the Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science.

20257

