This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robust Defense against Customization via Protective Perturbation
Resistant to Diffusion-based Puriﬁcation
Wenkui Yang1,2 , Jie Cao1 , Junxian Duan1 , Ran He1,2 *
1
MAIS & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
yangwenkui.03@gmail.com, {jie.cao,junxian.duan}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Since the landmark developments of Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [14, 41] and Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [33], Diffusion Models (DMs) have
virtually dominated every subtask of visual generation. This
triumph can be attributed to the readily available opensource Stable Diffusion (SD) [46], which enables numer* Corresponding author.

Uniform Grid Pattern

AntiPure

Anti-Customization
Protective
Perturbations

Diffusion-based
Purification

Perturbations
preserved

during Purification

Directly
Fine-tuning

(a)

Fine-tuning

Diffusion models like Stable Diffusion have become
prominent in visual synthesis tasks due to their powerful
customization capabilities, which also introduce signiﬁcant
security risks, including deepfakes and copyright infringement. In response, a class of methods known as protective
perturbation emerged, which mitigates image misuse by injecting imperceptible adversarial noise. However, puriﬁcation can remove protective perturbations, thereby exposing
images again to the risk of malicious forgery.
In this work, we formalize the anti-puriﬁcation task,
highlighting challenges that hinder existing approaches,
and propose a simple diagnostic protective perturbation
named AntiPure. AntiPure exposes vulnerabilities of puriﬁcation within the “puriﬁcation-customization” workﬂow,
owing to two guidance mechanisms: 1) Patch-wise Frequency Guidance, which reduces the model’s inﬂuence over
high-frequency components in the puriﬁed image, and 2)
Erroneous Timestep Guidance, which disrupts the model’s
denoising strategy across different timesteps. With additional guidance, AntiPure embeds imperceptible perturbations that persist under representative puriﬁcation settings,
achieving effective post-customization distortion. Experiments show that, as a stress test for puriﬁcation, AntiPure
achieves minimal perceptual discrepancy and maximal distortion, outperforming other protective perturbation methods within the puriﬁcation-customization workﬂow.

Anti-Purification
Protective Perturbations

Irregular Grid Pattern

Pre-trained Stable Diffusion for
Customization
Normally Fine-tuned
Stable Diffusion

Forgery

(b)

Poisoned
Stable Diffusion

(c)

Perturbations
amplified

during Customization
Amplified
Irregular Pattern

瀂P-C Workflow瀃
Protection

Figure 1. Overview diagram of “Puriﬁcation-Customization”
workﬂow. a). Protective perturbations use small noises to distort the outputs of ﬁne-tuned diffusion models. b). However, existing methods can be removed by diffusion-based puriﬁcation.
c). We propose a simple diagnostic method called AntiPure,
which achieves protective perturbations resistant to puriﬁcation
and makes customization outputs more distinguishable.

ous ﬁne-tuning and editing techniques for user-friendly customization. However, these advances also pose risks, including the proliferation of deepfakes and infringements of
portrait rights and intellectual property.
In response, recent studies [1, 23–25, 45, 49, 50, 55]
adapt adversarial attacks [10, 21, 26] to DMs, creating “poisoned” samples that impede concept comprehension dur-

19290

