This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holistic Unlearning Benchmark:
A Multi-Faceted Evaluation for Text-to-Image Diffusion Model Unlearning
Saemi Moon1⇤ , Minjong Lee1⇤ , Sangdon Park1,2 , Dongwoo Kim1,2
1
CSE, POSTECH, 2 GSAI, POSTECH
{saemi, minjong.lee, sangdon, dongwoo.kim}@postech.ac.kr
Faithfulness

Alignment

10,000
prompts

Make a pre-trained model
NOT generate Pikachu

“Charmander
under the cloud”

Does an unlearned model
remove the target concept well?

Do generated images
correctly reflect the prompt?

Pinpoint-ness

“Pikachu
under the cloud”

>
Does an unlearned model
generate high-quality images?
Attack robustness

Does an unlearned model
selectively remove targets?
Multilingual robustness

Does unlearning over-erase
similar but non-target concepts?
Efficiency

Adversarial
prompts

Computation time

Is an unlearned model
robust to adversarial prompts?

Is an unlearned model
robust to multilingual prompts?

Memory

Storage

Is an unlearning method
computationally efficient?

Figure 1. Holistic Unlearning Benchmark. HUB systematically evaluates unlearning methods across six key aspects, covering 33 target
concepts categorized into four dimensions: Celebrity, Style, IP, and NSFW. HUB provides an extensive set of 16,000 prompts per concept.

Abstract
As text-to-image diffusion models gain widespread commercial applications, there are increasing concerns about
unethical or harmful use, including the unauthorized generation of copyrighted or sensitive content. Concept unlearning has emerged as a promising solution to these challenges by removing undesired and harmful information from
the pre-trained model. However, the previous evaluations
primarily focus on whether target concepts are removed
while preserving image quality, neglecting the broader impacts such as unintended side effects. In this work, we propose Holistic Unlearning Benchmark (HUB), a comprehensive framework for evaluating unlearning methods across
six key dimensions: faithfulness, alignment, pinpoint-ness,
multilingual robustness, attack robustness, and efficiency.
Our benchmark covers 33 target concepts, including 16,000

prompts per concept, spanning four categories: Celebrity,
Style, Intellectual Property, and NSFW. Our investigation
reveals that no single method excels across all evaluation
criteria. By releasing our evaluation code and dataset1 , we
hope to inspire further research in this area, leading to more
reliable and effective unlearning methods.

1. Introduction

16356

Text-to-image diffusion models have achieved remarkable
success in various real-world applications, owing to the extensive text and image pairs used during training [7, 29, 31,
33]. However, these pairs are often collected from the Internet, where they may include not only violent, harmful, or
unethical materials but also copyrighted or protected intel1 https://github.com/ml-postech/HUB

