This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRE-Mamba: A 4D State Space Model for Ultra-High-Frequent
Event Camera Deraining
Ciyu Ruan1,* , Ruishan Guo1,* , Zihang Gong2 , Jingao Xu3 , Wenhan Yang4 , Xinlei Chen1, †
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology,
3
Carnegie Mellon University, 4 Pengcheng Laboratory,
{rcy23, grs24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gongzihang0201@gmail.com,
jingaox@andrew.cmu.edu, yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, chen.xinlei@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Rainy layer

Ours

𝒚

Event Camera

Sec. 5

EDnCNN

Point-based (Ours)

𝒙

(a) Comparison in rainy scenario

Deraining results

Sec. 3.2 , 3.3
Rainy

Spatial Feature
Temporal Feature of intra-window
Temporal Feature of inter-window

EDformer

Sec. 3.1

Frame Camera

Frame-based

(b) Direct Sampling of Raw Data

(c) Multi-scale State Space Model

(d) Deraining Performance

Figure 1. (a) Rain severely degrades event camera data compared to conventional cameras. (b) Unlike frame-based aggregation methods,
our approach directly samples raw data, preserving temporal resolution. (c) The multi-scale state space model integrates dual-temporal
scales for intra- and inter-window information and multi-spatial scales for rain dynamics. (d) Deraining results of our method.

Abstract

dataset with labeled synthetic and real-world sequences.
Moreover, our method generalizes well across varying rain
intensities, viewpoints, and even snowy conditions. Code
and dataset: https://github.com/softword-tt/PRE-Mamba.

Event cameras excel in high temporal resolution and dynamic range but suffer from dense noise in rainy conditions. Existing event deraining methods face trade-offs
between temporal precision, deraining effectiveness, and
computational efficiency. In this paper, we propose PREMamba, a novel point-based event camera deraining framework that fully exploits the spatiotemporal characteristics of
raw event and rain. Our framework introduces a 4D event
cloud representation that integrates dual temporal scales to
preserve high temporal precision, a Spatio-Temporal Decoupling and Fusion module (STDF) that enhances deraining capability by enabling shallow decoupling and interaction of temporal and spatial information, and a Multi-Scale
State Space Model (MS3M) that captures deeper rain dynamics across dual-temporal and multi-spatial scales with
linear computational complexity. Enhanced by frequencydomain regularization, PRE-Mamba achieves superior performance (0.95 SR, 0.91 NR, and 0.4s/M events) with only
0.26M parameters on EventRain-27K, a comprehensive

1. Introduction
Event cameras have revolutionized mobile applications with
their high temporal resolution (microsecond level), high dynamic range (>120 dB), and low power consumption (<10
mW) [1, 2], driving breakthroughs in high-speed tracking [3, 4], SLAM [5–7], localization [8] and obstacle avoidance [9, 10]. Unlike frame cameras, they asynchronously
capture pixel-level intensity changes without global exposure, eliminating motion blur even at extreme speeds. However, despite excelling in dynamic scenes, event cameras
suffer significant performance degradation under adverse
weather, particularly in rain [11, 12]. The rapid motion of
rain streaks triggers excessive intensity changes, generating
dense noise that overwhelms valid scene information and
exacerbates sampling rates. This severely impacts accuracy
and latency in downstream tasks on drones [13–15] and autonomous vehicles [16–18], limiting real-world reliability.
Despite significant advances in deep learning for frame

* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

9169

