This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamRelation: Relation-Centric Video Customization
Yujie Wei1 , Shiwei Zhang2,∗ , Hangjie Yuan2 , Biao Gong3 , Longxiang Tang2 , Xiang Wang2 ,
Haonan Qiu4 , Hengjia Li5 , Shuai Tan3 , Yingya Zhang2 , Hongming Shan1,†
1

2
Fudan University
Alibaba Group
5
Ant Group
Nanyang Technological University
Zhejiang University
yjwei22@m.fudan.edu.cn, zhangjin.zsw@alibaba-inc.com, hmshan@fudan.edu.cn
3

4

Project page: https://dreamrelation.github.io

hugging

A bear is hugging with a panda.

punching

A polar bear is punching a penguin on an icy plain.

cheering

A panda is raising a toast with a red panda in a bamboo grove.

shaking hands

A dog is shaking hands with a cat in a cyberpunk city.

Figure 1. Relational video customization results of DreamRelation. Given a few exemplar videos, our method can customize specific
relations and generalize them to novel domains, where animals mimic human interactions.

Abstract
Relational video customization refers to the creation of
personalized videos that depict user-specified relations between two subjects, a crucial task for comprehending real* Project Leader
† Corresponding Author: Hongming Shan is with Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence, MOE Frontiers
Center for Brain Science, Key Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence, and State Key Laboratory of
Brain Function and Disorders, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

world visual content. While existing methods can personalize subject appearances and motions, they still struggle
with complex relational video customization, where precise
relational modeling and high generalization across subject
categories are essential. The primary challenge arises from
the intricate spatial arrangements, layout variations, and
nuanced temporal dynamics inherent in relations; consequently, current models tend to overemphasize irrelevant visual details rather than capturing meaningful interactions.
To address these challenges, we propose DreamRelation, a
novel approach that personalizes relations through a small

12381

