This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Less Static, More Private: Towards Transferable Privacy-Preserving Action
Recognition by Generative Decoupled Learning
Zhi-Wei Xia1,∗

Kun-Yu Lin1,∗ Yuan-Ming Li1 Wei-Jin Huang1
Xian-Tuo Tan1 Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3,4,†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China;
4
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
{xiazhw3, linky5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract

Source Domain

Anonymized Video

Original Video

Action Recognition

Success

This work focuses on the task of privacy-preserving action recognition (PPAR), which aims to protect individual
privacy in action videos without compromising recognition
performance. Despite recent advancements, existing PPAR
models still struggle with video domain shifts. To address
this challenge, this work aims to develop transferable PPAR
models by leveraging labeled videos from the source domain and unlabeled videos from the target domain. This
work contributes a novel method named GenPriv, which
improves the transferability of privacy-preserving models
by generative decoupled learning. Inspired by the fact
that privacy-sensitive information in action videos primarily comes from static human appearances, our GenPriv decouples video features into static and dynamic aspects and
then removes privacy-sensitive content from static action
features. We propose a generative architecture, ST-VAE,
complemented by Spatial Consistency and Temporal Alignment losses, to enhance decoupled learning. Experimental results on three benchmarks with diverse domain shifts
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed GenPriv. The
code is available at https://github.com/iSEELaboratory/GenPriv.

Target Domain
Encoder
Lighting shifts

Decoder

Dark Domain

Fail
Privacy-Preserving Model

Viewpoint variation

Fail

Drone Domain

(a) Existing Privacy-Preserving Action Recognition methods fail under domain shifts.
Domain Aligned Dynamic Feature
Source

VITA

Target

+34% +22%

𝑥

Encoder

Decoupled latent space

Decoder

Privacy Removed Static Feature

GenPriv

+11% +8%

𝑥!

Anonymized
video

Input
video

SPAct

HMDB → UCF

UCF → HMDB

*with comparable privacy-preserving performance

(b) GenPriv maintains transferability across domains.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison between the existing PPAR methods and our
GenPriv. (a) Existing methods often struggle with domain shifts
inherent in real-world applications, such as variations in viewpoint
and lighting. (b) Our proposed GenPriv improves the transferability of PPAR models by generative decoupled learning. As shown
by the TP-UCF ↔ TP-HMDB transfer results above, our GenPriv
surpasses previous states of the art and demonstrates significant
improvements in action recognition transferability across domains
while maintaining comparable privacy-preserving performance.

The rapid advancements in video-based action recognition
have enabled its extensive use in areas like video surveillance [8, 34], smart home [15, 24], and elderly monitoring [1, 29, 45]. While these applications are primarily designed to enhance security and assist users, increasing concerns about privacy breaches have emerged due to the large

volumes of video data collected by these systems [14, 20].
Since visual data often needs to be transmitted to external
servers for processing, there is a significant risk of exposing
sensitive personal information, e.g., identity, face, gender,
and social relationships [40].
Recently, numerous methods for Privacy-Preserving Action Recognition (PPAR) have been proposed [28, 33, 35,
42, 43], aiming to conceal privacy-sensitive information in
videos while maintaining action recognition utility. Among

*: Equal contributions. †: Corresponding author.

12894

