This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InfiniCube: Unbounded and Controllable Dynamic 3D Driving Scene
Generation with World-Guided Video Models
Yifan Lu1,2 * Xuanchi Ren1,3,4 * Jiawei Yang5 Tianchang Shen1,3,4 Zhangjie Wu1
Jun Gao1,3,4 Yue Wang1,5 Siheng Chen2 Mike Chen1 Sanja Fidler1,3,4 Jiahui Huang1
1

NVIDIA, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 University of Toronto, 4 Vector Institute, 5 University of Southern California
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/infinicube/

…

HD Map & Boxes
Voxel
Diffusion

Guidance Buffers
Video
Diffusion

ry
cto
e
j
a
Tr

Feed-Forward
Dynamic Reconstruction

Voxel World

Long Driving Video

Generated Large-scale
3D Gaussian Scene

Figure 1. InfiniCube. Our model generates large-scale dynamic 3D driving scenes given the HD map, 3D bounding boxes and text
controls. Here we show a generated large-scale driving scene spanning →100 000 m2 in 3D Gaussians.

istic and dynamic 3D driving scenes, and extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our model design.

Abstract
We present InfiniCube, a scalable and controllable method
to generate unbounded and dynamic 3D driving scenes with
high fidelity. Previous methods for scene generation are
constrained either by their applicability to indoor scenes or
by their lack of controllability. In contrast, we take advantage of recent advances in 3D and video generative models to achieve large dynamic scene generation with flexible
controls like HD maps, vehicle bounding boxes, and text descriptions. First, we construct a map-conditioned 3D voxel
generative model to unleash its power for unbounded voxel
world generation. Then, we re-purpose a video model and
ground it on the voxel world through a set of pixel-aligned
guidance buffers, synthesizing a consistent appearance on
long-video generation for large-scale scenes. Finally, we
propose a fast feed-forward approach that employs both
voxel and pixel branches to lift videos to dynamic 3D Gaussians with controllable objects. Our method generates real-

1. Introduction

* Equal Contribution.

Generating simulatable and controllable 3D scenes is an essential task for a wide spectrum of applications, including
mixed reality, robotics, and the training and testing of autonomous vehicles (AV) [26, 34]. In particular, the requirements of AV applications have introduced new challenges
for 3D generative models in driving scenarios, posing the
following key desiderata: (1) fidelity and consistency, to
ensure that the generated scenes support photo-realistic rendering while preserving consistent appearance and geometry at large scales; and (2) controllability, to enables users to
effortlessly specify scene layouts, appearances, and ego-car
behaviors, facilitating the creation of diverse scenes tailored
to their specific needs; and (3) Representation in 3D, to support reliable physics simulation like collision detection and
LiDAR simulation.
The investigation into large-scale 3D driving scene gen-

27272

