This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Find Any Part in 3D
Ziqi Ma Yisong Yue Georgia Gkioxari
California Institute of Technology
{ziqima, yyue, georgia}@caltech.edu

a)

30K Objaverse Assets

𝑓𝜖ℝ𝑑

b)
FIND3D

…
Input
point cloud

Data Engine

(

,“hull”) (

,“liner”)

(

,“sail”) (

,“frosting”)

c)

…(

,“beak”)

(

,“wing”)

Query with text prompt
cos (𝑇 “ℎ𝑎𝑡” , 𝑓)

Input

“easel stand”
“canvas”

“body”
“head”
“leg” “wing”
“tail” “foot”

“blade”
“motor”
“hub”

Output

2.1M part annotations

Figure 1. F IND 3D is the first general-category 3D model that can segment any part of any object with any text query. We achieve this by
building a scalable Data Engine powered by 2D foundation models – SAM & Gemini – that automatically annotates 3D assets from the
web. Using the labeled data, F IND 3D trains a transformer-based point cloud model with a contrastive training recipe. Our method works
on diverse 3D objects and parts, e.g. the easel, the imaginary animal, and the ceiling fan.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Is it possible to build foundation models in 3D? For text and
image modalities, we have seen that strong, general models
come from internet-scale training data. In the absence of
such large-scale 3D datasets, can we attempt to replicate
this success in 3D?
In this paper, we provide an answer to this question. We
show that when you tackle the data challenge, you can get
a strong model with a simple, general training recipe. This
approach not only unlocks generalization to unseen objects
with a 260% improvement in mIoU, but even outperforms
prior methods on the datasets they train on.
Prior works which rely heavily on dataset-specific customization suffer from poor generalization because existing datasets are small and homogeneous. For example,
ShapeNet-Part [27] contains only 16 categories and makes
assumptions such as “all chairs face right”. Evaluation on
such limited datasets implicitly encourages dataset-specific
customization, which is not the path towards generalization.
Moreover, many prior works use pipelines that are computationally expensive and cannot scale to larger training sets.
In this paper, our goal is to: 1) establish a scalable data

Why don’t we have foundation models in 3D yet? A key limitation is data scarcity. For 3D object part segmentation,
existing datasets are small in size and lack diversity. We
show that it is possible to break this data barrier by building a data engine powered by 2D foundation models. Our
data engine automatically annotates any number of object
parts: 1,755× more unique part types than existing datasets
combined. By training on our annotated data with a simple contrastive objective, we obtain an open-world model
that generalizes to any part in any object based on any text
query. Even when evaluated zero-shot, we outperform existing methods on the datasets they train on. We achieve 260%
improvement in mIoU and boost speed by 6× to 300×.
Our scaling analysis confirms that this generalization stems
from the data scale, which underscores the impact of our
data engine. Finally, to advance general-category openworld 3D part segmentation, we release a benchmark covering a wide range of objects and parts. Project website:
https://ziqi-ma.github.io/find3dsite/

7818

