This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Power of Cooperative Supervision: Multiple Teachers Framework for Advanced
3D Semi-Supervised Object Detection
Jin-Hee Lee∗, †

Jae-Keun Lee∗
Jeseok Kim
DGIST, Daegu, Republic of Korea

Kwon Soon†

{jhlee07, lejk8104, jeseok, soonyk}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract

datasets, time and cost constraints make building large-scale
3D datasets for autonomous driving particularly challenging. Unlike image-based datasets [14, 26], LiDAR-based
datasets [2, 6, 32] are not only fewer in number but also
more demanding in terms of collecting and labeling data.
This is because 3D LiDAR point clouds is more challenging due to the lack of color differentiation and the sparse
nature of the data, which even is hard to distinguish object
sizes and orientations. Due to the irregular and sparse characteristics of LiDAR point data, object detection is more
challenging compared to camera image data. However, LiDAR provides highly accurate 3D distance information and
can detect objects in a 360-degree field of view with a single
sensor. As a result, object detection using LiDAR has been a
consistent focus of research, leading to the development of
numerous state-of-the-art (SOTA) models [4, 8, 11, 13, 15].
To enhance the performance of the detector, prior studies have adopted a 2-stage voxel-based approach to predict 3D bounding boxes. In the second stage, it is used to
pool region of interest (ROI) features from the voxel or
point features, generating refined ROI features. By leveraging these features during object detection, they can predict
more accurately positioned bounding boxes. However, relying solely on labeled data for object detection has its limitations. Hence, there has been growing attention towards
3D SSOD techniques [12, 17, 21, 22, 34], which aim to improve detection performance by training on a combination
of limited labeled data and a large volume of unlabeled data.
Inspired by the pioneering MeanTeacher model [33], these
studies adopt a teacher-student framework.
Although these approaches have proven effective, several critical challenges remain to be addressed. Firstly, the
quality of pseudo-labels generated by the teacher network
plays a pivotal role in determining the accuracy of object
detection. However, since objects vary significantly in aspect ratio and size across different categories, such as vehicles and pedestrians, relying on a single model to generate pseudo-labels without considering the unique characteristics of each category has clear limitations in improving detection accuracy. Secondly, there is a lack of the ef-

To ensure safe autonomous driving in complex urban
environments, it is essential not only to develop highperformance object detection models but also to establish
a diverse and representative dataset that captures a wide
range of urban scenarios and object characteristics. To address these challenges, we introduce a new multi-class 3D
LiDAR dataset that comprehensively reflects various urban environments and object types, along with a robust
3D semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) framework.
Our SSOD framework leverages a novel multiple teachers model, where similar object classes are grouped and
supervised by category-specialized teacher networks. This
category-specific collaborative guidance enables the student network to learn more effectively, leading to improved
object detection performance. Additionally, we propose the
Pseudo-points Generator (PointGen), a simple yet effective technique designed to enhance the generation of highquality pseudo-labels for the teacher network, mitigating
the impact of sparse LiDAR point clouds. Extensive experiments on the Waymo Open Dataset (WOD), KITTI, and
our newly introduced dataset validate the effectiveness of
both our dataset and SSOD framework. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach consistently outperforms state-of-the-art 3D SSOD methods across all evaluated datasets. To encourage further research in this domain,
we will publicly release our multi-class LiDAR dataset and
source code on our GitHub repository1 .

1. Introduction
For autonomous vehicles to drive safely in urban environments, it is crucial to accurately recognize and understand
their complex surroundings. Thus, many researchers leveraging deep learning often rely on substantial amounts of
labeled data. Despite efforts to acquire extensive labeled
∗ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding authors.

1 https://github.com/JH-Research/MultipleTeachers

6994

