This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAMap: Distance-aware MapNet for High Quality HD Map Construction
Jinpeng Dong, Chen Li, Yutong Lin, Jingwen Fu, Sanping Zhou, Nanning Zheng*
State Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{djp1235a, edward82, yutonglin, fu1371252069}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{spzhou, nnzheng}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

0.5

MapTRv2

DAMap(Ours)
MapDA(Ours)

0.4
Recall

High-deﬁnition (HD) map is an important component to
support navigation and planning for autonomous driving
vehicles. Predicting map elements with high quality (high
classiﬁcation and localization scores) is crucial to the safety
of autonomous driving vehicles. However, current methods perform poorly in high quality predictions due to inherent task misalignment. Two main factors are responsible for misalignment: 1) inappropriate task labels due
to one-to-many matching queries sharing the same labels,
and 2) sub-optimal task features due to task-shared sampling mechanism. In this paper, we reveal two inherent
defects in current methods and develop a novel HD map
construction method named DAMap to address these problems. Speciﬁcally, DAMap consists of three components:
Distance-aware Focal Loss (DAFL), Hybrid Loss Scheme
(HLS), and Task Modulated Deformable Attention (TMDA).
The DAFL is introduced to assign appropriate classiﬁcation labels for one-to-many matching samples. The TMDA
is proposed to obtain discriminative task-speciﬁc features.
Furthermore, the HLS is proposed to better utilize the advantages of the DAFL. We perform extensive experiments
and consistently achieve performance improvement on the
NuScenes and Argoverse2 benchmarks under different metrics, baselines, splits, backbones, and schedules.

0.3
0.2
0.1

0
0.9

0.8
Classification score

0.6

Surrounding views images

MapTRv2 DAMap

ego car

divider

ped. crossing

GT

boundary

Figure 1. Top: The analysis about recall at 0.5m threshold (high
localization). Even with the 0.6 classiﬁcation threshold, the recall
is only 35%. This indicates that the baseline performs poorly in
high quality predictions. Our method improves the recall of high
quality predictions at each score threshold. Bottom: A visualization example with a 0.4 classiﬁcation threshold. At this threshold,
the baseline model fails to predict pedestrian crossings, which is
dangerous for autonomous driving vehicles.

1. Introduction
in the development of online HD map. Inspired by DETR
[3, 7, 18, 34, 38] and BEV perception [10, 14, 24], MapTR
[15] designs a transformer-based pipeline with permutationequivalent modeling and hierarchical query embedding for
more efﬁcient HD map construction. MapTRv2 [16]builds
upon the MapTR framework by incorporating decoupled
self-attention to reduce memory consumption and the oneto-many matching to speed up convergence.
Predicting map elements with high classiﬁcation and lo-

High-deﬁnition (HD) map is an important component developed speciﬁcally for autonomous driving vehicles. Traditional ofﬂine HD maps are constructed using SLAMbased methods [27, 35] that require manual annotation on
the Lidar point clouds. The ofﬂine pipeline is complex,
high-cost, and difﬁcult to keep up-to-date frequently. To
address these challenges, there has been a growing interest
* Corresponding author.

5285

