This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Social Debiasing for Fair Multi-modal LLMs
Harry Cheng1 , Yangyang Guo2 , Qingpei Guo3,4, ,* Ming Yang4 , Tian Gan1 , Weili Guan5 , Liqiang Nie5
1
Shandong University, 2 National University of Singapore, 3 University of Warwick, 4 Ant Group,
5
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
xaCheng1996@gmail.com, guoyang.eric@gmail.com, qingpei.gqp@antgroup.com,
m.yang@antgroup.com, gantian@sdu.edu.cn, honeyguan@gmail.com, nieliqiang@gmail.com

Abstract

10%

Debias
50%

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have dramatically advanced the research field and delivered powPrompt
Response
How many Nurses
One Female Nurse
erful vision-language understanding capabilities. However,
are in the photo?
at coordinates […]
(GT: Two Nurses)
(Confidence: 96%)
these models often inherit deep-rooted social biases from
Biased
MLLM
their training data, leading to uncomfortable responses with Doctor
Nurse
respect to attributes such as race and gender. This paFigure 1. Social bias examples. Left: Gender-biased prediction on
per addresses the issue of social biases in MLLMs by i)
Nurse from LLaVA-7B1 . Right: Maximum Skews across different
introducing a comprehensive counterfactual dataset with
human attributes on the FairFace dataset from Qwen-VL-7B and
multiple social concepts (CMSC), which complements exLLaVA-7B. As a metric for measuring model bias, a larger Skew
implies a higher degree of social bias. Our CSD method outperisting datasets by providing 18 diverse and balanced social
forms existing (a)
approaches by a significant (b)
margin.
concepts; and ii) proposing a counter-stereotype debiasing
(CSD) strategy that mitigates social biases in MLLMs by
much more likely to associate the role of nurse with feleveraging the opposites of prevalent stereotypes. CSD inmale rather than male, which may be stereotypical. Such bicorporates both a novel bias-aware data sampling method
ased predictions often occur unconsciously within MLLMs,
and a loss rescaling method, enabling the model to effecmaking them difficult to detect and avoid by explicit rules.
tively reduce biases. We conduct extensive experiments with
A key reason for this issue lies in the composition of the
four prevalent MLLM architectures. The results demonMLLM training data, which can contain content related to
strate the advantage of the CMSC dataset and the edge of
violence or racism [6]. These inappropriate samples may
CSD strategy in reducing social biases compared to existing
collectively demonstrate some stereotypes, resulting in subcompeting methods, without compromising the overall pertle yet uncomfortable responses [8, 63].
formance on general multi-modal reasoning benchmarks.
Existing studies on mitigating the social bias problem in
MLLMs remain largely under-explored. A naive approach
is to collect attribute-balanced vision-language counterfactual datasets [24, 34], which can be used to directly finetune biased models to predict fairer distributions. However,
as demonstrated in Table 1, existing large-scale datasets are
limited by their focus on a single social concept, such as
occupation [27], without attending to multifaceted social
stereotypes [62]. This significantly hampers the model in
learning more comprehensive representations. Therefore,
we are motivated to construct a more extensive and diverse counterfactual dataset. From a methodological perspective, directly fine-tuning on a counterfactual dataset assigns equal importance to instances receiving different social biases, resulting in sub-optimal debiasing performance
(as demonstrated in Section 6.2). Analogy to a common
solution in chemistry—neutralizing acidic water requires

1. Introduction
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have revolutionized the field of general-purpose vision-language understanding. Representative models, such as LLaVA [38],
Qwen-VL [3], and Bunny [25], exhibit remarkable zeroshot performance and can be easily fine-tuned for diverse
downstream applications.
Despite MLLMs’ widespread use, it is imperative to recognize that these models can exhibit severe social biases
with respect to attributes such as race and gender [18, 65].
Figure 1a illustrates one example that a biased MLLM is
* Corresponding author.
1 We manually visualize the bounding boxes from LLaVA’s text output.

1740

