This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskHand: Generative Masked Modeling for Robust Hand Mesh
Reconstruction in the Wild
Muhammad Usama Saleem, Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong, Mayur Jagdishbhai Patel, Hongfei Xue,
Ahmed Helmy, Srijan Das, Pu Wang
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA
{msaleem2, epinyoan, mpate169, hxue2, ahelmy1, sdas24, pwang13}@charlotte.edu

Figure 1. MaskHand: a novel generative masked model for accurate and robust 3D hand mesh recovery from single RGB images, excelling
in diverse scenarios like occlusions, hand-object interactions, and varied appearances. Watch our Supplemental Video to see it in action!

Abstract

ness, and realism in 3D hand mesh reconstruction. Project
website: https://m-usamasaleem.github.io/
publication/MaskHand/MaskHand.html.

Reconstructing a 3D hand mesh from a single RGB
image is challenging due to complex articulations, selfocclusions, and depth ambiguities. Traditional discriminative methods, which learn a deterministic mapping from a
2D image to a single 3D mesh, often struggle with the inherent ambiguities in 2D-to-3D mapping. To address this challenge, we propose MaskHand, a novel generative masked
model for hand mesh recovery that synthesizes plausible
3D hand meshes by learning and sampling from the probabilistic distribution of the ambiguous 2D-to-3D mapping
process. MaskHand consists of two key components: (1) a
VQ-MANO, which encodes 3D hand articulations as discrete pose tokens in a latent space, and (2) a ContextGuided Masked Transformer that randomly masks out pose
tokens and learns their joint distribution, conditioned on
corrupted token sequence, image context, and 2D pose cues.
This learned distribution facilitates confidence-guided sampling during inference, producing mesh reconstructions
with low uncertainty and high precision. Extensive evaluations on benchmark and real-world datasets demonstrate
that MaskHand achieves state-of-the-art accuracy, robust-

1. Introduction
Hand mesh recovery has gained significant interest in computer vision due to its broad applications in fields such as
robotics, human-computer interaction [43, 57], animation,
and AR/VR [12, 31]. While previous methods have explored markerless, image-based hand understanding, most
depend on depth cameras [3, 24, 44, 50, 58] or multi-view
images [5, 25, 54, 56]. Consequently, most of these methods are not feasible for real-world applications where only
monocular RGB images are accessible. On the other hand,
monocular hand mesh recovery from a single RGB image,
especially without body context or explicit camera parameters, is highly challenging due to substantial variations in
hand appearance in 3D space, frequent self-occlusions, and
complex articulations.
Recent advances, especially in transformer-based methods, have shown significant promise in monocular hand
mesh recovery (HMR) by capturing intricate hand struc-

8372

