This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GSRecon: Efficient Generalizable Gaussian Splatting for Surface Reconstruction
from Sparse Views
Hang Yang1 , Le Hui2 , Jianjun Qian1 , Jin Xie3 *, Jian Yang1
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
1

{hangyang, csjqian, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn; csjxie@nju.edu.cn; huile@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalizable surface reconstruction aims to recover the
surface the scene from a sparse set of images in a feedforward manner. Existing volume rendering-based methods
evaluate numerous points along camera rays to infer the
geometry, resulting in inefficient reconstruction. Recently,
3D Gaussian Splatting offers an alternative efficient scene
representation and has inspired a series of surface reconstruction methods. However, these methods require
dense views and cannot be generalized to new scenes.
In this paper, we propose a novel surface reconstruction
method with Gaussian splatting, named GSRecon, which
leverages the advantages of rasterization-based rendering
to achieve efficient reconstruction. To obtain accurate
geometry representation, we propose a geometry-aware
cross-view enhancement module to improve the unreliable
geometry estimation in the current view by incorporating
accurate geometric information from other views. To
generate the fine-grained Gaussian primitives, we propose
a hybrid cross-view feature aggregation module that integrates an efficient voxel branch and a fine-grained point
branch to jointly capture cross-view geometric information.
Subsequently, per-view depth maps are rendered using
these Gaussian primitives and fused to obtain the final 3D
surface. Extensive experiments on the DTU, BlendedMVS,
and Tanks and Temples datasets validate that GSRecon
achieves state-of-the-art performance efficiently. Code is
available at https://github.com/hyangwinter/
GSRecon.

robotics, virtual reality, and augmented reality. In realworld scenarios, users may only have access to a limited number of views and desire to leverage generalizable
models for rapid reconstruction in new scenes. However,
generalizable surface reconstruction from sparse views is
a challenging problem due to the insufficient multi-view
constraints.
In recent years, neural implicit representation-based
generalizable methods [27, 31, 34, 37–39, 47] have
achieved significant progress in sparse view surface
reconstruction. These methods typically require evaluating
numerous points along camera rays due to inherent
limitation of implicit representation, leading to inefficient
reconstruction. More recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(GS) [23] has emerged as a compelling alternative to
implicit representations in novel view synthesis, owing to
its efficient rasterization-based rendering and high-fidelity
performance. Inspired by the success of 3D GS, a series
of methods [5, 16, 19, 58] have been explored to improve
the performance of 3D GS for surface reconstruction,
allowing for reconstruction within minutes. However,
these methods require dense input views and can not be
effectively generalized to new scenes.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose a generalizable surface reconstruction framework based on Gaussian representation
from sparse views, named GSRecon. The key to surface
reconstruction is to accurately determine the positions of
Gaussian points. A straightforward approach is to construct
cost volume for each view individually to capture the scene
geometry and back-project depth maps as Gaussian centers,
similar to MVSplat [7]. However, due to the unreliable
feature matching under challenging conditions such as
reflections, weak textures, and large viewpoint variations,
it is difficult to obtain accurate and consistent multi-view
depth maps from the cost volume, leading to suboptimal
surface reconstruction results.

Reconstructing an accurate 3D surface from a set of images with known poses has wide-ranging applications in

In GSRecon, we propose the geometry-aware cross-view

* Corresponding author

25346

