This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Client2Vec: Improving Federated Learning by Distribution Shifts Aware Client
Indexing

1

Yongxin Guo1 , Lin Wang1 , Xiaoying Tang1,2,3 , Tao Lin4,5
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, China
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society (AIRS), Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence, Shenzhen, China
4
School of Engineering, Westlake University
5
Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University

Abstract

lem in FL [1, 32], most existing studies center on the training process of FL by improving the key stages of the FL
training, such as client sampling [12, 39, 60], model aggregation [7, 36, 58], and local training [32, 34].
An additional line of research in FL aims to find efficient
methods to improve the performance before the training
stage. Yet only a limited number of works exist, either utilizing dataset distillation before the FL training [63], or generating global shared synthetic pseudo-data [18, 55]. Despite
promising, these approaches incur additional computation
costs on local devices with a limited number of applicable
scenarios and are incompatible with other FL training stages
like client sampling and model aggregation.
Taking inspiration from the Word2Vec technique in Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks [43] and domain indexing in Domain Generalization tasks [62], we introduce
a novel mechanism below, namely Client2Vec. Client2Vec
generates an index vector for each client, serving as their
identity by incorporating information about the client’s local
data distribution. These vectors are used to measure label
and feature distribution shifts among clients, seamlessly integrate into the FL training pipeline, and allows efficiently (1)
operating independently of the FL training process, (2) combining with existing FL methods, while imposing a minimal
additional computational load on local devices at training
stages, and (3) enhancing FL training performance throughout all FL training stages, including client sampling, model
aggregation, and local training.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We explore a novel mechanism in FL called Client2Vec,
which involves creating an index vector for each client
before the FL training phase. These vectors incorporate
information about the local distribution shifts of clients
and subsequently enhance the FL training process.
• We present the Distribution Shifts Aware Index Generation Network (DSA-IGN), a network specifically de-

Federated Learning (FL) is a privacy-preserving distributed
machine learning paradigm. Nonetheless, the substantial
distribution shifts among clients pose a considerable challenge to the performance of current FL algorithms. To mitigate this challenge, various methods have been proposed
to enhance the FL training process. This paper endeavors to tackle the issue of data heterogeneity from another
perspective—by improving FL algorithms prior to the actual training stage. Specifically, we introduce the Client2Vec
mechanism, which generates a unique client index that contains clients’ distribution shifts information for each client
before the commencement of FL training. Subsequently, we
leverage the generated client index to enhance the subsequent FL training process. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed Client2Vec method, we conduct three
case studies that assess the impact of the client index on
the FL training process. These case studies encompass enhanced client sampling, model aggregation, and local training. Extensive experiments conducted on diverse datasets
and model architectures show the efficacy of Client2Vec
across all three case studies. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LINs-lab/client2vec.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging machine learning
paradigm that preserves clients’ privacy by only exchanging
model parameters between clients and server, and maintains
the local data not exchanged. As the de facto algorithm
in FL, FedAvg [41] proposes to use local SGD to improve
the communication efficiency of FL. However, the non-i.i.d.
nature of local distributions significantly reduces the performance of FL algorithms [28, 34, 37]. Despite the great
success of existing methods in addressing the non-i.i.d. prob-

1433

