This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coordinate-based Speed of Sound Recovery for Aberration-Corrected
Photoacoustic Computed Tomography
Tianao Li1,4

Manxiu Cui2 Cheng Ma3 Emma Alexander1,4
2 California Institute of Technology
3 Tsinghua University
4 NSF-Simons AI Institute for the Sky (SkAI)

1 Northwestern University

tianaoli@u.northwestern.edu

Figure 1. Self-Supervised Speed of Sound Recovery Corrects PACT Aberrations. (a) Backprojection converts photoacoustic measurements into images (purple), which suffer aberrations caused by unaccounted-for variation in the speed of sound (SOS) of tissue. Our method
produces high-quality images through a self-supervised recovery of SOS. We begin with a stack of aberrated reconstructions, created with
a varying delay parameter (green), roughly analogous to a focal stack. Each image patch is recovered with a multi-channel deconvolution.
Our forward model (dashed red) uses a trainable coordinate-based SOS representation to estimate the point spread functions (PSFs) at each
location (white “x” for example shown). The physics-based forward model and multi-channel inversion are fully differentiable, enabling
test-time training without any external training data, which is currently limited for this imaging modality. (b) We benchmark our method
using both a neural field (NF) and pixel grid (PG) for SOS representation. Compared to the best existing methods, both with and without
SOS recovery, we provide state-of-the-art image quality, and recover SOS with an order-of-magnitude speed-up.

Abstract
Photoacoustic computed tomography (PACT) is a
non-invasive imaging modality, similar to ultrasound, with
wide-ranging medical applications. Conventional PACT
images are degraded by wavefront distortion caused by the
heterogeneous speed of sound (SOS) in tissue. Accounting
for these effects can improve image quality and provide
medically useful information, but measuring the SOS
directly is burdensome and the existing joint reconstruction method is computationally expensive. Traditional
supervised learning techniques are currently inaccessible
in this data-starved domain. In this work, we introduce
an efficient, self-supervised joint reconstruction method

that recovers SOS and high-quality images for ring array
PACT systems. To solve this semi-blind inverse problem,
we parametrize the SOS using either a pixel grid or a
neural field (NF) and update it directly by backpropagating the gradients through a differentiable imaging
forward model. Our method removes SOS aberrations
more accurately and 35x faster than the current SOTA.
We demonstrate the success of our method quantitatively
in simulation and qualitatively on experimentallycollected and in vivo data. Our code and synthetic
numerical phantoms are available on our project page:

27466

https://lukeli0425.github.io/Coord-SoS-PACT/.

