This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZFusion: Efﬁcient Deep Compositional Zero-shot Learning for Blind Image
Super-Resolution with Generative Diffusion Prior

1

Alireza Esmaeilzehi1 *, Hossein Zaredar1 *, Yapeng Tian2 , Laleh Seyyed-Kalantari1,3
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada 2 The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, US
3
Vector Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada
{alirezae, hzaredar, lsk}@yorku.ca, {yapeng.tian}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Deep blind image super resolution (Blind SR) schemes
strive to provide high performances under various image
degradation processes. Despite the signiﬁcant advancement in the area of Blind SR, the performances of these
methods still may not be as high as one would desire in
the case of real-world degradation operations. In this paper, we develop a novel diffusion-based Blind SR method,
which, by leveraging compositional zero-shot learning, is
able to provide superior performances for both synthetic
and real-world unknown degradation processes. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst extract both synthetic and real-world degradation embeddings from the input visual signal in a compositional zero-shot fashion. Next, we have efﬁciently embedded such degradation embeddings in the architecture of
our diffusion-based scheme for guiding the diffusion feature
generation process. The results of extensive experiments
have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed Blind
SR method over the state-of-the-art algorithms. Our code is
available at https://github.com/HosseinZaredar/ZFusion.

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Compositional zero-shot learning for SR. (a) LR image.
(b) Schematic of LR degradations as a composition of synthetic
and real-world degradations. (c) SR image. (d) Ground truth (GT).

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental challenge
in low-level vision, aiming to reconstruct photo-realistic
high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR) inputs. Deep SR networks [6–8, 14, 15, 20, 43, 63, 66]
have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance by effectively learning feature mappings between LR and HR
image spaces. However, many of these methods are trained
with data generated from a single degradation process, such
as bicubic downsampling, leading to signiﬁcant performance degradation when encountering different real-world
degradations during inference.
To address this limitation, blind image super-resolution
(Blind SR) has emerged [11, 25–27, 43, 60, 61]. These ap* Equal contribution.

(a)

proaches enhance generalization by training on diverse LR
images generated from various degradation processes, including blurring, downsampling, and noise, enabling them
to handle unknown degradation. Furthermore, advanced
learning paradigms like unpaired learning [22, 28], contrastive learning [47, 50], and self-supervised learning [4,
65] have been employed to improve Blind SR performance.
Very recently, generative diffusion priors have been exploited in Blind SR to restore images with realistic details [5, 21, 57]. Diffusion models excel at restoring highfrequency components often lost during degradation. Many
diffusion-based Blind SR methods incorporate text prompts
alongside LR images. These prompts, representing seman-

12338

