This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Fine-Tuning of Transformers for Generative Tasks
Wei Chen, Jingxi Yu, Zichen Miao, Qiang Qiu
Purdue University, IN, USA
{chen2732, yu667, miaoz, qqiu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Large pre-trained transformers have revolutionized artificial intelligence across various domains, and fine-tuning remains the dominant approach for adapting these models to
downstream tasks due to the cost of training from scratch.
However, in existing fine-tuning methods, the updated representations are formed as a dense combination of modified
parameters, making it challenging to interpret their contributions and understand how the model adapts to new tasks.
In this work, we introduce a fine-tuning framework inspired
by sparse coding, where fine-tuned features are represented
as a sparse combination of basic elements, i.e., feature dictionary atoms. The feature dictionary atoms function as
fundamental building blocks of the representation, and tuning atoms allows for seamless adaptation to downstream
tasks. Sparse coefficients then serve as indicators of atom
importance, identifying the contribution of each atom to the
updated representation. Leveraging the atom selection capability of sparse coefficients, we first demonstrate that our
method enhances image editing performance by improving text alignment through the removal of unimportant feature dictionary atoms. Additionally, we validate the effectiveness of our approach in the text-to-image concept customization task, where our method efficiently constructs the
target concept using a sparse combination of feature dictionary atoms, outperforming various baseline fine-tuning
methods. We provide more details at our project page.

formers by updating a small subset of parameters while
keeping large pre-trained weights frozen. A representative
family of these approaches [17, 26] utilizes lightweight parameterizations, such as low-rank decomposition, to adapt
the weight matrices. However, despite being lightweight,
these methods obtain the updated features with a dense
matrix multiplication between the input and the adapted
weights, making it challenging to interpret how the individual updated parameters contribute to the newly learned
representations and to identify the new knowledge gained
through fine-tuning.
To tackle this challenge, we take inspiration from sparse
coding [9, 30, 32, 33, 37, 39, 42, 54–56], in which signals are expressed as a sparse combination of basic elements, i.e., dictionary atoms. In this paper, we frame model
fine-tuning as a sparse coding problem, where the adapted
feature is constructed using a dictionary of feature atoms.
These feature atoms are selectively combined with sparse
coefficients, ensuring that only a small subset of atoms contributes to the updated representation. This sparsity not only
disentangles interactions between features but also allows
each atom to capture a distinct aspect of the downstream
data.

1. Introduction

We first analyze with a toy experiment that the tuned
feature dictionary atoms function as building blocks of the
adapted representation, and tuning these atoms allows for
effective adaptation to downstream tasks. We demonstrate
that with pre-trained coefficients and atoms, fine-tuning the
atoms effectively captures the representation of downstream
tasks. Representing features through individual atoms enhances controllability in the adaptation process.

In recent years, pre-trained large models have revolutionized artificial intelligence across domains like natural language processing and computer vision [11, 22, 46, 52].
Given the prohibitive computational resources required for
training these models from scratch, fine-tuning has emerged
as the dominant paradigm for adapting pre-trained models
to specific downstream tasks, enabling efficient knowledge
transfer while minimizing computational overhead.
Various parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods [17, 26, 43] have been developed to tune the large trans-

We validate our method on generative fine-tuning tasks.
We show that the target concept can be effectively represented using feature dictionary atoms after fine-tuning the
pre-trained model within our framework. Compared to
baseline methods, our approach allows the selection of specific atoms to refine the generated image. This adaptability
improves performance on image editing tasks by enhancing
editing results through the removal of unimportant atoms.
We also apply our approach to customized text-to-image
tasks, showing that fine-tuning atoms effectively captures

18703

