This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Large Vision-Language Model Meets Large Remote Sensing Imagery:
Coarse-to-Fine Text-Guided Token Pruning
Junwei Luo1 *, Yingying Zhang2 , Xue Yang3 , Kang Wu1 *, Qi Zhu2 ,
Lei Liang2 , Jingdong Chen2 , Yansheng Li1†
1 Wuhan University
2 Ant Group
3 SAIS, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{luojunwei,kangwu,yansheng.li}@whu.edu.cn

yangxue-2019-sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn

https://github.com/VisionXLab/LRS-VQA

Abstract
Efficient vision-language understanding of large Remote
Sensing Images (RSIs) is meaningful but challenging. Current Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) typically employ limited pre-defined grids to process images, leading to
information loss when handling gigapixel RSIs. Conversely,
using unlimited grids significantly increases computational
costs. To preserve image details while reducing computational complexity, we propose a text-guided token pruning
method with Dynamic Image Pyramid (DIP) integration.
Our method introduces: (i) a Region Focus Module (RFM)
that leverages text-aware region localization capability to
identify critical vision tokens, and (ii) a coarse-to-fine image tile selection and vision token pruning strategy based
on DIP, which is guided by RFM outputs and avoids directly processing the entire large imagery. Additionally, existing benchmarks for evaluating LVLMs’ perception ability on large RSI suffer from limited question diversity and
constrained image sizes. We construct a new benchmark
named LRS-VQA, which contains 7,333 QA pairs across
8 categories, with image length up to 27,328 pixels. Our
method outperforms existing high-resolution strategies on
four datasets using the same data. Moreover, compared
to existing token reduction methods, our approach demonstrates higher efficiency under high-resolution settings.

Figure 1. High-resolution strategy comparison for modular
LVLMs. (a) and (b) show that existing grid-based cropping methods face challenges when processing large RSIs. (c) The proposed
dynamic pyramid-based token pruning strategy can dynamically
select image tiles of key regions related to the input text, balancing image detail and computational cost.

tation [12, 32, 53, 73, 87, 94].
Advances in satellite imaging technology allow for the
acquisition of large remote sensing images (RSIs) that cover
extensive ground areas and contain detailed land use information [18, 38]. Therefore, language-based intelligent analysis of large RSIs is valuable for applications such as complex scene understanding [37, 50], urban planning [35, 64],
infrastructure development [70], and monitoring [93].
Some RS LVLMs handle high-resolution input through
position embedding interpolation [27, 86]. Additionally, various dynamic high-resolution strategies designed
for general LVLMs [33, 41, 80] can be adapted to RS
LVLMs, such as EarthDial [61] (based on InternVL1.5 [10])

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the rapid advancement of Large Language
Models (LLMs) [2, 11, 14, 17, 75], Large Visual-Language
Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in
perceiving and understanding visual information in textbased multimodal interactions [9, 29, 41, 65]. Currently,
LVLMs have been extensively studied and applied across
various fields like remote sensing (RS) intelligent interpre* indicates interns at Ant Group. † Corresponding author.

9206

