This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HERMES: temporal-coHERent long-forM understanding with Episodes and
Semantics
Gueter Josmy Faure1 Jia-Fong Yeh1 Min-Hung Chen2
Shang-Hong Lai4 Winston H. Hsu1
1

National Taiwan University

2

NVIDIA

4

Hung-Ting Su1

National Tsing Hua University

Figure 1. Semantic Knowledge and Episodic Memory Aggregation: Our Episodic COmpressor (ECO) processes and aggregates temporal
information across different scales: (I) Social interactions among adolescents in an outdoor setting, and (II) Complex family dynamics
portrayed through parent-child interactions. Simultaneously, our Semantics reTRiever (SeTR) extracts high-level semantic information: (I)
The contextual environment of a baseball game, and (II) The intersection of media consumption and domestic life through a news broadcast.
This dual-level approach enables comprehensive video understanding by capturing both specific events and overarching concepts.

Abstract
Long-form video understanding presents unique challenges
that extend beyond traditional short-video analysis approaches, particularly in capturing long-range dependencies, processing redundant information efficiently, and extracting high-level semantic concepts. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel approach that more accurately reflects human cognition. This paper introduces
HERMES: temporal-coHERent long-forM understanding
with Episodes and Semantics, featuring two versatile modules that can enhance existing video-language models or
operate as a standalone system. Our Episodic COmpressor
(ECO) efficiently aggregates representations from micro to
semi-macro levels, reducing computational overhead while
preserving temporal dependencies. Our Semantics reTRiever
(SeTR) enriches these representations with semantic information by focusing on broader context, dramatically reducing
feature dimensionality while preserving relevant macro-level
information. We demonstrate that these modules can be
seamlessly integrated into existing SOTA models, consistently improving their performance while reducing inference latency by up to 43% and memory usage by 46%. As

a standalone system, HERMES achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple long-video understanding benchmarks in both zero-shot and fully-supervised settings. Our
project page and code can be found here.

1. Introduction
Video understanding reflects how humans perceive the world
through one of our most essential senses, sight, and drives a
wide range of visual and multimodal applications. Whether
we want to create better video summarization tools, index
and retrieve specifics from the vast and ever-expanding array
of video content, or improve content moderation and copyright enforcement, we need models that excel at video understanding. This requirement extends beyond short videos
with few frames — a task that image models can already
handle adequately — to encompass the analysis of extended
video content spanning minutes and comprising thousands
of interrelated frames.
Long-form video understanding is challenging for several
reasons. First and foremost is the temporal complexity, as it
requires handling a large number of frames throughout the

22911

