This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Proxy-Bridged Game Transformer for Interactive Extreme Motion Prediction
Yanwen Fang1 , Wenqi Jia2, ,* Xu Cao2,3, ,* Peng-Tao Jiang4 , Guodong Li1 , Jintai Chen5,†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
PediaMed AI 4 vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd 5 HKUST(GZ)

Abstract
Multi-person motion prediction becomes particularly challenging when handling highly interactive scenarios involving extreme motions. Previous works focused more on
the case of ‘moderate’ motions (e.g., walking together),
where predicting each pose in isolation often yields reasonable results. However, these approaches fall short in
modeling extreme motions like lindy-hop dances, as they require a more comprehensive understanding of cross-person
dependencies. To bridge this gap, we introduce Proxybridged Game Transformer (PGformer), a Transformerbased foundation model that captures the interactions driving extreme multi-person motions. PGformer incorporates
a novel cross-query attention module to learn bidirectional
dependencies between pose sequences and a proxy unit
that subtly controls bidirectional spatial information flow.
We evaluated PGformer on the challenging ExPI dataset,
which involves large collaborative movements. Both quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate the superiority of PGformer in both short- and long-term predictions.
We also test the proposed method on moderate movement datasets CMU-Mocap and MuPoTS-3D, generalizing PGformer to scenarios with more than two individuals
with promising results. Code of PGformer is available at
https://github.com/joyfang1106/pgformer.

Figure 1. ‘moderate’ motions of a single person walking v.s. ‘extreme’ motions of two people dancing Lindy Hop.

1. Introduction

problem by deep learning models [5, 6, 17, 21, 22, 33].
While previous works have achieved remarkable successes,
most of them are devoted to exploring single-person prediction which forecasts single human poses in isolation, limiting their direct applications in real-world scenarios of multiple persons.
Growing evidence has shown that the motion of one
person is typically affected by those of others in a scenario with multiple persons [30]. Recently, multi-person
motion prediction has drawn increasing attention from researchers [14, 24, 29, 30]. Even so, these works mainly focused on modeling interacted persons with ‘moderate’ motions (e.g., hand-shaking and walking together), and yet neglected the scenario of highly correlated persons with ‘extreme’ motions that is often seen in team sports or collaborative assembly tasks. It is worth noting that transferring
single-person-basedy methods to predict ‘moderate’ motions can still achieve promising results, while these methods fail to predict ‘extreme’ motions. To clarify the word
‘extreme’, Figure 1 compares a ‘moderate’ motion with
small movements and an ‘extreme’ motion with large movements, showing that the right ones are more complex and
challenging.
To fill this gap, Guo et al. [13] collected a new dataset
called Extreme Pose Interaction (ExPI) containing human
motion sequences in pair with extreme motions. Based
on this dataset, they also proposed a cross-interaction attention (XIA) module and used it extracting the spatialtemporal motion information for a 26-layer Graph Convolutional Network, which is the first work to employ the historical information of both people in an interactive fashion.
However, their model only exploited the multi-person interactions in the historical poses, predicting the future poses

Human motion prediction aims to forecast a sequence
of future 3D motion trajectories given a sequence of past
ones, which is widely used in autonomous driving [4, 9],
target tracking [11], and human-robot interaction [7, 16], et
al. The skeleton-based human motion sequence is a structured time series, namely, the movement of a single body
joint is affected by the coupling of spatial connections with
other joints and the temporal trajectory tendency. Therefore, most existing works reformulated motion prediction
as a sequence-to-sequence prediction task and tackled this
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

13912

