This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GroundingSuite: Measuring Complex Multi-Granular Pixel Grounding
Rui Hu1∗

Lianghui Zhu1∗ Yuxuan Zhang1 Tianheng Cheng1† Lei Liu2 Heng Liu2
Longjin Ran2 Xiaoxin Chen2 Wenyu Liu1 Xinggang Wang1‡
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
vivo AI Lab

RefCOCO

gRefCOCO

GranD

Single Object

Multi Object

Stuff Class

GroundingSuite (Ours.)
Stuff Class

“far left”

“black car on right and red car”

“the water is blue”

Single Object

Single Object

Single Object

“in the front”

“left person”

“a broken computer monitor”

“A trail of white smoke …”

“Sidewalk with …”

Part Level

“The hair of the woman …”

“The beak of …”

Multi Object

“Paper towels scattered …”

“Banana chips …”

Single Object

“A cat with green eyes…”

“A bench in …”

Figure 1. Examples of our GroundingSuite dataset. Including four aspects: stuff-class segmentation for context-aware localization,
part-level segmentation requiring ﬁne-grained understanding, multi-object segmentation with complex referential relationships, and singleobject segmentation across diverse appearance variations. Note that ‘red’ color means the referring is wrong.

Abstract

GroundingSuite.

Pixel grounding, encompassing tasks such as Referring Expression Segmentation (RES), has garnered considerable
attention due to its potential for bridging the gap between
vision and language modalities. However, advancements in
this domain are currently constrained by limitations inherent in existing datasets, including limited object categories,
insufﬁcient textual diversity, and a scarcity of high-quality
annotations. To mitigate these limitations, we introduce
GroundingSuite, which comprises: (1) an automated data
annotation framework leveraging multiple Vision-Language
Model (VLM) agents; (2) a large-scale training dataset encompassing 9.56 million diverse referring expressions and
their corresponding segmentations; and (3) a meticulously
curated evaluation benchmark consisting of 3,800 images.
The GroundingSuite dataset boosts model performance to
state-of-the-art levels. Speciﬁcally, a cIoU of 68.9 on gRefCOCO and a gIoU of 55.3 on RefCOCOm. Moreover, the
GroundingSuite annotation framework demonstrates superior efﬁciency compared to the current leading data annotation method, i.e., 4.5× faster than the GLaMM. Codes
are available at: https://github.com/hustvl/
∗ Equal contribution;
xgwang@hust.edu.cn

†

Project lead;

‡

Corresponding author:

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in pixel grounding have fostered signiﬁcant interest due to their remarkable segmentation performance in following natural language descriptions. However, this task remains constrained by existing benchmark
limitations. As shown in Tab. 1, widely-used datasets
like RefCOCO series [8, 17, 19, 36], while valuable for
early research, restrict their scope to closed-set categories
and limited manually annotated data samples. Speciﬁcally,
only 80 object categories from the COCO dataset [13] hinder the pixel grounding task from generalizing to openvocabulary understanding, diverse granularity levels (e.g.,
part-level segmentation), and complex scene compositions
(e.g., multi-object interactions and background separation).
Besides, current datasets can not satisfy both the amount
and annotation quality requirements, i.e., manually annotated datasets can not scale up due to the heavy human effort, and automatically annotated datasets often show inferior label quality.
Some automatic annotation approaches, such as
GLaMM [22] and MRES [28], are proposed to alleviate the
heavy human annotation burden but also face low-quality

23105

