This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Complexity-Faithfulness Trade-off of Gradient-Based Explanations
Amir Mehrpanah Matteo Gamba Kevin Smith Hossein Azizpour
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
{amirme, mgamba, ksmith, azizpour}@kth.se

Abstract

a network’s architecture and complexity of its explanations.
With this formalism, we particularly study ReLU networks.
Explanation faithfulness. To reduce the explanation complexity, post-hoc techniques produce smooth surrogates
during the explanation phase [41], at the cost of lower
faithfulness to the original network, leading to an inherent trade-off between explanation complexity and faithfulness. Therefore, it is vital to carefully consider this tradeoff when developing, choosing, or using post-hoc methods [1, 23]. While several metrics are proposed to measure
complexity (e.g., entropy-based methods [6]) and faithfulness (e.g., pixel removal scores [6]), these metrics disjointly
measure one of the two aspects and are influenced by extraneous factors such as the choice of baseline and removal
order [33, 60]. These caveats of existing metrics impede
a principled analysis of the complexity-faithfulness tradeoff [14, 46]. Our goal is to formally study this trade-off.
Specifically, we introduce consistently-defined measures of
complexity and faithfulness with which we empirically analyze the existing post-hoc explanation methods, and our
method of mitigation of sharpness in ReLU networks.
Our Approach. We adopt a spectral perspective to formally establish a relationship between a network’s architecture and its gradient-based explanation. We first measure explanation complexity via spatial high-frequency content of input gradients (Sec. 3.2), and formally link it to
the high-frequency components, or sharp changes, of a
network (Sec. 3.3). This connection, importantly, allows
for characterization and improvement of network architectures for their explanation complexity, which we showcase
in Sec. 3.4. Finally, in Sec. 4, we leverage our formalism in
a unified framework to analyze the complexity-faithfulness
trade-off, i.e., by measuring complexity as “expected frequency” and faithfulness as the “gap” in the expected frequency of the original and surrogate functions. We use this
framework to analyze (smoothed versions of) ReLU networks and various post-hoc explanations; see Fig. 1.
Our Contributions. We summarize in the following list:
• A Framework for Formal Analysis: We introduce a
framework based on a formal connection between a network’s power spectrum tail and the complexity of its ex-

ReLU networks, while prevalent for visual data, have sharp
transitions, sometimes relying on individual pixels for predictions, making vanilla gradient-based explanations noisy
and difficult to interpret. Existing methods, such as GradCAM, smooth these explanations by producing surrogate
models at the cost of faithfulness. We introduce a unifying spectral framework to systematically analyze and quantify smoothness, faithfulness, and their trade-off in explanations. Using this framework, we quantify and regularize
the contribution of ReLU networks to high-frequency information, providing a principled approach to identifying this
trade-off. Our analysis characterizes how surrogate-based
smoothing distorts explanations, leading to an “explanation
gap” that we formally define and measure for different posthoc methods. Finally, we validate our theoretical findings
across different design choices, datasets, and ablations.1

1. Introduction
The growing complexity of deep networks necessitates
explainability, especially in safety-critical applications.
Gradient-based explanation methods are widely used in
computer vision for this aim. These methods, however,
suffer from two main shortcomings: lack of smoothness or
faithfulness, the trade-off of which is the focus of our study.
Explanation complexity. A crucial property for explanations to be human-understandable is their simplicity, which
translates to smoothness2 in saliency-based explanations.
However, both theoretical [19, 28] and empirical [47, 54]
studies suggest that ReLU networks, the most common variant of deep networks used for visual data, have sharp transitions, sometimes relying on individual pixels for predictions [57]. This sharpness can result in complex gradientbased explanations that hinder interpretability. Thus, as our
preliminary step, we establish a formal connection between
1 https://github.com/Amir-Mehrpanah/On-theComplexity-Faithfulness-Trade-off-of-GradientBased-Explanations-ICCV25/
2 We may refer to smoothness and complexity interchangeably.

3531

