This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R1-VL: Learning to Reason with Multimodal Large Language Models via
Step-wise Group Relative Policy Optimization
Jingyi Zhang Jiaxing Huang Huanjin Yao Shunyu Liu Xikun Zhang Shijian Lu Dacheng Tao
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
Recent studies generally enhance MLLMs’ reasoning capabilities via supervised fine-tuning on high-quality chainof-thought reasoning data, which often leads models to
merely imitate successful reasoning paths without understanding what the wrong reasoning paths are. In this
work, we aim to enhance the MLLMs’ reasoning ability
beyond passively imitating positive reasoning paths. To
this end, we design Step-wise Group Relative Policy Optimization (StepGRPO), a new online reinforcement learning framework that enables MLLMs to self-improve reasoning ability via simple, effective and dense step-wise rewarding. Specifically, StepGRPO introduces two novel rulebased reasoning rewards: Step-wise Reasoning Accuracy
Reward (StepRAR) and Step-wise Reasoning Validity Reward (StepRVR). StepRAR rewards the reasoning paths that
contain necessary intermediate reasoning steps via a soft
key-step matching technique, while StepRAR rewards reasoning paths that follow a well-structured and logically
consistent reasoning process through a reasoning completeness and logic evaluation strategy. With the proposed StepGRPO, we introduce R1-VL, a series of MLLMs with outstanding capabilities in step-by-step reasoning. Extensive
experiments over 8 benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our methods. Code is available at link.

Figure 1. For MLLMs, online reinforcement learning with
outcome-level reward, like in Deepseek-R1’s GRPO [34], often
suffers from sparse reward issues, where only a few reasoning
paths can receive positive/high rewards during training, ultimately
leading to poor exploration efficiency and unstable learning process. To tackle this, we propose a novel online reinforcement
learning framework that incorporates step-wise reasoning rewards
in addition to outcome-level rewards, encouraging MLLMs to iteratively refine their reasoning with dense rewards and resulting in
a more stable training process and improved reasoning capability.
The experiments are conducted on Qwen2-VL-7b over MathVista.

models to collectively search and identify effective reasoning paths, followed by SFT on the collected reasoning
data. However, SFT approaches focus solely on positive
reasoning paths (i.e., those leading to correct answers),
while the negative reasoning paths are largely neglected.
This limitation may cause the model to merely imitate
successful reasoning paths without understanding what the
flawed and wrong reasoning paths are.

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have
achieved significant progress in vision-language understanding [1, 8, 15, 18, 21, 38, 43, 51]. Recent efforts
generally enhance MLLMs’ reasoning capabilities by
employing supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on high-quality
chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning data generated by powerful models (e.g., GPT4) [37, 44, 46, 54]. For example,
Mulberry [46] introduces CoMCTS, which utilizes multiple

In this work, we aim to enhance the MLLMs’ reasoning
ability beyond passively imitating positive reasoning paths.
Recent advancements in NLP, such as Deepseek-R1 [13]
and Kimi-K1.5 [36], have shown great potential in incentivizing the reasoning capability of LLMs via actively selfexploring. The core design of these advances (e.g., GRPO
in Deepseek-R1) lies in online reinforcement learning without the need for reward models, which encourages an LLM

Correspondence to: Jiaxing Huang {jiaxing.huang@ntu.edu.sg}.

1859

