This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P ROGRESSOR: A Perceptually Guided Reward Estimator
with Self-Supervised Online Refinement
Tewodros W. Ayalew1 Xiao Zhang∗,1 Kevin Yuanbo Wu∗,1 Tianchong Jiang2
Michael Maire1 Matthew R. Walter2
1

University of Chicago

2

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

https://ripl.github.io/progressor

Abstract
We present P ROGRESSOR, a novel framework that learns
a task-agnostic reward function from videos, enabling policy training through goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) without manual supervision. Underlying this reward is an estimate of the distribution over task progress
as a function of the current, initial, and goal observations
that is learned in a self-supervised fashion. Crucially, P RO GRESSOR refines rewards adversarially during online RL
training by pushing back predictions for out-of-distribution
observations in order to mitigate distribution shift inherent
in non-expert observations. Utilizing this progress prediction as a dense reward together with an adversarial pushback, we show that P ROGRESSOR enables robots to learn
complex behaviors without any external supervision. Pretrained on large-scale egocentric human video from EPICKITCHENS, P ROGRESSOR requires no fine-tuning on indomain task-specific data for generalization to real-robot
offline RL under noisy demonstrations, outperforming contemporary methods that provide dense visual reward for
robotic learning. Our findings highlight the potential of
P ROGRESSOR for scalable robotic applications where direct action labels and task-specific rewards are not readily
available.

1. Introduction
Practical applications of reinforcement learning (RL) require that a domain expert design complex reward models
that encourage desired behavior while simultaneously penalizing unwanted behavior [34, 37, 38]. However, manually constructing dense rewards that enable effective learning is difficult and can yield undesired behaviors [5, 14].
Sparse rewards require far less effort, but the sparsity of
supervision typically results in a significant loss of sample
efficiency. These issues are exacerbated for long-horizon

Figure 1. Trained in a self-supervised manner on expert videos,
P ROGRESSOR predicts an agent’s progress toward task completion, providing a reward signal for reinforcement learning. During
online reinforcement learning, we employ an adversarial technique
to refine this reward estimate, addressing the distribution shift between expert data and non-expert online rollouts.

tasks, where credit assignment is particularly difficult.
A promising alternative is to learn effective rewards
from unlabeled (i.e., action-free) videos of task demonstrations [2, 8, 19, 25, 29, 41]. Large-scale video data is readily
available on the internet, providing a effective alternative to
costly, intensive task-specific data collection. An effective
way to incorporate diverse video data into a single model
without learning a new policy for each task is to condition
the model on a goal image that visually specifies the desired
environment changes upon task completion [9, 25].
To that end, we propose P ROGRESSOR, a self-supervised
framework that learns a task-agnostic reward function from
videos for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning that
only requires image observations, without the need for corresponding action labels. Following Yang et al. [41], we assume that expert demonstrations make monotonic progress
towards the goal and employ a self-supervised temporal
learning approach that utilizes a proxy objective aimed at

10297

