This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seal Your Backdoor with Variational Defense
Ivan Sabolić
Matej Grcić
Siniša Šegvić
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
Unska 3, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
name.surname@fer.hr

onto selected inputs and altering the corresponding labels1 .
On such data, standard supervised learning delivers a poisoned model [49]. During inference, attackers can exploit the installed backdoor by applying triggers to the desired inputs, which causes the model to behave maliciously
[23, 60]. Our goal is to defend against such attacks by training a clean model invariant to triggers present in the data.
Recent empirical defenses [11, 53, 107] partition the
training dataset into clean and poisoned subsets according
to some heuristics. The two subsets then take different roles
during the model training (e.g. semi-supervised learning
with labeled clean data and unlabeled poisoned data [33]).
However, heuristics are prone to failure modes and can be
exploited by adaptive attacks [67]. Also, pruning labels often leads to information loss, ultimately degrading recognition performance. Our approach avoids data partitioning
and label pruning. Instead, we leverage optimal transport
to refine potentially corrupted samples and labels into clean
pseudolabels that guide the training of a robust classifier.
In this work, we present VIBE (Variational Inference for
Backdoor Elimination), a framework for training backdoorrobust classifiers on poisoned data. Our key concept is
to treat dataset examples and the corresponding corrupted
labels as observed random variables, while the desired
clean labels are latent. Then, we achieve resilience against
backdoor attacks by recovering the latent clean posterior
parametrized as a deep classifier. VIBE training takes the
form of an expectation-maximization algorithm that alternates between classifier updates via gradient descent (Mstep), and inference of approximate clean class posterior
(E-step). In practice, the approximate clean labels are recovered by solving an entropy-regularized optimal transport
problem [15]. We validate the resilience against contemporary backdoor attacks on standard benchmarks, on a largescale setup with 1k classes, and on a dataset poisoned with
multiple attacks. Experiments indicate consistent improvements over previous defenses in all tested scenarios. Remarkably, VIBE attains over 12pp absolute improvement in

Abstract
We propose VIBE, a model-agnostic framework that trains
classifiers resilient to backdoor attacks. The key concept
behind our approach is to treat malicious inputs and corrupted labels from the training dataset as observed random
variables, while the actual clean labels are latent. VIBE
then recovers the corresponding latent clean label posterior through variational inference. The resulting training procedure follows the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm. The E-step infers the clean pseudolabels by
solving an entropy-regularized optimal transport problem,
while the M-step updates the classifier parameters via gradient descent. Being modular, VIBE can seamlessly integrate with recent advancements in self-supervised representation learning, which enhance its ability to resist backdoor
attacks. We experimentally validate the method effectiveness against contemporary backdoor attacks on standard
datasets, a large-scale setup with 1k classes, and a dataset
poisoned with multiple attacks. VIBE consistently outperforms previous defenses across all tested scenarios.

1. Introduction
Deep models possess enough capacity to learn any pattern present within the data [8, 42, 101]. This remarkable flexibility comes at the cost of control since it limits
our ability to influence the specific motifs the model learns
[2, 37]. For instance, a model may base its decisions on image backgrounds rather than focusing on the actual objects
[21]. Such bias towards simpler [75] and possibly spurious patterns [34] may lead to undesirable generalizations
that reveal themselves only in specific test cases. This deep
learning loophole can be maliciously exploited by attackers who manipulate training examples using triggers that
steer the model towards harmful generalization. Such practice is commonly referred to as backdoor learning [49] and
presents a serious threat in contemporary machine learning.
The majority of existing backdoor attacks [12, 23] modify a portion of the training dataset by installing triggers

1 Some attacks do not alter the labels [80]. However, our experiments
show that they are much easier to defend from.

752

