This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Fine-grained Interactive Segmentation in Images and Videos
Yuan Yao

Qiushi Yang

Miaomiao Cui

Liefeng Bo

Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
{ryan.yy, yangqiushi.yqs, miaomiao.cmm, liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com
SAM

HQ-SAM

SAM2Refiner

Input

SAM2

HQ-SAM2

SAM2Refiner

Video

Image

Input

Frame 1

Frame 100

Frame 200

Frame 1

Frame 100

Frame 200

Frame 1

Frame 100

Frame 200

Frame 1

Frame 100

Frame 200

Figure 1. Segmentation results of the proposed framework SAM2Reﬁner and previous methods. The proposed SAM2Reﬁner achieves the
best performance on both image and video segmentation, especially in ﬁne-grained details.

Abstract
The recent Segment Anything Models (SAMs) have emerged
as foundational visual models for general interactive segmentation. Despite demonstrating robust generalization
abilities, they still suffer from performance degradations in
scenarios that demand accurate masks. Existing methods
for high-precision interactive segmentation face a trade-off
between perceiving intricate local details and maintaining
stable prompting capability, which hinders the applicability and effectiveness of foundational segmentation models.
In this paper, we present a SAM2Reﬁner framework built
upon the SAM2 backbone. This architecture allows SAM2 to
generate ﬁne-grained segmentation masks for both images
and videos while preserving its inherent strengths. Specifically, we design a localization augment module, which incorporates local contextual cues to enhance global features
via a cross-attention mechanism, thereby exploiting potential detailed patterns while maintaining semantic information. Moreover, to strengthen the prompting ability toward
the enhanced object embeddings, we introduce a prompt

retargeting module that renews the embedding with spatially aligned prompt features. In addition, to obtain accurate high resolution segmentation masks, a mask reﬁnement
module is devised by employing a multi-scale cascaded
structure to fuse mask features with hierarchical representations from the encoder. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach, revealing that the proposed method can produce highly precise masks for both
images and videos, surpassing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Interactive segmentation is a long-standing computer vision task that allows users to segment objects from the guidance of user interaction, typically in the form of clicks,
strokes, or bounding boxes. In recent years, the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) [16] has emerged as a foundational
visual model for general interactive segmentation. Trained
on their proposed SA-1B dataset, which consists of more
than 1 billion masks and 11 million images, SAM can generate masks in various scenes and has been widely applied

22509

