This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyper-Depth: Hypergraph-based Multi-Scale Representation Fusion for
Monocular Depth Estimation
Lin Bie∗

Siqi Li* Yifan Feng

Yue Gao†

BNRist, THUIBCS, BLBCI, School of Software, Tsinghua University
biel20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lisiqi19971013@gmail.com, evanfeng97@gmail.com, gaoyue@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation (MDE) is a fundamental problem in computer vision with wide-ranging applications in
various downstream tasks. While multi-scale features are
perceptually critical for MDE, existing transformer-based
approaches have yet to leverage them explicitly. To address this limitation, we propose a hypergraph-based multiscale representation fusion framework, Hyper-Depth. The
proposed Hyper-Depth incorporates two key components:
a semantic consistency enhancement (SCE) module and a
geometric consistency constraint (GCC) module. The SCE
module, designed based on hypergraph convolution, aggregates global information and enhances the representation
of multi-scale patch features. Meanwhile, the GCC module
provides geometric guidance to reduce over-fitting errors
caused by excessive reliance on local features. In addition,
we introduce a correlation-based conditional random fields
(C-CRFs) module as the decoder to filter correlated patches
and compute attention weights more effectively. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches across all evaluation
metrics on the KITTI and NYU-Depth-v2 datasets, achieving improvements of 6.21% and 3.32% on the main metric
RMSE, respectively. Furthermore, zero-shot evaluations on
the nuScenes and SUN-RGBD datasets validate the generalizability of our method.

Figure 1. Due to excessive reliance on local texture features, the
carpet and floor regions are estimated with different depths (d).
By introducing geometric consistency constraints (c), our method
generates more accurate depth maps (e).

lem is inherently ill-posed and ambiguous, as an infinite
number of 3D scenes can be projected onto the same 2D
image. With the introduction of neural networks and largescale datasets by Eigen [7], deep learning-based supervised
monocular depth estimation (SMDE) has shown promising
improvement compared to traditional methods [26, 35].
In recent years, with the advancement of vision transformers [5, 24], transformer-based methods [1, 36] have
demonstrated superior performance on MDE compared
to traditional CNN-based approaches [18]. However,
transformer-based methods require significant computational costs for fully connected operations. Existing methods [20, 21, 39–41, 46, 51] mitigate the substantial computational overhead by employing patch-wise window conditional random fields (CRFs), which limits attention to
fixed-size local windows and neglects global information.
Additionally, window CRFs incorporate irrelevant image
patches while discarding correlated patch features outside
the window, further limiting their effectiveness. As shown
in Fig. 1, such local attention mechanisms lead to depth estimation errors caused by over-fitting the image’s local textures. Furthermore, transformer-based methods still strug-

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation (MDE) is a classical task in
computer vision and is essential for numerous applications,
such as 3D reconstruction [22], autonomous driving [4], and
scene understanding [50]. This task aims to predict a dense
depth map from a single RGB image. However, the prob* These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors.
† Corresponding author

5081

