This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One Perturbation is Enough: On Generating Universal Adversarial
Perturbations against Vision-Language Pre-training Models
Hao Fang1, * Jiawei Kong1,2,∗ Wenbo Yu1 Bin Chen2,3† Jiawei Li4
Hao Wu5 Shu-Tao Xia1,3 Ke Xu1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Huawei Technology 5 Shenzhen ShenNong Information Technology Co., Ltd.
ffhibnese@gmail.com, kongjiawei@stu.hit.edu.cn, wenbo.research@gmail.com, chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn,
li-jw15@tsinghua.org.cn, whpc79@163.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuke@tsinghua.edu.cn;

Abstract
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) models have exhibited
unprecedented capability in many applications by taking
full advantage of the learned multimodal alignment. However, previous studies have shown they are vulnerable to maliciously crafted adversarial samples. Despite recent success, these attacks are generally instance-specific and require generating perturbations for each input sample. In
this paper, we reveal that VLP models are also susceptible
to the instance-agnostic universal adversarial perturbation
(UAP). Specifically, we design a novel Contrastive-training
Perturbation Generator with Cross-modal conditions (CPGC). In light that the pivotal multimodal alignment in VLP
models is achieved via contrastive learning, we devise to
turn this powerful weapon against VLP models themselves.
I.e., we employ a malicious version of contrastive learning
to train the proposed generator using our carefully crafted
positive and negative image-text pairs. Once training is
complete, the generator is able to produce universal perturbations that can essentially destroy the established alignment relationship in VLP models. Besides, C-PGC fully
utilizes the characteristics of Vision-and-Language (V+L)
scenarios by incorporating both unimodal and cross-modal
information as effective guidance. Extensive experiments
show that C-PGC successfully forces adversarial samples
to move away from their original area in the VLP model’s
feature space, thus fundamentally enhancing attack performance across various victim models and V+L tasks.

Orange SUV drives
by the shore.

Orange SUV getting
by the shore.

…

…

getting
Two boys practicing
passing a soccer ball.

…

A lady with dark hair
is playing a harp.

UAP

Two boys practicing
getting a soccer ball.

…

A lady with dark hair
is getting a harp.

Fig. 1: Illustration of universal adversarial attacks. With only a
pair of image-text perturbations, the proposed method can effectively mislead different VLP models on diverse V+L tasks.

and-Language (V+L) tasks. By self-supervised pre-training
on large-scale image-text pairs, VLP models efficiently
align cross-modal features and capture rich information
from the aligned multimodal embeddings, thereby providing expressive representations for various applications.
Adversarial attacks [7, 13], which aim to deceive models during inference time, have attracted extensive attention
due to their significant threat to security-critical scenarios
[11]. Recent studies have shown that VLP models are also
vulnerable to adversarial samples. The pioneering work
Co-Attack [48] proposes the first multimodal attack that simultaneously perturbs both image and text modalities and
displays excellent performance. However, Co-Attack only
considers relatively easier white-box attacks where victim

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) models have recently
demonstrated remarkable efficacy in a wide range of Vision* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

4090

