This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncalibrated Structure from Motion on a Sphere
Jonathan Ventura
California Polytechnic
State University

Viktor Larsson
Lund University

Fredrik Kahl
Chalmers University
of Technology

viktor.larsson@math.lth.se

jventu09@calpoly.edu

fredrik.kahl@chalmers.se

Abstract
Spherical motion is a special case of camera motion where
the camera moves on the imaginary surface of a sphere with
the optical axis normal to the surface. Common sources of
spherical motion are a person capturing a stereo panorama
with a phone held in an outstretched hand, or a hemispherical camera rig used for multi-view scene capture.
However, traditional structure-from-motion pipelines tend
to fail on spherical camera motion sequences, especially
when the camera is facing outward. Building upon prior
work addressing the calibrated case, we explore uncalibrated reconstruction from spherical motion, assuming a
fixed but unknown focal length parameter. We show that,
although two-view spherical motion is always a critical
case, self-calibration is possible from three or more views.
Through analysis of the relationship between focal length
and spherical relative pose, we devise a global structurefrom-motion approach for uncalibrated reconstruction. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on real-world
captures in various settings, even when the camera motion
deviates from perfect spherical motion. Code and data for
our method are available at https://github.com/
jonathanventura/spherical-sfm.

(a) COLMAP

(b) GLOMAP

(c) Ours

(d) Pseudo ground truth

Figure 1. Comparison of our SFM results to COLMAP [29] and
GLOMAP [26] on handheld camera sequence arboretum4 from
our Phone Sweep dataset. (a) COLMAP is unable to find a good
camera pair for initialization and produces an incomplete and inaccurate reconstruction. (b) GLOMAP erroneously estimates the
motion to be inward-facing and thus produces an inside-out reconstruction. (c) Our SFM method accurately estimates all of the camera poses, as can be seen by comparison to (d) the pseudo ground
truth camera poses obtained by running COLMAP with additional
images to ensure a successful reconstruction.

1. Introduction

COLMAP [29] and GLOMAP [26] tend to fail on image
collections in an outward-facing spherical configuration,
often producing either partial reconstructions or highly
inaccurate reconstructions [2]. See Figure 1 for an example.
Building upon previous work on spherical SFM [36, 37],
in this work we explore the uncalibrated case, assuming
a single unknown focal length for all cameras. It is well
known that any two-view camera configuration with intersecting optical axes is a critical motion for self-calibration
[17, 19, 34]; thus two-view spherical motion is always a
critical motion. However, we show that self-calibration is
always possible from three or more distinct viewpoints with
spherical motion. We show that essential matrices and fundamental matrices are in fact interchangeable under spher-

Given a collection of input images of a scene or object, the
problem of structure from motion (SFM) is to estimate both
the camera parameters and the 3D structure of the scene [23,
25]. Ventura [37] introduced a special case of SFM where
the cameras lie on the surface of an imaginary sphere, with
the optical axis parallel to the surface normal. In an inwardfacing configuration, each camera faces to the center of the
sphere, as in the case of a camera gantry for object scanning.
In an outward-facing configuration, each camera faces away
from the center, as in the case of a person turning while
holding a phone [2–4, 27, 28], or a hemi-spherical multicamera rig for one-shot scene capture [5, 7].
General structure-from-motion systems such as

69

