This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-Capture: An Open-Source Portable Device for Multi-Sensory Learning
Samuel Clarke

Suzannah Wistreich
Yanjie Ze
Stanford University

Microphone Impact Hammer

Jiajun Wu

RGB

Depth

Tactile

Spectrogram

Hammer Impulse

Capture Pose

DIGIT
RealSense
Figure 1. X-Capture for multi-sensory data capture. (Left) The user captures tactile data from a vase in a living room. (Right) The
sensor readings for each modality from the same probed point on the vase, as well as a visualization of the hammer impulse and 3D pose
vectors for the image and tactile captures, shown in blue and red, respectively.

Abstract

object-centric tasks such as cross-sensory retrieval and reconstruction. X-Capture lays the groundwork for advancing human-like sensory representations in AI, emphasizing
scalability, accessibility, and real-world applicability.

Understanding objects through multiple sensory modalities is fundamental to human perception, enabling crosssensory integration and richer comprehension. For AI and
robotic systems to replicate this ability, access to diverse,
high-quality multi-sensory data is critical. Existing datasets
are often limited by their focus on controlled environments,
simulated objects, or restricted modality pairings. We introduce X-Capture, an open-source, portable, and costeffective device for real-world multi-sensory data collection, capable of capturing correlated RGBD images, tactile readings, and impact audio. With a build cost under $1,000, X-Capture democratizes the creation of multisensory datasets, requiring only consumer-grade tools for
assembly. Using X-Capture, we curate a sample dataset
of 3,600 total points on 600 everyday objects from diverse,
real-world environments, offering both richness and variety1 . Our experiments demonstrate the value of both the
quantity and the sensory breadth of our data for both pretraining and fine-tuning multi-modal representations for

1. Introduction
As humans, we experience objects in our everyday environments through a combination of every sensory modality
we possess. Each sensory modality provides us with unique
information about the object, which can complement the information evident from other modalities. Touching what visually appears to be a ripe fruit can reveal that it is in fact
not yet ripe or has a hidden bruise. Hearing a rigid drinking glass being tapped can disambiguate whether it is made
of glass, crystal, or plastic. However, while each of these
sensory modalities may complement each other, they are
often highly correlated, as they each derive from the underlying physical properties of a given object [25]. Thus, we
are able to intuitively relate different modalities and generate expectations of other modalities from experiencing only
one [26]. In order for robots and agents to understand objects in the same way humans do, they must similarly possess such intuition about the relationships between objects’

1 Project page, hardware designs, and dataset are available at
https://xcapture.github.io.

6436

