This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoTMR: Chain-of-Thought Multi-Scale Reasoning for Training-Free
Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval
Zelong Sun*, Dong Jing∗ , Zhiwu Lu †
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
zelongsun@ruc.edu.cn, luzhiwu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Retrieved Image

Text-to-Image
Retrieval

Modification Text:
“A photo of [S*]
that have same
breed dog inside
asleep on a blanket.”

Textual
Imversion

Content Lost

S*

Weak Reasoning

Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR) aims to retrieve target images by integrating information from a composed query (reference image and modification text) without
training samples. Existing methods primarily combine caption models and Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate target captions from composed queries but face various
issues such as incompatibility, visual information loss, and
insufficient reasoning. In this work, we propose CoTMR, a
training-free framework with novel Chain-of-thought (CoT)
and Multi-scale Reasoning. Instead of relying on caption
models for modality transformation, CoTMR directly employs the Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) to achieve
unified understanding and reasoning of composed queries.
To enhance reasoning reliability, we devise CIRCoT, which
guides the LVLM to perform step-by-step reasoning by following predefined subtasks. Additionally, while most existing approaches focus solely on global-level reasoning,
CoTMR introduces fine-grained predictions about the presence or absence of key elements at the object scale for more
comprehensive reasoning. Furthermore, we design a MultiGrained Scoring (MGS) mechanism, which integrates CLIP
similarity scores of the above reasoning outputs with candidate images to realize precise retrieval. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our CoTMR not only drastically outperforms previous methods across four prominent
benchmarks but also offers appealing interpretability.

Retrieved Image

Retrieved Image

Text-to-Image Retrieval

Multi-Grained Scoring Mechanism

Target Image Caption:
The dog is asleep on a blanket inside.

LLM

Target Image Caption:
A golden retriever is sleeping on a blanket indoors.
Existent Objects:
[Indoor setting. Golden Retriever ......]
Nonexistent Objects:
[Outdoor setting. Sitting dog]

LVLM

“A puppy with a big
smile on its face.”

CIRCoT Prompt:
Step 1, Understand the Reference Image.
Step 2, Analyze ......

Captioner
“Have same breed
dog inside asleep
on a blanket.”

Reference Image

(a) Pseudo-Token

Reference Image

Modification Text

(b) LLM-based Method

“Have same breed
dog inside asleep
on a blanket.”
Reference Image

Modification Text

(c) Ours (CoTMR)

Figure 1. Flowcharts of existing ZS-CIR methods and our proposed CoTMR. Methods (a) and (b) face serious issues of visual information loss and insufficient reasoning. In contrast, our
method (c) fully perceives image content, enhances reasoning process with CIRCoT, and augments multi-grained descriptions with
multi-scale reasoning.

1. Introduction

sitate precise “editing” to the reference image based on the
modification text. Therefore, successfully completing the
CIR task entails (1) Advanced multimodal composed understanding abilities to accurately interpret the visual context and user’s modification intent in modification text, and
(2) Robust multimodal reasoning abilities to implement
the modifications appropriately.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), previous methods [3, 36]
primarily propose a textual inversion module to generate
pseudo-tokens from the reference image and concatenate it
with the modification text. However, these methods still
require extensive data for training, and the relatively short
length of pseudo-tokens limits the model’s ability to fully
represent the reference image. Notably, these statistical
methods lack enough logical reasoning for the CIR task.
Recent works [17, 47] leverage Large Language Models
(LLMs) to identify the user’s modification intent. As shown
in Figure 1 (b), these methods use pre-trained caption models to generate a caption for the reference image, and then
employ the LLM to edit this caption based on the modifi-

Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR) [3, 36, 40]
aims to retrieve the target image by integrating information
from a reference image and a modification text, without
training with annotated triplets data. In contrast to traditional image retrieval tasks [9–11, 24], CIR queries neces* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

22675

