This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamActor-M1: Holistic, Expressive and Robust Human Image Animation
with Hybrid Guidance
Yuxuan Luo* Zhengkun Rong* Lizhen Wang* Longhao Zhang* Tianshu Hu*†
Bytedance China
{luoyuxuan, rongzhengkun, wanglizhen.2024, zhanglonghao.zlh, tianshu.hu}@bytedance.com

Figure 1. We introduce DreamActor-M1, a DiT-based human animation framework, with hybrid guidance to achieve fine-grained holistic
controllability, multi-scale adaptability, and long-term temporal coherence.

Abstract
While recent image-based human animation methods
achieve realistic body and facial motion synthesis, critical gaps remain in fine-grained holistic controllability,
multi-scale adaptability, and long-term temporal coherence, which leads to their lower expressiveness and robustness. We propose a diffusion transformer (DiT) based
framework, DreamActor-M1, with hybrid guidance to overcome these limitations. For motion guidance, our hybrid
control signals that integrate implicit facial representations,
3D head spheres, and 3D body skeletons achieve robust

control of facial expressions and body movements, while
producing expressive and identity-preserving animations.
For scale adaptation, to handle various body poses and image scales ranging from portraits to full-body views, we employ a progressive training strategy using data with varying
resolutions and scales. For appearance guidance, we integrate motion patterns from sequential frames with complementary visual references, ensuring long-term temporal
coherence for unseen regions during complex movements.
Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art works, delivering expressive results for portraits, upper-body, and full-body generation with robust
long-term consistency.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

11036

