This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Image Super-Resolution via Consistency Rectified Flow
Jiaqi Xu1,2 *, Wenbo Li2†, Haoze Sun2 , Fan Li2 , Zhixin Wang2 , Long Peng2 , Jingjing Ren3 ,
Haoran Yang1 , Xiaowei Hu4 , Renjing Pei2†, and Pheng-Ann Heng1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
HKUST (GZ) 4 South China University of Technology

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated remarkable
success in real-world image super-resolution (SR), yet their
reliance on time-consuming multi-step sampling largely
hinders their practical applications. While recent efforts
have introduced few- or single-step solutions, existing methods either inefficiently model the process from noisy input or
fail to fully exploit iterative generative priors, compromising the fidelity and quality of the reconstructed images. To
address this issue, we propose FlowSR, a novel approach
that reformulates the SR problem as a rectified flow from
low-resolution (LR) to high-resolution (HR) images. Our
method leverages an improved consistency learning strategy to enable high-quality SR in a single step. Specifically,
we refine the original consistency distillation process by incorporating HR regularization, ensuring that the learned
SR flow not only enforces self-consistency but also converges precisely to the ground-truth HR target. Furthermore, we introduce a fast-slow scheduling strategy, where
adjacent timesteps for consistency learning are sampled
from two distinct schedulers: a fast scheduler with fewer
timesteps to improve efficiency, and a slow scheduler with
more timesteps to capture fine-grained texture details. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FlowSR achieves outstanding performance in both efficiency and image quality.

LR

1-step

HR

(𝑋! , 0)

4-step

distilled, 1-step

Rectified Flow

(𝑋## , 𝑡" )
𝑓& (𝑋## , 𝑡" )

𝑓& (𝑋#" , 𝑡% )

LR

(𝑋#" , 𝑡% ) (𝑋# $ , 𝑡′) (𝑋#! , 𝑡$ )
𝑓& (𝑋#! , 𝑡$ )

…

(𝑋" , 1)

𝑓! 𝑋" , 1

Figure 1. Our consistency SR flow model achieves high-quality
single-step inference (distilled, 1-step) by distilling from multistep higher-quality sampling process (top). We achieve this by
formulating SR as a rectified flow that bridges LR and HR images,
combined with improved consistency learning (bottom).

1. Introduction

these diffusion-based SR approaches require an iterative reverse sampling process that gradually refines noisy inputs
into HR outputs. Despite advancements such as efficient ordinary differential equation (ODE) solvers like DDIM [36],
the slow inference speed remains a bottleneck, limiting their
practicality in real-world applications.
Recently, few-step or single-step SR methods derived
from diffusion models are designed [3, 45, 48, 59, 61]. Several studies focus on designing more efficient diffusion processes for SR. ResShift [59] speeds up diffusion by shifting the LR–HR residual into the Markov chain and reduces sampling to 15 steps, while DoSSR [3] introduces a
diffusion process more compatible with pre-trained DMs.
However, they rely on DDPM [10], which uses a more
curved transition trajectory and starts with a noise-perturbed
LR image that loses crucial information, ultimately limiting performance. In parallel, another line of work tar-

Real-world image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct
high-resolution (HR) images from their low-resolution
(LR) counterparts while simultaneously removing unknown
degradations. With the remarkable success of diffusion
models (DMs) [10, 37], SR methods leveraging these
models—particularly those built on powerful text-to-image
(T2I) models like Stable Diffusion (SD) [31]—have demonstrated outstanding performance [42, 49, 58]. However,
* Part of work done as an intern at Huawei.
† Corresponding author.

11755

