This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Multi-Person Motion Prediction by Lightweight Spatial and Temporal
Interactions
Yuanhong Zheng1
1

Jian Sun2,3

Ruixuan Yu1 *

School of Mechanical, Electrical and Information Engineering, Shandong University, Weihai 264209, China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
3
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong 510555, China
202200800358@mail.sdu.edu.cn, yuruixuan@sdu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

3DPW Dataset

Abstract
3D multi-person motion prediction is a highly complex task,
primarily due to the dependencies on both individual past
movements and the interactions between agents. Moreover,
effectively modeling these interactions often incurs substantial computational costs. In this work, we propose a computationally efficient model for multi-person motion prediction
by simplifying spatial and temporal interactions. Our approach begins with the design of lightweight dual branches
that learn local and global representations for individual
and multiple persons separately. Additionally, we introduce
a novel cross-level interaction block to integrate the spatial and temporal representations from both branches. To
further enhance interaction modeling, we explicitly incorporate the spatial inter-person distance embedding. With
above efficient temporal and spatial design, we achieve
state-of-the-art performance for multiple metrics on standard datasets of CMU-Mocap, MuPoTS-3D, and 3DPW,
while significantly reducing the computational cost. Code is
available at https://github.com/Yuanhong-Zheng/EMPMP.

VIM (Lower is better)

66
64
62
60
58
56
54
0

2

4

6

8

Model Parameters (Million)

10

12

Figure 1. Comparison of our model with state-of-the-art methods
on the 3DPW dataset. Our approach outperforms others while requiring significantly fewer parameters.

1. Introduction

30, 31, 39, 46], where the graph neural networks and
Transformer-based networks were commonly employed to
extract joint-wise features. For example, PGBIG [28]
proposed to alternately extract features through spatial
and temporal graph convolutional networks, while STCFormer [39] learned cross-joint and cross-frame interaction
with Spatial-Temporal Criss-cross attention. Though effective for individual poses, these methods ignored interperson interactions critical for multi-agent scenarios. Meanwhile, several works on multi-agent trajectory prediction [4,
10, 21, 49] have been proposed by treating the agents as
points within an interactive system, and conducting trajectory prediction with local context extraction and global interaction modeling. However, these works overlook the intrinsic structural information of individual agents, such as
the human skeletal configuration.
Recent research has increasingly focused on multiperson motion prediction, integrating trajectory estimation
for global movement and pose forecasting for fine-grained
joint-level dynamics [20, 33, 41, 45, 47]. MRT [45] proposed a multi-scale Transformer model with two encoders
to capture individual and inter-person interactions respec-

3D multi-person motion prediction focuses on predicting
the future positions of skeletal joints for multiple individuals based on the historical motions. It has broad applicability across various domains, including human-computer
interaction [5, 25, 34, 35], virtual/augmented reality [13,
16, 36, 37], sports analysis [6, 24], and surveillance systems [8, 18]. This task is challenging as it necessitates
not only accurate prediction of individual poses through the
modeling of historical temporal data, but also a comprehensive representation of inter-person interactions.
Early studies for 3D motion prediction commonly focused on single-person pose forecasting [15, 22, 27, 28,
* Corresponding author

10844

