This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LV-MAE: Learning Long Video Representations through Masked-Embedding
Autoencoders
Ilan Naiman Emanuel Ben-Baruch Oron Anschel Alon Shoshan
Igor Kviatkovsky Manoj Aggarwal Gérard Medioni
Amazon
{naimanil, emanbb, oronans, alonshos, kviat, manojagg, medioni}@amazon.com

Abstract
In this work, we introduce long-video masked-embedding
autoencoders (LV-MAE), a self-supervised learning framework for long video representation. Our approach treats
short- and long-span dependencies as two separate tasks.
Such decoupling allows for a more intuitive video processing where short-span spatiotemporal primitives are first encoded and are then used to capture long-range dependencies across consecutive video segments. To achieve this,
we leverage advanced off-the-shelf multimodal encoders
to extract representations from short segments within the
long video, followed by pre-training a masked-embedding
autoencoder capturing high-level interactions across segments. LV-MAE is highly efficient to train and enables the
processing of much longer videos by alleviating the constraint on the number of input frames. Furthermore, unlike existing methods that typically pre-train on short-video
datasets, our approach offers self-supervised pre-training
using long video samples (e.g., 20+ minutes video clips)
at scale. Using LV-MAE representations, we achieve stateof-the-art results on three long-video benchmarks – LVU,
COIN, and Breakfast – employing only a simple classification head for either attentive or linear probing. Finally,
to assess LV-MAE pre-training and visualize its reconstruction quality, we leverage the video-language aligned space
of short video representations to monitor LV-MAE through
video-text retrieval.

1. Introduction
In recent years, substantial progress has been achieved in
the development of models for short-video representation
learning. Numerous [4, 23, 24, 26, 34, 36–38, 41] approaches have been introduced, demonstrating state-of-theart performance across various tasks such as video classification, action recognition, text-video retrieval, video captioning, and video question answering. While models targeting short video clips (5–15 seconds long) are effective

21398

at capturing isolated moments, atomic actions, or specific
events, they usually struggle to capture long-range temporal dependencies essential for understanding complex, extended narratives. For example, grasping the full emotional
journey of characters in a drama or following the progression of a complex plot in a movie often requires viewing the
entire film, not just a brief scene.
Meanwhile, developing models that can effectively handle long video content (e.g., 20 minutes long) remains a
significant challenge. First, most current methods process spatio-temporal tokens at the frame level, restricting
the input video length they can handle. Second, scaling
these methods to accommodate longer sequences becomes
computationally prohibitive, as training on extended videos
demands significant GPU memory, along with increased
training cost and time, limiting accessibility for many researchers and organizations. Third, annotating long videos
requires substantial effort, and defining unambiguous annotation guidelines is challenging, often leading to inconsistencies.
Recently, approaches for handling long-video content
have been proposed based on state-space models (SSMs)
to address some of the above challenges. ViS4mer [17]
utilizes a transformer encoder to extract patch-level features from each individual frame, followed by an efficient aggregation of these representations across all frames
using the S4 decoder [11]. VideoMamba [22], a fully
SSM-based video model, directly processes spatio-temporal
patches from video frames using multiple bidirectional
Mamba blocks [42]. These architectures successfully bypass the quadratic complexity of the transformer’s attention mechanism and are trained on sequences of up to 64
frames [17, 22]. Yet, their computational demands rise significantly when applied to videos of extended duration.
In this paper, we tackle the challenges of learning representations for long video content by proposing a selfsupervised approach to pre-train on videos ranging from
minutes to hours. Our method is not constrained by the

