This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perception-as-Control: Fine-grained Controllable Image Animation
with 3D-aware Motion Representation
Yingjie Chen, Yifang Men, Yuan Yao, Miaomiao Cui, Liefeng Bo
Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
{chenyingjie.cyj, myf272609, ryan.yy, miaomiao.cmm, liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com

Figure 1. Potential applications for Perception-as-Control. By constructing 3D-aware motion representation based on user intentions and
utilizing the perception results as motion control signals, the proposed fine-grained motion-controllable image animation framework can
be applied to various motion-related video synthesis tasks, such as image-based motion generation (animate image according to user
instructions), and video-based motion clone (mimic the entire motions), motion transfer (relocate and rescale local motions based on
semantic correspondence), local motion editing (edit fine-grained scene and object motions in user-specified regions).

Abstract
Motion-controllable image animation is a fundamental task
with a wide range of potential applications. Recent works
have made progress in controlling camera or object motion
via various motion representations, while they still struggle
to support collaborative camera and object motion control
with adaptive control granularity. To this end, we introduce
3D-aware motion representation and propose an image animation framework, called Perception-as-Control, to achieve
fine-grained collaborative motion control. Specifically, we
construct 3D-aware motion representation from a reference
image, manipulate it based on interpreted user instructions,
and perceive it from different viewpoints. In this way, cam-

era and object motions are transformed into intuitive and
consistent visual changes. Then, our framework leverages
the perception results as motion control signals, enabling it
to support various motion-related video synthesis tasks in a
unified and flexible way. Experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach. For more details and
qualitative results, please refer to our anonymous project
webpage: Perception-as-Control.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of generative AI, image animation as
a fundamental task is undergoing rapid progress [2, 8, 18,
22, 25, 29, 35, 44]. Various potential application scenarios

14380

