This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniRes: Universal Image Restoration for Complex Degradations
Mo Zhou1,2 * Keren Ye1 Mauricio Delbracio1 Peyman Milanfar1 Vishal M. Patel2 Hossein Talebi1
1
2
Google
Johns Hopkins University

Real60 [72]
(512p → 512p)

Abstract

DiversePhotos×4
(128p → 512p)

DiversePhotos×4
(128p → 512p)

Ours

DACLIP-IR [37]

SUPIR [72]

DiffBIR [35]

StableSR [62]

LQ

Real-world image restoration is hampered by diverse degradations stemming from varying capture conditions, capture
devices and post-processing pipelines. Existing works make
improvements through simulating those degradations and
leveraging image generative priors, however generalization
to in-the-wild data remains an unresolved problem. In this
paper, we focus on complex degradations, i.e., arbitrary
mixtures of multiple types of known degradations, which is
frequently seen in the wild. A simple yet flexible diffusionbased framework, named UniRes, is proposed to address
such degradations in an end-to-end manner. It combines several specialized models during the diffusion sampling steps,
hence transferring the knowledge from several well-isolated
restoration tasks to the restoration of complex in-the-wild
degradations. This only requires well-isolated training data
for several degradation types. The framework is flexible
as extensions can be added through a unified formulation,
and the fidelity-quality trade-off can be adjusted through a
new paradigm. Our proposed method is evaluated on both
complex-degradation and single-degradation image restoration datasets. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experimental results show consistent performance gain especially
for images with complex degradations.

DiversePhotos×1
(512p → 512p)

1. Introduction
Real-world image restoration [35, 62–64, 72] is challenging
due to very diverse and unpredictable degradations. These
degradations stem from various factors, including capture
conditions, capture devices, and post-processing pipelines.
For example, object motion and slow shutter speeds (along
with camera shake [13] and the absence of vibration reduction) can cause motion blur [40]; large apertures or focusing
errors lead to defocus blur [2]; high ISO settings produce
noise [1]; and low JPEG quality factor for better storage
leads to compression artifacts [64]. Even worse, these degradations can co-appear on the same image as a complex degra-

Figure 1. Image restoration demonstration for complex degradations. The “complex degradations” means arbitrary combinations of several fundamental image degradations caused by
capture condition, capture device, and/or post-processing. Our
method is compared with several related state-of-the-art image
restoration methods [35, 37, 62, 72] on test images including
Real60 [72], DiversePhotos×1 and DiversePhotos×4. The later
two “DiversePhotos” test sets are challenging in-the-wild degradated images curated from several image quality assessment
datasets [14, 17, 21], focusing on properly representing the realworld complex photo degradations (see Sec. 4 for detail). The first
row of “LQ” image is the low-quality input image.

* Work done during internship at Google LLC.

13237

