This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LVAgent: Long Video Understanding by
Multi-Round Dynamical Collaboration of MLLM Agents
†

†

Boyu Chen1,2,*, Zhengrong Yue5,6,*, Siran Chen1,2,*, Zikang Wang5,6,*, Yang Liu3,4,5 , Peng Li3,5, , Yali Wang1,5,
1
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen Institutes of
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
6
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

1. Introduction

Abstract
Existing MLLMs encounter significant challenges in modeling the temporal context within long videos. Currently,
mainstream Agent-based methods use external tools to assist a single MLLM in answering long video questions. Despite such tool-based support, a solitary MLLM still offers
only a partial understanding of long videos, resulting in
limited performance. In order to better address long video
tasks, we introduce LVAgent, the first framework enabling
multi-round dynamic collaboration of MLLM agents in long
video understanding. Our method consists of four key steps:
1) Selection: We pre-select appropriate agents from the
model library to form optimal agent teams based on different tasks. 2) Perception: We design an effective retrieval
scheme for long videos, improving the coverage of critical temporal segments while maintaining computational efficiency. 3) Action: Agents answer long video questions
and exchange reasons. 4) Reflection: We evaluate each
agent’s performance in each round of discussion and optimize the agent team for dynamic collaboration. The agents
iteratively refine their answers by multi-round dynamical
collaboration of MLLM agents. LVAgent is the first agent
system method that outperforms all closed-source models
(like GPT-4o) and open-source models (like InternVL-2.5
and Qwen2-VL) in the long video understanding tasks. Our
LVAgent achieves an accuracy of 80% on four mainstream
long video understanding tasks. Notably, LVAgent improves
accuracy by 13.3% on LongVideoBench. Code is available
at https://github.com/64327069/LVAgent.

* Equal contribution.
† Equal corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparsion with SOTA. LVAgent outperforms all
closed-source models (including GPT-4o) and open-source models (including Agent-based methods) in long video tasks.

Long videos are crucial in Internet data and important in
fields like healthcare, education, and entertainment [14, 35,
37]. In the current data-driven era, correctly and efficiently
understanding long videos holds great significance. Despite being pretrained on large multi-modal datasets, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [30, 38, 42, 43,
45, 47, 56, 57, 60] struggle with modeling the long-term
temporal context of long videos (from minutes to hours
long). Feeding numerous video frames (e.g., at 1 frame/s)
directly into a single MLLM incurs high computational
costs and much redundant information, yielding poor performance. Taking Figure 3 as an example, we input the
whole video into Gemini 1.5Pro [44], GPT-4o [38], Qwen2VL [47] and InternVL-2.5 [4], and all of these models fail to
provide the correct answer due to the redundant confusing

20237

