This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Prompt Generation with Adaptive Refinement for Camouflaged
Object Detection
Xuehan Chen1

Guangyu Ren1 * Tianhong Dai2 Tania Stathaki2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, China
2
Imperial College London, United Kingdom

Hengyan Liu1 *

xuehanchen83@gmail.com, {guangyu.ren, hengyan.liu}@xjtlu.edu.cn
tianhong.dai15@alumni.imperial.ac.uk, t.stathaki@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Foundation models, such as Segment Anything Model
(SAM), have exhibited remarkable performance in conventional segmentation tasks, primarily due to their training
on large-scale datasets. Nonetheless, challenges remain in
specific downstream tasks, such as Camouflaged Object Detection (COD). Existing research primarily aims to enhance
performance by integrating additional multimodal information derived from other foundation models. However, directly leveraging the information generated by these models may introduce additional biases due to domain shifts.
To address this issue, we propose an Adaptive Refinement
Module (ARM), which efficiently processes multimodal information and simultaneously refining the mask prompt.
Furthermore, we construct an auxiliary embedding that effectively exploits the intermediate information generated
during ARM, providing SAM with richer feature representations. Experimental results indicate that our proposed
architecture surpasses most state-of-the-art (SOTA) models
in the COD task, particularly excelling in structured target
segmentation.

Image

Image

Auxiliary Data
(Human-Generated)

Feature
Extraction

Feature
Extraction

Data
Processing

Feature
Enhancement

Feature
Enhancement

Predictor

Predictor

(a) Image-Only Methods

(b) Hybrid-Input Methods
(PSCOD, SAM-COD, RISNet, ...)

(EFNet, ZoomNeXt, FSEL, ...)

VLMs

Image

Multimodal
Information

Adaptive
Refinement Module

SAMEncoder

SAMDecoder

Prediction
Map

(c) Ours

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed Adaptive Refinement
Module (ARM) with common COD frameworks. Unlike conventional methods that rely solely on images or manually annotated additional modalities, our approach not only leverages
vision-language models (VLMs) to automatically generate multimodal data but also mitigates domain shift through the proposed
ARM, providing high-quality prompts for SAM’s decoder. Meanwhile, ARM can also fine-tune SAM’s image encoder, further improving SAM’s feature representation capability.

Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) is a challenging
computer vision task, as it involves segmenting objects that
are virtually identical to their immediate surroundings. It
plays a crucial role in the field due to its wide range of practical applications, including object detection [34, 45], lowaltitude economy [22], zoological research [31, 35, 37], and
medical image segmentation [18, 52].
Current research [12, 14, 33, 41, 43] focuses on designing advanced architectures to extract and refine more detailed features exclusively from image data. However, the
* Corresponding author

unique nature of the COD task, where the targets are visually similar to their surroundings, limits the effectiveness of image features. Additionally, the lack of data from
other modalities further limits the models’ ability to acquire meaningful features, making them highly susceptible
to background, preventing them from accurately detecting
camouflaged objects. Although some studies incorporate
human-made auxiliary data, such as depth images [53], textual descriptions [61], or prompts [2, 3], to provide supple-

20672

