This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Epipolar Consistent Attention Aggregation Network for Unsupervised
Light Field Disparity Estimation
Chen Gao, Shuo Zhang*, Youfang Lin
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China.
{gaochen, zhangshuo, yflin}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Disparity estimation is an essential step in processing and
analyzing Light Field (LF) images. Recent methods construct the cost volume to exploit the correspondence of the
LFs over the preset maximum disparity, limiting them to
process the large parallax scenes. Different from constructing cost volume, the self-attention mechanism calculates the
parallax attention between epipolar lines to find the matching points. However, for LFs that have different views,
the related disparity scales are different in parallax attention since the baselines with the central view are different. Moreover, if the matching information is occluded in
one view, the disparity information can be explored through
other views. Therefore, mapping these attentions to the
same scale and selecting effective matching information
are key points for disparity estimation from parallax attention. In this paper, we explore parallax attention for
LF and design an unsupervised method, named Epipolar
Consistent Attention Aggregation Network (ECAAN). We
first introduce an epipolar consistent scale unification block
by considering the consistency relationships to standardize disparity scales of the parallax attention maps. Based
on the intra-properties and inter-relationships of parallax attention, we further propose a consistent occlusionfree aggregation block to integrate the information from
the occlusion-free areas. In addition, we design an improved photometric loss to constrain the model. ECAAN
achieves state-of-the-art performance in LF depth estimation. Notably, ECAAN attains a mean square error of 0.2
on large-disparity LF datasets, achieving a 68% error reduction compared to the second-best method.

Figure 1. Comparative analysis with state-of-the-art methods on
the SLFD dataset. Left: Performance metrics of models on Bp
across thresholds (0.3, 0.1, 0.05). Right: Quantitative results for
MSE (→ 100) and Inference Time (seconds). Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance across all metrics while maintaining
competitive computational efficiency. Lower values of the Bp and
MSE metrics indicate better performance.

eficial for various advanced computer vision applications
ranging from 3D reconstruction to robotics and autonomous
driving [4, 5]. The key aspect of LF disparity estimation is
to identify corresponding pixels across different views.
At present, both non-learning methods [15] and learning
methods [8, 10, 16, 17, 24] explore geometry information
between LF images based on the constructed cost volume.
These methods usually construct a cost volume within a predefined disparity range, and compute the weighted sum of
those pre-defined disparity candidates to obtain the final disparity prediction. However, such a design suffers from a
high computational and memory burden, which limits them
in constructing a full-range cost volume for handling large
disparities scenes. Moreover, the predefined disparity range
inherently constrains the performance of cost-volume-based
approaches, making them less effective in handling scenes
with extreme parallax variations.
Recently, some methods [13] attempt to use selfattention to explore consistency in stereo matching and
show great potential in learning stereo correspondence.
PAM [25] explores the pixel movements between views by

1. Introduction
Light Field (LF) disparity estimation aims to infer the 3D
scene geometry from the captured LF images, which is ben* Corresponding author: zhangshuo@bjtu.edu.cn

6488

