This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianProperty: Integrating Physical Properties to 3D Gaussians with LMMs
Xinli Xu1 * Wenhang Ge1∗ Dicong Qiu1∗ ZhiFei Chen1 Dongyu Yan1 Zhuoyun LIU1
Haoyu Zhao1 Hanfeng Zhao3 Shunsi Zhang3 Junwei Liang1,2 Ying-Cong Chen1,2†
HKUST(GZ)1

HKUST2

Quwan3

Abstract

Physics-based Simulation

Estimating physical properties for visual data is a crucial task in computer vision, graphics, and robotics, underpinning applications such as augmented reality, physical simulation, and robotic grasping. However, this area
remains under-explored due to the inherent ambiguities in
physical property estimation. To address these challenges,
we introduce GaussianProperty, a training-free framework
that assigns physical properties to 3D Gaussians. Specifically, we integrate the segmentation capability of SAM with
the recognition capability of GPT-4V(ision) to formulate a
global-local physical property reasoning module for 2D images. Then we project the physical properties from multiview 2D images to 3D Gaussians using a voting strategy.
We demonstrate that 3D Gaussians with physical property
annotations enable applications in physics-based dynamic
simulation and robotic grasping. For physics-based dynamic simulation, we leverage the Material Point Method
(MPM) for realistic dynamic simulation. For robot grasping, we develop a grasping force prediction strategy that
estimates a safe force range required for object grasping based on the estimated physical properties. Extensive
experiments on material segmentation, physics-based dynamic simulation, and robotic grasping validate the effectiveness of our proposed method, highlighting its crucial
role in understanding physical properties from visual data.
Online demo, code, and annotated datasets are available on
the project page: https://Gaussian-Property.github.io

Multi-view images

+
SAM

t1

t2

t3

LMMs

cal s
ysi
Ph ertie
p
o
Pr
3D Gaussians

Physical Properties Preidiction

Robot Grasping

t1

t2

t3

Applications

Figure 1. GaussianProperty is a training-free framework, aiming
at adding physical properties to 3D Gaussians with the assistance
of LMMs. By assigning physical properties to 3D Gaussians, it
promotes several downstream tasks such as physical-based generative dynamics and robot grasping.

ated significant interest across these domains, underscoring
the need for precise physical property estimation. However,
this area remains under-explored due to the inherent ambiguities in physical property estimation. Key challenges include the difficulty of acquiring labeled ground-truth data,
as intrinsic physical properties are not directly observable
through visual means, and the ambiguity of the prediction
task, which is further compounded by the limited number
of observable surfaces.
Prior studies in cognitive science [12, 26] reveal that humans infer physical properties by associating visual appearances with material experiences. Inspired by this mechanism, we propose a novel framework that mimics human reasoning through Large Multimodal Models (LMMs).
This process allows us to intuitively gauge physical property such as weight, texture, and density from visual observation. Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have
achieved impressive progress in nature language understanding. Based on this, Large Multimodal Models (LMMs)
extend LLMs by further incorporating image modality into
the model training. With a massive repository of prior
knowledge, which covers the task of physical property estimation, showcasing a robust understanding and recognition

1. Introduction
Estimating physical properties from visual data is a critical
task in both computer vision and graphics, serving as the
foundation for various fields, including augmented reality
(AR) [2, 3, 15], robotic grasping [4, 7, 37], and physicsbased dynamic simulation [8, 13, 14]. Recently, the integration of physical properties into 3D model has gener* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7231

