This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ETA: Efﬁciency through Thinking Ahead,
A Dual Approach to Self-Driving with Large Models
Shadi Hamdan1,2∗ Chonghao Sima3
Koç University 2 KUIS AI Center

Zetong Yang4 Hongyang Li3
The University of Hong Kong

1

3

Fatma Güney1,2
4
OpenDriveLab

{shamdan17,fguney}@ku.edu.tr, chonghaosima@connect.hku.hk, hongyang@hku.hk, tomztyang@gmail.com

Abstract
How can we beneﬁt from large models without sacriﬁcing inference speed, a common dilemma in self-driving
systems? A prevalent solution is a dual-system architecture, employing a small model for rapid, reactive decisions
and a larger model for slower but more informative analyses. Existing dual-system designs often implement parallel architectures where inference is either directly conducted using the large model at each current frame or
retrieved from previously stored inference results. However, these works still struggle to enable large models for
a timely response to every online frame. Our key insight
is to shift intensive computations of the current frame to
previous time steps and perform a batch inference of multiple time steps to make large models respond promptly to
each time step. To achieve the shifting, we introduce Efﬁciency through Thinking Ahead (ETA), an asynchronous
system designed to: (1) propagate informative features from
the past to the current frame using future predictions from
the large model, (2) extract current frame features using a
small model for real-time responsiveness, and (3) integrate
these dual features via an action mask mechanism that emphasizes action-critical image regions. Evaluated on the
Bench2Drive CARLA Leaderboard-v2 benchmark, ETA advances state-of-the-art performance by 8% with a driving
score of 69.53 while maintaining a near-real-time inference
speed at 50 ms. Code and checkpoints can be found here.

1. Introduction
Large models, including multimodal foundation models [5,
26] and vision foundation models with huge amount of parameters [6, 18], have been increasingly used in self-driving
because of their impressive perception and reasoning capabilities [4, 9, 24, 36]. Due to the real-time demand of self∗ Work partially done during internship at OpenDriveLab.
Primary contact: shamdan17@ku.edu.tr

Figure 1. Comparison on Bench2Drive [13]. Our Base model
achieves the best performance across all metrics with a high latency. By improving latency to 20 FPS, our Async model achieves
the second best in all metrics except Trafﬁc Sign handling.

driving, inference-time speed becomes a critical concern
when using large models. For instance, the best-performing
models [11, 14] on the Bench2Drive closed-loop benchmark [13] currently have latencies in the order of hundreds
of milliseconds due to their large transformer structures,
which do not satisfy the real-time requirement. In this work,
we address the challenge of utilizing large models for selfdriving without compromising inference-time speed.
The efﬁciency bottleneck in large models has driven researchers to develop dual approaches for embodied systems [3, 8, 20, 30, 37, 39], including self-driving [25, 32,
33, 41]. Inspired by the System-1 and System-2 framework from cognitive science [16], these dual frameworks
utilize a small model for fast, reactive decisions and a large
model for slower, more thoughtful decisions. While the
dual approach facilitates the use of large models in online systems, the inference results from these models in existing paradigms [33, 41] are often infrequently available.

26529

