This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVTRv2: CTC Beats Encoder-Decoder Models in Scene Text Recognition
Yongkun Du1 , Zhineng Chen1 ,* Hongtao Xie2 , Caiyan Jia3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1
1
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
2
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
ykdu23@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhinchen, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, htxie@ustc.edu.cn, cyjia@bjtu.edu.cn

SVTR

Abstract

CPPD
FPS

Connectionist temporal classification (CTC)-based
scene text recognition (STR) methods, e.g., SVTR, are
widely employed in OCR applications, mainly due to their
simple architecture, which only contains a visual model
and a CTC-aligned linear classifier, and therefore fast
inference. However, they generally exhibit worse accuracy
than encoder-decoder-based methods (EDTRs) due to
struggling with text irregularity and linguistic missing.
To address these challenges, we propose SVTRv2, a CTC
model endowed with the ability to handle text irregularities
and model linguistic context. First, a multi-size resizing
strategy is proposed to resize text instances to appropriate
predefined sizes, effectively avoiding severe text distortion.
Meanwhile, we introduce a feature rearrangement module
to ensure that visual features accommodate the requirement
of CTC, thus alleviating the alignment puzzle. Second, we
propose a semantic guidance module. It integrates linguistic context into the visual features, allowing CTC model to
leverage language information for accuracy improvement.
This module can be omitted at the inference stage and
would not increase the time cost. We extensively evaluate
SVTRv2 in both standard and recent challenging benchmarks, where SVTRv2 is fairly compared to popular STR
models across multiple scenarios, including different types
of text irregularity, languages, long text, and whether employing pretraining. SVTRv2 surpasses most EDTRs across
the scenarios in terms of accuracy and inference speed.
Code: https://github.com/Topdu/OpenOCR.

PARSeq MAERec
Common
100
80

LISTER

SVTRv2

Union14M

60
40
20

Long

Curved

0

Chinese

Multi-Oriented
Occluded

Fixed-Scale Resizing

Artistic
BB_UULLC_

Severe distortion
causing unreadable

Reading order
puzzling CTC
alignment

BULC

Text Irregularity

Objccts
Linguistic Missing

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Top: comparison with previous methods [4, 8, 11, 13,
25] best in a single scenario, where long text recognition accuracy
(Long) and FPS are normalized. Our SVTRv2 achieves the new
state of the arts in every scenario except for FPS. Nevertheless,
SVTRv2 is still the fastest compared to all the EDTRs. Bottom:
challenges caused by text irregularity and linguistic missing.

As a task of extracting text from natural images, scene text
recognition (STR) has garnered considerable interest over
decades. Unlike text from scanned documents, scene text
often exists within complex natural scenarios, posing chal* Corresponding Author

20147

lenges such as background noise, text distortions, irregular
layouts, artistic fonts [7], etc. To tackle these challenges, a
variety of STR methods have been developed and they can
be roughly divided into two categories, i.e., connectionist
temporal classification (CTC)-based methods and encoderdecoder-based methods (EDTRs).
Typically, CTC-based methods [11, 23, 28, 39] employ
a single visual model to extract image features and then apply a CTC-aligned linear classifier [17] to predict recognition results. This straightforward architecture provides advantages such as fast inference, which makes them especially popular in OCR applications. However, these models struggle to handle text irregularity, i.e., text distortions,
varying layouts, etc. As a consequence, attention-based de-

