This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NegRefine: Refining Negative Label-Based Zero-Shot OOD Detection
Amirhossein Ansari1
1

Simon Fraser University

Ke Wang1
2

Pulei Xiong2

National Research Council Canada

ah_ansari@sfu.ca, wangk@cs.sfu.ca, pulei.xiong@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

Abstract

paradigm that also incorporates class label information has
gained significant attention [10, 22, 38]. Among these, negative label-based methods, such as NegLabel [16] and CSP
[6], have emerged as particularly promising solutions.
The core idea behind NegLabel [16] is to leverage a
large lexicon of English words, such as WordNet [11], as
a label pool to create a set of negative (OOD) labels Yneg .
To form Yneg , words (nouns and adjectives) from the lexicon are ranked based on their semantic similarity to the indistribution labels in Yin , and the top p% least similar words
to the in-distribution labels are selected as negative labels.
For an input image, the similarity between the image and
both the in-distribution labels in Yin and the negative labels
in Yneg is computed using CLIP, and based on these similarity scores, a final score is defined to detect the image as
in-distribution or OOD. CSP [6] improves upon NegLabel
by refining the use of adjectives to construct superclass labels that better capture OOD samples.
Despite the impressive performance of NegLabel [16]
and CSP [6], these methods still face the following notable
limitations:
Subcategory Overlap. These methods rely on textual
similarity and a cutoff of the top p% least similar words to
select Yneg . This approach is inherently limited, as it depends solely on semantic similarity without explicitly considering hierarchical relationships among words. As a result, they can mistakenly include subcategories (e.g., “blueeyed african daisy”) of in-distribution labels (e.g., “daisy”)
in the negative set, leading to an overlap between Yneg and
Yin . This issue is particularly pronounced because, for a
given image, CLIP tends to assign higher similarity scores
to more specific labels than to general terms, consequently,
the negative subcategory label can receive a higher similarity score than the more general in-distribution label, leading
to incorrect detection of in-distribution samples as OOD.
Fig. 1a shows this issue using an in-distribution sample
from the ImageNet-1K [8] dataset.
Proper Nouns. WordNet contains many proper nouns
(e.g., names of individual persons, places, or organizations), leading to their excessive selection as negative labels. The CLIP model tends to match samples from cer-

Recent advancements in Vision-Language Models like CLIP
have enabled zero-shot OOD detection by leveraging both
image and textual label information. Among these, negative label-based methods such as NegLabel and CSP have
shown promising results by utilizing a lexicon of words
to define negative labels for distinguishing OOD samples. However, these methods suffer from detecting indistribution samples as OOD due to negative labels that
are subcategories of in-distribution labels or proper nouns.
They also face limitations in handling images that match
multiple in-distribution and negative labels. We propose
NegRefine, a novel negative label refinement framework for
zero-shot OOD detection. By introducing a filtering mechanism to exclude subcategory labels and proper nouns from
the negative label set and incorporating a multi-matchingaware scoring function that dynamically adjusts the contributions of multiple labels matching an image, NegRefine
ensures a more robust separation between in-distribution
and OOD samples. We evaluate NegRefine on large-scale
benchmarks, including ImageNet-1K. The code is available
at https://github.com/ah-ansari/NegRefine.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models deployed in real-world environments often encounter input samples from unknown classes
that differ significantly from the pre-defined classes in
the training data. Model predictions for these Out-ofDistribution (OOD) samples are typically unreliable and
overconfident, posing critical risks and security vulnerabilities in critical domains like healthcare and autonomous
driving [27]. OOD detection mitigates this issue by distinguishing OOD samples from in-distribution ones, enabling
models to reject and flag OOD inputs when encountered
[1, 12, 41]. Traditionally, image OOD detection methods
have relied on single-visual modality [9, 20, 21, 39], neglecting the textual information available in class labels.
However, with recent advancements in pre-trained VisionLanguage Models like CLIP [30], adopting a multi-modal

573

