This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TrustMark: Robust Watermarking and Watermark Removal for Arbitrary
Resolution Images
Tu Bui1

Shruti Agarwal2
John Collomosse1,2
1
University of Surrey, UK.
2
Adobe Research, USA.

tuvbui90@gmail.com, {shragarw,collomos}@adobe.com

Abstract

watermark, and so present provenance data to enable users
to make more informed trust decisions about an image. Second, creative tools may (re-)encode these openly detectable
identifiers in images as they are edited. Third, a key consideration for creative practice is visual quality degradation
due to watermarking, and ‘re-watermarking’ (watermark removal and replacement). Creative imagery is often high
resolution, and the watermark should be imperceptible. Finally, the watermark should robust to non-editorial transformations (renditions) performed by content platforms such
as social media. Many robust watermarks operate only over
fixed resolutions [13, 40, 48, 66, 77]. We propose TrustMark to address these challenges. Our contributions are:
1. State-of-art watermarking performance. We extend
the existing encoder-decoder based watermarking methods
[66, 73, 77] with a new backbone, a post-process layer and
a novel frequency-based (FFL) loss for improved preservation of high frequency detail in the watermarked image. Robustness of the encoding is encouraged via extensive noise
simulation during training. TrustMark achieves state-of-art
performance in both imperceptibility and watermark recovery on three benchmarks.
2. Watermark removal network ReMark, to restore the
original image with high quality, useful for applications
such as re-watermarking.
3. Resolution Scaling method to extend TrustMark, ReMark and other watermarking methods to operate over images of arbitrary resolution.
TrustMark thus addresses practical challenges across the
watermark lifecycle for creative work: imperceptibility and
robustness; scaling for arbitrary resolution; and ReMark enabling high quality restoration for re-watermarking.

Imperceptible digital watermarking is important in copyright protection, misinformation prevention, and responsible generative AI. We propose TrustMark - a watermarking
method that leverages a spatio-spectral loss function and a
1×1 convolution layer to enhance encoding quality. TrustMark is robust against both in-place and out-of-place perturbations while maintaining image quality above 43 dB.
Additionally, we propose ReMark, a watermark removal
method designed for re-watermarking, along with a simple
yet effective algorithm that enables both TrustMark and ReMark to operate across arbitrary resolutions. Our methods
achieve state-of-art performance on 3 benchmarks1 .

1. Introduction
Advances in generative AI (GenAI) present fresh challenges in combating misinformation and identifying the
origins (provenance) of images. Emerging content provenance standards (e.g. C2PA [16]) address this challenge by
embedding metadata within images to describe how they
were created. However, such metadata is often removed
by non-compliant platforms (e.g. social media) as images
are posted and shared. Digital watermarking offers a way
to embed an imperceptible identifier that may be used to
recover provenance information in this situation [19]. In
this paper we propose TrustMark, a novel image watermarking model that can be applied to general images (photos or
GenAI) in order to help identify their provenance.
The goal of (imperceptible) image watermarking is to
embed a message (here, provenance data) directly within
the image content in such a way that the changes to the image are imperceptible yet detectable by a ‘watermark decoder’. TrustMark is designed to address several requirements specific to image provenance. First, provenance is a
non-steganographic use case for watermarking, where public detection and decoding is required, not conditional on
any secret key. For example, a web browser may detect a
1 Models and code are released under MIT license at https://
github.com/adobe/trustmark.

2. Related work
Media provenance is the focus of cross-industry coalitions
(e.g. CAI [60], Origin [3]) and emerging standards (e.g.
C2PA [16]) that encode a metadata ‘manifest’ within an image, containing information on its origins. When that metadata is stripped, a perceptual hash [5, 6, 52] can be used
to lookup the manifest in a database or distributed ledger
e.g. blockchain [8, 9]. Yet reliance on near-duplicate search
is inexact, and provides no signal to trigger such a lookup.

18629

