This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RMultiplex200K: Toward Reliable Multimodal Process Supervision for Visual
Language Models on Telecommunications
Sijia Chen
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Bin Song†
Xidian University

sijiachen@hkust-gz.edu.cn

bsong@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Question

Image

Time-Varying Interference: This problem illustrates the capacity gains that can be obtained
from interference estimation, and how a malicious jammer can wreak havoc on link
performance. Consider the following interference channel, shown in the image.
and interference
. We model
as
The channel has a combination of AWGN
AWGN. The interferer is on (i.e. the switch is down) with probability 0.25 and off (i.e. the
switch is up) with probability 0.75. The average transmit power is 10 mW, the noise spectral
density is
, the channel bandwidth is 10 KHz (receiver noise power is
),
and the interference power (when on) is 9 mW.

Visual Language Models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable
success in many domains due to their ability to perform
step-by-step reasoning. However, progress in the telecommunication (Telecom) domain remains limited, primarily
due to the lack of high-quality datasets and domain-speciﬁc
insights. In this paper, we introduce RMultiplex200K, a
multimodal dataset designed to present step-wise reasoning rationales and correctness scores for real-world Telecom questions. This enables VLMs to engage in steplevel reasoning and veriﬁcation using multimodal information, thereby facilitating reliable problem-solving. RMultiplex200K is highly scalable as it is constructed without
human annotations, relying instead on our automatic planbased annotation (ApPA) method, which automatically synthesizes reasoning steps labeled with reward scores. With
this dataset, we introduce TC-NAVIGATOR, a new mechanism for training multimodal process reward models to
serve as reliable reasoning veriﬁers for VLMs. For instance,
the Qwen-2-VL-72B and Llama-3.2-90B models, which initially achieve only 21.3% and 19.8% respectively on practice Telecom questions, reached 48.5% and 46.1% accuracy, respectively, after training with RMultiplex200K and
verifying with TC-NAVIGATOR.

(so the
Suppose now that the interferer is a malicious jammer with perfect knowledge of
interferer is no longer modeled as AWGN). Assume that neither transmitter nor receiver have
knowledge of the jammer behavior. Assume also that the jammer is always on and has an
average transmit power of 10 mW. What strategy should the jammer use to minimize the
SNR of the received signal?

Reasoning Steps
Step 1:¬The jammer should transmit
.

Reward

to completely cancel off the signal.

,

,

1.0

Step 1:¬The jammer should generate a signal
to achieve perfect destructive interference, fully
canceling the transmitted signal and minimizing the SNR at the receiver.

Step 5:¬Next we assume that

0.9

...

...
, then

...

This time our assumption was

right. So we get that only two sub-bands each of bandwidth 10 MHz are used for transmission and the remaining two with
lesser SNR's are left unused.

1.0

Step 5:¬Now assume that

0.2

gives:

. Calculate

using the equation:

. Since

, this assumption is correct. Thus,

Step 6:¬Now, we can find capacity as:
Step 6:¬Calculate the capacity for sub-bands with SNR
:
. For
capacity:
.

. Solving this

. This gives us,

.
using

:

1.0
. For
. Total

0.1

Figure 1. Illustration of a solution sample of the RMultiplex200K
dataset. It contains a question, an image, and a step-by-step reasoning process in italics, along with the steps and rewards generated by ApPA highlighted in a shadow box.

patterns.
Existing literature [5, 34, 42] typically employs only textual datasets [20, 33, 37]. However, omitting visual information limits the applicability of VLMs, particularly because problem-solving in Telecom often relies on interpreting images such as circuit diagrams and waveform plots.
Although more recent works [8, 51, 59] incorporate visual
data into their datasets, they fail to provide answers with the
necessary step-wise rationales and human-level correctness
scores, which are critical to the success of large language
foundation models (LLMs), as demonstrated in mathematics [24, 46].
This paper introduces RMultiplex200K, the ﬁrst multimodal dataset built for reliable process supervision, which
support the training of VLMs toward complex reasoning
ability on real-world Telecom problems. Compared with existing Telecom datasets, mathematics datasets (e.g., MATHSHEPHERD [46] and PRM800K [24]), and even the mul-

1. Introduction
Visual Language Models (VLMs) can perform step-by-step
reasoning to solve complex problems across a wide range
of tasks. By leveraging datasets that capture this step-wise
reasoning, VLMs have achieved markedly improved performance in ﬁelds such as physics [19], medicine [36], and
particularly mathematics [44, 46, 58]. However, relatively
little work has been done to develop these datasets and validate the effectiveness of VLMs in the critical domain of
telecommunications (Telecom) [65], which is characterized
by domain-speciﬁc terminologies, concepts, and reasoning
† Bin Song is the Corresponding author.

1686

