This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GUAVA: Generalizable Upper Body 3D Gaussian Avatar
Dongbin Zhang1,2∗ Yunfei Liu2† Lijian Lin2 Ye Zhu2 Yang Li1
Minghan Qin1 Yu Li2‡ Haoqian Wang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)

Motion actor

Animation

Novel views synthesis

50 FPS

GUAVA

0.1S

Single Images

Ubody Gaussians

Figure 1. From a single image with a tracked pose, GUAVA can reconstruct a 3D upper-body Gaussian avatar via feed-forward inference
within sub-second time, enabling real-time expressive animation and novel view synthesis at 512×512 resolution.

Abstract

real-time animation and rendering. Code and video demos
are available at the Project page.

Reconstructing a high-quality, animatable 3D human
avatar with expressive facial and hand motions from a single image has gained significant attention due to its broad
application potential. 3D human avatar reconstruction typically requires multi-view or monocular videos and training on individual IDs, which is both complex and timeconsuming. Furthermore, limited by SMPLX’s expressiveness, these methods often focus on body motion but struggle with facial expressions. To address these challenges,
we first introduce an expressive human model (EHM) to enhance facial expression capabilities and develop an accurate tracking method. Based on this template model, we
propose GUAVA, the first framework for fast animatable
upper-body 3D Gaussian avatar reconstruction. We leverage inverse texture mapping and projection sampling techniques to infer Ubody (upper-body) Gaussians from a single
image. The rendered images are refined through a neural refiner. Experimental results demonstrate that GUAVA significantly outperforms previous methods in rendering quality
and offers significant speed improvements, with reconstruction times in the sub-second range (∼ 0.1s), and supports
∗ Intern at IDEA. ‡ Project lead.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding authors.

Creating realistic and expressive upper-body human avatars
is essential for applications like films, games, virtual meetings, and digital media. These avatars are expected to exhibit high realism with expressiveness, such as detailed facial expressions and rich hand gestures. Efficiency, ease of
creation, and real-time rendering are also critical. However,
achieving these goals, especially from a single image, remains a significant challenge in computer vision.
Recently, this area has gained growing attention, with
progress in both 2D and 3D-based methods. Several works
[13, 25, 50, 51, 60] directly predict the coefficients of the
human template model SMPLX [65] from images, enabling
rapid human mesh reconstruction. However, due to the template model’s coarse textures, these methods struggle to render photorealistic images. With the breakthrough of NeRF
[59] in novel view synthesis, methods like [27, 39, 54, 68,
113] combine template models like FLAME [47] or SMPLX to reconstruct high-quality head or whole body avatars
from multi-view or monocular videos. While achieving re-

14205

