This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DADet: Safeguarding Image Conditional Diffusion Models against Adversarial
and Backdoor Attacks via Diffusion Anomaly Detection
Hongwei Yu∗1 , Xinlong Ding∗1 , Jiawei Li∗1 , Jinlong Wang1 , Yudong Zhang2
Rongquan Wang1 , Huimin Ma1 , Jiansheng Chen†1
1

University of Science and Technology Beijing, China

Abstract

2

Tsinghua University, China

While image conditional diffusion models demonstrate impressive generation capabilities, they exhibit high vulnerability when facing backdoor and adversarial attacks. In this
paper, we define a scenario named diffusion anomaly where
the generated results of a reverse process under attack deviate significantly from the normal ones. By analyzing the
underlying formation mechanism of the diffusion anomaly,
we reveal how perturbations are amplified during the reverse process and accumulated in the results. Based on the
analysis, we reveal the phenomena of divergence and homogeneity, which cause the diffusion process to deviate significantly from the normal process and to decline in diversity.
Leveraging these two phenomena, we propose a method
named Diffusion Anomaly Detection (DADet) to effectively
detect both backdoor and adversarial attacks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposal achieves excellent
defense performance against backdoor and adversarial attacks. Specifically, for the backdoor attack detection, our
method achieves an F1 score of 99% on different datasets,
including MS COCO and CIFAR-10. For the detection of
adversarial samples, the F1 score exceeds 84% across three
adversarial attacks and two different tasks, evaluated on the
MS COCO and Places365 datasets, respectively.

are vulnerable to backdoor attacks [1, 5, 8, 11, 36, 37, 42]
and adversarial attacks [24, 31, 32, 49, 51]. The backdoor
attacker aims to manipulate the diffusion model to generate a specified content with a pre-defined trigger. This trigger can be added to the noise input [1, 37] or condition
part [11, 19, 36]. The adversarial attackers [20, 27, 49, 51]
find that the condition part is probably a weak point of
the conditional diffusion model. In text-to-image diffusion
models, they modify the text prompt [22, 23, 46] so that the
attacked model will generate incorrect results. As for image
conditional diffusion models, they add adversarial noise to
the condition image [31, 49, 51] to influence the generation.
Despite its clear threat to diffusion models, research on
defending against backdoor or adversarial attacks is still
limited. For backoor defense, most works [1, 8, 37, 50]
focus on unconditional diffusion models. For instance, Sui
et al. proposed DisDet [37]. They observed a distinguishable difference in the noise input distribution between benign and backdoor samples. Nevertheless, backdoor attacks [5, 19] on conditional diffusion models do not affect the noise input, making DisDet fails to detect backdoor samples. Wang et al. [41] recently paid attention to
conditional diffusion models. They proposed T2IShield,
which utilizes anomalies in the cross-attention map to detect backdoor samples. Their research focuses on text-toimage diffusion models, making it inapplicable to image
conditional diffusion models. For adversarial defense, a
safety filter is commonly used in diffusion models. The
filter compares the latent representation of the generated
image to pre-computed representations of harmful information. Despite this, studies [39, 52] have demonstrated that
safety filters can be easily bypassed by a range of methods. Some research resists adversarial attacks by identifying potential prompts that can generate harmful contents [3, 27, 45]. Others aim to erase harmful concepts using
machine unlearning-based methods [7, 10, 13, 26]. These
studies are all designed for text-to-image models, leaving a
gap in defenses for image conditional diffusion models.
In this paper, we define the diffusion anomaly as a scenario where the generated result of a reverse process under

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [9, 33–35] have demonstrated outstanding performances in various generation tasks. They disrupt images by adding noise over multiple steps in the forward process and generate samples by progressively denoising through multiple steps in the reverse process. To
achieve better control over the generation results, image
condition diffusion models [25, 28–30, 40] are used in varieties of areas, including image inpainting [25, 29], image
editing [2, 12], and video synthesis [43, 44].
However, recent research shows that diffusion models
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author (jschen@ustb.edu.cn).

17411

