This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NuiScene: Exploring Efficient Generation of Unbounded Outdoor Scenes
Han-Hung Lee1 Qinghong Han1 Angel X. Chang1,2
1
Simon Fraser University, 2 Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii
{hla300, qha32, angelx}@sfu.ca
https://3dlg-hcvc.github.io/NuiScene/

Figure 1. Our model enables efficient, unbounded generation of large outdoor scene geometry. Scenes are textured with SceneTex [6].

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the task of generating expansive
outdoor scenes, ranging from castles to high-rises. Unlike
indoor scene generation, which has been a primary focus of
prior work, outdoor scene generation presents unique challenges, including wide variations in scene heights and the
need for a method capable of rapidly producing large landscapes. To address this, we propose an efficient approach
that encodes scene chunks as uniform vector sets, offering
better compression and performance than the spatially structured latents used in prior methods. Furthermore, we train
an explicit outpainting model for unbounded generation,
which improves coherence compared to prior resamplingbased inpainting schemes while also speeding up generation
by eliminating extra diffusion steps. To facilitate this task,
we curate NuiScene43, a small but high-quality set of scenes,
preprocessed for joint training. Notably, when trained on
scenes of varying styles, our model can blend different environments, such as rural houses and city skyscrapers, within
the same scene, highlighting the potential of our curation
process to leverage heterogeneous scenes for joint training.

1. Introduction
Large-scale outdoor scene generation is crucial for many
applications such as enabling immersive world-building for
open-world video games, cinematic CGI environments, and

VR simulations. Traditionally, crafting these vast outdoor environments required extensive manual labor and significant
resources. Fortunately, recent advances in AI-driven content generation techniques offer the potential to significantly
enhance accessibility and efficiency for this task.
Following the trend of diffusion models in image generation—such as Stable Diffusion [37]—generative models
for creating standalone 3D objects [23, 45] are also rapidly
maturing. The success of such models is partly driven by
large-scale datasets like Objaverse [10]. However, largescale scene generation remains limited, with many works
focused on indoor environments [4, 17, 32, 44]. While some
methods utilize semantic car datasets [25, 26, 30] or CAD
models [29], these datasets lack high-quality geometry and
have limited scene variation and height. Compared to previous methods, we tackle a difficult task with three key challenges: 1) enabling fast and efficient generation of outdoor
scenes with varying heights, 2) generating landscapes with
varying styles into a cohesive and continuous scene, 3) curating a dataset that facilitates exploration into such methods
and supports joint training of heterogeneous scenes.
Previous works on generating unbounded indoor scenes
using 3D-Front [12] assume scenes can be divided into
equal-sized cubes, and learn spatially structured latents like
triplanes [44] or dense feature grids [32] for compression.
This approach struggles with outdoor scenes featuring buildings like skyscrapers with significantly different heights. As
shown in Figure 3, naively scaling these representations can
result in intensive memory usage. Rescaling the scene via
normalization will also degrade details. To address this, we

26509

