This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIM: Amending Inherent Interpretability via Self-Supervised Masking
Eyad Alshami1,2

Shashank Agnihotri3

Bernt Schiele1,2

Margret Keuper1,3

1

2

Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
RTG Neuroexplicit Models of Language, Vision, and Action, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
Data and Web Science Group, University of Mannheim, Germany

{ealshami,schiele,keuper}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, shashank.agnihotri@uni-mannheim.de

Input Image

Abstract

ConvNeXt+AIM
GradCAM

ImageNet100

It has been observed that deep neural networks (DNNs)
often use both genuine as well as spurious features. In
this work, we propose “Amending Inherent Interpretability via Self-Supervised Masking” (AIM), a simple yet interestingly effective method that promotes the network’s utilization of genuine features over spurious alternatives without requiring additional annotations. In particular, AIM
uses features at multiple encoding stages to guide a selfsupervised, sample-specific feature-masking process. As a
result, AIM enables the training of well-performing and inherently interpretable models that faithfully summarize the
decision process. We validate AIM across a diverse range of
challenging datasets that test both out-of-distribution generalization and fine-grained visual understanding. These
include general-purpose classification benchmarks such
as ImageNet100, HardImageNet, and ImageWoof, as well
as fine-grained classification datasets such as Waterbirds,
TravelingBirds, and CUB-200. AIM demonstrates significant dual benefits: interpretability improvements, as measured by the Energy Pointing Game (EPG) score, and accuracy gains over strong baselines. These consistent gains
across domains and architectures provide compelling evidence that AIM promotes the use of genuine and meaningful
features that directly contribute to improved generalization
and human-aligned interpretability.

ConvNeXt
GradCAM

Hard ImangeNet
Waterbirds-100

Figure 1. AIM uses self-supervised masking for precise object
localization relying only on the image label. As shown, it outperforms baseline methods, even in challenging scenarios like the
WaterBirds dataset.

ter birds’ for the WaterBirds dataset [28, 33] that often
learn to classify the background environment rather than
the birds themselves, resulting in poor generalization when
birds appear in atypical habitats. It is therefore desired
that models leverage genuine features, that are distinctive,
class specific, and are localized on the object. Recent research has shown that, while DNNs exhibit dependence on
spurious features, they simultaneously acquire some genuine features [18]. This key insight suggests an opportunity: How can we promote the models’ utilization of genuine features while suppressing spurious ones? Prior works
proposed using extra annotations in the form of bound-

1. Introduction
Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success across domains such as Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision. Despite their
impressive performance metrics, these models often use
spurious features that happen to correlate with target labels in training data but lack causal relevance to the task.
This phenomenon, sometimes called ‘Clever Hans’ behavior [20, 35]. A classic example is classification models trained to distinguish between ‘land birds’ and ‘wa-

993

