This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UDC-VIT: A Real-World Video Dataset for Under-Display Cameras
Kyusu Ahn3 * JiSoo Kim1 Sangik Lee4†
HyunGyu Lee2 Byeonghyun Ko2 Chanwoo Park2 Jaejin Lee1,2
1
2

Dept. of Data Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
3

4

Research Center, Samsung Display Co., Ltd., Yongin, Republic of Korea

Mobile Display Electronics Development Team, Samsung Display Co., Ltd., Yongin, Republic of Korea
{kyusu.ahn, jisoo.kim, sangik85, devko, hyungyu, 99chanwoo, jaejin}@snu.ac.kr

https://github.com/mcrl/UDC-VIT

Abstract
Even though an Under-Display Camera (UDC) is an advanced imaging system, the display panel significantly degrades captured images or videos, introducing low transmittance, blur, noise, and flare issues. Tackling such issues is challenging because of the complex degradation
of UDCs, including diverse flare patterns. However, no
dataset contains videos of real-world UDC degradation. In
this paper, we propose a real-world UDC video dataset
called UDC-VIT. Unlike existing datasets, UDC-VIT exclusively includes human motions for facial recognition.
We propose a video-capturing system to acquire clean and
UDC-degraded videos of the same scene simultaneously.
Then, we align a pair of captured videos frame by frame,
using discrete Fourier transform (DFT). We compare UDCVIT with six representative UDC still image datasets and
two existing UDC video datasets. Using six deep-learning
models, we compare UDC-VIT and an existing synthetic
UDC video dataset. The results indicate the ineffectiveness
of models trained on earlier synthetic UDC video datasets,
as they do not reflect the actual characteristics of UDCdegraded videos. We also demonstrate the importance of effective UDC restoration by evaluating face recognition accuracy concerning PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS scores. UDCVIT is available at our official GitHub repository.

1. Introduction
Under-Display Camera (UDC) is an imaging system where
the camera is positioned beneath the display. Modern smartphones, including the Samsung Galaxy Z-Fold series [37–
40] and the ZTE Axon series [58–60] have adopted UDCs.
* This work was done when he was a Ph.D. student at Seoul National University.
† This work was done when he was an M.S. student at Seoul National University.

The UDC area, depicted in Fig. 1, serves as display space
under normal circumstances and acts as the light’s passage
to the camera when capturing pictures or videos. This design allows for a larger screen-to-body ratio, meeting the
common consumer demand for a full-screen display without a camera hole or notch. However, UDC introduces severe and complex degradations such as reduced transmittance, noise, blur, and flare in a single image or video frame.
Moreover, motion is also involved in UDC videos.
UDC degradation results from micrometer-scale diffraction of incoming light by display pixels [34]. To mitigate
this, modern UDC smartphones adopt lower pixel density in
the UDC area, as shown in Fig. 1(c). However, this reduces
the local display resolution and disrupts the natural video
viewing experience, making high-quality video restoration
essential.
Many studies have explored UDC image datasets, including synthetic datasets (e.g., T-OLED/P-OLED [57] and
SYNTH [17]) and a pseudo-real dataset [19]. Additionally,
a real-world dataset called UDC-SIT [1] exists.
Ahn et al. [1] highlight the importance of training DNN
models on real-world UDC datasets as synthetic datasets do
not reflect the actual characteristics of UDC-degraded images. However, a real-world UDC video dataset and restoration model have yet to be introduced. Although several
studies address the synthetic UDC video datasets [12, 27],
they still fall short of accurately representing the actual
properties of UDC videos. There are two main challenges in
constructing a real-world UDC video dataset. One is to find
a matching pair of UDC-distorted and ground-truth videos
with high alignment accuracy. The other is to synchronize
the time for all frames when capturing videos.
This paper proposes a new UDC video dataset called
UDC-VIT (UDC’s VIdeo by Thunder Research Group). As
far as we know, it is the first real-world UDC video dataset

10950

