This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Input-Adaptive Inference for Efficient VLN
Dongwoo Kang, Akhil Perincherry, Zachary Coalson, Aiden Gabriel, Stefan Lee, Sanghyun Hong
Oregon State University
{kangdo, perincha, coalsonz, gabrieai, leestef, sanghyun.hong}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract

reduce overthinking [34]: as shallow networks are sufficient for the majority of samples to make decisions, e.g.,
class predictions, input-adaptive methods [31, 39, 51, 61]
stop forwarding preemptively during inference and return
intermediate outputs when the internal decisions of a model
converge. During inference, they demonstrate up to 50%
computational savings while preserving model performance.

An emerging paradigm in vision-and-language navigation
(VLN) is the use of history-aware multi-modal transformer
models. Given a language instruction, these models process
observation and navigation history to predict the most appropriate action for an agent. While they have significantly
improved performance, the scale of these models can be a
bottleneck in practical settings with limited computational
resources. In this work, we propose a novel input-adaptive
navigation method to enhance VLN model efficiency. We
first show that existing input-adaptive mechanisms fail to
reduce computations without substantial performance degradation. To address this, we introduce three adaptive algorithms, each deployed at a different level: (1) To improve
spatial efficiency, we selectively process panoramic views at
each observation of an agent. (2) To improve intra-model
efficiency, we propose importance-based adaptive thresholding for the early-exit methods. (3) To improve temporal
efficiency, we implement a caching mechanism that prevents
reprocessing of views previously seen by the agent. In evaluations on seven VLN benchmarks, we demonstrate over a 2ˆ
reduction in computation across three off-the-shelf agents
in both standard and continuous environments. Our code is
publicly available at https:// github.com/ secure-ai-systemsgroup/ adaptive-vision-and-language-navigation.

In this work, we study the overthinking problem in a new
domain—VLN—and propose a novel input-adaptive method
to address it. Unlike prior studies on overthinking, which focus on tasks where inputs are processed independently (e.g.,
classification), VLN involves sequential decision-making,
introducing unique problems driven by spatio-temporal dependencies in the inputs. Moreover, these models can be
deployed for real-world navigation; thus, it is important to
assess whether they are robust to common visual corruptions.

Progress in vision-and-language navigation (VLN) has been
enabled by larger models trained on increasingly large
datasets [10, 21, 25, 29, 43]. These models can process
and interpret complex data, enabling them to understand and
act upon natural language instructions within visual environments. Despite the success, there is a growing concern
about their computational demands. The need for substantial
computational power poses a notable challenge for deployment in resource-constrained settings, such as robots, where
low-power consumption becomes increasingly critical.
A potential solution to addressing these computational
demands is input-adaptive inference. The main idea is to

Second, to address this issue and achieve computational
efficiency, we propose a novel input-adaptive navigation
method (shown in Figure 1). We not only minimize overthinking within visual encoders, as in prior approaches, but
also reduce overthinking caused by cognitive overload during navigation. Specifically, we focus on exploiting the
spatiotemporal localities unique to VLN tasks: (1) The spatial locality: In a panorama, we find that navigable views
and a few neighboring views are critical for successful navigation. We design a weighting mechanism that significantly
reduces the number of views the encoder should process. We
also develop an efficient subgoal module that predicts nav-

œ

1. Introduction

Contributions. We first characterize the overthinking problem in VLN by analyzing its computational bottlenecks. In
our evaluation with two standard VLN agents (HAMT [10]
and DUET [11]) and one continuous VLN agent (VLNCE BERT [35]), we find that „99.5% of computations
are spent in visual encoders. We also show that addressing
overthinking within these visual encoders is ineffective in
providing computational savings. Even with our best effort to apply the existing input-adaptive inference method,
MuE [51], we demonstrate that this approach results in inaccurate navigation decisions. This increases both the time it
takes for an agent to reach the target location and the overall
computations while lowering the navigation success.

8219

