This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial Alignment and Temporal Matching Adapter for Video-Radar Remote
Physiological Measurement

1

Qian Liang1 , Ruixu Geng1 , Jinbo Chen2 , Haoyu Wang1 , Yan Chen1 , Yang Hu1 *
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Nanyang Technological University
{qianliang, gengruixu, why1999}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jinbo.chen@ntu.edu.sg
{eecyan,eeyhu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Video
Backbone
Video-Radar
Dataset

Remote physiological measurement (RPM) based on video
and radar has made significant progress in recent years.
However, unimodal methods based solely on video or
radar sensor have notable limitations due to their measurement principles, and multimodal RPM that combines
these modalities has emerged as a promising direction.
Despite its potential, the lack of large-scale multimodal
data and the significant modality gap between video and
radar pose substantial challenges in building robust videoradar RPM models. To handle these problems, we suggest
leveraging unimodal pre-training and present the Spatial
alignment and Temporal Matching (SATM) Adapter to effectively fine-tune pre-trained unimodal backbones into a
multimodal RPM model. Given the distinct measurement
principles of video- and radar-based methods, we propose
Spatial Alignment to align the spatial distribution of their
features. Furthermore, Temporal Matching is applied to
mitigate waveform discrepancies between video and radar
signals. By integrating these two modules into adapters,
the unimodal backbones could retain their modality-specific
knowledge while effectively extracting complementary features from each other. Extensive experiments across various
challenging scenarios, including low light conditions and
head motions, demonstrate that our approach significantly
surpasses the state-of-the-art methods.

Fusion
Model
Radar
Backbone

Video
Dataset

Video Backbone

Radar
Dataset

Radar Backbone

Frozen
Update

(a) EquiPleth
Video Backbone

Video-Radar
Dataset

Cross-Modal Fusion or
Weight-Sharing

Radar Backbone

(b) Fusion-Vital and CardiacMamba

Video
Backbone

Video-Radar
Dataset

SATM r2v
Adapter

Cross-Modal
Fusion
Radar
Backbone

SATM v2r
Adapter

(c) SATM (ours)

Figure 1. Frameworks of video-radar RPM methods: (a)
EquiPleth [41] trains unimodal backbones on the multimodal
dataset and leverage a late fusion model to ensemble their predictions. (b) Fusion-Vital [6] and CardiacMamba [46] train their
end-to-end models from scratch on the multimodal dataset. (c)
Our method makes full use of unimodal pre-training and propose
the SATM adapter to enable effective multimodal adaptation.

methods, an alternative approach involves the use of radar
sensors to capture cardiac activities through subtle mechanical motions of the human chest [3, 35, 42, 43].
However, both video- and radar-based methods have notable limitations. Video-based methods are highly sensitive to light conditions and may be influenced by subjects’
skin tones [41]. On the other hand, radar-based methods are
much more susceptible to subject movements, and most existing methods are designed for strict-constraint scenarios.
Therefore, it is necessary and promising to combine video
and radar for RPM measurement to overcome the limitations of unimodal approaches.
Nevertheless, constructing a robust video-radar RPM
model remains a significant challenge. Due to the complexity of recording synchronized videos, radar data, and
ground-truth PPG signals, video-radar RPM datasets are
mostly limited in scale. Consequently, training a model
from scratch on such datasets is prone to severe overfitting.
Unfortunately, existing multimodal RPM works [6, 41, 46]
overlook this problem, leading to limited robustness and
generalization ability (See Sec. 4.3). In addition, video-

1. Introduction
Remote physiological measurement has attracted a lot of
attention recently owing to its ability to detect physiological signals without contact. A prominent line of research focuses on video-based remote photoplethysmography (rPPG), which uses ordinary cameras to extract vital
signals by detecting periodic changes in skin color induced
by heartbeats [4, 10, 24, 29, 49, 51]. Beyond video-based
* Corresponding author

8623

