This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Text-to-3D Generation with
Linearized Lookahead Variational Score Distillation
Yu Lei1

Bingde Liu1
Qingsong Xie2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

1

{tony-lei, bingde, zhijied}@sjtu.edu.cn

Haonan Lu2
Zhijie Deng1 *
OPPO AI Center

2

Abstract

{xieqingsong1, luhaonan}@oppo.com

Text-to-3D generation based on score distillation of pretrained 2D diffusion models has gained increasing interest,
with variational score distillation (VSD) as a remarkable
example. VSD proves that vanilla score distillation can be
improved by introducing an extra score-based model, which
characterizes the distribution of images rendered from 3D
models, to correct the distillation gradient. Despite the
theoretical foundations, VSD, in practice, is likely to suffer from slow and sometimes ill-posed convergence. In this
paper, we perform an in-depth investigation of the interplay between the introduced score model and the 3D model,
and find that there exists a mismatching problem between
LoRA and 3D distributions in practical implementation. We
can simply adjust their optimization order to improve the
generation quality. By doing so, the score model looks
ahead to the current 3D state and hence yields more reasonable corrections. Nevertheless, naive lookahead VSD
may suffer from unstable training in practice due to the potential over-fitting. To address this, we propose to use a
linearized variant of the model for score distillation, giving rise to the Linearized Lookahead Variational Score
Distillation (L2 -VSD). L2 -VSD can be realized efficiently
with forward-mode autodiff functionalities of existing deep
learning libraries. Extensive experiments validate the efficacy of L2 -VSD, revealing its clear superiority over prior
score distillation-based methods. We also show that our
method can be seamlessly incorporated into any other VSDbased text-to-3D framework.

it requires a high level of expertise. Therefore, automating
this process with generative models has become an important problem [12], while remaining non-trivial due to the
scarcity of data and complexity of 3D representations.
Score distillation has emerged as an attractive way for
3D generation given textual condition [2, 17, 21, 28, 29]. It
leverages pretrained 2D diffusion models [9, 22] to define
priors to guide the evolution of 3D content without reliance
on annotations. Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [21] is
a seminal work in this line, but it is widely criticized that
its generations suffer from the over-smoothing issue. Variational Score Distillation (VSD) [29] remediates this by introducing an extra model that captures the score of the images rendered from the 3D model to correct the distillation
gradient. However, VSD often requires a lengthy optimization through 3 stages: NeRF generation, geometry refinement, and texture refinement. The outcomes obtained in the
initial stage are often blurry, prone to collapsing, and not
directly applicable [30]. Though existing works begin to
understand and improve SDS [13, 28, 34], there are great
but fewer efforts dedicated to improving the more promising VSD [18, 31].
To identify the root of VSD’s drawback, we conduct a
comprehensive analysis of the interaction between the introduced score model and the 3D model, revealing that adjusting their optimization order can sometimes lead to a considerable enhancement in generation quality. This adjustment allows the score model to look ahead to the current 3D
state, resulting in more accurate and sensible corrections for
the distillation gradient. Yet, naive lookahead VSD can encounter unstable training due to the risk of the score model
overfitting the single 3D particle and sampled camera view.
To address this issue, we formally compare the correction gradients before and after looking ahead and identify two major differences—a linear first-order term and
a high-order one. Upon closer examination, we observe
that the former accommodates subtle semantic information, whereas the latter contains non-trivial high-frequency
noises. Given these findings, we propose to use only the
first-order term for correction, yielding Linearized Looka-

1. Introduction
3D content creation is important for a variety of applications, such as interactive gaming [1, 32], cinematic arts [3],
AR/VR [4, 16], and building simulated environments for
training agents in robotics [26]. However, it is still challenging and expensive to create high-quality 3D assets as
* Corresponding author.

19567

