This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inverse Image-Based Rendering for
Light Field Generation from Single Images
Hyunjun Jung
GIST AI Graduated School

Hae-Gon Jeon
Yonsei University

hyunjun.jung@gm.gist.ac.kr

earboll@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

Ray generator

Generated light field

Outputs

A concept of light-ﬁelds computed from multiple view images on regular grids has proven its beneﬁt for scene representations, and supported realistic renderings of novel
views and photographic effects such as refocusing and shallow depth of ﬁeld. In spite of its effectiveness of light ﬂow
computations, obtaining light ﬁelds requires either computational costs or specialized devices like a bulky camera
setup and a specialized microlens array. In an effort to
broaden its beneﬁt and applicability, in this paper, we propose a novel view synthesis method for light ﬁeld generation from only single images, named inverse image-based
rendering. Unlike previous attempts to implicitly rebuild
3D geometry or to explicitly represent objective scenes, our
method reconstructs light ﬂows in a space from image pixels, which behaves in the opposite way to image-based rendering. To accomplish this, we design a neural rendering
pipeline to render a target ray in an arbitrary viewpoint.
Our neural renderer ﬁrst stores the light ﬂow of source
rays from the input image, then computes the relationships
among them through cross-attention, and ﬁnally predicts
the color of the target ray based on these relationships.
After the rendering pipeline generates the ﬁrst novel view
from a single input image, the generated out-of-view contents are updated to the set of source rays. This procedure
is iteratively performed while ensuring the consistent generation of occluded contents. We demonstrate that our inverse image-based rendering works well with various challenging datasets without any retraining or ﬁnetuning after
once trained on synthetic dataset, and outperforms relevant
state-of-the-art novel view synthesis methods.

1. Introduction
The selective control of focus and shallow depth of ﬁeld
(DoF) have been critical tools of photography. Unfortunately, modern devices such as cell phones have struggled
to reproduce these effects because of their small sensors and
lenses. As a solution to this issue, a concept of 4D light

ሺ‫ݔ‬ǡ ‫ݕ‬ǡ ‫ݑ‬ǡ ‫ݒ‬ሻ

Input

SinMPI

ZeroMVS

NViST

Ours

Figure 1. iIBR enables to generate high ﬁdelity and consistent 4D
light ﬁeld from single image

ﬁelds [1, 33, 34], taking colors and directions of the light
ﬂow in a space, enables to render novel views and photographic effects such as refocusing and shallow depth of
ﬁeld. However, capturing real light ﬁelds requires specialized cameras, and suffers from an inherent trade-offs between spatial and angular resolutions of captured images
because one sensor should take both of them. The inherent
trade-off potentially causes aliasing when we implement the
photographic effects from fewer angular resolutions. Light
ﬁeld angular super-resolutions [9, 18, 19, 23, 58] have been
proposed to mitigate this trade-off, but still need geometrically well-aligned multiple images as input.
Recent advancements in learning-based methods for
novel view synthesis allow us to synthesize angular contents of light ﬁeld. Techniques like NeRF [31] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting [20] facilitate the transformation of photographs of real-world scenes into 3D models by optimizing
the underlying geometry and visual properties. However,
producing highly detailed scenes is still a demanding task
that requires capturing a large number of images. Its inadequate observations can result in models with incorrect
geometry and appearance, leading to unrealistic renderings
from novel viewpoints.

24739

