This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAR3D: Creating High-Quality 3D Assets via Next-Part Prediction
Xuying Zhang1*§ , Yutong Liu3* , Yangguang Li4,5 , Renrui Zhang4 , Yufei Liu6 , Kai Wang1 ,
Wanli Ouyang4,6 , Zhiwei Xiong3 , Peng Gao6 , Qibin Hou1,2† , Ming-Ming Cheng1,2
1

2

VCIP, CS, Nankai University
4

CUHK MMLab

5

NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian

VAST

6

3

USTC

Shanghai AI Lab

Homepage: https://github.com/HVision-NKU/TAR3D

Figure 1. 3D asset gallery generated by the proposed TAR3D model. We employ SyncMVD [42] as the texture synthesizer.

1. Introduction

Abstract
We present TAR3D, a novel framework that consists of a
3D-aware Vector Quantized-Variational AutoEncoder (VQVAE) and a Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) to
generate high-quality 3D assets. The core insight of this
work is to migrate the multimodal unification and promising
learning capabilities of the next-token prediction paradigm
to conditional 3D object generation. To achieve this, the
3D VQ-VAE first encodes a wide range of 3D shapes
into a compact triplane latent space and utilizes a set of
discrete representations from a trainable codebook to reconstruct fine-grained geometries under the supervision of
query point occupancy. Then, the 3D GPT, equipped with
a custom triplane position embedding called TriPE, predicts the codebook index sequence with prefilling prompt
tokens in an autoregressive manner so that the composition
of 3D geometries can be modeled part by part. Extensive
experiments on several public 3D datasets demonstrate that
TAR3D can achieve superior generation quality over existing methods in text-to-3D and image-to-3D tasks.
* Equal contribution.

Conditional 3D object generation aims to generate highquality 3D assets that semantically conform to the given
prompts, e.g., 2D images, and text. It has witnessed significant progress with substantial advances in diffusion-based
methods, including Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) optimization [7, 49], multiview synthesis [40, 55, 73], and 3Daware diffusion generation [33, 72, 80]. However, establishing a unified model across various modalities poses huge
challenges due to the different paradigms between diffusion
models and large language models (LLMs) [1, 3, 13, 45].
More recently, pioneering works like MeshGPT [56] and
MeshXL [8] attempt to introduce the autoregressive manner
of LLM into 3D mesh generation. However, they struggle
in a sequence length of 9 times the face number, which is
attributed to their quantization of the vertices of mesh faces.
Such an excessively long sequence length limits their applicability in industrial 3D assets with hundreds of thousands
of faces. This motivates us to investigate whether it is possible to encode a mesh with an arbitrary number of faces
into a fixed-length sequence to alleviate the computational
burden of autoregressive modeling.

† Corresponding author.

§ Work done during the internship at Shanghai AI Lab.

5134

