This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Certifiably Optimal Anisotropic Rotation Averaging
Carl Olsson1
1

Yaroslava Lochman2
Lund University

2

Johan Malmport1

Christopher Zach2

Chalmers University of Technology

Abstract
Rotation averaging is a key subproblem in applications of
computer vision and robotics. Many methods for solving
this problem exist, and there are also several theoretical
results analyzing difficulty and optimality. However, one
aspect that most of these have in common is a focus on
the isotropic setting, where the intrinsic uncertainties in
the measurements are not fully incorporated into the resulting optimization task. Recent empirical results suggest that moving to an anisotropic framework, where these
uncertainties are explicitly included, can result in an improvement of solution quality. However, global optimization for rotation averaging has remained a challenge in
this scenario. In this work we show how anisotropic costs
can be incorporated in certifiably optimal rotation averaging. We also demonstrate how existing solvers, designed for
isotropic situations, fail in the anisotropic setting. Finally,
we propose a stronger relaxation and empirically show that
it recovers global optima in all tested datasets and leads to
more accurate reconstructions in almost all scenes.1

portance of rotation averaging to improve the accuracy and
speed of simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM).
The main difficulty in solving the rotation averaging
problem is that rotations reside in a nonlinear manifold
SO(3). Some approaches [11, 15, 21, 22, 24, 43] address
this challenge by using local optimization over SO(3)n via
explicit parametrizations. These, and other methods of local
optimization all work by moving along descent directions,
which may lead to a global optima in practical and sufficiently “nice” situations. Wilson et al. [47, 48] study when
this occurs, and when local optimization is “hard” due to
the existence of “bad” local minima. They conclude that
this depends on both the measurement noise and on the algebraic connectivity of the graph representing the problem.
More recent methods for solving rotation averaging
problems formulate a non-convex quadratically constrained
quadratic problem (QCQP) and relax it to a semidefinite
program (SDP). The quadratic constraints force the desired
matrices to be orthogonal. The non-quadratic determinant
constraint is often dropped, effectively replacing optimization over SO(3) with one over O(3) [5, 12, 16, 28, 36, 39].
The SDP formulation is a relaxation of the QCQP and results in a strictly less or equal optimal value than the QCQP.
There are, however, several theoretical results [18, 22, 39]
that point to this “gap” often being non-existent, giving a
tight lower bound allowing the recovery of a “certifiably
correct” solution. In [18] an explicit bound depending on
the measurement noise and algebraic connectivity of the
graph is given, in analogy to the local optimization setting.
While the above methods and algorithms are often certifiably correct, they minimize the isotropic chordal distance
and, therefore, ignore the relative rotation uncertainties.
The anisotropic version of the chordal distance allows to
explicitly include uncertainties obtained by local two-view
optimization into the rotation averaging framework. Recent
empirical results such as [51] suggest that accounting for
uncertainties in the optimization could “largely improve reconstruction quality”. Therefore the isotropic assumption
discussed above can be seen as a disadvantage.
In this paper, we develop a certifiably optimal SDPformulation able to optimize the anisotropic chordal distance. In light of the above, this is an improvement of many

1. Introduction
Rotation averaging has been a topic of interest now for some
time, dating back more than two decades, with early work
such as [20]. Govindu’s groundbreaking work has since
been followed up by many others and the study of rotation
averaging is now a very important area.
In large part this is because of the great importance
it has for many problems within computer vision and
robotics. Traditionally, it has been a core component
of non-sequential structure from motion (SfM), see e.g.
[29, 30, 35]. The key strength here is that rotation averaging optimizes the orientations of all the cameras at the same
time, allowing recovery methods to avoid incrementally increasing errors (drift) [14] that easily occur in sequential
SfM methods. More recently, [7, 9, 10] point out the im1 This work was supported by the Wallenberg Artificial Intelligence,

Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP), funded by the Knut
and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, and the Swedish Research Council
(#2023-05341).

14856

