This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLM-assisted Entropy-based Adaptive Distillation for Unsupervised
Fine-grained Visual Representation Learning
Jianfeng Dong1,5 Danfeng Luo1 Daizong Liu2† Jie Sun1,5†
Xiaoye Qu3 Xun Yang4 Dongsheng Liu1,5 Xun Wang1,5
1
Zhejiang Gongshang University, 2 Peking University
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 4 University of Science and Technology of China
5
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data and Future E-Commerce Technology
https://github.com/HuiGuanLab/LEAD
90

Abstract

SOTA
CLIP

80

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Unsupervised Fine-grained Visual Represent Learning
(FVRL) aims to learn discriminative features to distinguish
subtle differences among visually similar categories without using labeled fine-grained data. Existing works, which
typically learn representation from target data, often struggle to capture subtle inter-class variations due to the limited prior fine-grained knowledge. To alleviate it, this paper proposes LLM-assisted Entropy-based Adaptive Distillation (LEAD), a novel unsupervised FVRL framework that
selectively distills fine-grained knowledge from a powerful teacher model built upon pre-trained models. Specifically, we first harness the powerful reasoning capabilities
of Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate contextual
knowledge of fine-grained category-aware descriptions, enriching semantic priors in the teacher model. These descriptions are then used to form a prototype-driven finegrained classifier, which acts as an assistant to generate
rich knowledge with a frozen vision-language model. Besides, to achieve effective knowledge transfer, we further
introduce an entropy-based adaptive mechanism, which dynamically adjusts the distillation strength based on the information entropy to identify and prioritize valuable knowledge. Extensive experimental results on three fine-grained
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
proposed LEAD for unsupervised FVRL.

Ground truth: Pine Grosbeak
Clip's Prediction: Pine Grosbeak

IE: 0.097

70
Ground truth: Elegant Tern
Clip's Prediction: Nighthawk

60

IE: 0.795

50
40

Cub

Car
(a)

Aircraft
(b)

Figure 1. (a) Performance comparisons between the state-of-theart methods (SOTA) [3, 41] and CLIP [37] on the fine-grained image classification, where CLIP shows huge divergences of performance gain on different datasets. (b) We observe that the information entropy (IE) of the predicted category distribution can serve
as a valuable clue for assessing the confidence of the model’s predictions in the unsupervised setting. A lower IE indicates a more
certain prediction, where the model assigns a higher probability to
a single category. Conversely, a higher IE suggests that the prediction model exhibits lower confidence, as the predicted categories
are more evenly distributed.

such as different species of birds [47], and models of vehicle [21]. Compared to general visual representation learning [6, 16], FVRL presents two unique challenges: 1) acquiring and annotating fine-grained data is both costly and
labor-intensive [51], often requiring specialized domain expertise. 2) the task itself is complicated by large intra-class
variations and small inter-class differences [49], which demand high generalization and robustness from the model.
To alleviate the necessity of annotating fine-grained
data, unsupervised representation learning has emerged as
a promising alternative [5, 6, 10, 17, 32, 44], which leverages pretext tasks (e.g. contrastive learning) to derive supervision from the data itself. Recently, we have observed
an increasing trend of integrating unsupervised representation learning with FVRL [3, 42, 48], known as unsupervised

1. Introduction
Fine-grained Visual Representation Learning (FVRL) [8,
9, 15, 43] is a critical task in computer vision that focuses on extracting discriminative features to distinguish
subtle differences among visually similar subcategories,
† Corresponding authors: Daizong Liu and Jie Sun.

383

