This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ODP-Bench: Benchmarking Out-of-Distribution Performance Prediction
Han Yu1,† , Kehan Li1,† , Dongbai Li1 , Yue He2 , Xingxuan Zhang1 , Peng Cui1,∗
1
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China
yuh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lkh20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, ldb22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
hy865865@gmail.com, xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

1.0

Abstract

ATC
Nuclear Norm
DOC
NI
MaNo

0.8

Rank Correlation

Recently, there has been gradually more attention paid to
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) performance prediction, whose
goal is to predict the performance of trained models on unlabeled OOD test datasets, so that we could better leverage
and deploy off-the-shelf trained models in risk-sensitive scenarios. Although progress has been made in this area, evaluation protocols in previous literature are inconsistent, and
most works cover only a limited number of real-world OOD
datasets and types of distribution shifts. To provide convenient and fair comparisons for various algorithms, we propose Out-of-Distribution Performance Prediction Benchmark (ODP-Bench), a comprehensive benchmark that includes most commonly used OOD datasets and existing
practical performance prediction algorithms. We provide
our trained models as a testbench for future researchers,
thus guaranteeing the consistency of comparison and avoiding the burden of repeating the model training process. Furthermore, we also conduct in-depth experimental analyses
to better understand their capability boundary.

Dispersion
Agreement
COT
COTT

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Synthetic

Shift Type

Natural

Figure 1. Rank correlation between predicted scores and ground
truth performances. We can see that most of current algorithms do
well in synthetic corruptions, but generally fail in natural shifts.

els, including invariant learning [2, 20, 51], domain generalization [11, 40, 66], distributionally robust optimization [28, 76, 85], stable learning [21, 94, 102], etc. Nevertheless, none of these algorithms could substantially improve the OOD performance [31, 42] and learn trustworthy
models that can be deployed under risk-sensitive scenarios.
Instead of developing algorithms and training new models to improve the OOD generalization ability, with a
tremendous number of off-the-shelf trained models nowadays, it is efficient and meaningful to directly leverage them
by taking a look at the other side of the coin [95]: Given
trained models, we aim to predict their performance on unlabeled OOD datasets, i.e. OOD performance prediction.
With successful performance prediction, we could safely
apply models to their well-performing scenarios and use
them with caution in their poorly-performing scenarios, e.g.
simply avoiding their usage or cooperating with humans in
such scenarios. Meanwhile, we could conduct model selection from a pool of models when facing unseen environments. Therefore, we could broaden the application of offthe-shelf deep learning models in risk-sensitive areas.
Recently, more attention has been paid to the area of

1. Introduction
Although deep learning has achieved significant progress in
many applications [1, 10, 55, 83], their performance heavily relies on the assumption that test data follows the same
distribution as training data does, known as the I.I.D. assumption. Yet in wild environments, such an assumption
can be easily violated and models are likely to encounter
severe performance degradation in the face of distribution
shifts [74], which severely hinders applications of deep
learning models in risk-sensitive areas like autonomous
driving [13] and medical imaging [92]. In recent years,
there have been many algorithms proposed to improve the
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization ability of mod†Equal contribution, *Corresponding author

1846

