This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Constraint Generation with Design Intent in Parametric CAD
Evan Casey
Tianyu Zhang
Shu Ishida
John Roger Thompson
Amir Khasahmadi
Joseph George Lambourne
Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman
Karl D.D. Willis
Autodesk Research

A

B

C

+1

-1

+0.8

A B C

Constraint Solver
Scoring

+1.2

Unconstrained Sketches

Under Constrained

Curve Types
Original Curve
Fully Constrained Curve
Potential Distortion

Fully Constrained

-0.8 +

0.9

A' B' C'

A'

B'

C'

Figure 1. Left: a constraint solver is used to score model generated constraints A, B, C ∼ πbase (and A′ , B′ , C′ ∼ πaligned ). Starting with the
base model πbase , we post-train an aligned model πaligned from this feedback. Right: Blue lines show original primitives and gray lines show
geometric distortion when dimensions vary. The aligned model πaligned produces fully-constrained sketches that preserve relative geometric
relationships, whereas the base model πbase produces under-constrained sketches that may distort the geometry in unintended ways.

Abstract

stage for further research bridging alignment strategies between the language and design domains. Additional results
can be found at https://autodeskailab.github.
io/aligning-constraint-generation/.

We adapt alignment techniques from reasoning LLMs to
the task of generating engineering sketch constraints found
in computer-aided design (CAD) models. Engineering
sketches consist of geometric primitives (e.g. points, lines)
connected by constraints (e.g. perpendicular, tangent) that
define the relationships between them. For a design to
be easily editable, the constraints must effectively capture
design intent, ensuring the geometry updates predictably
when parameters change. Although current approaches
can generate CAD designs, an open challenge remains
to align model outputs with design intent, we label this
problem ‘design alignment’. A critical first step towards
aligning generative CAD models is to generate constraints
which fully-constrain all geometric primitives, without
over-constraining or distorting sketch geometry. Using
alignment techniques to train an existing constraint generation model with feedback from a constraint solver, we are
able to fully-constrain 93% of sketches compared to 34%
when using a naı̈ve supervised fine-tuning (SFT) baseline
and only 8.9% without SFT. Our approach can be applied
to any existing constraint generation model and sets the

1. Introduction
A central challenge in artificial intelligence (AI) is alignment: ensuring that AI systems produce outputs that adhere
to human goals and expectations [11, 26, 30]. Although
alignment of language models has been researched extensively [26, 28, 35], the application of alignment techniques
to parametric design problems has yet to be studied. The use
of AI in this discipline covers a broad range of areas, ranging from floor-plan layout [24, 34], to engineering design
problems [9, 29, 41], to 3D generation [44]. Design problems are often visual in nature and incorporate other functional requirements, making them unique when compared
with language model alignment. In this paper, we establish the problem of design alignment and demonstrate how
this expansive problem can be made tractable by adapting
techniques from the alignment literature into a new context.
In language models, alignment is achieved by incorpo-

8613

