This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Source Image is the Best Attention for Infrared and Visible Image Fusion
Song Wang Xie Han Liqun Kuang* Boying Wang Zhongyu Chen
Zherui Qiao Fan Yang Xiaoxia Liu Bingyu Zhang Zhixun Wang
School of Computer Science and Technology, North University of China, Taiyuan 030051, China
Shanxi Key Laboratory of Machine Vision & Virtual Reality, Taiyuan 030051, China
Shanxi Vision Information Processing and Intelligent Robot Engineering Research Center, Taiyuan 030051, China
b20230704@st.nuc.edu.cn, kuang@nuc.edu.cn

Abstract
Infrared and visible image fusion (IVF) endeavors to
engineer composite outputs by blending optimal virtues
of divergent modalities. This paper reveals, unprecedentedly, the intrinsic “attention properties” of infrared images,
which directly arise from their physical characteristics (i.e.,
heat distribution) and can be linked to attention mechanisms naturally, as observed in the gradient-weighted class
activation mapping (Grad-CAM) visualization analysis of
image classification models. To incorporate this property
into IVF for better fusion, we propose the source infrared
cross attention (I-SCA) and further extend it to the visible modality, subsequently introducing the source visible
cross attention (V-SCA). The joint use of I-SCA and V-SCA
greatly alleviate longstanding issues, such as insufficient
and incomplete multimodal feature interaction and fusion,
in IVF. Moreover, an auxiliary component for I-SCA and VSCA, termed CBSM, is employed to boost the channel, map
space, and suppress redundancy and misleading information of the source images. Specifically, we directly treat the
CBSM-processed raw image as the query, while the intermediate features of another modality are treated as keys and
values in I-SCA and V-SCA. Unlike attention mechanisms
that divide images into patches or limit computations to local windows, our cross attention modules achieve smoother
and more robust IVF through true global modeling across
the entire image space with linear complexity. Comparison with current SOTA methods on three popular public
datasets confirms its superiority.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a, b) Grad-CAM visualization results for two images
(00022004, 00028021), both labeled as “dog”, predicted by the final layer of ResNet-50 on the ImageNet validation set. The color
gradient from red to blue indicates the decreasing level of attention
paid by the model to different regions. (c) An infrared image example (00519D) consists of highlighted thermal radiation regions
and remaining ordinary regions from the MSRS dataset. (d) Visible image of the same scene corresponding to subplot (c). (e) Subplot (c) is displayed by applying the Jet colormap. (f) The negative
transformation of subplot (c) is visualized with the Jet colormap.

IVF, a bedrock of image processing, with the objective
of engendering a composite that encapsulates the considerable thermal radiation from infrared and the intricacies de-

tail from visible. Prior to the surge in deep learning, this
process was typically achieved by traditional algorithms in
spatial and transform domains [11]. However, thanks to the
development of neural networks and attention mechanisms,
heuristic algorithms have become more widely adopted.
In this paper, we draw inspiration from the Grad-CAM

* Corresponding author

13513

