This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLOAT: Generative Motion Latent Flow Matching for Audio-driven Talking
Portrait
Taekyung Ki1⋆

Dongchan Min1
1

KAIST

2

Gyeongsu Chae2

DeepBrain AI Inc.

{taekyung.ki, alsehdcks95}@kaist.ac.kr

gc@deepbrain.io

https://deepbrainai-research.github.io/float/

Source Image

Generated Talking Portrait Videos

[Emotional] Audio

FLOAT
Speech2Emotion

Figure 1. FLOAT can generate a talking portrait video from a single source image and audio where the talking motion is generated by the
motion latent flow matching. It can enhance the emotion-related talking motion by leveraging speech-driven emotion labels, a natural way
of emotion-aware motion control.

1. Introduction

Abstract
With the rapid advancement of diffusion-based generative
models, portrait image animation has achieved remarkable
results. However, it still faces challenges in temporally consistent video generation and fast sampling due to its iterative sampling nature. This paper presents FLOAT, an audiodriven talking portrait video generation method based on
flow matching generative model. Instead of a pixel-based
latent space, we take advantage of a learned orthogonal
motion latent space, enabling efficient generation and editing of temporally consistent motion. To achieve this, we introduce a transformer-based vector field predictor with an
effective frame-wise conditioning mechanism. Additionally,
our method supports speech-driven emotion enhancement,
enabling a natural incorporation of expressive motions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art audio-driven talking portrait methods
in terms of visual quality, motion fidelity, and efficiency.
⋆ This work was done during South Korea Mandatory Military Service
at DeepBrain AI Inc.

Animating a single image using a driving audio (i.e., audiodriven talking portrait generation) has gained significant attention in recent years for its great potential in avatar creation, video conferencing, virtual avatar chat, and userfriendly customer service. It aims to synthesize natural talking motion from audio signals, including accurate lip synchronization, rhythmical head movements, and fine-grained
facial expressions. However, generating such motion solely
from audio is extremely challenging due to its one-to-many
correlation between audio and motion. In the earlier stage
of this field, many works [8, 19, 28, 47, 51, 86] focus on
generating accurate lip movements by relying on learned
audio-lip alignment losses [9, 45].
To comprehensively extend the range of motion, some
works [45, 66, 84] incorporate probabilistic generative
models, such as VAE [29] and normalizing flow [53], turning the motion generation into probabilistic sampling. However, these models still lack expressiveness in generated motion due to the limited capacity of these generative models.
Recent talking portrait generation methods [7, 21, 26, 36,

14699

