This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EasyControl: Adding Efficient and Flexible Control for Diffusion Transformer
Yuxuan Zhang1 * Yirui Yuan2 * Yiren Song3 Haofan Wang4 Jiaming Liu5†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 ShanghaiTech University,
3
National University of Singapore, 4 Liblib AI, 5 Alibaba group
yxzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, yuanyr2023@shanghaitech.edu.cn, yiren@nus.edu.sg,
haofanwang.ai@gmail.com, jmliu1217@gmail.com

Figure 1. Our proposed framework, EasyControl, is a lightweight and efficient plug-and-play module specifically designed for diffusion
transformer. This solution not only enables spatial control and subject/face control under single conditions but also demonstrates remarkable zero-shot multi-condition generalization capability after single-condition training, achieving sophisticated multi-condition control.

Abstract
Recent advancements in Unet-based diffusion models, such
as ControlNet and IP-Adapter, have introduced effective
spatial and subject control mechanisms. However, the DiT
(Diffusion Transformer) architecture still struggles with efficient and flexible control. To tackle this issue, we propose EasyControl, a novel framework designed to unify
condition-guided diffusion transformers with high efficiency

and flexibility. Our framework is built on three key innovations. First, we introduce a lightweight Condition Injection
LoRA Module. This module processes conditional signals
in isolation, acting as a plug-and-play solution. It avoids
modifying the base model’s weights, ensuring compatibility
with customized models and enabling the flexible injection
of diverse conditions. Notably, this module also supports
harmonious and robust zero-shot multi-condition generalization, even when trained only on single-condition data.
Second, we propose a Position-Aware Training Paradigm.
This approach standardizes input conditions to fixed reso-

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

19513

