This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clink! Chop! Thud! – Learning Object Sounds from Real-World Interactions
Mengyu Yang1
1

Yiming Chen1
Haozheng Pei1
Siddhant Agarwal1
Arun Balajee Vasudevan2
James Hays1
2

Georgia Institute of Technology

Carnegie Mellon University

Project Page: https://clink-chop-thud.github.io/

Which objects are sounding
in this interaction?
Figure 1. Humans handle a wide variety of objects throughout the day and many of these interactions produce sounds. We introduce
a multimodal object-aware framework that learns the relationship between the objects in an interaction and the resulting sounds. This
enables our model to detect the sounding objects from a set of candidates in a scene.

Abstract

1. Introduction

the knife hits the chopping board. Humans can listen to the
unique sounds of these object interactions and make crossmodal inferences about the objects involved. After hearing
a sound, we can look at a visual scene and latch onto its
focal region. For example, if we hear the sound of oil sizzling, we do not first look at the sink next to the stove but
instead direct our attention to the person stirring food in a
pan. This is a biological phenomenon where humans perceive their surroundings by concentrating on key regions
in a scene [19, 37]. While humans excel at distinguishing these sounds, current learning methods face challenges.
Unlike the typical video datasets used in multimodal training [4, 8, 15], which feature predefined sound categories
(e.g. vehicles, animals), differentiating the impact sound
caused by different materials is more subtle. This shortcoming is compounded by vision frameworks relying on global
features that take the whole scene as input [3, 5, 25, 41].
Meanwhile, understanding object interactions requires a localized, object-centric approach.

Humans interact with many physical objects throughout the
day. Oftentimes, interacting with an object results in a distinct sound that provides informative cues about that action
and the objects involved. The sound produced when a knife
cuts through an onion is distinct from the sound made when

We evaluate a model’s understanding of the relationship
between object interactions and sound by proposing the
sounding object detection task. Given a set of object regions present in a scene and the sound of an interaction, the
model predicts which object is directly involved in produc-

Can a model distinguish between the sound of a spoon hitting a hardwood floor versus a carpeted one? Everyday
object interactions produce sounds unique to the objects involved. We introduce the sounding object detection task to
evaluate a model’s ability to link these sounds to the objects
directly involved. Inspired by human perception, our multimodal object-aware framework learns from in-the-wild egocentric videos. To encourage an object-centric approach,
we first develop an automatic pipeline to compute segmentation masks of the objects involved to guide the model’s
focus during training towards the most informative regions
of the interaction. A slot attention visual encoder is used to
further enforce an object prior. We demonstrate state of the
art performance on our new task along with existing multimodal action understanding tasks.

14549

