This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceCraft4D: Animated 3D Facial Avatar Generation from a Single Image
Fei Yin1,2 , Mallikarjun B R2 , Chun-Han Yao2 , Rafał K. Mantiuk1†, Varun Jampani2†,
1
University of Cambridge, 2 Stability AI

Abstract
We present a novel framework for generating highquality, animatable 4D avatar from a single image. While
recent advances have shown promising results in 4D avatar
creation, existing methods either require extensive multiview data or struggle with shape accuracy and identity consistency. To address these limitations, we propose a comprehensive system that leverages shape, image, and video
priors to create full-view, animatable avatars. Our approach first obtains initial coarse shape through 3D-GAN
inversion. Then, it enhances multiview textures using depthguided warping signals for cross-view consistency with the
help of the image diffusion model. To handle expression
animation, we incorporate a video prior with synchronized
driving signals across viewpoints. We further introduce a
Consistent-Inconsistent training to effectively handle data
inconsistencies during 4D reconstruction. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves superior quality compared to the prior art, while maintaining consistency
across different viewpoints and expressions.

Single Image Input

Figure 1. Given a single image input, our method is capable
of generating 4D avatars, producing photorealistic textures and
consistent expressions across multiple views. Our approach also
demonstrates robust performance on challenging inputs, including
cartoon characters or old photographs.

1. Introduction

for constructing a complete 3D model. A single image cannot provide information about the unseen parts of a person’s
head or capture dynamic aspects like facial expressions. It
is also impractical to train an end-to-end model due to the
lack of multiview full-head animation datasets. To address
these challenges, the system needs to rely on prior knowledge, like shape and expression.
Existing single-image avatar generation methods come
with many shortcomings, which we summarize in Tab. 1.
The works that rely on a single image of novel identity at
test time, typically utilize large-scale, unstructured 2D images [1] and videos [7, 39] during training to account for
multiview and temporal aspects. Due to the practical challenges in collecting multiview full-head animation datasets,
most single-image methods, including recent work [35],
cannot reconstruct a complete 360-degree view of the head.
While some approaches can generate full views [1, 40],
they typically lack the ability to model facial expressions.
Among methods that can animate, some methods rely solely
on 2D representation [39], which makes these methods
multi-view inconsistent by design. To overcome the above
limitation, some methods rely on a hybrid representation

4D Avatar generation aims to create animatable 3D head
avatars, enabling the generation of consistent identities with
custom viewpoints and expressions. High-quality 4D heads
have significant applications in gaming, education, and film
industries. However, existing 4D avatar building methods [18, 23, 27, 36] often require extensive inputs, such as
multiview video with camera pose estimation, which is impractical for widespread use. Furthermore, these methods
struggle to produce realistic results for extreme viewpoints
and expression changes due to data scarcity, for instance the
back view of the head.
The goal of this work is to create a 4D facial avatar from
just a single image. This task is challenging because a single image provides limited information, missing essential
details like depth and multiple viewpoints that are crucial
† Equal advising.
* No biometric data was used to train, validate, or evaluate the model
described in this work.

11612

