This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Textualization for Image Prompted Object Detection
Yongjian Wu1 * Yang Zhou1 * Jiya Saiyin1 Bingzheng Wei2 Yan Xu 1†
1
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University
2
ByteDance Inc.
{wuyongjian,zhouyangbme}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose VisTex-OVLM, a novel image prompted object
detection method that introduces visual textualization —– a
process that projects a few visual exemplars into the text feature space to enhance Object-level Vision-Language Models’
(OVLMs) capability in detecting rare categories that are difficult to describe textually and nearly absent from their pretraining data, while preserving their pre-trained object-text
alignment. Specifically, VisTex-OVLM leverages multi-scale
textualizing blocks and a multi-stage fusion strategy to integrate visual information from visual exemplars, generating
textualized visual tokens that effectively guide OVLMs alongside text prompts. Unlike previous methods, our method
maintains the original architecture of OVLM, maintaining
its generalization capabilities while enhancing performance
in few-shot settings. VisTex-OVLM demonstrates superior
performance across open-set datasets which have minimal
overlap with OVLM’s pre-training data and achieves stateof-the-art results on few-shot benchmarks PASCAL VOC and
MSCOCO. The code will be released at VisTex-OVLM.

1. Introduction
Recently, vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated exceptional generalization in CV by pre-training on
extensive image-text pairs, allowing zero-shot transfer via
natural language prompts and inspiring new approaches for
object detection [15, 17, 19, 30, 52, 58]. Among VLMs,
object-level VLMs (OVLMs) [5, 31, 33], represented by
GLIP [31], achieve better object-text alignment. OVLMs
are pre-trained with extensive object detection and phrase
grounding data, featuring multi-stage and multi-scale encoders to enhance object-text alignment beyond general
VLMs. Furthermore, OVLMs commonly employ a multistage encoding structure based on cross-attention, allowing text prompts to actively guide object feature represen* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

xuyan04@gmail.com

tation and location regression. These characteristics enable
OVLMs to surpass conventional VLMs like CLIP [42] in
zero-shot transfer for downstream object detection tasks.
However, OVLM’s zero-shot object detection (ZSOD)
has intrinsic limitations. First, many objects in downstream
tasks are underrepresented in the pre-training data, leading
to suboptimal zero-shot transfer performance. Second, text
prompts often lack sufficient description granularity, resulting in semantic bias and omissions. Third, fine-grained
objects share similar descriptions in the text space, making it
difficult to distinguish them using text alone [7, 53]. These
challenges make introducing new visual information from
downstream tasks essential for improving OVLM’s transfer ability. One solution is to leverage visual exemplars for
fine-tuning, which also refers to few-shot object detection
(FSOD) [3, 17, 22, 40, 45]. For example, some VLM-based
object detection methods incorporate few-shot visual exemplars information by fine-tuning original weights or adding
processing structures. However, these approaches risk disrupting the OVLM’s original object-text alignment and harm
its generalization capabilities.
To illustrate this, without loss of generality, we conducted
an empirical analysis by transferring GLIP, pre-trained on
Object365 [44], to MSCOCO [32] using various common
transfer methods. Post-transfer, we computed the cosine
similarity between paired text and object features from Object365 (Fig. 1). Results revealed that any modification in
model structure or weights (methods 2-4) with limited transfer data skewed the object-text similarity distribution in the
source domain, partially degrading alignment. This raises
the question: can we introduce the semantics of a few visual
exemplars while preventing the limited target training data
from disrupting OVLM’s object-text alignment?
Using images as prompts, i.e., image prompting [36, 53],
to provide semantic guidance alongside text prompts may address the question above. However, most OVLMs [5, 31, 33]
are text-prompt-exclusive, lacking native support for image
prompting due to architectural incompatibilities. MQ-Det
[53] is the first to integrate visual exemplars into OVLM’s
prompting process by adding extra trainable cross-attention

20900

