This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency Domain-Based Diffusion Model for Unpaired Image Dehazing
Chengxu Liu1
Lu Qi2,3
Jinshan Pan4
Xueming Qian1
Ming-Hsuan Yang5
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Wuhan University
3
Insta360 4 Nanjing University of Science and Technology 5 University of California, Merced

FrDiff

Abstract

(Ours)

ODCR

Unpaired image dehazing has attracted increasing attention due to its flexible data requirements during model
training. Dominant methods based on contrastive learning not only introduce haze-unrelated content information,
but also ignore haze-specific properties in the frequency domain (i.e., haze-related degradation is mainly manifested
in the amplitude spectrum). To address these issues, we
propose a novel frequency domain-based diffusion model,
named FrDiff, for fully exploiting the beneficial knowledge
in unpaired clear data. In particular, inspired by the strong
generative ability shown by Diffusion Models (DMs), we
tackle the dehazing task from the perspective of frequency
domain reconstruction and perform the DMs to yield the
amplitude spectrum consistent with the distribution of clear
images. To implement it, we propose an Amplitude Residual
Encoder (ARE) to extract the amplitude residuals, which effectively compensates for the amplitude gap from the hazy
to clear domains, as well as provide supervision for the
DMs training. In addition, we propose a Phase Correction Module (PCM) to eliminate artifacts by further refining
the phase spectrum during dehazing with a simple attention mechanism. Experimental results demonstrate that our
FrDiff outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on both
synthetic and real-world datasets.

(CVPR24)

CDD-GAN

RefineDNet

PSNR (dB)

(ECCV22)

(TIP21)

UCL

(TIP24)

CycleGAN
(ICCV17)

CycleDehaze
(CVPRW18)

#Params

CUT

(ECCV20)

5M

10M

20M

FLOPs (G)

Figure 1. Comparison of performance, FLOPs, and parameters
with state-of-the-art methods on the SOTS-Indoor dataset [27].
Notably, FrDiff is the first work to apply the diffusion model to
the unpaired image dehazing task. Better viewed in color.

mainly on developing supervised models using synthetic
paired hazy-clear data [12, 33, 41, 43, 61, 63]. Among
them, the finding that the illuminance contrast (e.g., haze)
is manifested by the amplitude spectrum [38, 47] shows
great potential in haze removal through the frequency domain [29, 40, 61] (illustrated by Fig. 2(a), please refer to
the supplementary for detailed statistical analyses). Nevertheless, the large domain gap between synthetic haze and
realistic haze limits its generalization ability in real-world
scenarios [59]. Moreover, acquiring paired hazy-clear data
is prohibitively expensive and time-consuming.
To tackle these problems, an increasing number of unpaired image dehazing methods have emerged. Among
these, CycleGAN-like methods [14, 32, 40, 59] attempt to
establish a cyclic transformation between the hazy and clear
domains. Unfortunately, the diversity in haze intensity often
leads to asymmetric domain knowledge. Such a bijective relationship between the two domains can lead to sub-optimal
performance [39]. Additionally, some methods inspired by
contrastive learning [6, 39, 52, 53] focus on maximizing
the mutual information between the dehazed output and the

1. Introduction
Haze is an often-occurring atmospheric phenomenon
caused by the scattering effect of aerosol particles, such as
dust, smoke, and others. It usually leads to scene radiative
attenuation, producing a severe degradation of visual content [18]. Image dehazing can be applied to improve the
performance of subsequent high-level vision tasks [30, 45].
To remove the haze, conventional methods manually designed image priors based on the atmospheric scattering
model [37] or observations [2, 3, 17, 18, 67]. However,
these hand-crafted priors struggled to accurately model
the intrinsic features of haze and often lacked robustness
and reliability. Recent deep learning-based methods focus

7538

