This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-Expert Consistency Model for Efficient and High-Quality Video Generation
Zhengyao Lv2,3→ Chenyang Si1‡→ Tianlin Pan1,4 Zhaoxi Chen5
Kwan-Yee K. Wong2 Yu Qiao3 Ziwei Liu5†
1

Nanjing University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
cszy98@gmail.com

chenyang.si@nju.edu.cn
kykwong@cs.hku.hk

pantianlin23@mails.ucas.ac.cn

yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn

ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

DCM-4

PCM-4

LCM-4

Hunyuan

zhaoxi001@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1. Comparison of visual results between our DCM (4 steps), the original HunyuanVideo, and other competing methods (left).
Comparison of latency and VBench score across different methods (right). Latency is measured on two A100 GPUs under the video
synthesis configuration of 129 frames at 1280 → 720 resolution.

Abstract
Diffusion Models have achieved remarkable results in video
synthesis but require iterative denoising steps, leading to
substantial computational overhead. Consistency Models
have made significant progress in accelerating diffusion
models. However, directly applying them to video diffusion models often results in severe degradation of temporal consistency and appearance details. In this paper,
by analyzing the training dynamics of Consistency Models, we identify a key conflicting learning dynamics during the distillation process: there is a significant discrepancy in the optimization gradients and loss contributions across different timesteps. This discrepancy prevents the distilled student model from achieving an optimal state, leading to compromised temporal consistency
and degraded appearance details. To address this issue,
we propose a parameter-efficient Dual-Expert Consistency
Model (DCM), where a semantic expert focuses on learn-

ing semantic layout and motion, while a detail expert specializes in fine detail refinement. Furthermore, we introduce Temporal Coherence Loss to improve motion consistency for the semantic expert and apply GAN and Feature
Matching Loss to enhance the synthesis quality of the detail
expert. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art visual quality with significantly reduced sampling steps, demonstrating
the effectiveness of expert specialization in video diffusion
model distillation. Our code and models are available at
https://github.com/Vchitect/DCM.

1. Introduction

*Equal Contribution. ‡ Project Leader † Corresponding Author.

Diffusion Models [8] have achieved remarkable progress in
image and video synthesis [45, 48, 63]. However, they require multiple iterations to model the probability flow Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) [52] and rely on increasingly large denoising networks, resulting in substantial computational overhead that limits their practicality in
real-world applications.
To mitigate this constraint, Consistency Distillation [54]

14983

