This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End Entity-Predicate Association Reasoning for Dynamic Scene Graph
Generation
Liwei Wang1 , Yanduo Zhang1,2 , Tao Lu1 , Fang Liu1 ,
Huiqin Zhang1 , Jiayi Ma3 , Huabing Zhou1
1
Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robot, Wuhan Institute of Technology
2
Hubei University of Arts and Science 3 Wuhan University
wlw951226@163.com, {ydzhang,lut}@wit.edu.cn,
{fangliu8822,666zhanghuiqin,jyma2010,Zhouhuabing}@gmail.com

Dynamic Scene Graph Generation (DSGG) aims to comprehensively understand videos by abstracting them into
visual triplets <subject, predicate, object>. Most existing methods focus on capturing temporal dependencies,
but overlook crucial visual relationship dependencies between entities and predicates, as well as among predicate subclasses. These dependencies are essential for a
deeper contextual understanding of scenarios. Additionally, current approaches do not support end-to-end training and instead rely on a two-stage pipeline, which incurs higher computational costs. To address these issues,
we propose an end-to-end Association Reasoning Network
(ARN) for DSGG. ARN leverages CLIP’s semantic priors to model ﬁne-grained triplet cues to generate scene
graph. In addition, we design a Predicate Association Parsing (PAP) module that employs a conditional weight mapping mechanism to structure entity and predicate representations. We further introduce a Hierarchical Attention
(HA) mechanism to integrate spatio-temporal context with
entity and predicate representations, enabling effective associative reasoning. Extensive experiments on the Action
Genome dataset demonstrate signiﬁcant performance improvements over existing methods. The source code is available in https://github.com/wlw951226/ARN.

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation is a promising approach to scene
understanding and has emerged as a frontier topic. Dynamic
Scene Graph Generation (DSGG) advances this by capturing dynamic visual relationships in videos, contributing to a
comprehensive understanding of video content. DSGG has
 Corresponding authors.

looking at

Not looking at
in front of

in front of

looking at
in front of

predicate

Abstract

notebook

holding

Writing on
entity

(a) The correlation matrix between predicates and entities

(b) The correlation matrix between predicates

Predicate: looking at
in front of
writing on

person

notebook

notebook

(c) Association Reasoning Network

Figure 1. (a) The association frequency matrix between entities
and predicates in the dataset [13]; (b) the association frequency
matrix between predicate subclasses, where the vertical axis represents the pairwise combinations of two predicate subclasses; (c)
an example and the pipeline of our associative reasoning network.

also opened up new possibilities in areas such as video analysis [9, 18, 42], video captioning [12, 38], and video question answering [5, 43], enabling computers to better simulate human perception and cognitive processes in real-world
scenarios.
Dynamic scene graphs encode implicitly co-occurrences
and affordance relations among entities and predicates. We
analyze the frequency co-occurrence of predicates and entities in the Action Genome [13] dataset. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), there is a strong association between certain predicates and entities; for instance, the predicate “writing on”
often implies that the object is a notebook. Similarly, when
the object is a notebook, it is likely in front of a person
who is looking at it. Fig. 1(b) highlights the association be-

17729

