This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Referring Expression Comprehension for Small Objects
Kanoko Goto1 * Takumi Hirose1 * Mahiro Ukai1
1

2

Institute of Science Tokyo
Project Page:

Shuhei Kurita2,1

Nakamasa Inoue1

National Institute of Informatics

https://github.com/mmaiLab/sorec

Abstract
Referring expression comprehension (REC) aims to localize
the target object described by a natural language expression. Recent advances in vision-language learning have
led to significant performance improvements in REC tasks.
However, localizing extremely small objects remains a considerable challenge despite its importance in real-world applications such as autonomous driving. To address this
issue, we introduce a novel dataset and method for REC
targeting small objects. First, we present the small object
REC (SOREC) dataset, which consists of 100,000 pairs of
referring expressions and corresponding bounding boxes
for small objects in driving scenarios. Second, we propose the progressive-iterative zooming adapter (PIZA), an
adapter module for parameter-efficient fine-tuning that enables models to progressively zoom in and localize small
objects. In a series of experiments, we apply PIZA to
GroundingDINO and demonstrate a significant improvement in accuracy on the SOREC dataset. Our dataset, codes
and pre-trained models are publicly available on the project
page.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The SOREC dataset consists of pairs of referring expressions and bounding boxes for extremely small objects. (a) Existing approach fine-tunes a model F to localize the target. (b) Our
approach fine-tunes F to progressively zoom in and localize the
target in an autoregressive manner. (c) Example of prediction in
three zooming steps.

Object localization in images has been a long-term research topic in the field of computer vision. Early studies introduced image datasets such as Pascal VOC [14] and
COCO [39], which involve bounding box annotations for
predefined object categories, leading to the development
of object detection models including CNN-based models [15, 16, 19, 60] and Transformer-based models [1, 21,
29, 41, 50, 64, 82, 85, 92]. For more detailed and flexible object localization, referring expression comprehension
(REC) aims to localize a specific object referred to by a
natural language description. REC uses queries like “the
red car parked in front of the coffee shop” as input and requires locating this unique object in an input image. Ref* Equal contribution

COCO, RefCOCO+ and RefCOCOg [53, 78] are the most
popular datasets for REC, providing referring expressions
for images in the COCO dataset along with Flickr30K entities [57]. Over the past decade, deep learning architectures
that bridge visual contents and natural language descriptions have been investigated. Examples include one-stage
architectures [38, 48, 62, 75] and two-stage architectures
based on CNN-LSTM [24, 40, 49, 52, 54, 78, 79, 83] and
attention mechanism [8, 12, 25, 43, 48, 66, 80, 94].

21231

