This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CCL-LGS: Contrastive Codebook Learning for 3D Language Gaussian Splatting
Lei Tian1 , Xiaomin Li1 , Liqian Ma2 , Hao Yin1 , Zirui Zheng1 ,
Hefei Huang1 , Taiqing Li1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Xu Jia1,
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 ZMO AI Inc.

View #2

View #1

View #2

View #1

View #1

View #2

Occlusion

view-dependent variations

Text query: Ottolenghi

Text query: Miffy

Render

2D Feature
Supervision

Text query: Tea in glass

Image Blur

LangSplat

Ours

LangSplat

Ours

LangSplat

Ours

Figure 1. Quantitative comparison of our method and LangSplat under three challenging scenarios: Occlusion, Image Blur, and ViewDependent Variations. The results clearly demonstrate the superior performance of our approach, which exhibits greater robustness and
fidelity in handling these challenges compared to LangSplat.

Abstract

align a set of SAM-generated 2D masks and reliably identify their corresponding categories. Next, we utilize CLIP
to extract robust semantic encodings across views. Finally,
our Contrastive Codebook Learning (CCL) module distills
discriminative semantic features by enforcing intra-class
compactness and inter-class distinctiveness. In contrast
to previous methods that directly apply CLIP to imperfect
masks, our framework explicitly resolves semantic conflicts
while preserving category discriminability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CCL-LGS outperforms previous
state-of-the-art methods. Our project page is available at
https://epsilontl.github.io/CCL-LGS/.

Recent advances in 3D reconstruction techniques and
vision-language models have fueled significant progress
in 3D semantic understanding, a capability critical to
robotics, autonomous driving, and virtual/augmented reality. However, methods that rely on 2D priors are prone to a
critical challenge: cross-view semantic inconsistencies induced by occlusion, image blur, and view-dependent variations. These inconsistencies, when propagated via projection supervision, deteriorate the quality of 3D Gaussian
semantic fields and introduce artifacts in the rendered outputs. To mitigate this limitation, we propose CCL-LGS, a
novel framework that enforces view-consistent semantic supervision by integrating multi-view semantic cues. Specifically, our approach first employs a zero-shot tracker to

1. Introduction
Significant progress has been made in 3D reconstruction, particularly with the advent of 3D Gaussian splatting
(3DGS) [7], which enables the generation of high-fidelity

Corresponding authors.

9855

