This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCORE: Scene Context Matters
in Open-Vocabulary Remote Sensing Instance Segmentation

1

Shiqi Huang1 Shuting He2 Huaiyuan Qin3 Bihan Wen1 *
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
3
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
Abstract

Most existing remote sensing instance segmentation approaches are designed for close-vocabulary prediction,
limiting their ability to recognize novel categories or
generalize across datasets. This restricts their applicability
in diverse Earth observation scenarios. To address this, we
introduce open-vocabulary (OV) learning for remote sensing
instance segmentation. While current OV segmentation
models perform well on natural image datasets, their direct
application to remote sensing faces challenges such as
diverse landscapes, seasonal variations, and the presence
of small or ambiguous objects in aerial imagery. To
overcome these challenges, we propose SCORE (Scene
Context matters in Open-vocabulary REmote sensing instance segmentation), a framework that integrates multigranularity scene context, i.e., regional context and global
context, to enhance both visual and textual representations.
Specifically, we introduce Region-Aware Integration, which
refines class embeddings with regional context to improve
object distinguishability. Additionally, we propose Global
Context Adaptation, which enriches naive text embeddings
with remote sensing global context, creating a more adaptable and expressive linguistic latent space for the classifier.
We establish new benchmarks for OV remote sensing instance
segmentation across diverse datasets. Experimental results
demonstrate that, our proposed method achieves SOTA
performance, which provides a robust solution for largescale, real-world geospatial analysis. Our code is available
at https://github.com/HuangShiqi128/SCORE.

I can hardly tell
if it is a
vehicle or ship.

?
It is a ship! ❌

It is a vehicle! ❌

(a) w/o surrounding environment
With surrounding
environment, I can
tell them easily!

!

pred score for vehicle
pred score for ship

It is a vehicle! ✅
It is a ship! ✅
(b) w/ surrounding environment

Figure 1. The example illustrates how human perception &
model prediction differ (a) without and (b) with the surrounding
environment. Prediction scores are derived from FC-CLIP [63].

66]. It plays a vital role in diverse applications, including
environmental monitoring [16, 43], urban development
[32, 51, 53, 59], and agricultural planning [69, 70]. With the
vast amount of remote sensing data collected from satellites,
drones, and aerial surveys, instance segmentation serves as a
key tool for large-scale geospatial analysis.

1. Introduction

Most existing approaches rely on pixel-wise annotated
datasets to train instance segmentation models [44, 45, 64].
However, manually labeling aerial imagery is both timeconsuming and challenging due to the small, densely
packed, and visually ambiguous nature of instance objects
in remote sensing [17, 58]. Furthermore, these models are
constrained by the training data, limiting their ability to
recognize novel categories or generalize across different
domains. This restricts their applicability in diverse Earth
observation tasks. Open-vocabulary (OV) learning [52, 55,

Instance segmentation is a fundamental task in remote
sensing, aiming to localize aerial objects with pixel-wise
instance masks and category labels [2, 3, 33, 44, 45, 57, 62,
* Corresponding author

12559

