This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CObL: Toward Zero-Shot Ordinal Layering without User Prompting
Aneel Damaraju Dean Hazineh Todd Zickler
Harvard University, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
aneeldamaraju@g.harvard.edu

Figure 1. Our model, CObL, infers a stack of occlusion-ordered object layers that composite back to the image. (Left) We train CObL using
2250 synthetic 3D tabletop scenes created using 3D shapes with generative textures and lighting. (Right) Once trained, CObL generalizes
to captured photographs of tabletops with variable numbers of novel objects. It concurrently generates a stack of amodally-completed
object layers while using inference-time guidance to ensure the layers composite to the input.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Perceptual organization refers to the mechanisms by which
pixels are structured into larger units of perceived objects
and their interrelations [39]. Humans are very good at this,
not only segmenting the visible portions of objects and inferring their figure-ground relationships, but also performing amodal completion to perceive the portions of objects
that are occluded and therefore not visible. Humans can do
this for a wide variety of objects, even when they are unfamiliar, partially camouflaged, and hard to name or describe.

Vision benefits from grouping pixels into objects and understanding their spatial relationships, both laterally and
in depth. We capture this with a scene representation
comprising an occlusion-ordered stack of “object layers,”
each containing an isolated and amodally-completed object. To infer this representation from an image, we introduce a diffusion-based architecture named Concurrent
Object Layers (CObL). CObL generates a stack of object
layers in parallel, using Stable Diffusion as a prior for
natural objects and inference-time guidance to ensure the
inferred layers composite back to the input image. We
train CObL using a few thousand synthetically-generated
images of multi-object tabletop scenes, and we find that it
zero-shot generalizes to photographs of real-world tabletops with varying numbers of novel objects. In contrast
to recent models for amodal object completion, CObL reconstructs multiple occluded objects without user prompting and without knowing the number of objects beforehand.
Unlike previous models for unsupervised object-centric representation learning, CObL is not limited to the world it was
trained in.

We adopt object layers [36] as a computational representation that captures the perceptual organization of an image.
An object layer is a two-dimensional RGBA array (we use
binary alpha channels) that conveys the location and color
values of an object in isolation. When a stack of object layers is ordered according to occlusion relationships, from the
background to the nearest objects, the stack composites to
form an image. See Figure 1.
We suggest using this representation to explore the degree to which computer vision systems can perform zeroshot perceptual organization, where the objects or their categories have not been explicitly shown to the vision system
beforehand. We capture a dataset of tabletop photographs

8154

