This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NATRA: Noise-Agnostic Framework for Trajectory Prediction with Noisy
Observations
Rongqing Li1

Changsheng Li1‡ Ruilin Lv1 Yuhang Li1 Yang Gao2
Xiaolu Zhang3 JUN ZHOU3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Meituan 3 Ant Group
lcs@bit.edu.cn

gaoyang94@meituan.com

3220231454@bit.edu.cn

yueyin.zxl@antfin.com

Abstract

ADE

Trajectory prediction aims to forecast an agent’s future trajectories based on its historical observed trajectories, which is a critical task for various applications such
as autonomous driving, robotics, and surveillance systems.
Most existing trajectory prediction methods assume that the
observed trajectories collected for forecasting are clean.
However, in real-world scenarios, noise is inevitably introduced into the observations, resulting in the collapse of the
existing approaches. Therefore, it is essential to perform
robust trajectory prediction based on noisy observations,
which is a more practical scenario. In this paper, we propose NATRA, a Noise-Agnostic framework capable of tackling the problem of TRAjectory prediction with arbitrary
types of noisy observations. Specifically, we put forward a
mutual information-based mechanism to denoise the original noisy observations. It optimizes the produced trajectories to exhibit a pattern that closely resembles the clean trajectory pattern while deviating from the noisy one. Considering that the trajectory structure may be destroyed through
the only optimization of mutual information, we introduce
an additional reconstruction loss to preserve the structure
information of the produced observed trajectories. Moreover, we further propose a ranking loss to further enhance
the performance. Because NATRA does not rely on any specific module tailored to particular noise distributions, it can
handle arbitrary types of noise in principle. Additionally,
our proposed NATRA can be easily integrated into existing trajectory prediction models. Extensive experiments on
both synthetic and real-world noisy datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

596983629@qq.com

jun.zhoujun@antfin.com

Performance Drop on ETH/UCY (Unit: meters)
0.7

14

0.6

13

GraphTern
EqMotion
SocialVAE
MID

0.4

GraphTern
EqMotion
SocialVAE
MID

11
10

0.3
0.2
0.3

Performance Drop on SDD (Unit: pixels)

12

0.5

ADE

lirongqing99@gmail.com

9
0.4

0.5

FDE

0.6

0.7

0.8

8
13

15

17
FDE

19

21

Figure 1. Performance drop of various trajectory prediction methods, including GraphTern [3], EqMotion [87], SocialVAE [88] and
MID [21], on the ETH/UCY [33, 53] and Stanford Drone datasets
(SDD) [57]. The start of each arrow indicates the performance
under clean observations, while the end represents the degraded
performance under noisy observations (We add Gaussian noise
N (0, σ = 0.4) to the clean observations.). Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction

‡ Corresponding Author

The objective of trajectory prediction is to anticipate the
future trajectories for agents given their past observed trajectories, which is an essential and emerging task in numerous applications, such as autonomous driving [22, 54,
55, 79, 105, 106], drones [15], surveillance systems [76],
and robotics [25, 58]. In recent years, trajectory prediction
has garnered significant attention in the computer vision
and machine learning communities, with numerous methods proposed [4, 5, 11, 12, 14, 81]. Among these methods,
they typically assume the observed historical trajectories are
clean, and leverage them to predict future trajectories. Recent advances have demonstrated promising performance in
trajectory prediction by learning from such clean observed
trajectory data.
However, in real-world scenarios, the observed trajectories are inevitably noisy, often caused by adverse weather
conditions or occlusions [72, 73, 99], which significantly
hinder the performance of existing trajectory prediction
methods. To substantiate this point, we introduce noise into
the historical trajectories of both the training and testing sets

27872

