This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEGS-SLAM: Structure-enhanced 3D Gaussian Splatting SLAM with
Appearance Embedding

1

Tianci Wen1,2 Zhiang Liu1,2 Yongchun Fang1,2 ∗
IRAIS, tjKLIR, College of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nankai University
2
IITRS, Shenzhen Research Institute, Nankai University
https://segs-slam.github.io/

Figure 1. Our method SEGS-SLAM outperforms SOTA methods (GS-ICP SLAM [11], Photo-SLAM [14], SplaTAM [16], MonoGS [26])
in photorealistic mapping quality across monocular, stereo, and RGB-D cameras. The scenes are from TUM RGB-D dataset [34] (the top
row and the left three images in the bottom row) and the EuRoC MAV dataset [2] (the right three images in the bottom row).

e.g., an improvement of 19.86% in PSNR over MonoGS on
the TUM RGB-D dataset for monocular cameras.

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS) has recently revolutionized
novel view synthesis in the simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) problem. However, most existing algorithms fail to fully capture the underlying structure, resulting in structural inconsistency. Additionally, they struggle with abrupt appearance variations, leading to inconsistent visual quality. To address these problems, we propose
SEGS-SLAM, a structure-enhanced 3D Gaussian Splatting
SLAM, which achieves high-quality photorealistic mapping.
Our main contributions are two-fold. First, we propose a
structure-enhanced photorealistic mapping (SEPM) framework that, for the ﬁrst time, leverages highly structured
point cloud to initialize structured 3D Gaussians, leading
to signiﬁcant improvements in rendering quality. Second,
we propose Appearance-from-Motion embedding (AfME),
enabling 3D Gaussians to better model image appearance
variations across different camera poses. Extensive experiments on monocular, stereo, and RGB-D datasets demonstrate that SEGS-SLAM signiﬁcantly outperforms state-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods in photorealistic mapping quality,
∗ Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is
a fundamental problem in 3D computer vision, with wide
applications in autonomous driving, robotics, virtual reality, and augmented reality. SLAM aims to construct dense
or sparse maps to represent the scene. Recently, neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF) [28] has been integrated into SLAM
pipelines, signiﬁcantly enhancing scene representation capabilities. The latest advancement in radiance ﬁeld rendering is 3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS) [17], an explicit
scene representation that achieves revolutionary improvements in rendering and training speed. Recent SLAM
works [11, 13, 14, 16, 19, 26, 29, 41, 42] incorporating
3D-GS have demonstrated that explicit representations provide more promising rendering performance when compared with implicit ones.
However, most SLAM algorithms based on 3D-GS have
neglected the latent structure in the scene, which constrains
their rendering quality. While some methods [11, 13, 16,

28103

