This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Draw Your Mind: Personalized Generation via Condition-Level Modeling in
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Hyungjin Kim, Seokho Ahn, Young-Duk Seo∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Inha University
flslzk@inha.edu, sokho0514@inha.edu, mysid88@inha.ac.kr
∗

Corresponding author

https://github.com/Burf/DrUM

…

User 1

Lantern in deep forest

User 2

Ink wash, Sumi-e,
Monochrome, …

Latent space

User 3

Condition-level modeling

Melancholic,
Purples and Blues, …

User profiling

Beach with angry waves

Target

Personalized
generation

Ancient bridge

Autumn walking trails

Rocky cliffs

Rabbit in flower field

Textured, Vintage,
Rough strokes, …

Comic

Naïve Art

Dark

Cartoon

Sharpie

Historical prompts

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. DrUM personalizes synthesis results on popular foundation T2I models without fine-tuning by incorporating open-source text
encoders. It integrates key preference information such as style, texture within the latent space, effectively satisfying individual demands.
(a) Conceptual illustration of our methodology. (b) Personalized results using multiple prompts on Stable Diffusion V3.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Personalized generation in T2I diffusion models aims to
naturally incorporate individual user preferences into the
generation process with minimal user intervention. However, existing studies primarily rely on prompt-level modeling with large-scale models, often leading to inaccurate
personalization due to the limited input token capacity of
T2I diffusion models. To address these limitations, we propose DrUM, a novel method that integrates user profiling
with a transformer-based adapter to enable personalized
generation through condition-level modeling in the latent
space. DrUM demonstrates strong performance on largescale datasets and seamlessly integrates with open-source
text encoders, making it compatible with widely used foundation T2I models without requiring additional fine-tuning.

17171

Recently, various techniques in text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models, such as fine-tuning, additional conditioning,
editing, and guidance, have been developed. These approaches enable users to exert more direct control over
the generation process beyond prompt engineering, allowing for greater alignment with their intended outcomes [9].
However, they often require substantial computational resources and iterative refinements before achieving results
that accurately reflect user preferences [22, 28].
Personalized generation presents a promising solution to
these limitations by directly integrating individual preferences into the generation process [4, 22, 25, 28, 31]. In
this context, many studies have employed large language
models (LLMs) and multimodal models to generate person-

