This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEGA: A Stepwise Evolution Paradigm for Content-Aware Layout Generation
with Design Prior
Haoran Wang
Baidu Inc.

Bo Zhao †
Nanjing University

brucewang9111@gmail.com

zhaobo20000116@gmail.com

Hanzhang Wang
Harbin Institute of Technology

Huan Yang
Kuaishou Technology

Jinghui Wang
Baidu Inc.

Wei Ji
Nanjing University

Hao Liu
Baidu Inc.

Xinyan Xiao
Baidu Inc.
Background
Image

Task
Instruction
Please
arrange
the layouts
for given
elements.

Coarse-level
Estimator

(c)

(a)
How to correct
the planning
results ?

Please
arrange
the layouts
for given
elements.
Background
Image

Task
Instruction

(b)

1

Fine-level
Refiner

Coarse-level
Estimator
2

Evaluation
Coarse-level Estimation
Fine-level Refinement

1.
2.

Feedback

Element should not overlay
Element should be covered by underlay

Iterative
Rethinking

Evaluation
Current layout is fine

Figure 1. Distinct from traditional methods using single-stage planning model (a), we propose a hierarchical layout generation paradigm
(b) guided by design prior knowledge. Accordingly, our refinement module accepts an initial layout draft from the first stage and iteratively
improves it. The superiority of our method is proven by handling difficult scenes on the Crello dataset (arranging > 8 elements) (c). The
metric in (c) is underlay accuracy which is introduced in the experiment section.

Abstract
In this paper, we study the content-aware layout generation problem, which aims to automatically generate layouts
that are harmonious with a given background image. Existing methods usually deal with this task with a single-step
reasoning framework. The lack of a feedback-based selfcorrection mechanism leads to their failure rates significantly increasing when faced with complex element layout
planning. To address this challenge, we introduce SEGA,
a novel Stepwise Evolution Paradigm for Content-Aware
Layout GenerAtion. Inspired by the systematic mode of

human thinking, SEGA employs a hierarchical reasoning
framework with a coarse-to-fine strategy: first, a coarselevel module roughly estimates the layout planning results;
then, another refining module performs fine-level reasoning regarding the coarse planning results. Furthermore,
we incorporate layout design principles as prior knowledge into the model to enhance its layout planning ability.
Besides, we present GenPoster-100K that is a new largescale poster dataset with rich meta-information annotation.
The experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by achieving the state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmark datasets. Our project page is at: https:
//brucew91.github.io/SEGA.github.io/

† Corresponding author.

19321

