This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MUG: Pseudo Labeling Augmented Audio-Visual Mamba Network for
Audio-Visual Video Parsing
Langyu Wang

Bingke Zhu* Yingying Chen Yiyuan Zhang Ming Tang Jinqiao Wang
Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
1

wangly54321@163.com

{bingke.zhu, yingying.chen, yiyuan.zhang, tangm, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The weakly-supervised audio-visual video parsing (AVVP)
aims to predict all modality-specific events and locate their
temporal boundaries. Despite significant progress, due to
the limitations of the weakly-supervised and the deficiencies of the model architecture, existing methods are lacking in simultaneously improving both the segment-level prediction and the event-level prediction. In this work, we
propose an audio-visual Mamba network with pseudo labeling aUGmentation (MUG) for emphasising the uniqueness of each segment and excluding the noise interference
from the alternate modalities. Specifically, we annotate
some of the pseudo-labels based on previous work. Using
unimodal pseudo-labels, we perform cross-modal random
combinations to generate new data, which can enhance the
model’s ability to parse various segment-level event combinations. For feature processing and interaction, we employ
an audio-visual mamba network. The AV-Mamba enhances
the ability to perceive different segments and excludes additional modal noise while sharing similar modal information. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that MUG improves state-of-the-art results on LLP dataset in all metrics
( e.g., gains of 2.1% and 1.2% in terms of visual Segmentlevel and audio Segment-level metrics). Our code is available at https://github.com/WangLY136/MUG.

(a)

(b)

Fig.1. (a): With only video level label, AVVP requires parsing out visual
events, audio events, and their temporal boundaries. (b): Constrained by
the weakly-supervision learning and the noise in LLP dataset, previous
works fail to learn a large number of event combinations at the segmentlevel, and a large quantity of empty pseudo-labels occur. Meanwhile, the
input tokens are approaching the long sequence threshold of ViT-S [45].

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning is now a crucial field in machine
learning. Many audio-visual tasks such as audio-visual
event localization [33] and audio-visual question answering [38] assume that modalities are aligned and both visual
and audio modalities contain learnable cues. However, in
the real world, audio-visual events are often unaligned, e.g.,
* Corresponding author.

seeing a group of people playing basketball but hearing the
honking of cars on the road. After observing this prevalent
modal mismatch, Tian et al. [34] proposed the audio-visual
video parsing task. The aim of audio-visual video parsing is
to classify video events and localize them according to time
and modality. Due to the laborious labeling process, the
LLP dataset proposed by Tian et al. is only trained using

20637

