This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoMaps: Semantics-Aware Scene Motion Generation with Motion Maps
Jiahui Lei1,2 Kyle Genova1 George Kopanas3 Noah Snavely1
1
2
Google DeepMind
University of Pennsylvania

Leonidas Guibas1
3
Google

leijh@cis.upenn.edu, {jiahuilei,kgenova,gkopanas,snavely,guibas}@google.com

Figure 1. (A) Given the first time frame color and segmentation image and a text prompt, our model generates the future dynamic 3D
scene. (B) 3D dynamic scenes as pixel-aligned curve/trajectory images, re-purposing an image diffusion model for 4D generation.

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of learning semantically and functionally meaningful 3D motion priors from
real-world videos, in order to enable prediction of future
3D scene motion from a single input image. We propose
a novel pixel-aligned Motion Map (MoMap) representation
for 3D scene motion, which can be generated from existing generative image models to facilitate efficient and effective motion prediction. To learn meaningful distributions
over motion, we create a large-scale database of MoMaps
from over 50,000 real videos and train a diffusion model on
these representations. Our motion generation not only synthesizes trajectories in 3D but also suggests a new pipeline
for 2D video synthesis: first generate a MoMap, then warp
an image accordingly and complete the warped point-based
renderings. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach generates plausible and semantically consistent 3D
scene motion.

In this work, we aim to learn semantically and functionally meaningful 3D motion priors from real-world videos at
scale, and to use these priors for semantics-aware 3D motion generation. Recent generative motion methods either
consider 2D motions (e.g., TAPIR [10]) or treat 3D trajectories as sets of very short curves, using PointNet or Transformer architectures over them (e.g., GeneralFlow [41],
Track2Act [4]). In contrast, we represent motion in a
video through a set of pixel-aligned 3D motion snippets we
call Motion Maps, or MoMaps for short (Fig. 2-A). Each
MoMap is a motion snapshot—a view of the evolving scene
from a fixed camera over a time interval (typically about 50
frames at 3 FPS). The pixels of each MoMap frame encode
(in RGB channels) the XYZ 3D locations of points seen by
that camera in the fixed reference camera coordinate system, and the entire MoMap records their spatial evolution
during the time interval captured by the MoMap.
MoMaps facilitate motion learning in two ways. First,
they disentangle camera motion from object motion, reducing the dimensionality of the problem (only dynamic foreground changes over time). Second, their image-like structure allows us to build upon diffusion-based image generative models, such as Stable Diffusion [30, 32], that have
been trained on vast amounts of data—effectively repurposing them from the task of dense photometric generation to
that of dense position and motion prediction, considering
the full context (both foreground and background) of the
scene. Such repurposing has been used, for example, in
depth prediction by the Marigold method [18]. Additionally, pixel-aligned motion images can directly bind with
powerful 2D segmentation masks such as SAM [19, 31],
enabling us to exploit semantic and instance information
when predicting motion, as motion and semantics are often
strongly correlated.
Prior motion prediction methods typically rely on syn-

1. Introduction
Motion is ubiquitous in the visual world. Understanding,
reconstructing, forecasting, and interrogating how objects
and entities move in 3D is an important task for computer
vision and is critical for applications that involve interaction
with physical environments such as augmented reality, autonomous driving, or robotics. Of special interest to us is
motion forecasting, prediction, and generation, as required
by an agent operating in a 3D environment. Despite its importance, there is a lack of approaches that learn 3D generative motion priors at scale. Existing methods either treat
dynamic scene priors as a 2D video generation problem, focus on localized object-centric priors from large-scale object databases, or handle only very short 3D trajectories in
constrained, small-scale setups.

10022

