This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpectralAR: Spectral Autoregressive Visual Generation
Yuanhui Huang Weiliang Chen Wenzhao Zheng
Yueqi Duan Jie Zhou Jiwen Lu
Tsinghua University
huangyh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; wenzhao.zheng@outlook.com
4 tokens

14 tokens

24 tokens

34 tokens

44 tokens

54 tokens

64 tokens

Generate more spectral tokens

Figure 1. We approach autoregressive visual generation from the spectral perspective and propose SpectralAR which converts images into
1D causal sequences with nested spectral tokenization and generates images in a hierarchical coarse-to-fine manner. In the autoregressive
process, each generated token improves the quality of the image by introducing new high-frequency components.

Abstract
Autoregressive visual generation has garnered increasing
attention due to its scalability and compatibility with other
modalities compared with diffusion models. Most existing
methods construct visual sequences as spatial patches for
autoregressive generation. However, image patches are inherently parallel, contradicting the causal nature of autoregressive modeling. To address this, we propose a Spectral
AutoRegressive (SpectralAR) visual generation framework,
which realizes causality for visual sequences from the spectral perspective. Specifically, we first transform an image
into ordered spectral tokens with Nested Spectral Tokeniza-

tion, representing lower to higher frequency components.
We then perform autoregressive generation in a coarse-tofine manner with the sequences of spectral tokens. By considering different levels of detail in images, our SpectralAR
achieves both sequence causality and token efficiency without bells and whistles. We conduct extensive experiments on
ImageNet-1K for image reconstruction and autoregressive
generation, and SpectralAR achieves 3.02 gFID with only
64 tokens and 310M parameters. Project page: https:
//huang-yh.github.io/spectralar/.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [19, 39, 44, 46] have long been the best
performing approach to visual generation. Despite their ex-

Corresponding author.

15842

