This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AccidentalGS: 3D Gaussian Splatting from Accidental Camera Motion
Mao Mao, Xujie Shen, Guyuan Chen, Boming Zhao, Jiarui Hu, Hujun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui*
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

CF-3DGS [9]
InstantSplat [8]
Ours
Ground Truth
Figure 1. Novel View Rendering and Camera Pose Estimation Results on the Accidental Camera Motion Dataset Off-0. We propose
AccidentalGS for novel view synthesis for the scenarios with accidental camera motion. AccidentalGS demonstrates enhanced robustness
in pose estimation and produces higher-quality results in novel view synthesis compared to prior state-of-the-art approaches.

Abstract
Neural 3D modeling and novel view synthesis with Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) or 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
typically requires the multi-view images with wide baselines and accurate camera poses as input. However, scenarios with accidental camera motions are rarely studied.
In this paper, we propose AccidentalGS, the first method
for neural 3D modeling and novel view synthesis from
accidental camera motions. To achieve this, we present
a novel joint optimization framework that considers geometric and photometric errors, using a simplified camera
model for stability. We also introduce a novel online adaptive depth-consistency loss to prevent the overfitting of the
Gaussian model to input images. Extensive experiments on
both synthetic and real-world datasets show that AccidentalGS achieves more accurate camera poses and realistic
novel views compared to existing methods, and supports
3D modeling and neural rendering even for the Moon with
telescope-like images.

3DGS require the multi-view camera images with wide
baselines and accurate camera poses to achieve high-quality
3D modeling and rendering. Accidental motion is involuntary camera movement caused by hand shaking or breathing
during photo capture, especially with lightweight devices
like smartphones. Then this raises an interesting question:

1. Introduction
Recently, there have been rapid developments in neural 3D
modeling and novel view synthesis, driven by the emergence of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [36] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [24]. Typically, both NeRF and
* Corresponding author.

27445

Can we achieve neural 3D modeling and novel view
synthesis from accidental camera motions?
Compared to standard camera motions, 3D modeling
with neural representations from accidental camera motions
presents several challenges. Firstly, the maximum triangulation angle for a 3D point is extremely small, which significantly affects the camera pose estimation for standard
structure-from-motion methods. Although several posefree methods [1, 9, 25, 32, 50] have been proposed, they either rely on initial camera poses or assume certain patterns
of camera motions, which are not applicable to scenarios
with accidental motions. Secondly, since the camera views
are very close, the learning of neural fields or Gaussians can
easily overfit to these input observations, resulting in poor
rendering quality from viewpoints that are significantly different from the input views. The camera pose optimization
of InstantSplat [8], utilizing the foundation model [29, 48],
also fails under scenarios involving accidental motion.
In this paper, we propose the first method, AccidentalGS,
for neural 3D modeling and novel view synthesis from accidental camera motions. Firstly, to handle the challenging pose estimation, we propose a joint optimization framework with the recent 3DGS representation, which considers

