This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VisionMath: Vision-Form Mathematical Problem-Solving
Zongyang Ma1,2,4,5* , Yuxin Chen2*† , Ziqi Zhang1,5 # , Zhongang Qi6 , Chunfeng Yuan1,5 ,
Shaojie Zhu3 , Chengxiang Zhuo3 , Bing Li1,5 , Ye Liu2,7 , Zang Li3 , Ying Shan2 , Weiming Hu1,4,5,8
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 ARC Lab, 3 Tencent PCG
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Beijing Key Laboratory of Super Intelligent Securityof Multi-Modal Information
6
vivo Mobile Communication Co. 7 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
8
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
{mazongyang2020,zhangziqi2017}@ia.ac.cn, {cfyuan,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{uasonchen,alisyzhu,felixzhuo,gavinzli,yingsshan}@tencent.com, zhongangqi@gmail.com,
coco.ye.liu@connect.polyu.hk

Textual Problem Statement:

Abstract

By cutting off two triangular pyramids from the square shape (Figure
1), we obtain the geometry shown in Figure 2. The left view of this
geometric shape is ( ).

Mathematical problems in real-world scenarios are often presented in a purely vision-form, where textual problem statement and accompanying math figures, e.g., geometry figures and functional graphs, are integrated into
a single image. This vision-form problem-solving task
requires precise comprehension and reasoning on both
textual and graphical elements in the images, posing
significant challenge to current Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), which process text and math
figures in isolation. In this work, we propose VisionMath, the first exploration for vision-form mathematical
problem-solving model, which employs a three-stage progressive multimodal reasoning alignment strategy to systematically enhance task-specific capabilities. Building
upon a LLM proficient in unimodal mathematical reasoning, VisionMath first establishes foundational OCR capabilities through capturing rendered mathematical problem
images. Subsequently, the model develops comprehensive understanding of figure structures and properties via
learning from figure descriptions and mathematical educational videos. Finally, the model’s reasoning capacity is
activated using carefully constructed visual-form problemsolving datasets VisionMath-IT with chain-of-thought annotations. For comprehensive evaluation, we construct multilingual benchmarks covering diverse problem types, including geometry, algebra, function problems in both English
and Chinese. Experimental results demonstrate that VisionMath significantly outperforms existing general-purpose

(a) Images:
……

(b)

Figure 1. Demonstration of mathematical problem examples of
image-text-separation-form (a) and vision-form (b).

and math-specialized models, showcasing superior multilingual and multi-type problem-solving capabilities. Our
model weights, data and code will be made available at
https://github.com/mengqiDyangge/VisionMath.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in reasoning capabilities have significantly enhanced the performance of both generalpurpose [3, 7–9, 22, 27–29, 50, 52] and math-specalized
MLLMs [10, 14, 32, 42], enabling them to demonstrate re-

* Equal contribution. † Project Lead. # Corresponding author.

1162

