This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PLMP – Point-Line Minimal Problems for Projective SfM
Kim Kiehn
KTH, Department of Mathematics
Lindstedtsvägen 25, 10044 Stockholm

Albin Ahlbäck
CNRS, LIX (UMR 7161), École Polytechnique
1 Rue Honoré d’Estienne d’Orves, 91120 Palaiseau

kiehn@kth.se

ahlback@lix.polytechnique.fr

Kathlén Kohn
KTH, Department of Mathematics
Lindstedtsvägen 25, 10044 Stockholm
kathlen@kth.se

Abstract

liers, a large number of minimal problems has to be solved
in this scheme. Therefore, it is crucial to work with minimal
problems that can be solved efficiently and stably.
A given reconstruction problem has in general many
minimal subproblems. Thus, it is desirable to identify those
minimal problems that can be solved most efficiently.
In this article, we provide a complete catalog of minimal
problems (including the most efficient ones) for the following Structure-from-Motion (SfM) problem: Multiple uncalibrated pinhole cameras observe an arrangement of points
and lines with prescribed incidences. We assume complete
visibility in our minimal problems, meaning that every point
and line appears in each view. The reconstruction task is
to find the camera matrices and the 3D coordinates of the
points and lines, up to projective transformations.
We then measure the intrinsic difficulty of solving each
minimal problem by its generic number of solutions. This
number is known as the degree of the minimal problem. Of
course, we re-discover the famous 7-point problem for 2
views, which has degree 3, and its degenerations. We also
find 2 point-line arrangements where 7 points lie on 3 lines
that admit unique reconstruction (via linear solvers) from
arbitrarily many views (these are the 2 right-most arrangements in Table 1). We show that there are precisely 285 further minimal problems (illustrated in SM Section F). These
have 3-9 views and their degrees range from 1 through 114.
Some problems are well-known (such as 6 points in 3 views
[20, 40, 44], or 9 lines in 3 views [28], see also [39] for all
incidence-free 3-view problems), but most are new. Almost
all minimal problems in our catalog have very low degrees.
In particular, 73 of them have degree 1, and so admit unique
reconstruction which can be found by linear solvers.
In addition to this catalog of minimal problems, we provide formal proofs for the non-minimality of a given problem, which is in contrast to all previous works where non-

We completely classify all minimal problems for Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) where arrangements of points and lines
are fully observed by multiple uncalibrated pinhole cameras. We find 291 minimal problems, 73 of which have
unique solutions and can thus be solved linearly. Two of
the linear problems allow an arbitrary number of views,
while all other minimal problems have at most 9 cameras.
All minimal problems have at most 7 points and at most 12
lines. We compute the number of solutions of each minimal
problem, as this gives a measurement of the problem’s intrinsic difficulty, and find that these number are relatively
low (e.g., when comparing with minimal problems for calibrated cameras). Finally, by exploring stabilizer subgroups
of subarrangements, we develop a geometric and systematic
way to 1) factorize minimal problems into smaller problems,
2) identify minimal problems in underconstrained problems,
and 3) formally prove non-minimality.

1. Introduction
Minimal problems are families of algebraic inverse problems that generically have a finite number of solutions.
They are a key ingredient in RANSAC schemes for reconstruction problems, where one selects a minimal amount of
random data samples to obtain subproblems with finitely
many solutions [17, 45]. The solution to the original problem is then obtained by finding a consensus among the solutions of many minimal subproblems and optimization refinement. Particularly if the data is compromised by outKK and KK were supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. AA was supported by an ERC-2023-ADG grant for
the ODELIX project (number 101142171).

8558

