This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Fine-Tuning of Large Models via Nested Low-Rank Adaptation
Lujun Li1
1

Cheng Lin2

Dezhi Li3 You-Liang Huang1 Wei Li4
Wei Xue1 Sirui Han1∗ Yike Guo1 *

Jie Zou2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3

1

Tianyu Wu1

Southeast University, 4 University of Birmingham

lilujunai@gmail.com, {siruihan,yikeguo}@ust.hk, 2 linchengtech@gmail.com, 3 lidezhi@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has become a popular
paradigm for fine-tuning large models, but it still necessitates a substantial number of training parameters. To
address this issue, we first conduct comprehensive empirical
studies on parameter-efficient LoRA structure. Then, we
establish design guidelines that emphasize the use of serial
structures, optimal placements, and nested LoRA. Based
on these insights, we present NoRA, a nested parameterefficient LoRA structure that revolutionizes the initialization
and fine-tuning of projection matrices. Our NoRA’s innovative approach involves freezing outer layer LoRA weights
and employing a serial inner layer design, enabling precise task-specific adaptations while maintaining compact
training parameters. In addition, we propose an activationaware Singular Value Decomposition (AwSVD) that adjusts
the weight matrices based on activation distributions for
initialization of outer layer LoRA weights. This schema
enhances decomposition accuracy and mitigates computational errors. Extensive evaluations across multiple large
models demonstrate that NoRA outperforms state-of-theart LoRA variants, achieving significant improvements in
performance-efficiency trade-off on visual few-shot tasks, visual instruction tuning and subject-driven generation. Codes
are available at https://github.com/lliai/LoRA-Zoo.

(a) Unified design space

(b) AwSVD and SVD init. Error

Figure 1. Motivations. (a): Our proposed unified design space for
efficient LoRA variants. (b): Output errors of vanilla SVD and our
Activation-aware SVD (AwSVD) for efficient LoRA variant [37].

(a) Model Acc & #Param

(b) Performance of NoRA

Figure 2. Results Comparison. (a): Trainable parameter. (b):
performance on multi-benchmarks of NoRA and other methods.

1. Introduction

parameters. Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [19] is a notable
PEFT technique that uses low-rank matrices for efficient
adaptation to specific tasks [16]. It achieves significant computational and memory savings during fine-tuning, making
it feasible to adapt LFMs on consumer-grade hardware [42].
Problem Statement: Despite proving beneficial, LoRA
encounters obstacles that impair its performance in downstream applications. The traditional LoRA involves training
numerous parameters, which may result in slow convergence
and possible issues with overfitting. To mitigate these drawbacks, three primary methodologies have been identified in
the literature: ① Hyperparameter-based approaches, concentrating on tuning rank allocation, optimization, and initialization settings. AdaLoRA [60] and PiSSA [43] exemplify

Large Foundation Models (LFMs) have recently achieved
remarkable performance in multimodal [9] and generative
tasks [34] and related fields [66]. However, the high parameter size makes training and adaptation challenging, especially
in resource-limited settings. To address this, ParameterEfficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) techniques have been developed [5, 14], focusing on fine-tuning a subset of model
* Corresponding author. First three authors have equal contributions to
experiments.

22252

