This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transparent Vision: A Theory of Hierarchical Invariant Representations
Shuren Qi1
1

Yushu Zhang2 * Chao Wang3

Zhihua Xia4

Xiaochun Cao5

Fenglei Fan6

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics
3
Ningbo University of Technology 4 Jinan University
5
Sun Yat-sen University 6 City University of Hong Kong
Table 1. A conceptual comparison with related approaches.

Abstract
Developing robust and interpretable vision systems is
a crucial step towards trustworthy artificial intelligence.
One promising paradigm is to design transparent structures, e.g., geometric invariance, for fundamental representations. However, such invariants exhibit limited discriminability, limiting their applications in larger-scale tasks.
For this open problem, we conduct a systematic investigation of hierarchical invariance, exploring this topic from
theoretical, practical, and application perspectives.
At the theoretical level, we show how to construct discriminative invariants with a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-like hierarchical architecture, yet in a fully
transparent manner. The general blueprint, specific definitions, invariant properties, and numerical implementations are provided. At the practical level, we discuss how
to customize this transparent framework into a given task.
With the over-completeness, discriminative features w.r.t.
the task can be adaptively formed in a Neural Architecture
Search (NAS)-like manner. We demonstrate the above arguments with accuracy, invariance, and efficiency results on
laboratory-style classification experiments. Furthermore,
at the application level, our representations are explored in
real-world forensic tasks on adversarial perturbations and
generated content. Such applications reveal that our invariants exhibit competitive discriminability even in the era of
deep learning.
For robust and interpretable vision tasks at larger scales,
hierarchical invariant representations can be considered as
an effective alternative to traditional CNNs and invariants.

Approach

Traditional

Traditional

Scattering

Equivariant

Hierarchical

invariants

CNNs

networks

networks

invariants

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

Discriminative
Robust

✓

✓

✓

Interpretable

✓

✓

✓

Efficient

✓

✓
✓

Network (CNN), have led to breakthrough results in numerous AI tasks, e.g., processing human perceptual information [20], playing board games [36], and solving hard science problems [45]. More recently, their applications are
expanding into trust-related scenarios, e.g., biometrics [39],
medical diagnostics [47], self-driving cars [10], and misinformation detection [17]. In such scenarios, the robustness and interpretability of AI systems are crucial [24]: 1)
robustness means the performance is stable for intra-class
variations on the input; 2) interpretability means the behavior can be understood or predicted by humans.
Integrating invariance into image representations is a
transparent structure towards robust and interpretable vision
systems [5]. Specifically, representations play a fundamental role in visual systems, where the system is generally built
on meaningful representations of digital images (rather than
the raw data) [3]. Note that the proper design/learning of
such representations in fact relies on priors w.r.t. the task of
interest [43]. Here, the concept of symmetry from the Erlangen Program [18, 42] may be the most fruitful prior – informally, a symmetry of a system is a transformation such that
a certain property of said system is invariant to this transformation. Symmetry priors are ubiquitous in vision tasks,
e.g., translation as a symmetry of the classification system
where the object category is invariant under translation [11].

1. Introduction

1.1. State of the Art and Motivation

The trustworthiness is a rising topic in modern Artificial
Intelligence (AI) communities [48]. Over the past decade,
deep learning techniques, especially Convolutional Neural

Historically, to a certain extent, efforts at invariance [31]
and discriminability [50] have developed independently
in hand-crafted [31] and learning [50] approaches. The
compatibility between invariance and discriminability has
emerged as a tricky problem when moving towards trust-

* Corresponding author.

3435

