This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViLLa: Video Reasoning Segmentation with Large Language Model
Rongkun Zheng1 Lu Qi2 Xi Chen1 Yi Wang3,4
Kun Wang5 Hengshuang Zhao1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Insta360 3 Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
4
Shanghai Innovation Institute 5 SenseTime Research
{zrk22@connect, hszhao@cs}.hku.hk

Abstract
Recent efforts in video reasoning segmentation (VRS) integrate large language models (LLMs) with perception models
to localize and track objects via textual instructions, achieving barely satisfactory results in simple scenarios. However,
they struggled to discriminate and deduce the objects from
user queries in more real-world scenes featured by long durations, multiple objects, rapid motion, and heavy occlusions.
In this work, we analyze the underlying causes of these limitations, and present ViLLa: Video reasoning segmentation
with Large Language Model. Remarkably, our ViLLa manages to tackle these challenges through multiple core innovations: (1) a context synthesizer that dynamically encodes
the user intent with video contexts for accurate reasoning,
resolving ambiguities in complex queries, and (2) a hierarchical temporal synchronizer that disentangles multi-object
interactions across complex temporal scenarios by modelling
multi-object interactions at local and global temporal scales.
To enable efﬁcient processing of long videos, ViLLa incorporates (3) a key segment sampler that adaptively partitions
long videos into shorter but semantically dense segments
for less redundancy. What’s more, to promote research in
this unexplored area, we construct a VRS benchmark, VideoReasonSeg, featuring different complex scenarios. Our
model also exhibits impressive state-of-the-art results on
VideoReasonSeg, Ref-YouTube-VOS, Ref-DAVIS17, MeViS,
and ReVOS. Both quantitative and qualitative experiments
demonstrate that our method effectively enhances video reasoning segmentation capabilities for multimodal LLMs.

1. Introduction
Capitalizing on the achievements of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [10, 38, 39, 75], the development of large multimodal models (LMMs) [3, 25, 32, 34, 58, 80] has notably
enhanced visual perception capabilities and user-interaction
* Corresponding author.

23667

experiences to new heights. However, in the absence of
explicit instructions specifying target objects or categories,
the majority of models [1, 24, 25, 31, 32, 71, 80], including
both perception models and language ones, struggle to generate detailed and granular outputs such as instance masks.
Instead, these models typically generate only general textual
descriptions for images or videos. This limitation hinders
the practical application of multimodal systems in various
scenarios, such as autonomous driving [57], image and video
editing [30], robotics [48], and augmented reality [46].
Recent studies [23, 45, 70] have investigated the application of LLMs to generate object masks in a novel reasoning segmentation task that requires complex reasoning
to interpret sophisticated instructions. These approaches
introduce efﬁcient language models capable of producing
multiple open-set targets while accommodating diverse reasoning complexities. However, despite their successes, these
methods remain limited to image-level reasoning and do not
extend ﬁne-grained reasoning capabilities to the temporal dimension. To address this issue, researchers [4, 67] managed
to equip the image reasoning segmentation model with temporal understanding ability, and propose VRS. VISA [67]
employs a video understanding model [28] to select the key
frame for LISA [23] to segment and subsequently utilizes
an object tracker [8] to maintain temporal consistency. However, the quality of segmentation is highly dependent on the
accuracy of key frame selection, which is susceptible to error
accumulation through propagation as the number of input
frames increases. On the other hand, VideoLISA [4] adopts
a sparse dense sampling strategy to compress visual features
and extends the single segmentation token to track an instance across frames, especially when the movement is rapid.
Nevertheless, the sampling strategy fails to adaptively select
the key video segments, making it challenging to capture the
essential information from the video. Also, because a single
segmentation token is unable to segment and track multiple instances across frames, the segmentation and tracking
quality decrease signiﬁcantly when the video scene becomes
intricate (e.g., involving multiple objects with occlusion),

