This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Φ-GAN: Physics-Inspired GAN for Generating SAR Images Under Limited Data
†

†

Xidan Zhang1 , Yihan Zhuang1 , Qian Guo3 , Haodong Yang1 , Xuelin Qian1 , Gong Cheng1 , Junwei
∗
Han1 , and Zhongling Huang1,2
1

School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University
Shenzhen Research Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2

Figure 1. (a) Our goal is to generate SAR images at unseen angles using a few samples. (b) The unique electromagnetic imaging mechanism
of SAR creates a significant discrepancy between “image rotation” and “target rotation”. (c) and (d) show SAR images generated by
DIGGAN [9], while (e) and (f) display images generated by our proposed Φ-GAN. It is evident that our method produces well-detailed
results both near seen angles (red) and at unseen angles (blue). All SAR images are single-channel and visualized using the “hot” colormap
for enhanced visual interpretation.

Abstract
Approaches for improving generative adversarial networks (GANs) training under a few samples have been explored for natural images. However, these methods have
limited effectiveness for synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images, as they do not account for the unique electromagnetic
scattering properties of SAR. To remedy this, we propose
a physics-inspired regularization method dubbed Φ-GAN,
which incorporates the ideal point scattering center (PSC)
model of SAR with two physical consistency losses. The
PSC model approximates SAR targets using physical parameters, ensuring that Φ-GAN generates SAR images consistent with real physical properties while preventing discriminator overfitting by focusing on PSC-based decision

cues. To embed the PSC model into GANs for end-to-end
training, we introduce a physics-inspired neural module
capable of estimating physical parameters of SAR targets
efficiently. This module retains the interpretability of the
physical model and can be trained with limited data. We
propose two physical loss functions: one for the generator, guiding it to produce SAR images with physical parameters consistent with real ones, and one for the discriminator, enhancing its robustness by basing decisions on
PSC attributes. We evaluate Φ-GAN across several conditional GAN (cGAN) models, demonstrating state-of-the-art
performance in data-scarce scenarios on three SAR image
datasets.

1. Introduction
† Equal contribution.

Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), an active sensor that
transmits and receives high-frequency microwaves, is vital

*Corresponding author: huangzhongling@nwpu.edu.cn. Other contacts: zhangxidan@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; zhuangyihan@mail.nwpu.edu.cn.

29075

