This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Switch-a-View: View Selection Learned from Unlabeled In-the-wild Videos
Sagnik Majumder1 Tushar Nagarajan1 Ziad Al-Halah2 Kristen Grauman1
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Utah

Toss the rice and
sausages together …

t+1

t

t -T

Exo

Ego

Exo

Now that I'm done
mixing, I’ll add …

I have some marinade
prepared to my right …

Exo

Exo

Ego or Exo?

…
Today, I will
make a ball
drilling jig …

You need to
precisely mark
the corners …

Keep view
or switch?

Ego

Now, drill a hole
at each of the
corners …

Ego

t=1

t=2

Ego

t=3

Inference: Select the best view sequence for a multi-view video

Training: Learn human view choices from large-scale in-the-wild videos

Figure 1. Given a multi-view narrated how-to video, can we select the sequence of camera viewpoints that best show the activity—automating
the camerawork that is today done with manual editing? While direct supervision for this task is impractical, our S WITCH - A - VIEW approach
shows how to learn typical viewpoint choice patterns from large-scale unlabeled in-the-wild instructional videos (left), then translate those
patterns to novel multi-view videos (right), yielding an informative how-to that hops between the most useful ego/exo viewpoints.

Abstract

perform some special skill. From how to plant a garden, how
to make yogurt, how to fold origami, or how to give a dog
a haircut, there is no shortage of how-to nuggets produced
and consumed by users of many ages and backgrounds.

We introduce S WITCH - A - VIEW, a model that learns to automatically select the viewpoint to display at each timepoint
when creating a how-to video. The key insight of our approach is how to train such a model from unlabeled—but
human-edited—video samples. We pose a pretext task that
pseudo-labels segments in the training videos for their primary viewpoint (egocentric or exocentric), and then discovers the patterns between the visual and spoken content in a
how-to video on the one hand and its view-switch moments
on the other hand. Armed with this predictor, our model can
be applied to new multi-view videos to orchestrate which
viewpoint should be displayed when. We demonstrate our
idea on a variety of real-world videos from HowTo100M and
Ego-Exo4D, and rigorously validate its advantages.

1. Introduction
Video is an amazing medium for communication, and today’s
widely used Internet platforms make it easy to create and
share content broadly. Instructional or “how-to" video is
particularly compelling in this setting: YouTube, TikTok,
and similar sites have democratized the ability to share our
talents with others, by both showing and telling how to

Creating an effective how-to video, however, is not trivial.
From potentially hours of footage from multiple cameras
capturing all aspects of the instructional activity, a creator
needs to edit down to the essential steps of their demonstration and decide on the camera viewpoint (view) for each
temporal segment that best reveals what they want to show.
For example, when showing how to cut the dog’s hair, the
instructor might first appear standing beside the dog—the
camera more distant—then the camera may zoom close up
to her using scissors and describing how to trim near the
ear, then zoom back out while she shows progress across
the dog’s body. How-to videos often exhibit this sequential mix of "exocentric" and "egocentric-like" viewpoints to
effectively recap the procedure with clear visuals.
The status quo is to either orchestrate camerawork live
while filming, or do post-recording editing among the multiple available cameras—both of which are labor intensive.
Work in automatic cinematography [7, 15, 16, 22, 49, 56],
though inspiring, relies on heuristics or domain-specific models that are not equipped to address automatic editing of
video demonstrations. How could we train an “AI how-to

11969

