This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An OpenMind for 3D medical vision self-supervised learning
Tassilo Wald *,1,2,3 , Constantin Ulrich*,1,4 , Jonathan Suprijadi*,†,
Sebastian Ziegler1,2 , Michal Nohel†,6,7 , Robin Peretzke1,4
Gregor Köhler†,1 , Klaus Maier-Hein1,2,3,4,5,8
1

Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
2

Helmholtz Imaging, DKFZ; 3 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Heidelberg University
4

6

Medical Faculty, Heidelberg University; 5 National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg

Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication, Brno University of Technology, Czech Republic
7

University hospital Ostrava, Department of Deputy director for science, research and education
8

Pattern Analysis and Learning Group, Department of Radiation Oncology
tassilo.wald@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Abstract
The field of self-supervised learning (SSL) for 3D medical
images lacks consistency and standardization. While many
methods have been developed, it is impossible to identify
the current state-of-the-art, due to i) varying and small pretraining datasets, ii) varying architectures, and iii) being
evaluated on differing downstream datasets. In this paper,
we bring clarity to this field and lay the foundation for further method advancements through three key contributions:
We a) publish the largest publicly available pre-training
dataset comprising 114k 3D brain MRI volumes, enabling
all practitioners to pre-train on a large-scale dataset. We
b) benchmark existing 3D self-supervised learning methods
on this dataset for a state-of-the-art CNN and Transformer
architecture, clarifying the state of 3D SSL pre-training.
Among many findings, we show that pre-trained methods
can exceed a strong from-scratch nnU-Net ResEnc-L baseline. Lastly, we c) publish the code of our pre-training and
fine-tuning frameworks and provide the pre-trained models
created during the benchmarking process to facilitate rapid
adoption and reproduction. Available here.

ing and natural image computer vision. In the domain of 3D
medical imaging, where annotation is expensive and annotated data scarce, SSL pre-training holds great promise as
it can learn transferable representations without requiring
extensive manual labeling efforts. However, currently the
field of medical image analysis follows two predominant
approaches to develop vision models: training models from
scratch, often using the nnU-Net framework [4], or adopting supervised pre-training with large, monolithic annotated
datasets [5–7] or aggregates of many datasets to increase
supervised data scale [8, 9]. While the latter approach indicates a willingness to adopt pre-training paradigms, it raises
the question why self-supervised learning is hardly pursued
in 3D medical imaging. We believe this lack of SSL method
development and adoption can be attributed to two major
factors:

1. Introduction

1) A lack of a large, open-source 3D dataset for pretraining. Acquiring large unlabeled datasets for selfsupervised pre-training is a non-trivial task. While large
studies like the UK-BioBank or the NIH Adolescent Brain
Cognitive Development (ABCD) exist and hold >100k or
>40k 3D Volumes respectively, access to them depends on
a positive internal review process requiring an appropriate
project proposal. To add to the complexity, datasets are often subject to unique Data Usage Agreements (DUAs) that
impose various restrictions on recipients. These rules may
include: (i) mandatory acknowledgments, (ii) internal administrative review of manuscripts prior to submission [10–
14], (iii) inclusion of a consortium in the author list [12–
14], or (iv) requiring the dataset’s name to appear in the
manuscript title [13]. While acknowledgements are reasonable and exemptions for the remaining restrictions can be
requested, these DUAs create legal barriers that hinder re-

Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has emerged as a transformative approach in deep learning, enabling the extraction of
robust and general representations from data-rich domains
[1–3]. This paradigm has led to significant advancements in
areas with abundant data, such as natural language process* Equal contribution, Author order among the co-first authors may be
adjusted for individual use.
† Work done while at DKFZ.

23839

