This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One Encoder to Rule them All: Representation Learning for Model-free Visual
Reinforcement Learning using Fourier Neural Operators
Parag Dutta, Mohd Ayyoob, Shalabh Bhatnagar and Ambedkar Dukkipati
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, KA, IN - 560012
{paragdutta, ayyoobmohd, shalabh, ambedkar}@iisc.ac.in

Atari 100K

Abstract

Carla Lane (Image Obs)

30

90
80

25

Representation learning lies at the core of deep reinforcement learning. Although CNNs have traditionally served as
the primary models for encoding image observations, modifying the encoder architecture introduces challenges, especially due to the necessity of determining a new set of hyperparameters. To address this problem, we propose a powerful representation learning technique for visual reinforcement learning utilizing Fourier Neural Operators (FNO).
Our findings demonstrate that the proposed FNO encoder
effectively learns representations from images that encapsulate the underlying differential equations (PDEs) governing the dynamics of the environment in an online model-free
RL framework. We demonstrate the applicability of our proposed architecture by replacing the CNN image encoder in
PPO, A2C, and Rainbow (a Policy Gradient, Actor-Critic,
and Q-Learning RL algorithm, respectively). We achieve
state-of-the-art scores (in the model-free RL setting) at both
the CARLA Autonomous Driving (from image observations)
benchmark and the Atari 100k benchmark. Our proposed
FNO encoder is compatible with all model-free reinforcement learning algorithms, enhances both rewards and sample efficiency by implicitly learning the underlying dynamics of the environment, and eliminates the need for additional hyperparameter tuning.

250

70

20

60

200

50

15

150

40

10

30

100

20

5

50

10

0

0
Median HNS (across 26
environments)
Eff. RB

CURL

FNO-RB

ViZDoom Deadly Corridor
300

0
Normalized Score Sample Complexity
(/100)
(5K frames)
CNN-PPO

FNO-PPO

Rewards

Sample Complexity
(Episodes)

CNN-A2C

FNO-A2C

Figure 1. [Best viewed in color] FNO’s performance improvement and sample efficiency. Left: The median Human Normalized Score (HNS) across 26 environments in the Atari100K benchmark. The number of frames is fixed to 100K. Efficient Rainbow
(Eff. RB)[21] is the base algorithm. CURL [19] modifies Eff. RB
with momentum contrast, whereas we replace the CNN encoder
with our proposed FNO encoder. Center: The performance and
sample complexity with the FNO-PPO algorithm compared to the
CNN-PPO algorithm on the CARLA Lane Keeping task as defined
in the D4RL benchmark, i.e. only images are used for control and
not other information such as state, LIDAR, and overhead segmentation map. Right: The episodic rewards and the sample complexity of CNN-A2C vs our FNO-A2C on the ViZDoom Deadly
Corridor environment.

in these complex tasks, it is necessary that learning mechanisms force agents to learn to solve the tasks from raw sensory inputs. Visual RL is one such subdomain in RL where
observations in the form of images are made available to the
agents, for instance, the sensor can be a camera.
Making sequential decisions under uncertainty from images is an extremely challenging problem, specifically due
to the immense combinatorial possibilities within the image
space (see Section 2). Naturally, a nonlinear function approximator, for instance, a CNN, is used to infer meaningful
state representations from a given image. In addition to the
inherent difficulties of training reinforcement agents, such
as managing non-stationary targets [36], the use of function
approximations for image encoding presents its own unique

1. Introduction
Despite the fact that research in contemporary Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been conducted for over fifty years,
it was approximately ten years ago that RL gained significant traction when RL techniques demonstrated humanlevel capabilities in Atari 2600 games [22]. Since then, RL
has been successfully applied to a plethora of tasks ranging from games such as AlphaGo [29] (where the RL algorithm beat the world’s best GO player) to autonomous navigation [2, 9, 33]. To achieve a good general performance

4818

