This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spherical Epipolar Rectification for Deep Two-View Absolute Depth Estimation
Pierre-André Brousseau
Université de Montréal

Sébastien Roy
Université de Montréal

pierre-andre.brousseau@umontreal.ca

roys@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
Absolute depth estimation from single camera sequence of
images is a relevant task given that mobile machines increasingly rely on vision to navigate. Deep learning for
stereo matching has been demonstrated to improve performance for stereo rectified depth estimation but these
methods require straightforward left-right camera setups.
This work proposes to introduce deep stereo matching to
two views of a monocular image sequence obtained from
a camera in motion in a static scene. This paper introduces a novel and principled spherical epipolar rectification model, which handles all camera motions. This rectification model is differentiable and allows self-supervised
deep stereo matching algorithms to compute disparity and
recover depth, given known camera pose. This paper also
introduces a spherical crop operation which limits rectified
image size and allows for competitive absolute depth estimation performance. This results in a spherical rectification model that is demonstrated to provide metric depth
and compete favorably with current state-of-the-art monocular depth estimators. The code is available at https://
gitlab.com/labv3d/spherical-stereo.git.

Figure 1. Comparing two-view depth estimation from plane sweep
and the proposed two-view depth estimation from spherical epipolar rectification.

1. Introduction

era is available. This case occurs in systems where the cost
of the second camera is prohibitive but pose can be recovered reliably (GPS, IMU, EKF). In this situation and given
two views, it is worth exploring methods that can directly
solve for absolute metric depth rather than scaled relative
depth. Because of the known pose, an epipolar geometry
links both views and reduces the task of optical flow estimation, which has a 2D search space, to a stereo matching task, which has a 1D search space. This 1D search
space is expressed to deep neural networks as rectified images where the match for each pixel lies on the same row
in the matching image. This process is referred to as rectification whereby images are warped to fit the same row
requirement [27].
Epipolar rectification for two views of a monocular sequence differs from the standard synchronized two-view
stereo camera systems because the rectification cannot be
precomputed for image pairs. In the case of two-view depth
estimation from a monocular sequence, the epipolar rectification must be computed according to the pose and must
handle forward translation. Planar rectification, through homography warping, breaks down when the projection of the
second camera center, the epipole, is inside the image. This
problem can be addressed by using a rectification with a
polar coordinate system, but this category of methods leads
to increased deformation of the image structure, i.e. dis-

Reconstructing the world is an important task in the computer vision field. Multiple views with a calibrated camera
system makes it possible to solve for metric depth passively.
As humans, we capture the 3D world with a binocular camera system, our eyes, but most camera systems that capture
the world as photos and videos instead rely on a single camera. This work tackles the problem of recovering absolute
metric depth from two image frames of a monocular sequence with known camera pose using self-supervised deep
neural networks. It will be shown that depth from two views
with known pose, known as stereo depth estimation, can be
extended to monocular sequences by spherical epipolar rectification.
The challenge to address with deep networks is to enable
stereo depth estimation for devices where only a single cam-

28925

