This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LOMM: Latest Object Memory Management
for Temporally Consistent Video Instance Segmentation
Seunghun Lee1,∗ Jiwan Seo1 Minwoo Choi1 Kiljoon Han1
Jahoon Jeong1 Zane Durante2 Ehsan Adeli2,† Sang Hyun Park1 Sunghoon Im1,†
1

2

DGIST, Daegu, Republic of Korea
Abstract

In this paper, we introduce Latest Object Memory (LOM),
a system for robustly tracking and continuously updating
the latest states of objects by explicitly modeling their presence across video frames. LOM enables consistent tracking
and accurate identity management across frames, enhancing both performance and reliability through the video segmentation process. Building upon LOM, we present Latest
Object Memory Management (LOMM) for temporally consistent video instance segmentation, significantly improving
long-term instance tracking. This enables consistent tracking and accurate identity management across frames, enhancing both performance and reliability through the video
segmentation process. Moreover, we introduce Decoupled
Object Association (DOA), a strategy that separately handles
newly appearing and already existing objects. By leveraging
our memory system, DOA accurately assigns object indices,
improving matching accuracy and ensuring stable identity
consistency, even in dynamic scenes where objects frequently
appear and disappear. Extensive experiments and ablation
studies demonstrate the superiority of our method over traditional approaches, setting a new state-of-the-art in video
instance segmentation. Notably, our LOMM achieves an AP
score of 54.0 on YouTube-VIS 2022, a dataset known for its
challenging long videos. Project page: this https URL

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is a complex task that
requires segmenting, classifying, and tracking objects across
video frames [42]. Recent breakthroughs in this field have
been significantly propelled by the adoption of query-based
segmentation networks [5, 6], which have notably enhanced
the precision of instance segmentation. These networks utilize object queries to extract distinctive features for each
∗ This work was done while visiting Stanford University.
† Corresponding author.

Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

object within a frame and then group pixels on the image
feature map to delineate object regions. Building on the capabilities of these architectures, the latest VIS approaches
[14–16, 20, 23, 36, 46, 47] focus on developing sophisticated
methods for instance association, aiming to improve the accuracy and efficiency of tracking objects across a video.
To enhance object association between frames,
transformer-based trackers [47, 48] directly align predictions
using cross-frame attention, dynamically reconstructing
object representations from prior frames. While effective for
short-term tracking, these methods heavily rely on previous
frame data, which can hinder long-term consistency, as
shown in the first row of Fig. 1. To mitigate this issue,
some approaches incorporate a memory system, updating
object representations based on similarity [19, 36, 46] or
momentum mechanisms [11]. However, as shown in the
second row of Fig. 1, these methods often struggle due to
mixed representations, causing ambiguity in memory-object
matching and leading to tracking failures. Even SAM2
[30], which stores not only object features but also spatial
feature maps in memory, fails to maintain consistency in
long videos, as demonstrated in the third row of Fig. 1.
These limitations highlight the need for a more robust
approach that consistently updates and associates object
representations over long videos. (We refer the reader to the
Supplementary Material for deeper understanding.)
To tackle the challenges inherent in VIS, we introduce
Latest Object Memory Management (LOMM) designed for
temporally consistent object tracking. As its core, Latest
Object Memory (LOM) maintains and updates the latest state
of each object, using the most recent object state as the key
cue for tracking. By explicitly modeling object presence in
each frame, our method efficiently handles dynamic scene
where objects frequently appear and disappear. This memorydriven approach ensures stable identity management across
frames, significantly improving VIS accuracy and reliability.
We also introduce an Decoupled Object Association (DOA),
a method that leverages our memory system for precise object matching. This strategy separates the object association

13719

