This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVDM: Event-based Real-world Video Deblurring with Mamba
Zhijing Sun† , Senyan Xu† , Kean Liu, Runze Tian, Xueyang Fu, Zheng-Jun Zha∗
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{sunzhijing, syxu, rickyliu, trz220765}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

濁濕濡濖濕

Abstract

1. Introduction
During video capture, the relative motion and ﬁxed frame
rates can lead to motion blur degradation in the resulting frames. This degradation signiﬁcantly impacts the
subjective visual quality and damages the structural information of the scene, resulting in inaccurate feature extraction that affects the models’ performance on downstream tasks, such as segmentation and detection. To mitigate the interference caused by motion blur degradation,
Code at https://github.com/ZhijingS/EVDM

澾濇濈澔澵濨濨濢澢

濃濩濨澔濣濚澔濡濙濡濣濦濭

澦澩澤澤澤

濁濕濡濖濕

澦澤澤澤澤
澥澩澤澤澤
澥澤澤澤澤
澩澤澤澤
澤

澸濇濈澔澵濨濨濢澢

澲澧澤澤澤澤

澻濄濉澔濁濙濡濣濦濭澔澜濁澶澝

澻濄濉澔濁濙濡濣濦濭澔澜濁澶澝

Existing event-based video deblurring methods face limitations in extracting and fusing long-range spatiotemporal motion information from events, primarily due to restricted receptive ﬁelds or low computational efﬁciency, resulting in suboptimal deblurring performance. To address
these issues, we introduce the state space model, which
leverages linear complexity and global receptive ﬁelds for
long-range modeling, and propose EVDM, a novel Eventbased Video Deblurring framework with Mamba. The
framework consists of: (1) Motion Clue Extraction Mamba
(MCEM), which employs an event self-reconstruction loss
to ensure the completeness of details when extracting longrange motion information. (2) Motion-aware Intra-frame
Fusion Mamba (MIFM) and Inter-frame Temporal Propagation Mamba (ITPM), which utilize the motion-aware state
space to perform cross-modal fusion and inter-frame information exchange guided by motion clues. Consequently,
EVDM achieves superior detail restoration in blurred regions while ensuring temporal motion consistency across
frames. Additionally, to overcome the limitation of ﬁxed exposure ratios in existing event-frame paired datasets, we introduce T-RED, a high-quality, high-resolution dataset with
varying exposure time ratios. T-RED provides more realistic and complex data for event-based video deblurring research. Experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that
EVDM outperforms previous SOTA methods.

† Equal contribution, ∗ Corresponding author,

澸濇濈澔澵濨濨濢澢

澲澧澤澤澤澤

澾濇濈澔澵濨濨濢澢

濃
濚
濩濨澔濣濚澔濡濙濡濣濦濭

澦澩澤澤澤
澦澤澤澤澤
澥澩澤澤澤
澥澤澤澤澤
澩澤澤澤
澤

澧

澪

澭

澥澦

澥澩

澥澬

濂濩濡濖濙濦濧澔濣濚澔濝濢濤濩濨澔濚濦濕濡濙濧
漏a漐

澦澥

澨澬

澭澪

澥澭澦

澦澩澪

澧澬澨

澨澬澤

澩澦澬

濇濤濕濨濝濕濠澔濧濝濮濙澔濣濚澔濝濢濤濩濨澔濚濦濕濡濙濧
漏b漐

Figure 1. Memory usage comparison in temporal and spatial dimensions. We replace the MCEM, MIFM, and ITPM in our network with Joint Space-Time Attention (JST Attn.) and Divided
Space-Time Attention (DST Attn.) from TimeSformer [1] for
comparison. In (a), the input size is 192×192, while in (b), the
input consists of 3 frames. Under limited GPU memory capacity
(an NVIDIA 3090 GPU), our EVDM can handle longer temporal
windows and larger input sizes simultaneously.

video deblurring methods have been extensively researched
[17, 26, 30, 59, 60, 63]. These techniques aim to restore
latent sharp frames by utilizing the spatiotemporal information from adjacent frames. However, due to the restricted
temporal resolution of frame cameras, the motion information provided by adjacent frames is very limited during
rapid motion. This leads to constrained performance of existing deblurring methods in fast-moving scenes.
To address traditional cameras’ limitations in capturing
dynamic scenes, event cameras [2, 10] have emerged as a
promising solution for video deblurring and computer vision tasks. This camera records scene brightness changes
asynchronously with microsecond-level temporal resolution, making it inherently suitable for capturing the motion
information required for deblurring tasks. Consequently, researchers have further introduced events as auxiliary information to guide the video deblurring process. These methods [20, 43, 47] often employ CNNs for spatiotemporal
feature extraction, while the local receptive ﬁeld of CNNs
limits the modeling of the long-range motion information
contained in events. On the other hand, Transformer-based
approaches [24, 48, 56] leverage multi-head attention for
global receptive ﬁelds but suffer from high computational
costs due to quadratic computational complexity in long-

13793

