This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-view Gaze Target Estimation
Qiaomu Miao1 , Vivek Raju Golani1 , Jingyi Xu1 , Progga Paromita Dutta1 , Minh Hoai2 , Dimitris Samaras1
1
2
Stony Brook University
The University of Adelaide

Abstract
This paper presents a method that utilizes multiple camera
views for the gaze target estimation (GTE) task. The approach integrates information from different camera views
to improve accuracy and expand applicability, addressing
limitations in existing single-view methods that face challenges such as face occlusion, target ambiguity, and out-ofview targets. Our method processes a pair of camera views
as input, incorporating a Head Information Aggregation
(HIA) module for leveraging head information from both
views for more accurate gaze estimation, an Uncertaintybased Gaze Selection (UGS) for identifying the most reliable gaze output, and an Epipolar-based Scene Attention
(ESA) module for cross-view background information sharing. This approach significantly outperforms single-view
baselines, especially when the second camera provides a
clear view of the person’s face. Additionally, our method
can estimate the gaze target in the first view using the image of the person in the second view only, a capability not
possessed by single-view GTE methods. Furthermore, the
paper introduces a multi-view dataset for developing and
evaluating multi-view GTE methods. Data and code are
available at https://www3.cs.stonybrook.edu/
˜cvl/multiview_gte.html.

Figure 1. Benefits of multi-view GTE. Single-view GTE models
struggle with input where the subject face is occluded, and cannot
predict the target location outside the frame. In contrast, a multiview GTE model can leverage another view’s information to improve GTE accuracy, and predict the gaze target across views.

In addition, single view GTE methods only function when
both the person and their gaze target are visible in the image. If the gaze target is outside the image, these methods
cannot function at all. These limitations make current methods restrictive due to the limited field of view of a camera.
Using multiple cameras provides a solution to these limitations. Compared to single-camera systems, multi-camera
setups provide broader coverage and multiple perspectives
of both human faces and the scene background. This enables more accurate gaze estimation by providing a clearer
view of the face, and allows predicting gaze targets that may
appear in a different camera view from the subject. Furthermore, multi-camera setups are widely utilized in many environments, such as supermarkets and lecture halls, that could
benefit from non-intrusive gaze target estimation (GTE).
However, there are challenges in developing a method
that effectively leverage multiple cameras for GTE. Due to
perspective changes between different views, directly combining input images or extracted features without accounting for the geometric relationship between them, is not beneficial. Meanwhile, in real-world applications, explicit and
complete 3D reconstruction of the scene and subject is not
always feasible, as the views often have limited or no over-

1. Introduction
Gaze Target Estimation (GTE) is an important problem
with applications in areas such as social behavior analysis [13, 52], human-machine interactions [1, 32], and mental disorder diagnosis [17, 63]. Earlier works studied gaze
behaviors using specialized equipment like eye trackers
[16, 40] or head-mounted cameras [15, 46], which are expensive and intrusive. Recent advances in deep learning
[23, 26, 36, 62] have facilitated the development of GTE
models to estimate gaze in the wild using ordinary scene
cameras, thereby broadening their range of applications.
Several methods have been proposed for GTE using ordinary scene cameras. However, as shown in Fig.1, existing
methods struggle with images in which the subject’s face is
not visible to the camera and multiple potential targets exist.

5371

