This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized and Efficient 2D Gaussian Splatting for
Arbitrary-scale Super-Resolution
Du Chen1,2 * Liyi Chen1 * Zhengqiang Zhang1,2 Lei Zhang1,2†
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 OPPO Research Institute
{csdud.chen, liyi0308.chen, zhengqiang.zhang}@connect.polyu.hk, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
1

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INR) have been successfully employed for Arbitrary-scale Super-Resolution
(ASR). However, INR-based models need to query the multilayer perceptron module numerous times and render a pixel
in each query, resulting in insufficient representation capability and low computational efficiency. Recently, Gaussian
Splatting (GS) has shown its advantages over INR in both
visual quality and rendering speed in 3D tasks, which motivates us to explore whether GS can be employed for the ASR
task. However, directly applying GS to ASR is exceptionally challenging because the original GS is an optimizationbased method through overfitting each single scene, while
in ASR we aim to learn a single model that can generalize
to different images and scaling factors. We overcome these
challenges by developing two novel techniques. Firstly, to
generalize GS for ASR, we elaborately design an architecture to predict the corresponding image-conditioned Gaussians of the input low-resolution image in a feed-forward
manner. Each Gaussian can fit the shape and direction of
an area of complex textures, showing powerful representation capability. Secondly, we implement an efficient differentiable 2D GPU/CUDA-based scale-aware rasterization
to render super-resolved images by sampling discrete RGB
values from the predicted continuous Gaussians. Via endto-end training, our optimized network, namely GSASR,
can perform ASR for any image and unseen scaling factors. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our
proposed method. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/ChrisDud0257/GSASR.

Scaling factor: x2

Scaling factor: x4

Scaling factor: x6

GaussianSR

Scaling factor: x12

LIIF

CiaoSR

GSASR (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between GSASR and representative ASR methods

1. Introduction

on DIV2K. GSASR outperforms previous methods in visual quality with
competitive inference time across both in-distribution (×2, ×4) and outof-distribution (×6, ×12) scaling factors.

Image Super-Resolution (SR) has been a challenging inverse problem in computer vision for many years, and a
variety of deep learning-based (SR) methods have been de* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

This work is supported by the PolyU-OPPO
Joint Innovative Research Center.

26435

veloped in the past decade [5–7, 32, 44, 47, 48, 51, 52, 56–
58, 60]. However, most of the existing SR models [10, 16,
30, 31, 46, 61, 63, 65, 66] are designed to operate only under
integer or fixed scaling factors, i.e., ×2, ×3, ×4, due to the
fact that they perform resolution upsampling by processing
discrete pixels with de-convolutional layers [16] or pixelshuffle layers [41]. As a result, it is hard for them to perform
SR with decimal or even arbitrary scaling factors. Although
the existing SR models could achieve arbitrary-scale zooming via adopting bicubic or bilinear interpolation operations,
they would inevitably lead to unsatisfied or over-smoothing
super-resolved results.
Inspired by the development of Implicit Neural Representations (INR) [38], Chen et al. presented LIIF [11] to
address the problem of Arbitrary-scale SR (ASR) by making use of the continuity of Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
to query the RGB values of a high-resolution (HR) image
and feeding its index to the MLP network. The following

