This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking DPO-style Diffusion Aligning Frameworks
Xun Wu1

Lingjie Jiang2
Furu Wei1
2
Peking University

Shaohan Huang1 *
1
Microsoft Research

{xunwu, shaohanh, fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Direct preference optimization (DPO) has shown success in
aligning diffusion models with human preference. However,
We identify two potential risks for existing DPO algorithms:
First, current DPO methods for estimating the rewards of
step-wise intermediate samples are biased, leading to inaccurate preference ordering for step-wise optimization. Second, existing DPO methods may inadvertently increase the
sampling probabilities of dispreferred samples, potentially
introducing application risks. To address these issues, we
propose Revised Direct Preference Optimization (RDPO),
a simple but effective step-wise DPO-based text-to-image
diffusion model alignment method. By designing a more theoretically grounded and efficient intermediate-step reward estimation and introducing an additional regularization terms
to constrain the sampling probability of dispreferred samples,
RDPO can achieve more effective and stable text-to-image
alignment performance. Our experiments on two datasets,
with base models including Stable Diffusion v1.5 and SDXL,
demonstrate that RDPO can effectively learn and construct
reward signals for each step of the model, improving alignment performance while ensuring better generalization.
Code is available at https://github.com/yushuiwx/RDPO.git

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generative models [28, 33, 35, 38] have seen
significant advancements in recent years. Notably, largescale text-to-image diffusion models such as Imagen [34] and
DALL·E 2 [28] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
generating high-quality and creative images based on textual
prompts. However, despite these advancements, current
generative models still suffer from misalignment with human
preferences, such as discrepancies with the provided text
prompts or the generation of incorrect content [25].
Direct preference optimization (DPO), which fine-tunes
the model on paired data to align the model generations with
human preferences, has demonstrated its success in large
* Corresponding author.

lingjiejiang@stu.pku.edu.cn

language models (LLMs) [27]. Recently, researchers generalized this method to diffusion models for text-to-image generation [2, 20, 29, 42, 48]. Given a pair of images generated
from the same prompt and a ranking of human preferences
for them, DPO aims to increase the likelihood of generating
the preferred sample while reducing the likelihood of generating the less preferred sample. This process enables the
model to produce more visually appealing and aesthetically
aligned images that better reflect human preferences.
However, after carefully revisiting existing DPO methods
for text-to-image diffusion alignment, we identify two potential risk: (1) First, when estimating the rewards of intermediate step-wise samples, existing DPO algorithm either relies
on strong assumptions that are difficult to satisfy [41, 47]
or introduces bias [20, 29], leading to an inaccurate determination of the preference order of step-wise samples. (2)
Second, we find that existing DPO methods can increase
the sampling probabilities of dispreferred samples, as long
as the relative probability between the preferred and dispreferred classes increases, which may introduce application
risks and potential issues with generalization performance.
We conduct detailed theoretical analysis of both two issues
in § 3.2 and § 3.3, respectively.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose Revised Direct Preference Optimization (RDPO) to address abovementioned
two risk. First, our theoretical analysis reveals that the intermediate reward used in existing DPO algorithms is a Q-value,
representing the expected final reward of the entire diffusion
trajectory up to step  t . However, a true step-wise reward at
step  t  should be the difference between the Q-values (i.e.,
∆Q) at steps  t  and  t-1 , capturing the impact of the denoising process at that step. Thus, unlike previous methods that
approximate step-wise rewards using the full trajectory’s
expectation, RDPO leverages this expectation difference
∆Q, enabling more accurate intermediate-step reward estimation. Additionally, to address risk 2—ensuring that DPO
follows the principle of increasing the generation probability
of preferred samples while decreasing that of dispreferred
samples—RDPO introduce an additional penalty term. This
term is jointly optimized with the loss function to constrain
the sampling probability of dispreferred samples.

18068

