This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One Last Attention for Your Vision-Language Model
Liang Chen*†
MBZUAI

Ghazi Shazan Ahmad*
MBZUAI

Tianjun Yao
MBZUAI

liangchen527@gmail.com

ghazi.ahmad@mbzuai.ac.ae

tianjun.yao@mbzuai.ac.ae

Lingqiao Liu
The University of Adelaide

Zhiqiang Shen‡
MBZUAI

lingqiao.liu@adelaide.edu.au

zhiqiang.shen@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract

input

Pretrained vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP,
achieve remarkable zero-shot performance, yet their downstream potential hinges on effective fine-tuning. Most adaptation methods typically focus on refining representation
from separate modalities (text or vision) but neglect the
critical role of their fused representations in the decisionmaking process, i.e. rational matrix that drives the final
prediction [5]. To bridge the gap, we propose a simple
yet effective Rational Adaptaion (RAda) to explicitly exploit
the final fused representation during fine-tuning. RAda employs a learned mask, obtained from a lightweight attention
layer attached at the end of a VLM, to dynamically calibrate
the contribution of each element in the rational matrix, enabling targeted adjustments to the final cross-modal interactions without incurring costly modifications to intermediate features. Experiments in different settings (i.e. updating, or freezing pretrained encoders in adaptation, and testtime training that can only access the unlabeled test data)
show that RAda serves as a versatile fine-tuning technique,
improving the baseline with minimal code and performing
comparably against current arts in most settings. Code is
available at github.com/khufia/RAda.

text

(a) Prompt tuning

input

image

(b) Adapter tuning

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Comparisons between fine-tuning ideas for VLMs that
incorporate new parameters. Blue and green blocks denote fixed
encoders and learnable parameters. Unlike previous arts that focus
on intermediate features from separate modalities, we aim at the
fused representations in the final decision-making process, adjusting the corresponding rational matrix [5] to achieve adaptation.

tations, with the closest match determining the prediction.
Thanks to the rich supervision provided by the diverse data
pairs, such “zero-shot” classifiers can reason about openvocabulary visual concepts and obtain impressive robustness to many distribution shifts. Nevertheless, in many occasions, it is still beneficial that pretrained VLMs can be
adapted to the given data distribution through fine-tuning.
There are several different fine-tuning strategies applicable for VLMs when the source data is available. Besides
fine-tuning within the standard practice of transfer learning, which updates all parameters [15, 23] or only the classification head, some recent methods suggest altering the
original text or visual representations by tuning newly introduced parameters. Ideas are achieved by either incorporating learnable prompts as an addition to alter the original input embeddings [20, 33, 48, 54, 55] (i.e. prompt tuning, as seen in Figure 1 (a)), or inserting lightweight learnable parameters within the encoders to modify their outputs [8, 12, 14, 26, 36, 51] (i.e. adapter tuning, as seen in
Figure 1 (b)). Despite their distinct settings, most methods treat the text or visual features in isolation, overlook-

1. Introduction
Recent foundation models trained on multiple modalities (e.g. vision, language, audio) have demonstrated exceptional generalization across diverse tasks. Among
these, vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP [30] and
ALIGN [19], pretrained on large-scale image-text pairs,
achieve remarkable zero-shot classification by aligning input images with text prompts. This alignment is measured by the similarity between image and text represen∗ Equal technical contribution. † Project lead. ‡ Correspondence.

1464

