This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVER: Exact Volumetric Ellipsoid Rendering for Real-time View Synthesis
Alexander Mai1∗

Peter Hedman2

George Kopanas2

amai@ucsd.edu

hedman@google.com

gkopanas@google.com

Dor Verbin2

David Futschik2

Qiangeng Xu2

dfutschik@google.com

qiangenx@google.com

dorverbin@google.com

Falko Kuester3
fkuester@ucsd.edu
1

Jonathan T. Barron2
barron@google.com

University of California, San Diego

2

Google

Yinda Zhang2
yindaz@google.com

∗

work done while at Google

3DGS

StopThePop

3DGS

StopThePop

Global Sort

Ray Sort

Ours

GT

Ours

GT

Ours

GT via Quadrature

Figure 1. An overview of the quality beneﬁts of our EVER technique. Left: On the Zip-NeRF dataset, our model produces the sharpest
results ever. Middle: Our method is able to blend primitive colors together to reproduce light and shadow better than other 3DGS-based
methods. Right: The way our approach blends colors is physically accurate over any number of primitives, matching the ground truth
computed via quadrature.

Abstract
We present Exact Volumetric Ellipsoid Rendering
(EVER), a method for real-time 3D reconstruction. EVER
accurately blends an unlimited number of overlapping
primitives together in 3D space, eliminating the popping
artifacts that 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) and other related methods exhibit. EVER represents a radiance ﬁeld as
a set of constant-density volumetric ellipsoids, which are
raytraced by intersecting each primitive twice (once upon
ray entrance and another on ray exit) and accumulating the
derivatives of the densities and colors along the ray. Because EVER is built around ray tracing, it also enables effects such as defocus blur and ﬁsh-eye camera distortion,
while still achieving frame rates of ∼ 30 FPS at 720p on an
NVIDIA RTX4090. We show that our method is more accurate on the challenging large-scale scenes from the ZipNeRF dataset, where it achieves state of the art SSIM, even

higher than Zip-NeRF.

1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of 3D reconstruction for novel view synthesis has explored a variety of scene representations: point
based [23], surface based [28, 46, 49], and volume
based [31, 33]. Since their introduction in NeRF [31], differentiable rendering of volumetric scene representations
have become popular due to their ability to yield photorealistic 3D reconstructions. More recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) combined the speed of point based models with
the differentiability of volume based representations by representing the scene as a collection of millions of Gaussian
primitives that can be rendered via rasterization in real-time.
Unlike NeRF, 3DGS lacks a true volumetric density
ﬁeld, and uses Gaussians to describe the opacity of the scene

4930

