This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uniﬁed Multi-Agent Trajectory Modeling with Masked Trajectory Diffusion
Songru Yang, Zhenwei Shi, Zhengxia Zou∗
Department of Aerospace Intelligent Science and Technology,
School of Astronautics, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{songruyang2001, shizhenwei, zhengxiazou}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Understanding movements in multi-agent scenarios is a
fundamental problem in intelligent systems. Previous research assumes complete and synchronized observations.
However, real-world partial observation caused by occlusions leads to inevitable model failure, which demands a
uniﬁed framework for coexisting trajectory prediction, imputation, and recovery. Unlike previous attempts that handled observed and unobserved behaviors in a coupled manner, we explore a decoupled denoising diffusion modeling
paradigm with a unidirectional information valve to separate the interference from uncertain behaviors. Building
on this, we proposed a Uniﬁed Masked Trajectory Diffusion model (UniMTD) for arbitrary levels of missing observations. We designed a unidirectional attention as a
valve unit to control the direction of information ﬂow between the observed and masked areas, gradually reﬁning
the missing observations toward a real-world distribution.
We construct it into a unidirectional MoE structure to handle varying proportions of missing observations. A Cached
Diffusion model is further designed to improve generation
quality while reducing computation and time overhead. Our
method has achieved a great leap across human motions
and vehicle trafﬁc. UniMTD efﬁciently achieves 74% improvement in minADE20 and reaches SOTA with advantages of 91%, 66%, 69%, and 58% across 4 ﬁdelity metrics
on out-of-boundary, velocity, and trajectory length.

1. Introduction
Understanding multi-agent behavior is a critical foundation
in various domains, including autonomous driving [35], action analysis [15, 26, 74], video surveillance [79, 83], and
scene generation [69]. Trajectory modeling, which analyzes and generates the position sequence of multiple agents
within the same scene, is particularly straightforward and
effective for understanding agents’ behavior.
* Corresponding author

Existing methods have made signiﬁcant strides in trajectory prediction [4, 59, 72, 76, 86, 87], imputation [46,
84, 85], and recovery[20, 22] across multiple ﬁelds, such
as human sports and trafﬁc trajectory. However, existing
approaches cannot handle multiple tasks simultaneously,
leaving a gap between methods and real-world scenarios
where all three tasks coexist, as shown in Fig.1 (a). Recently, increasing attempts have been made to break the
task boundaries. [36, 40, 53, 73] employed multi-task
frameworks to combine trajectory imputation and prediction. [24, 57, 62, 88] distilled complete trajectory knowledge into partially observed models. Lately, [71] ﬁrst exploited mask formats as conditional input to unify all three
tasks in a BERT-SSM structure.
Even though signiﬁcant efforts have been devoted, existing approaches handled observed and unobserved behaviors
in a coupled manner and encountered challenges in generating realistic multi-agent trajectories. Their suboptimal
performance is inevitable for 2 reasons. First, they failed
to realize that coupling the accurate representations and the
uncertain ones with signiﬁcant noise is deviating its latent
space from the real-world behavior distribution. Second,
more than an attached condition, the observation masks are
precise boundaries between accuracy and uncertainty that
need to be explicitly incorporated into the decoupling.
In this work, we reexamine uniﬁed trajectory modeling
from coupled to decoupled manner. We introduce UniMTD,
a uniﬁed framework for trajectory modeling in a decoupled
denoising diffusion modeling paradigm, as a ‘panacea’ for
arbitrary levels of missing observations in real practice. To
achieve decoupling according to observation masks, a unidirectional attention as the valve unit is proposed. By controlling one-way information ﬂow between observed and
masked tokens, it can separate the uncertain noise, maintain
the accuracy of the latent space, and consistently project
the masked representations into the preserved space. For
decoding, we consider the pre-completed encoder output as
the deterministic component of the trajectory pattern and directly reuse it as intermediate parts in the diffusion model
to efﬁciently improve trajectory generation quality. Main

27563

