This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GENMO: A GENeralist Model for Human MOtion
Jiefeng Li

0

Jinkun Cao

Haotian Zhang

Davis Rempe Jan Kautz Umar Iqbal
NVIDIA
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dair/genmo

10

20

30

“walks in a counterclockwise
circle and raises
their hand to
their face to
yawn.”

“walks over
to a chair sits
and then gets
back up.”

Ye Yuan

40

“walks up stair,
holding a rail to
their left.”

seconds

Music
(Relaxing Ballet)

keyframe

Figure 1. GENMO unifies human motion estimation and generation in a single framework and supports diverse conditioning signals including monocular videos, 2D keypoints, text descriptions, music, and 3D keyframes. GENMO can estimate accurate global human motion
from videos with dynamic cameras and seamlessly handles arbitrary combinations and lengths of conditioning signals while generating
smooth transitions between them. All of this is achieved in a single feedforward diffusion pass without complex post-processing.

Abstract
Human motion modeling traditionally separates motion
generation and estimation into distinct tasks with specialized models. Motion generation models focus on creating diverse, realistic motions from inputs like text, audio,
or keyframes, while motion estimation models aim to reconstruct accurate motion trajectories from observations
like videos. Despite sharing underlying representations of
temporal dynamics and kinematics, this separation limits
knowledge transfer between tasks and requires maintaining
separate models. We present GENMO, a unified Generalist Model for Human Motion that bridges motion estimation and generation in a single framework. Our key insight
is to reformulate motion estimation as constrained motion
generation, where the output motion must precisely satisfy
observed conditioning signals. Leveraging the synergy between regression and diffusion, GENMO achieves accurate
global motion estimation while enabling diverse motion
generation. We also introduce an estimation-guided train-

ing objective that exploits in-the-wild videos with 2D annotations and text descriptions to enhance generative diversity. Furthermore, our novel architecture handles variablelength motions and mixed multimodal conditions (text, audio, video) at different time intervals, offering flexible control. This unified approach creates synergistic benefits:
generative priors improve estimated motions under challenging conditions like occlusions, while diverse video data
enhances generation capabilities. Extensive experiments
demonstrate GENMO’s effectiveness as a generalist framework that successfully handles multiple human motion tasks
within a single model.

1. Introduction

11766

Human motion modeling is a longstanding topic in computer vision and graphics, with applications in gaming,
animation, and 3D content creation. These creative applications typically require precise and intuitive user con-

