This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Single Images: Retrieval Self-Augmented Unsupervised
Camouflaged Object Detection
Ji Du1,2 , Xin Wang2 , Fangwei Hao1,∗ , Mingyang Yu1
Chunyuan Chen1 , Jiesheng Wu3 , Bin Wang1 , Jing Xu1,∗ , Ping Li2, *
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Nankai University, China
2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
3
School of Computer and Information, Anhui Normal University, China

Abstract

Image-Level
ENVIR.
OBJ.

At the core of Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) lies
segmenting objects from their highly similar surroundings.
Previous efforts navigate this challenge primarily through
image-level modeling or annotation-based optimization.
Despite advancing considerably, this commonplace practice hardly taps valuable dataset-level contextual information or relies on laborious annotations. In this paper,
we propose RISE, a RetrIeval SElf-augmented paradigm
that exploits the entire training dataset to generate pseudolabels for single images, which could be used to train COD
models. RISE begins by constructing prototype libraries for
environments and camouflaged objects using training images (without ground truth), followed by K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) retrieval to generate pseudo-masks for each image based on these libraries. It is important to recognize
that using only training images without annotations exerts
a pronounced challenge in crafting high-quality prototype
libraries. In this light, we introduce a Clustering-thenRetrieval (CR) strategy, where coarse masks are first generated through clustering, facilitating subsequent histogrambased image filtering and cross-category retrieval to produce high-confidence prototypes. In the KNN retrieval
stage, to alleviate the effect of artifacts in feature maps,
we propose Multi-View KNN Retrieval (MVKR), which integrates retrieval results from diverse views to produce more
robust and precise pseudo-masks. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that RISE outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised and prompt-based methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/xiaohainku/RISE.

* Corresponding
authors:
Fangwei Hao, Jing
jing@nankai.edu.cn) and Ping Li (p.li@polyu.edu.hk).

Xu

(xu-

Dataset-Level
Back. Proto.
Fore. Proto.

t-SNE

Obj. Simi. Distri.

Envir. Simi. Distri.

Previous Method

Image

Ours

Figure 1. LEFT: t-SNE visualization of DINOv2 [54] features and
segmentation results from previous unsupervised methods. The
highly similar characteristics between the camouflaged object and
its environment cause the intra-image similarity-based approach to
underperform on the COD task. RIGHT: Similarity distributions
of global features of camouflaged objects and environments on the
respective foreground and background prototype libraries. These
prototype libraries are constructed from the COD dataset. Both the
camouflaged object and the environment show a higher similarity
to their corresponding prototype libraries, suggesting that datasetlevel information can be effectively utilized to distinguish between
the highly similar foreground and background in a single image.

1. Introduction
Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) [14] is dedicated to
segmenting objects meticulously concealed within their surroundings. Existing research efforts have predominantly
concentrated on leveraging contextual information within
individual images to accurately delineate and extract camouflaged objects from visually homogeneous backgrounds.
Mainstream supervised learning methods, including
fully supervised [15, 32, 48, 55, 71, 75], weakly supervised [7, 8, 20, 25, 73], and semi-supervised [37, 79], exploit varying degrees of single-image-level supervised signals, such as dense annotations, scribbles, bounding boxes,
and categories, to model the intrinsic relationship between

22131

