This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I2V3D: Controllable image-to-video generation with 3D guidance
Zhiyuan Zhang1 , Dongdong Chen2 , Jing Liao1‡
1
2
City University of Hong Kong
Microsoft GenAI
https://bestzzhang.github.io/I2V3D

Figure 1. Starting with a single image, our method reconstructs the complete scene geometry and uses the CG pipeline to enable precise
control of character animation (e.g., keyframe animation or skeleton control) and camera movement (e.g., the camera rotation in the 2nd
and 3rd rows, and the camera panning and zooming in the 1st and 4th rows). We then apply geometric guidance, based on the coarse
rendering results, to generate high-quality, controllable videos.

ance. Experimental results highlight the effectiveness of our
framework in producing controllable, high-quality animations from single input images by harmonizing 3D geometry
with generative models.

Abstract
We present I2V3D, a novel framework for animating
static images into dynamic videos with precise 3D control,
leveraging the strengths of both 3D geometry guidance and
advanced generative models. Our approach combines the
precision of a computer graphics pipeline, enabling accurate control over elements such as camera movement, object rotation, and character animation, with the visual fidelity of generative AI to produce high-quality videos from
coarsely rendered inputs. To support animations with any
initial start point and extended sequences, we adopt a twostage generation process guided by 3D geometry: 1) 3DGuided Keyframe Generation, where a customized image
diffusion model refines rendered keyframes to ensure consistency and quality, and 2) 3D-Guided Video Interpolation, a
training-free approach that generates smooth, high-quality
video frames between keyframes using bidirectional guid-

1. Introduction

† Corresponding Author: jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

Recent advancements in image-to-video generation models [3, 11, 31, 63] have significantly improved the ability to produce high-quality videos with dynamic motions.
However, these methods still face substantial challenges
in providing precise controllability during the generation
process. For example, Stable Video Diffusion (SVD) [2]
constrains the first frame of the generated video to be the
given input image, offering no user control over subsequent frames. While subsequent text-based image-to-video
methods [41, 59] allow rough motion control using textual
prompts, they fall short of achieving precise control over
object and camera movements as well. To address these
limitations, bounding box-based [54, 60] and trajectory-

13360

