This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Embodied VideoAgent: Persistent Memory from Egocentric Videos and
Embodied Sensors Enables Dynamic Scene Understanding
⋆

†

⋆†

Yue Fan1 , Xiaojian Ma1 , Rongpeng Su1,2 , Jun Guo1,3 , Rujie Wu1,4 , Xi Chen1 , Qing Li1
1
2

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI, Beijing, China

University of Science and Technology of China 3 Tsinghua University 4 Peking University
{fanyue,maxiaojian,liqing}@bigai.ai
https://embodied-videoagent.github.io

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of understanding dynamic 3D scenes from egocentric observations, a key challenge in robotics and embodied AI. Unlike prior studies
that explored this as long-form video understanding and
utilized egocentric video only, we instead propose an LLMbased agent, Embodied VideoAgent, which constructs scene
memory from both egocentric video and embodied sensory
inputs (e.g. depth and pose sensing). We further introduce
a VLM-based approach to automatically update the memory when actions or activities over objects are perceived.
Embodied VideoAgent attains significant advantages over
counterparts in challenging reasoning and planning tasks in
3D scenes, achieving gains of 6.5% on Ego4D-VQ3D, 2.6%
on OpenEQA, and 15.3% on EnvQA. We have also demonstrated its potential in various embodied AI tasks including
generating embodied interactions and perception for robot
manipulation. The code and demo will be made public.

Figure 1. Embodied VideoAgent is a multimodal agent that 1) builds
scene memory from both egocentric video and embodied sensory
input; 2) utilizes multiple tools to query this memory; 3) activates
embodied action primitives to interact with the environments, effectively fulfills various user requests.

tent memory about the scene that allows frequent update
over time [10, 17, 41]. However, existing efforts on this
front mostly adopt end-to-end pretrained multimodal large
models (MLMs) [16, 23, 24, 27, 63, 67, 68]. Their capabilities of handling long-form videos and embodied sensory observations have been questioned by several prior
studies [22, 34, 47, 57], especially when the scene being
depicted is highly volatile with complex events and spatialtemporal dependencies [13, 18, 19]. Some sophisticated
MLMs coming out recently have attained great progress in
understanding long-form videos and the underlying embodied scenes [48, 49, 55], but the computation cost can grow at
a prohibitively expensive rate. All these issues have hindered
the progress of deploying robust dynamic scene perception
pipelines on edge devices like robots in the wild.
Unlike these end-to-end models, there has been rapid development in another family of multimodal understanding
approaches – multimodal agents [5, 7, 12, 45, 56]. These

1. Introduction
Understanding dynamic 3D scenes is crucial to the development of generally capable embodied AI [16, 52–54]. In
this paper, we investigate approaching this problem using
egocentric observations [3, 5, 9, 19, 25, 33, 38], which is
one of the most intuitive way of how humans and robots
perceive the world around them. The key challenges include: 1) making sense of environments from lengthy egocentric videos and other forms of embodied sensory inputs
(depth maps, camera poses, etc.) [16, 42, 44, 69]; 2) handling dynamic environments as actions and activities might
be performed by embodied agents themselves and other
co-habited characters [3, 9, 33]; 3) maintaining a persis⋆ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

6342

