This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Part Discovery via Descriptor-Based Masked Image Restoration
with Optimized Constraints
Jiahao Xia1 , Yike Wu1 , Wenjian Huang2 , Jianguo Zhang2 , Jian Zhang*,1
1
Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Eng., Southern University of Science and Technology
Jiahao.Xia-1@uts.edu.au, Yike.Wu@student.uts.edu.au, {huangwj, zhangjg}@sustech.edu.cn, Jian.Zhang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Unmasked
Patch Features

Randomly Mask

Filled Feature map

Restored Image

Restore

Part-level features are crucial for image understanding, but
few studies focus on them because of the lack of fine-grained
labels. Although unsupervised part discovery can eliminate the reliance on labels, most of them cannot maintain
robustness across various categories and scenarios, which
restricts their application range. To overcome this limitation, we present a more effective paradigm for unsupervised
part discovery, named Masked Part Autoencoder (MPAE).
It first learns part descriptors as well as a feature map from
the inputs and produces patch features from a masked version of the original images. Then, the masked regions are
filled with the learned part descriptors based on the similarity between the local features and descriptors. By restoring these masked patches using the part descriptors, they
become better aligned with their part shapes, guided by appearance features from unmasked patches. Finally, MPAE
robustly discovers meaningful parts that closely match the
actual object shapes, even in complex scenarios. Moreover, several looser yet more effective constraints are proposed to enable MPAE to identify the presence of parts
across various scenarios and categories in an unsupervised
manner. This provides the foundation for addressing challenges posed by occlusion and for exploring part similarity
across multiple categories. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method robustly discovers meaningful parts
across various categories and scenarios. The code is available at the project website1 .

Fill

Part Descriptors

Restoration Process

Original Image
Similarity Maps

Cluster

Feature Map

Ship Hull

Cluster

Ship Sail

Constrain
Cluster

Ship Bow

Cluster

Background

Figure 1. MPAE uses similarity maps between local image features and part descriptors to assign these descriptors to fill masked
regions in a randomly masked version of the inputs. The restoration implicitly clusters the features of the restored patches that
share similar appearance, further aligning low-level appearance
in unmasked patches and high-level semantics of part descriptors.
This drives similarity maps to closely match the actual part shapes.

havior analysis [25]. But the high cost of part-level label
results in a scarcity of training samples. Consequently, partlevel feature learning has received much less attention compared to instance-level feature learning.
To eliminate the reliance on part-level labels, existing
methods achieve part discovery mainly through two strategies: reconstruction [12, 19, 21, 23, 32, 40, 41, 43] and clustering [4, 6]. By directly reconstructing the input images using learned part descriptors, the descriptors are expected to
align with the part shapes, allowing these part descriptors to
further predict part masks. However, to discover meaningful parts, these descriptors are designed to learn high-level
semantics rather than low-level appearance [1], which prevents such reconstruction and alignment, especially in complex scenarios. Clustering-based methods use foreground
masks to remove irrelevant regions and directly cluster foreground features, regardless of their actual appearance similarity. Some near-outlier features are identified as separate
parts, leading to the discovery of unreasonable parts.
To address these limitations and extend unsupervised

1. Introduction
Decomposing objects into meaningful parts drives models to gain better image understanding and further improves the performance of downstream tasks, such as person search [27], fine-grained classifcation [2, 35] and be* Corresponding Author
1 https://github.com/Jiahao-UTS/MPAE

8668

