This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Extraction and Representation of Pre-training Point Cloud Based on
Diffusion Models
Chang Qiu
Southeast University

Feipeng Da*
Southeast University

Zilei Zhang
Southeast University

230238519@seu.edu.cn

dafp@seu.edu.cn

230238524@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
The pretrain-finetune paradigm of pre-training a model on
large amounts of image and text data and then fine-tuning
the model for a specific task has led to significant progress
in many 2D image and natural language processing tasks.
Similarly, the use of pre-training methods in point cloud
data can also enhance the working performance and generalization ability of the model. Therefore, in this paper,
we propose a pre-training framework based on a diffusion
model called PreDifPoint. It is able to accomplish the pretraining of the model’s backbone network through a diffusion process of gradual denoising. We aggregate the potential features extracted from the backbone network, input
them as conditions into the subsequent diffusion model, and
direct the point-to-point mapping relationship of the noisy
point clouds at neighboring time steps, so as to generate
high-quality point clouds and at the same time better perform various downstream tasks of the point clouds. We
also introduce a bi-directional covariate attention (DXCAAttention) mechanism for capturing complex feature interactions, fusing local and global features, and improving
the detail recovery of point clouds. In addition, we propose a density-adaptive sampling strategy, which can help
the model dynamically adjust the sampling strategy between
different time steps, and guide the model to pay more attention to the denser regions in the point cloud, thus improving
the effectiveness of the model in point cloud recovery. Our
PreDifPoint framework achieves more competitive results
on various real-world datasets. Specifically, PreDifPoint
achieves an overall accuracy of 87.96%, which is 0.35%
higher than PointDif, on the classification task on PB-T50395RS, a variant of ScanObjectNN dataset.

amounts of image and text data and then fine-tuned for specific tasks, has led to substantial advancements in many 2D
image and natural language processing tasks [11, 16, 27].
Pretraining the backbone on large-scale datasets enables
the model to learn rich feature representations while also
avoiding the need for large amounts of data and computational resources required for training a model from scratch
[8, 9, 32]. Pretrained models, after fine-tuning, can learn
task-specific knowledge, exhibit better generalization capabilities, and converge to optimal performance levels more
rapidly [6, 14]. Similarly, using pretraining methods for
point cloud data can also enhance the model’s performance
and generalization ability [44, 46, 48].
Generative pretraining methods, through generative
models, capture the complex structure and intricate details of point cloud data, thereby obtaining more powerful feature representations. Early works such as PointBERT [44], Point-MAE [23], and Point-M2AE [45] employed self-supervised learning by reconstructing masked
local point patches, forcing the model to learn local point
cloud information. However, this masking and reconstruction approach may overlook the contextual relationships between masked and unmasked regions, preventing the model
from effectively understanding the global structure of the
object or scene. Inspired by diffusion models [10], which
can understand global structure and long-term dependencies
through the process of adding and removing noise, we propose using a diffusion model to guide the pretraining process of point clouds.
Thus, we introduce a diffusion-based pretraining framework, named PreDifPoint. This framework pretrains only
the backbone network of the model, and then fine-tunes the
task-specific parts. The pretraining of the backbone network is achieved through a progressive denoising diffusion
process, as shown in Fig. 1. By pretraining the backbone, it
can learn meaningful features during the feature extraction
phase, which also significantly enhances the model’s generalization ability. At the same time, this reduces the number
of parameters that need to be adjusted during training, accelerating convergence and reducing overfitting.

1. Introduction
Recent work has demonstrated that the pretrain-finetune
paradigm, where a model is first pretrained on large
* Corresponding author.

26559

