This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Privacy-centric Deep Motion Retargeting for Anonymization of Skeleton-Based
Motion Visualization
Thomas Carr1 Depeng Xu1 Shuhan Yuan2 Aidong Lu1
1
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
2
Utah State University
{tcarr23, dxu7, aidong.lu}@charlotte.edu, shuhan.yuan@usu.edu

Abstract
Capturing and visualizing motion using skeleton-based
techniques is a key aspect of computer vision, particularly
in virtual reality (VR) settings. Its popularity has surged,
driven by the simplicity of obtaining skeleton data and
the growing appetite for virtual interaction. Although this
skeleton data appears to be non-identifiable, it can be exploited to derive personally identifiable information (PII),
posing a risk of inadvertent privacy breaches. In this paper, we explore the application of motion retargeting and its
ability to mitigate privacy leakages. Motion retargeting can
effectively transfer the motion from an initial user onto a
dummy skeleton with the purpose of hiding PII. We propose
a Privacy-centric Deep Motion Retargeting model (PMR),
which mitigates the PII through adversarial learning. In
our evaluation, our proposed model achieves motion retargeting performance on par with the current state-of-the-art
models. More importantly, it effectively prevents the attackers from identifying the initial user. Code is available at
github.com/Thomasc33/Privacy-Retargeting.

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed privacy-centric motion retargeting approach. Rather than displaying the original user’s skeleton, we transfer its motion to a dummy skeleton, thereby masking personally identifiable traits like body shape, gait, and limb
lengths.

1. Introduction

define personally identifiable information (PII) in skeleton
data to include static traits (limb lengths, body proportions),
dynamic style (gait, posture), and compound cues that enable re-identification or sensitive inferences [3, 7, 11]. Removing these identifiable traits is necessary to preserve user
privacy.
We consider three primary privacy threats in our work:
(1) Re-identification attacks, where an adversary attempts to
match anonymized skeletons with a known user profile, (2)
Linkage attacks, which determine whether two skeleton sequences are from the same user, and (3) Sensitive Attribute
Inference (gender or health conditions), a straightforward
yet powerful demonstration of how easily an attacker can
infer sensitive attributes from skeleton data [3, 13]. We
also assume attackers may have auxiliary data or pretrained
models, as is often the case in realistic VR or motion capture settings. These attacks are further demonstrated in a
study [4].

The rapid advancement of virtual reality (VR) technologies
has brought in a new era of digital interaction, where the
boundaries between physical and virtual worlds are blending. Skeleton-based data is a critical component for creating immersive and interactive VR experiences. Consumer
motion capture systems like the Microsoft Xbox Kinect v2
translate the movement of users into digital avatars for various applications, playing a pivotal role in enhancing VR
experiences [8, 9, 14, 16]. However, the benefits of skeleton data are accompanied by privacy concerns that have not
been fully addressed [4, 19], marking a crucial area for ongoing research.
Privacy in skeleton data is important due to the sensitive nature of the information it can reveal. We explicitly

13162

