This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stepping Out of Similar Semantic Space for Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Yong Liu1,2 *, Song-Li Wu1,2 *, Sule Bai1,2 *, Jiahao Wang3 , Yitong Wang4 , Yansong Tang1,2†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School 2 Tsinghua University
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 ByteDance Inc.
liuyong23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

.

VOC

Abstract

mIoU Gap

+0.6

PC-59

Open-vocabulary segmentation aims to achieve segmentation of arbitrary categories given unlimited text inputs as
guidance. To achieve this, recent works have focused on
developing various technical routes to exploit the potential
of large-scale pre-trained vision-language models and have
made significant progress on existing benchmarks. However, we find that existing test sets are limited in measuring the models’ comprehension of “open-vocabulary” concepts, as their semantic space closely resembles the training space, even with many overlapping categories. To this
end, we present a new benchmark named OpenBench that
differs significantly from the training semantics. It is designed to better assess the model’s ability to understand
and segment a wide range of real-world concepts. When
testing existing methods on OpenBench, we find that their
performance diverges from the conclusions drawn on existing test sets. In addition, we propose a method named
OVSNet to improve the segmentation performance for diverse and open scenarios. Through elaborate fusion of heterogeneous features and cost-free expansion of the training
space, OVSNet achieves state-of-the-art results on both existing datasets and our proposed OpenBench. Corresponding analysis demonstrates the rationality and effectiveness
of our proposed benchmark and method.

+3.7

ADE-150

+4.3

PC-459

+6.4

ADE-847
OpenBench

(a)

+1.9
-3.5

(b)

Figure 1. (a) shows the similarity distribution of the existing test
set (blue) and our OpenBench (orange) with the training semantic
space. (b) illustrates the performance gap between the methods
finetuning [10] and frozen [61] CLIP on different benchmarks.

lenge has inspired the exploration of Open-Vocabulary Segmentation (OVS) task [12, 15, 17, 18, 27, 37, 55, 64]. Different from traditional closed-set segmentation, OVS methods aim to segment arbitrary categories under the guidance
of given text inputs, which has many potential applications
such as auto-driving and human-robot interaction [19, 39].

1. Introduction

However, it is challenging to identify unseen categories
without the intervention of external knowledge. Therefore,
an intuitive idea is to introduce large-scale vision-language
model [24, 46] trained with numerous sources to extend
the semantic space of segmentation models. Following this
idea, existing OVS methods [10, 31, 37, 57, 61, 62] concentrate on exploring how to exploit the pretrained knowledge
prior more effectively and derive several technical routes.
Early methods [12, 31, 60] adopt a two-stage pipeline.
This approach first generates class-agnostic mask proposals
with segmentation models, following which the pre-trained
CLIP [46] serves as an additional classifier to execute
region-level open-vocabulary classification. However, this
strategy incurs heavy computation overhead, as it requires
repeated forward passes of the CLIP vision encoder for each
mask. This can be prohibitively expensive for real-world
applications. To address this problem, researchers [25, 61–
63] propose to unify classification and segmentation within
a shared space, i.e., integrating frozen CLIP features into the
segmenter and extracting CLIP embeddings from potential

Semantic segmentation is one of the most fundamental tasks
in computer vision, which targets at assigning semantic category to pixels in an image. Despite achieving excellent
progress in recent years [2, 6, 20, 21, 33–36, 38, 42, 49–
52, 58], traditional semantic segmentation approaches rely
on predefined categories sets and tend to falter when encountering categories absent during the training phase, significantly impeding their real-world application. Such chal* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

22664

