This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Multi-Image Synthetic Data for Text-to-Image Customization
Nupur Kumari1

Xi Yin2
1

Jun-Yan Zhu1

Carnegie Mellon University

Ishan Misra2
2

Meta

on a sidewalk, with a
christmas tree and
lights in the
background. bokeh shot.

On a beach, palm trees
in the background
under golden sunlight

Hanging on a wire,
green fields in the
background

On a coffee table, with a
cup of coffee beside it.

(a) Synthetic Training Dataset

Samaneh Azadi2

(b) Inference with three images

(b) Inference with one image

Figure 1. (a) We propose a new pipeline for synthetic training data generation consisting of multiple images of the same object under
different lighting, poses, and backgrounds. Given the dataset, we train a new encoder-based model customization method, which can take
either (b) three or (c) one reference image of the object as input and successfully generate it in new compositions using text prompts.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Customization of text-to-image models enables users to
insert new concepts or objects and generate them in unseen settings. Existing methods either rely on comparatively
expensive test-time optimization or train encoders on singleimage datasets without multi-image supervision, which can
limit image quality. We propose a simple approach to address
these challenges. We first leverage existing text-to-image
models and 3D datasets to create a high-quality Synthetic
Customization Dataset (SynCD) consisting of multiple images of the same object in different lighting, backgrounds,
and poses. Using this dataset, we train an encoder-based
model that incorporates fine-grained visual details from reference images via a shared attention mechanism. Finally,
we propose an inference technique that normalizes text and
image guidance vectors to mitigate overexposure issues in
sampled images. Through extensive experiments, we show
that our encoder-based model, trained on SynCD, and with
the proposed inference algorithm, improves upon existing
encoder-based methods on standard customization benchmarks.

Text-to-image models are capable of generating high-fidelity
and realistic images given only a text prompt [13, 46, 51, 53].
Yet, text often falls short of describing rich visual details
of real-world objects, such as the unique toy in Figure 1.
What if the user wishes to generate images of this toy in
new scenarios? This has given rise to the emerging field of
model customization or personalization [6, 14, 28, 52, 67],
allowing us to generate new compositions of the object via
text prompts, e.g., the toy on a sidewalk with a different
background, as shown in Figure 1. Early optimization-based
works [14, 28, 68] for the task require many fine-tuning steps
on user-provided images of every new object — a process
both costly and slow. To address this, several encoder-based
methods [6, 31, 59, 67, 72] learn an image encoder model
with reference images as an additional conditional input.
Thus, during inference, these methods can generate new
compositions of the reference object in a single forward pass
without expensive per-object optimization.

16524

However, the lack of a dataset comprising multiple images of the same object in diverse poses, backgrounds, and
lighting conditions has been a major bottleneck in develop-

