This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseLaneSTP: Leveraging Spatio-Temporal Priors with Sparse Transformers
for 3D Lane Detection
Maximilian Pittner1,2 , Joel Janai1 , Mario Faigle*1,3 , Alexandru Paul Condurache1,2
1
Bosch Mobility Solutions, Robert Bosch GmbH
2
Institute of Neuro- and Bioinformatics, University of Lübeck
3
Institute for Signal Processing and System Theory, University of Stuttgart
{Maximilian.Pittner, Joel.Janai, Mario.Faigle, AlexandruPaul.Condurache}@de.bosch.com

Abstract
3D lane detection has emerged as a critical challenge in autonomous driving, encompassing identification and localization of lane markings and the 3D road surface. Conventional 3D methods detect lanes from dense birds-eyeviewed (BEV) features, though erroneous transformations
often result in a poor feature representation misaligned with
the true 3D road surface. While recent sparse lane detectors have surpassed dense BEV approaches, they completely
disregard valuable lane-specific priors. Furthermore, existing methods fail to utilize historic lane observations, which
yield the potential to resolve ambiguities in situations of
poor visibility. To address these challenges, we present
SparseLaneSTP, a novel method that integrates both geometric properties of the lane structure and temporal information into a sparse lane transformer. It introduces a new
lane-specific spatio-temporal attention mechanism, a continuous lane representation tailored for sparse architectures
as well as temporal regularization.
Identifying weaknesses of existing 3D lane datasets, we
also introduce a precise and consistent 3D lane dataset using a simple yet effective auto-labeling strategy. Our experimental section proves the benefits of our contributions and
demonstrates state-of-the-art performance across all detection and error metrics on existing 3D lane detection benchmarks as well as on our novel dataset.

depth information, which is crucial for autonomous navigation in the 3D world. In contrast, 3D lane detection
jointly estimates lane markings and the road surface, directly producing 3D lanes in a vehicle-centered coordinate
system. Conventional methods operate on dense feature
maps that are transformed from the front-viewed (FV) to
the birds-eye-viewed (BEV) perspective using inverse perspective mapping (IPM) [9, 11, 38] or learned mappings
[6, 39, 49]. Although this step yields a suitable intermediate representation to capture the road, potential errors in
the transformation cause misalignment between the resulting BEV and the true road surface that can hardly be compensated in the subsequent lane estimation step.

1. Introduction

As opposed to this two-stage approach, sparse detection
methods have gained popularity in object detection [34] and
have recently been adapted to 3D lane detection [2, 31].
These methods model 3D lane points as queries and associate them with uncorrupted FV image features - avoiding
the necessity of error-prone BEV representations. Queries
composed of learned context embedding vectors are integrated into transformer architectures [3, 54] leveraging their
ability to learn global context. However, current approaches
completely ignore valuable well-known priors about lane
and road geometry. Spatial priors have already been utilized in [39]. Based on lane continuity and other properties
like line parallelism, a continuous lane representation was
introduced together with an efficient regularization. Despite
notable advances brought by this approach, the architecture
is based on dense BEV representations and the proposed
priors have not been successfully customized for sparse architectures. Another class of prior knowledge is grounded
in the history of observations. Among various temporal fusion paradigms, object-centric query propagation [50] has
recently been proposed for 3D object detection in sparse
architectures. In lane detection, temporal information has
the potential to resolve ambiguities, particularly in scenarios with limited visibility or occlusions. Though, it has not

Accurate and robust 3D lane detection forms a pivotal task
in autonomous driving addressing safe and reliable identification and localization of the road surface and lane markings. While significant progress has been made in 2D lane
detection [10, 13, 17–19, 21, 35, 36, 40, 41, 46, 48, 55], the
prediction output is only provided in image space lacking
* Work done in context of master’s thesis at Bosch.

29099

