This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Brain Decoding:
Visual-Semantic Reconstructions to Mental Creation Extension Based on fMRI
Haodong Jing1 Dongyao Jiang1 Yongqiang Ma1 Haibo Hua1 Bo Huang2 Nanning Zheng1 *
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University
jinghd@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, nnzheng@xjtu.edu.cn

Figure 1. NeuroCreat can combine brain multi-features and LMM to achieve accurate semantic extraction with brain expert adaptation as
well as prompt variant alignment, and to extract creative information from visual working memory.

Abstract
Decoding visual information from fMRI signals is an important pathway to understand how the brain represents the
world, and is a cutting-edge field of artificial general intelligence. Decoding fMRI should not be limited to reconstructing visual stimuli, but also further transforming them into
descriptions, creating actions, and even generating unseen
content. We purposefully propose a novel and efficient brain
multimodal architecture, NeuroCreat, which combines the
powerful visual and textual abilities of LLM to capture finegrained semantic information from fMRI, transformed it
into embodied implementation of different neural representations. Specifically, we innovatively designed a brain expert adaption (BEA) module, effectively capturing commonalities and individual differences among subjects through
the collaborative learning of shared/routed experts. Inspired by human visual working memory, we extracted “creation” information from higher visual cortex for idea generation. We further constructed a prompt variant alignment module, seamlessly integrates fMRI-visual-semanticcreation into LLM to achieve flexible incorporation of different semantics in the decoding of neural representations.

Experiments on different fMRI datasets show that NeuroCreat achieves SOTA performance on multiple brain decoding tasks. More importantly, we have innovatively achieved
few-shot brain video creation, which opens up a new direction for demonstrating the brain’s ‘imaginative’ ability.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

“The brain’s lens not only sees but creates realities.” The
human brain is a complex and marvellous organism from
which we have made advances in artificial intelligence by
imitating only some simple mechanisms [47]. The most direct way to understand how the brain works is “seeing” the
information from neural signals, such as fMRI [26], which
encodes the world we perceive every day. Thus the brain becomes an experienced creator as we think about and witness
the world [55]. The challenge of mimicking the complexity
and variety of these tasks excites us [31]. We hope that the
visual-semantic decoding model we have constructed will
help more people in the future to demonstrate their creativity and make progress in practical application areas such as
brain-computer interfaces (BCI) [9].
Humans possess a unique ability to extract semantic concepts from visual information, and the learning of diverse

19258

