This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Accurate and Efﬁcient 3D Object Detection for Autonomous Driving:
A Mixture of Experts Computing System on Edge
Linshen Liu1,∗ Boyan Su1,∗ Junyue Jiang1 Guanlin Wu1
Cong Guo2 Ceyu Xu3 Hao Frank Yang1,†
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Duke University 3 HKUST
{lliu148, bsu11}@jh.edu, haofrankyang@jhu.edu
Accuracy

Abstract

Accuracy-Prioritized Methods

High

LoGoNet [50]
(2023, CVPR)
VFF [51]
(2022, CVPR)

L

M3DETR [45]
(2022, WACV)

EMC2 (Ours)

M
M

M

M PartA2-Free [48] L

L 3ONet [49]

(2020, TPAMI)

(2023, Sensors)

M CAT-DET [52]
(2022, CVPR)

PartA2-Anchor [48]
(2020, TPAMI)

L

Second-IoU [40]
(2018, Sensors)

L
L

Efficiency-Prioritized Methods

Second [40]
(2018, Sensors)

PointPillar [20]
(2019, CVPR)

L

Efficiency

This paper presents Edge-based Mixture of Experts (MoE)
Collaborative Computing (EMC2‡ ), an optimal computing
system designed for autonomous vehicles (AVs) that simultaneously achieves low-latency and high-accuracy 3D object detection. Unlike existing works, the EMC2 introduces
a novel scenario-aware MoE architecture optimized for fusing complementary sparse 3D point clouds and dense 2D
images to achieve robust multimodal representations for detection. Furthermore, EMC2 integrates an adaptive multimodal data bridge with multi-scale region proposing and
scenario-aware routing, dynamically dispatching features
to complementary experts based on object visibility and
distance. In addition, EMC2 integrates joint hardwaresoftware optimizations, including hardware resource utilization optimization and computational graph simpliﬁcation, to ensure efﬁcient and real-time inference on resourceconstrained edge devices. Experiments on open-source
benchmarks clearly show the EMC2 advancements as an
end-to-end system. On the KITTI dataset, it achieves an average accuracy improvement of 3.58% and a 159.06% inference speedup compared to 15 baseline methods on Jetson
platforms, with similar performance gains on the nuScenes
dataset, highlighting its capability to advance reliable, realtime 3D object detection tasks for AVs.

TED [53]
2023, AAAI

Low
Slow

Fast

L
M Multimodal method with LiDAR-camera fusion
LiDAR-only method

Figure 1. Comparison of 3D object detection models in accuracy and inference efﬁciency on the KITTI and nuScenes
dataset. Most existing methods improve accuracy at the expense
of inference efﬁciency. The proposed EMC2 achieves win-win
performance by customizing MoE for autonomous driving.

1. Introduction
Trafﬁc safety is a fundamental concern for both human
drivers and Autonomous Driving Systems (ADS). Within
an ADS, the perception module plays a pivotal role by serving as the ”eyes” of the autonomous vehicle (AV), sensing
the surrounding environment and delivering critical information to downstream modules such as motion planning,
control, and safety guarantees. Existing conceptual safety
of an AV perception system is generally deﬁned by two core
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.
‡ EMC2 Code: https://github.com/LinshenLiu622/EMC2

25903

dimensions: accuracy and efﬁciency. Accuracy ensures reliable object detection and tracking capabilities, enabling
a credible understanding of the environment. Efﬁciency,
characterized by low perception delay, is equally essential,
as real-time high-level planning and control rely on fast information processing. Perception delay, deﬁned as the sum
of data acquisition, computation, and algorithm processing
time, directly affects an ADS’s responsiveness to dynamic
environments. Research indicates that an ADS must process sensory inputs and issue feedback control commands
within 100 milliseconds to guarantee prompt and safe vehicle operations [1]. Detection precision and perception
delay together deﬁne a critical safety boundary: a precise but sluggish system cannot react in time, while a fast
but inaccurate system may lead to unsafe decisions.

