This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UNIS: A Unified Framework for Achieving Unbiased Neural Implicit Surfaces
in Volume Rendering
Junkai Deng1 Hanting Niu2,3 Jiaze Li1 Fei Hou2,3 * Ying He1 *
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
2
Key Laboratory of System Software (CAS), State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

junkai006@e.ntu.edu.sg

niuht@ios.ac.cn

houfei@ios.ac.cn

yhe@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Reconstruction from multi-view images is a fundamental
challenge in computer vision that has been extensively studied over the past decades. Recently, neural radiance fields
have driven significant advancements, especially through
methods using implicit functions and volume rendering,
achieving high levels of accuracy. A core component of
these methods is the mapping that transforms an implicit
function’s output into corresponding volume densities. Despite its critical role, this mapping has received limited attention in existing literature. In this paper, we provide a
comprehensive and systematic study of mapping functions,
examining their properties and representations. We first
outline the necessary conditions for the mapping function
and propose a family of functions that meet these criteria,
to ensure first-order unbiasedness. We further demonstrate
that the mappings employed by NeuS and VolSDF, two representative neural implicit surface techniques, are special
cases within this broader family. Building on our theoretical framework, we introduce several new mapping functions
and evaluate their effectiveness through numerical experiments. Our approach offers a fresh perspective on this wellestablished problem, opening avenues for the development
of new techniques in the field.

1. Introduction
For decades, surface reconstruction from multi-view images
has been a central research focus in computer vision. Classic approaches, such as visual hull [10], Structure from Motion (SfM) [6] and multi-view stereo (MVS) [5], have seen
numerous real-world applications. Most recently, the in* Corresponding authors: Y. He and F. Hou

liji0077@e.ntu.edu.sg

troduction of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [17] has established new standards in this domain. Leveraging the inherently differentiable nature of volume rendering, NeRF
offers an implicit representation of objects that enhances
learning effectiveness and delivers remarkable results in
novel view synthesis.
Within the NeRF framework, two seminal works–
NeuS [20] and VolSDF [25]– revolutionize the approach
by modeling volume density as a function of geometry,
contrasting with previous methods that modeled geometry
based on volume density. Specifically, they utilize signed
distance fields (SDFs) to represent 3D objects, capitalizing on the smooth and continuous properties of SDFs to
significantly enhance surface reconstruction quality from
multi-view images, achieving superior reconstruction fidelity. Building upon NeuS and VolSDF, many strategies have emerged to further improve surface reconstruction [4, 6, 19, 26, 27].
Among methods using neural implicit functions for volume rendering, a critical component is the mapping that
converts implicit function values into volume densities. As
noted in [20, 25], many mappings—including the intuitive approach of assigning higher volume density to points
closer to the zero level set of the SDF—can introduce substantial biases, leading to inherent geometric inaccuracies
in reconstructed surfaces. To address this, VolSDF [25] employs an effective sampling strategy to mitigate bias, while
NeuS [20] proposes a mapping function specifically designed to achieve theoretically unbiased surface reconstruction at the first-order approximation of the SDF.
Despite the critical role of the mapping function, few of
the subsequent studies have conducted an in-depth investigation of the mapping function itself. Most recently, αNeuS [28] has demonstrated that NeuS can also reconstruct
semi-transparent surfaces in an unbiased manner by using

27671

