This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskControl: Spatio-Temporal Control for Masked Motion Synthesis
Ekkasit Pinyoanuntapong1 , Muhammad Usama Saleem1 , Korrawe Karunratanakul2 ,
Pu Wang1 , Hongfei Xue1 , Chen Chen3 , Chuan Guo4 , Junli Cao4 , Jian Ren4 , Sergey Tulyakov4
1

University of North Carolina at Charlotte

2

ETH Zürich

3

University of Central Florida

4

Snap Inc.

epinyoan@charlotte.edu

Right wrist

Left wrist

Upper body: a person raises their hands in the air.

Optimization

Pelvis

Lower body: a person
jumps forward.
the person waves his hand

Left leg: a person
kicks their left leg.

a person walks in a circle clockwise

(a) Any-Joint-Any-Frame Control

the man walks forward in a straight line.

(b) Body-Part Timeline Control

(c) Zero-shot Objective Control

Figure 1. MaskControl enables a wide range of applications in text-to-motion generation with high quality and precision. (a) Any-Joint
Any-Frame Control: Controls specific joints at designated frames. (b) Body-Part Timeline Control: Generates motion from multiple text
prompts, each corresponding to different body parts. (c) Arbitrary Objective Control: Supports any control function at inference time.

Abstract

control, and zero-shot objective control. Video visualization can be found at https://www.ekkasit.com/
ControlMM-page/

Recent advances in motion diffusion models have enabled
spatially controllable text-to-motion generation. However, these models struggle to achieve high-precision control while maintaining high-quality motion generation. To
address these challenges, we propose MaskControl, the
first approach to introduce controllability to the generative masked motion model. Our approach introduces two
key innovations. First, Logits Regularizer implicitly perturbs logits at training time to align the distribution of motion tokens with the controlled joint positions, while regularizing the categorical token prediction to ensure highfidelity generation. Second, Logit Optimization explicitly
optimizes the predicted logits during inference time, directly reshaping the token distribution that forces the generated motion to accurately align with the controlled joint
positions. Moreover, we introduce Differentiable Expectation Sampling (DES) to combat the non-differential distribution sampling process encountered by logits regularizer
and optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
MaskControl outperforms state-of-the-art methods, achieving superior motion quality (FID decreases by 77%) and
higher control precision (average error 0.91 vs. 1.08).
Additionally, MaskControl enables diverse applications,
including any-joint-any-frame control, body-part timeline

1. Introduction
Text-driven human motion generation has recently gained
significant attention due to the semantic richness and intuitive nature of natural language descriptions. This approach has broad applications in animation, film, virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR), and robotics. While text
descriptions offer a wealth of semantic guidance for motion
generation, they often fall short in providing precise joint
control over specific human joints, such as the pelvis and
hands. As a result, achieving natural interaction with the
environment and fluid navigation through 3D space remains
a challenge.
To tackle this challenge, a few controllable motion generation models have been developed recently to synthesize realistic human movements that align with both text
prompts and joint control signals [42, 43, 51, 55]. However,
existing solutions face significant difficulties in generating
high-fidelity motion with precise and flexible joint control. In particular, current models struggle to support both
sparse and dense joint control signals simultaneously. For
instance, some models excel at generating natural human
movements that traverse sparse waypoints [21, 42], while

9955

