This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SmolDocling: An ultra-compact vision-language model for end-to-end
multi-modal document conversion
Ahmed Nassar Matteo Omenetti Maksym Lysak Nikolaos Livathinos Christoph Auer Lucas Morin
Rafael Teixeira de Lima Yusik Kim A. Said Gurbuz Michele Dolfi Peter W. J. Staar
{ahn, mly, nli, cau, dol, taa}@zurich.ibm.com, {Matteo.Omenetti1}@ibm.com

IBM Research

Abstract
We introduce SmolDocling, an ultra-compact visionlanguage model targeting end-to-end document conversion.
Our model comprehensively processes entire pages by generating DocTags, a new universal markup format that captures all page elements in their full context with location.
Unlike existing approaches that rely on large foundational
models, or ensemble solutions that rely on handcrafted
pipelines of multiple specialized models, SmolDocling offers an end-to-end conversion for accurately capturing content, structure and spatial location of document elements
in a 256M parameters vision-language model. SmolDocling exhibits robust performance in correctly reproducing
document features such as code listings, tables, equations,
charts, lists, and more across a diverse range of document
types including business documents, academic papers, technical reports, patents, and forms — significantly extending
beyond the commonly observed focus on scientific papers.
Additionally, we contribute novel publicly sourced datasets
for charts, tables, equations, and code recognition. Experimental results demonstrate that SmolDocling competes
with other Vision Language Models that are up to 27 times
larger in size, while reducing computational requirements
substantially. The model weights and datasets are available
at: https://huggingface.co/ds4sd

1. Introduction
For decades, converting complex digital documents into a
structured, machine-processable format has been a significant technical challenge. This challenge primarily stems
from the substantial variability in document layouts and
styles, as well as the inherently opaque nature of the widely
used PDF format, which is optimized for printing rather
than semantic parsing. Intricate layout styles and visually
challenging elements such as forms, tables, and complex
charts can significantly impact the reading order and gen-

eral understanding of documents. These problems have
driven extensive research and development across multiple
domains of computer science. On one hand, sophisticated
ensemble systems emerged, which decompose the conversion problem into several sub-tasks (e.g. OCR, layout analysis, table structure recognition, classification) and tackle
each sub-task independently. Although such systems can
achieve high-quality results for many document types while
maintaining relatively low computational demands, they are
often difficult to tune and generalize.
On the other hand, in the recent past, great interest has
developed around large foundational multimodal models
that can solve the whole conversion task in one shot, while
simultaneously offering flexible querying and parametrization through prompts. This approach has been made possible by the advent of multimodal pre-training of large visionlanguage models (LVLMs), which opened up a vast array of
opportunities for leveraging diverse data sources, including
PDF documents. However, the literature on this topic highlights a significant gap in the availability of high-quality
and open-access datasets suitable for training robust multimodal models for the task of document understanding. Furthermore, relying on LVLMs may introduce common issues
associated with such models, including hallucinations and
the use of significant computational resources, making them
impractical from both a quality and cost perspective.
In this work, we outline how we close the gaps left by
publicly available datasets and establish a training approach
to achieve end-to-end, full-featured document conversion
through a vision-language model, which we name SmolDocling. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• SmolDocling: An ultra-compact VLM for end-to-end
document conversion, based on Hugging Face’s most recent SmolVLM-256M [53], which is between 5 and 10
times smaller in parameters than comparable VLMs tuned
on document understanding tasks. Hence, we reduce the
computational complexity to roughly the same order of
magnitude as typical representatives of ensemble meth-

21972

