This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Versatile Transition Generation with Image-to-Video Diffusion
Zuhao Yang1 * Jiahui Zhang1
1

Yingchen Yu2

Nanyang Technological University

Shijian Lu1† Song Bai2
2

ByteDance Inc.

https://mwxely.github.io/projects/yang2025vtg/index

…

…

…

(a) “a dog facing forward” → “a dog turning his head to the right”

…

…

(b) “a woman riding a horse” → “a woman moving forward on a horse”

…

…

(c) “an airplane” → “a cruise”

…

(d) “a wooden house in the forest” → “a wooden house in the snow”

Figure 1. Illustration of Versatile Transition Generation (VTG). VTG is capable of performing four types of transition generation, namely,
(a) object morphing, (b) motion prediction, (c) concept blending, and (d) scene transition, within a single uniform framework.

Abstract
Leveraging text, images, structure maps, or motion trajectories as conditional guidance, diffusion models have
achieved great success in automated and high-quality video
generation. However, generating smooth and rational transition videos given the first and last video frames as well as
descriptive text prompts is far underexplored. We present
VTG, a Versatile Transition video Generation framework
that can generate smooth, high-fidelity, and semanticcoherent video transitions. VTG introduces interpolationbased initialization that helps preserve object identity and
handle abrupt content changes effectively. In addition, it
incorporates dual-directional motion fine-tuning and representation alignment regularization that mitigate the limitations of the pre-trained image-to-video diffusion models
in motion smoothness and generation fidelity, respectively.
To evaluate VTG and facilitate future studies on unified
transition generation, we collected TransitBench, a com-

prehensive benchmark for transition generation that covers
two representative transition tasks including concept blending and scene transition. Extensive experiments show that
VTG achieves superior transition performance consistently
across the four tasks.

1. Introduction

* This work was done while Zuhao Yang was interning at ByteDance.
† Shijian Lu is the corresponding author.

The success of diffusion models [18, 43] in image synthesis [30, 34, 36, 38] has inspired a number of studies on
diffusion-based video synthesis [19, 47, 58, 60]. Leveraging textual prompts, video frames, structure maps and even
motion patterns, several studies [7, 41, 44, 48] have demonstrated impressive synthesis performance by generating realistic and high-fidelity videos automatically. Nevertheless,
despite its significant value in various real-world tasks such
as video and film production, generating high-quality transition videos conditioned on the first and last frames together
with related text prompts remains largely underexplored.
Generating realistic transition videos is a non-trivial task.
A high-quality transition generator should meet at least four

16981

