This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enrich and Detect: Video Temporal Grounding
with Multimodal LLMs
†

Shraman Pramanick 1,2B Effrosyni Mavroudi1 Yale Song1 Rama Chellappa2
Lorenzo Torresani⋄1 Triantafyllos Afouras1B
1
FAIR, Meta 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 Northeastern University
Abstract
We introduce ED-VTG, a method for fine-grained video
temporal grounding utilizing multi-modal large language
models. Our approach harnesses the capabilities of multimodal LLMs to jointly process text and video, in order
to effectively localize natural language queries in videos
through a two-stage process. Rather than being directly
grounded, language queries are initially transformed into
enriched sentences that incorporate missing details and
cues to aid in grounding. In the second stage, these enriched
queries are grounded, using a lightweight decoder, which
specializes at predicting accurate boundaries conditioned
on contextualized representations of the enriched queries.
To mitigate noise and reduce the impact of hallucinations,
our model is trained with a multiple-instance-learning objective that dynamically selects the optimal version of the
query for each training sample. We demonstrate state-ofthe-art results across various benchmarks in temporal video
grounding and paragraph grounding settings. Experiments
reveal that our method significantly outperforms all previously proposed LLM-based temporal grounding approaches
and is either superior or comparable to specialized models,
while maintaining a clear advantage against them in zeroshot evaluation scenarios.

Detect Precise Interval

Interval Decoder

The query “The man with a yellow surfboard slowly runs to start surfing” occurs at <INT>
Enrich Query & Embed

Video LLM

Untrimmed Video

User Query

“Man starts
surfing”

Figure 1. Our proposed system. ED-VTG performs video temporal grounding as a two-stage process: since user queries are
often incomplete or coarse, the first stage involves producing an
enriched query that adds additional details to the original, making it easier to ground. Meanwhile, a contextualized embedding is
generated, containing all the information about the interval to be
predicted. In the second stage, an interval decoder translates these
embeddings into precise temporal boundaries.

1. Introduction

ing them in multi-task setting [72, 85] without investigating
how each task can benefit the other.
In this work, we exploit this duality by leveraging captioning to enhance grounding. Our key observation is
that natural language queries often lack the completeness
or detail necessary for effective temporal localization; indeed, existing grounding datasets frequently contain poorly
worded, coarse, and potentially incomplete queries. The
quality and completeness of these queries however is crucial for the precision of the temporal grounding. A natural
hypothesis, therefore, is that more detailed queries, which
could be obtained via conditional captioning, can significantly enhance grounding accuracy. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, a vague query like ‘Man starts surfing’
can be refined into a more detailed description such as ‘The
man with a yellow surfboard slowly runs to start surfing,’
resulting in grounding with more accurate temporal boundaries. In other cases, refining an abstract concept may involve breaking down a complex query into simpler components that are more directly groundable.
This key idea of query enrichment forms the basis of
our proposed approach. Concretely, we transform grounding into a two-stage reasoning process using a multi-modal

Video temporal grounding [32, 40, 53, 80, 102] aims to
identify temporal intervals in a video that correspond to a set
of provided language queries. The task is essential for applications such as video editing and content retrieval. Conversely, video captioning [1, 59, 78, 79, 104] entails generating a natural language description for a given video segment, effectively translating visual content into text. The
two tasks are in fact dual, as the outputs of one task are the
inputs to the other, and vice versa. Intuitively, there is significant potential in exploiting this synergy, however it has
largely remained unexplored, with previous works typically
specializing in one of the two tasks [8, 32, 53, 104] or solv† Work done during an internship at FAIR.
⋄ Work done while at FAIR.
B spraman3@meta.com, afourast@meta.com

24297

