This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VehicleMAE: View-asymmetry Mutual Learning for Vehicle Re-identification
Pre-training via Masked AutoEncoders
Qi Wang1 , Zeyu Zhang1 , Dong Wang2,*, Di Gai1 , Xin Xiong3 , Jiyang Xu1 and Ruihua Zhou2
1
School of Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Nanchang University, Nanchang, China
2
School of Software, Nanchang University, Nanchang, China
3
The First Affiliated Hospital, Jiangxi Medical College, Nanchang University, Nanchang, China
{wangqi,gaidi,xiongxinxx}@ncu.edu.cn, {zeyuzhang1010,dongwang,xujiyang,zrh}@email.ncu.edu.cn

Abstract

ous views. Despite impressive performance in some current
works, this task still faces a main obstacle of large intraclass discrepancy among vehicles of the same identity. The
primary cause is that the unique geometrically rigid structure of the vehicle itself leads to dynamic appearances of
the same instance from different views. Accordingly, it is
imperative to enable the Re-ID model to efficiently learn
view-invariant representations.

Large-scale pre-training technology has achieved remarkable performance in diversified object re-identification (ReID) downstream tasks. Nevertheless, to our best knowledge, the pre-training model specifically for vehicle Re-ID,
which focuses on tackling the challenge of multi-view variations, has not been fully investigated. In this paper, we
first leverage a diffusion model to build a large-scale vehicle Re-ID benchmark dataset, dubbed “DiffVERI”, containing over 1700K images from abundant multi-view annotations. In terms of this dataset, we further present VehicleMAE, a novel masked image modeling pre-training
paradigm that learns view-invariant representations by performing mutual-distillation in a self-supervised manner.
To be specific, the pipeline of VehicleMAE unfolds two
core modules, i.e., view-asymmetry masked image modeling
(VMIM) and past-to-present mutual-distillation (PPMD).
Technically, VMIM consists of two homogeneous masked
autoencoders (MAE) that simultaneously reconstruct the
RGB pixels and multi-view semantic information of the specific vehicle body region via paired asymmetric mask sampling strategies. To progressively distill the knowledge of
the model itself, PPMD considers the two MAEs in the
current epoch and the previous one as the student models and the teacher models, respectively, which leverages
the knowledge learned by the current student and the historical teacher for mutual feature-level distillation. Extensive experimental results have verified that the proposed
pre-training paradigm on DiffVERI gains compelling downstream task performance for vehicle Re-ID.

Figure 1. Illustration of DiffVERI dataset: (a) Steps for synthesizing data and annotations. (b) Synthetic examples from DiffVERI
dataset.

With the release of the previous generic vehicle Re-ID
datasets (such as VeRi-776 [25], VehicleID [26], VERIWild [27], etc.), early efforts [10, 30, 44] preferred the use
of vehicle keypoints and part-based bounding boxes for discriminative representation learning to achieve view alignment. Additionally, some follow-up works [22, 39] based
on metric learning resort to vehicle attribute annotations and

1. Introduction
The purpose of vehicle re-identification (Re-ID)[3, 23, 53]
is to match target vehicles with the same identity under vari* Corresponding author

4701

