This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-Dynamic Attention Modulation for Dense Prediction
Linwei Chen1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology

Lin Gu2,3
2
RIKEN AIP

Ying Fu1∗
3
The University of Tokyo

chenlinwei@bit.edu.cn; lin.gu@riken.jp; fuying@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have significantly advanced
computer vision, demonstrating strong performance across
various tasks. However, the attention mechanism in ViTs
makes each layer function as a low-pass filter, and the
stacked-layer architecture in existing transformers suffers
from frequency vanishing. This leads to the loss of critical details and textures. We propose a novel, circuittheory-inspired strategy called Frequency-Dynamic Attention Modulation (FDAM), which can be easily plugged into
ViTs. FDAM directly modulates the overall frequency response of ViTs and consists of two techniques: Attention
Inversion (AttInv) and Frequency Dynamic Scaling (FreqScale). Since circuit theory uses low-pass filters as fundamental elements, we introduce AttInv, a method that generates complementary high-pass filtering by inverting the lowpass filter in the attention matrix, and dynamically combining the two. We further design FreqScale to weight different
frequency components for fine-grained adjustments to the
target response function. Through feature similarity analysis and effective rank evaluation, we demonstrate that our
approach avoids representation collapse, leading to consistent performance improvements across various models, including SegFormer, DeiT, and MaskDINO. These improvements are evident in tasks such as semantic segmentation,
object detection, and instance segmentation. Additionally,
we apply our method to remote sensing detection, achieving
state-of-the-art results in single-scale settings. The code is
available at https://github.com/Linwei-Chen/FDAM.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Vision Transformers (ViTs) have revolutionized computer vision, achieving state-of-the-art performance across various dense prediction tasks [21,47,55,92].
However, when applying ViTs [21] to vision tasks, a
critical issue emerges. The attention mechanism in ViTs
exhibits a strong low-pass filtering characteristic [61, 83].
As shown in Figure 1(a), frequency analysis reveals that
*Corresponding Author

(a) Attention frequency response analysis

(b) Feature spectrum analysis

Figure 1. Frequency analysis. We stack a model with pure
12 attention layer. (a) Attention frequency response analysis reveals that our modulated attention maintains a higher mean magnitude across all frequency bands compared to standard attention,
while also exhibiting greater diversity in high-frequency regions.
(b) Feature spectrum analysis shows that our modulated attention
maintains a stable high-frequency ratio and consistently preserves
high-frequency information across layers, unlike standard attention, which rapidly loses it and results in representation collapse.

this low-pass filtering limits spectral diversity, severely restricting the frequency representation power. This limitation is exacerbated by the stacked-layer architecture. As
illustrated in Figure 1(b), feature spectrum analysis shows
that standard attention rapidly loses high-frequency information across layers, with the high-frequency ratio dropping sharply from the initial layers to the deeper layers
(nearly 0). This leads to frequency vanishing and blurred
feature representations, negatively impacting performance
on tasks requiring fine-grained visual understanding.
To address this issue, we propose Frequency-Dynamic
Attention Modulation (FDAM), a novel, circuit-theoryinspired strategy to modulate the overall frequency response
of ViTs. FDAM consists of two techniques: Attention Inversion (AttInv) and Frequency Dynamic Scaling (FreqScale). Drawing on circuit theory [2, 73, 85], which treats
low-pass filters as fundamental building blocks, we introduce our first technique, AttInv. In AttInv, we view attention
matrix as a set of low-pass filters and invert them (analogous
to s-domain inversion in circuit design) to derive complementary high-pass filters. At each layer, both low-pass and
high-pass filters are dynamically weighted. By cascading
these layers over L levels, the architecture forms 2L unique
combinations of filter weights, enabling it to learn complex
frequency responses, as shown in Figure 2.

22620

