This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Information Capacity Between Vision and Language via
Dense-to-Sparse Feature Distillation for Image-Text Matching
Yang Liu1, 2 , Wentao Feng1, 2 , Zhuoyao Liu1, 2 , Shudong Huang1, 2, *, Jiancheng Lv1, 2
1
2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China

Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, China
https://d2s-vse.github.io

Limited Information Capacity

Abstract
Enabling Visual Semantic Models to effectively handle
multi-view description matching has been a longstanding
challenge. Existing methods typically learn a set of embeddings to find the optimal match for each view’s text and
compute similarity. However, the visual and text embeddings learned through these approaches have limited information capacity and are prone to interference from locally
similar negative samples. To address this issue, we argue
that the information capacity of embeddings is crucial and
propose Dense-to-Sparse Feature Distilled Visual Semantic Embedding (D2S-VSE), which enhances the information
capacity of sparse text by leveraging dense text distillation.
Specifically, D2S-VSE is a two-stage framework. In the pretraining stage, we align images with dense text to enhance
the information capacity of visual semantic embeddings. In
the fine-tuning stage, we optimize two tasks simultaneously,
distilling dense text embeddings to sparse text embeddings
while aligning images and sparse texts, enhancing the information capacity of sparse text embeddings. Our proposed
D2S-VSE model is extensively evaluated on the large-scale
MS-COCO and Flickr30K datasets, demonstrating its superiority over recent state-of-the-art methods.

Sparse Text 1

Aligning

A construction work
worker holds a sign
about bicycling .

Aligning

A man and woman
talking are interrupted
and a man cover his face.
Sparse Text 2

Greater Information Capacity

Aligning

In the picture, a man
is sitting on a bench
reading a book. He is
wearing a yellow vest,
with a red bucket on
the bench and … …
Dense Text

Sparse Text 1
A construction work
worker holds a sign
about bicycling .

Enhance Information Capacity by Distillation
ℱ𝑑
Distill

A man and woman
talking are interrupted
and a man cover his face.

ℱ𝑑

In the picture, a man
is sitting on a bench
reading a book. He is
wearing a yellow vest,
with a red bucket on
the bench and … …
Dense Text

Sparse Text 2

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (Top) In previous methods, when addressing problems
with varying information density, a set of visual embeddings is
learned to match the most similar text embeddings. However, this
approach results in learned embeddings with limited information
capacity. (Mid) Since dense text has a higher information density
than sparse text, training with aligned dense text results in image
embeddings with greater information capacity. (Bottom) Sparse
text embedding can be distilled through dense text embedding to
enhance its information capacity, enabling the matching of text
descriptions from different perspectives with a single visual embedding. (Best viewed in color)

In the domain of vision and language, the alignment of vision and language stands as a foundational task, with the
core objective of establishing a robust and precise bridge between these two distinct yet interconnected modalities. The
traditional approach to cross-modal retrieval [12, 24, 31, 32]
follows a standard procedure: encoding images and texts
into a shared embedding space and measuring their similarity. Typically, models are optimized using a triplet loss,
which ensures that matched image-text pairs exhibit higher
similarity than unmatched pairs [9, 16].
* Corresponding Author

However, most traditional Visual Semantic Embedding
(VSE) models overlook the inherent differences between
image and text modalities [3, 18, 35]. Specifically, visual
signals represent natural, objective records of real-world
phenomena, whereas textual signals are inherently seman-

21679

