This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CombatVLA: An Efficient Vision-Language-Action Model for Combat Tasks in
3D Action Role-Playing Games
Peng Chen∗ Pi Bu∗ Yingyao Wang Xinyi Wang Ziming Wang Jie Guo
Yingxiu Zhao Qi Zhu Jun Song† Siran Yang Jiamang Wang Bo Zheng
Alibaba Group
chenpeng.cp0225@gmail.com
{bupi.wj,jsong.sj}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
[‘type’ : ‘keyboard’ , ‘ key’: ‘space’, ‘explanation’: ‘The enemy
is about to attack, so you need to dodge to avoid the damage.’ …]

Recent advances in Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs)
have expanded the capabilities of embodied intelligence. However, significant challenges remain in real-time
decision-making in complex 3D environments, which demand second-level responses, high-resolution perception,
and tactical reasoning under dynamic conditions. To advance the field, we introduce CombatVLA, an efficient VLA
model optimized for combat tasks in 3D action role-playing
games(ARPGs). Specifically, our CombatVLA is a 3B
model trained on video-action pairs collected by an action
tracker, where the data is formatted as action-of-thought
(AoT) sequences. Thereafter, CombatVLA seamlessly integrates into an action execution framework, allowing efficient inference through our truncated AoT strategy. Experimental results demonstrate that CombatVLA not only
outperforms all existing models on the combat understanding benchmark but also achieves a 50-fold acceleration in
game combat. Moreover, it has a higher task success rate
than human players. We will release all resources, including the action tracker, dataset, model weights, training code, and action execution framework implementation
at https://combatvla.github.io/.

Figure 1. CombatVLA surpasses GPT-4o and Qwen2.5-VL
in combat understanding, is 50 times faster than Cradle and
VARP framework, and has a higher success rate than humans.

1. Introduction

which present critical but underexplored demands: realtime processing of high-resolution visual streams, tactical adaptation to dynamically evolving enemy behaviors,
and second-level action execution—requirements mirroring
latency-sensitive real-world scenarios [3, 5]. In fact, the dynamic complexity of combat games rigorously challenges
VLAs’ capabilities in: 1) Visual perception (e.g., enemy
and self positioning, movement, and environmental awareness). 2) Combat reasoning (e.g., recognizing enemy attack
patterns). 3) Efficient inference (i.e., real-time reaction).
Currently, no framework excels in these tasks, nor is there a
benchmark for assessing combat understanding.
The pioneers working on 3D combat games primarily
access video game APIs to read memory and thereby acquire information on the game environment. For example,
Wang et al. [35] used this strategy to employ LLM-driven
agents to play Minecraft, enabling automatic mining, exploration, and combat with enemies. However, this method
of interacting with the environment is significantly different from that of humans, who rely on vision rather than

Vision-Language-Action Models (VLAs) have achieved
groundbreaking progress in embodied intelligence through
unified frameworks integrating visual perception, semantic
reasoning, and physical action control [1, 18, 19, 46]. In
agent applications, they perform well in UI operations and
navigation tasks [22, 23, 30, 36, 40] but struggle with efficient decision-making in complex 3D environments. A
representative challenge lies in combat tasks in 3D action
role-playing games(ARPGs) like “Black Myth: Wukong”,
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

10919

