This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAGDiffusion: Faithful Cloth Generation via External Knowledge Assimilation
Yuhan Li1∗† , Xianfeng Tan2∗ , Wenxiang Shang2 , Yubo Wu2 , Jian Wang2 ,
Xuanhong Chen1 , Yi Zhang1 , Hangcheng Zhu2‡ , Bingbing Ni1‡
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Alibaba Group
https://colorful-liyu.github.io/RAGDiffusion-page/

Abstract

External Multi-modal Database
...

Retrieval

RAGDiffusion
Standard Flat-lay Garments

Faithful Patterns

Accurate Structure

In-the-wild Diverse Garments

Region Supplement

Standard clothing asset generation involves restoring
forward-facing flat-lay garment images displayed on a
clear background by extracting clothing information from
diverse real-world contexts, which presents significant challenges due to highly standardized structure sampling distributions and clothing semantic absence in complex scenarios. Existing models have limited spatial perception,
often exhibiting structural hallucinations and texture distortion in this high-specification generative task. To address this issue, we propose a novel Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) framework, termed RAGDiffusion, to enhance structure determinacy and mitigate hallucinations by
assimilating knowledge from language models and external databases. RAGDiffusion consists of two processes: (1)
Retrieval-based structure aggregation, which employs contrastive learning and a Structure Locally Linear Embedding
(SLLE) to derive global structure and spatial landmarks,
providing both soft and hard guidance to counteract structural ambiguities; and (2) Omni-level faithful garment generation, which introduces a coarse-to-fine texture alignment
that ensures fidelity in pattern and detail components within
the diffusing. Extensive experiments on challenging realworld datasets demonstrate that RAGDiffusion synthesizes
structurally and texture-faithful clothing assets with significant performance improvements, representing a pioneering
effort in high-specification faithful generation with RAG to
confront intrinsic hallucinations and enhance fidelity.

Figure 1. RAGDiffusion synthesizes structurally and pattern-wise
faithful standard garments by assimilating retrieved knowledge.

1. Introduction

eration refers to generating forward-facing flat-lay garment
images [49] on a clear background by recovering clothing
information from arbitrary real-world scenes (e.g., garments
hung on hangers, worn by models, or casually laid on chairs
in Fig. 1). Standard garments serve as a crucial intermediary variable, connecting various downstream applications
such as e-commerce catalogs maintenance, garment design,
product marketing and virtual fitting [19, 64, 65].
The garment generation task presents dual technical challenges distinct from conventional virtual try-on
paradigms. First, standard clothing generation necessitates standard structure and frontal positioning while inherently limiting stylistic flexibility, constrained by the
narrow manifold of high-specification garment distributions [62]. Second, the complexity of in-the-wild condi-

While the high quality of images generated by diffusion
models [20, 45] has significantly lowered the barriers for
individuals to engage in content creation, the generation of
2D standard clothing assets from in-the-wild data has been
relatively underexplored [43]. Standard clothing asset gen* Joint first authors.
†Work done during an internship at Alibaba.
‡Joint corresponding authors.

17485

