This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MSA2 : Multi-task Framework with Structure-aware and Style-adaptive
Character Representation for Open-set Chinese Text Recognition
Yangfu Li ♣ Hongjian Zhan ♣ † * Qi Liu ♣ Li Sun ♣ Yu-Jie Xiong ‡ Yue Lu ♣
♣

East China Normal University, † Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, ‡ Shanghai University of Engineering Science
{yfli cee, qiliu}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, hjzhan@cee.ecnu.edu.cn, ylu@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Improvement on SOTA

Ours
HierCode (PR’25)

Most existing methods regard open-set Chinese text recognition (CTR) as a single-task problem, primarily focusing
on prototype learning of linguistic components or glyphs
to identify unseen characters. In contrast, humans identify characters by integrating multiple perspectives, including linguistic and visual cues. Inspired by this, we propose a multi-task framework termed MSA2 , which considers multi-view character representations for open-set CTR.
Within MSA2 , we introduce two novel strategies for character representation: structure-aware component encoding
(SACE) and style-adaptive glyph embedding (SAGE). SACE
utilizes a binary tree with dynamic representation space to
emphasize the primary linguistic components, thereby generating structure-aware and discriminative linguistic representations for each character. Meanwhile, SAGE employs glyph-centric contrastive learning to aggregate features from diverse forms, yielding robust glyph representations for the CTR model to adapt to the style variations
among various fonts. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our proposed MSA2 outperforms state-of-the-art CTR
methods, achieving average improvements of 1.3% and
6.0% in accuracy under closed-set and open-set settings on
the BCTR dataset, respectively. The code is available at
https://github.com/LPAIS/MSA-2.

SideNet-DDCM (PR’24)
Chen et al.
(IJCAI’21)
HDE (PR’20)
DenseRAN

with SAIE

+2.9 %

with SAGE

+2.8 %

MSA2

+4.5 %

Accuracy

(a)

(b)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Performance comparisons of MSA2 and previous methods on ICDAR2013 in open-set scenarios. (a) accuracy vs. inference time; (b) improvements from three key strategies.

Chinese Text Recognition (CTR) is a fundamental task
in computer vision that has been extensively studied for
decades [4, 18, 23, 30, 33–35, 37, 41]. Unlike Latin, Chinese vocabulary is vast and continuously expanding, which
naturally leads to open-set recognition challenges, i.e., requiring recognizers to identify out-of-vocabulary characters, in real-world applications. Conventional CTR methods must be fine-tuned with updated vocabularies whenever
new Chinese characters emerge, which is very inefficient
* Corresponding Author

23095

and resource-consuming.
To address the open-set recognition problem, existing solutions can be broadly categorized into linguistic and glyphbased methods. Linguistic methods generate a unified representation for both seen and unseen characters by decomposing them into more basic linguistic components, such as
stroke order [3, 16, 29], radical distribution [11, 31], structured radicals [21, 38, 42, 45, 46], and hierarchical information [1, 48]. Open-set recognition is achieved by matching the predicted sequence with a representation lexicon.
In contrast, glyph-based methods directly assess the similarity of features between the input and glyphs rendered
in a standard form (e.g., printed), including glyph-based
prototype learning [13, 15, 36, 47] and deep matching networks [12, 14, 44]. Despite these advancements, existing
approaches generally treat open-set CTR as a single-task
problem, where the potential to integrate linguistic knowledge and glyphs has not been fully exploited.
When encountering unseen text images, native Chinese
speakers typically utilize both linguistic knowledge and
glyphs to infer their categories. Moreover, humans can easily recognize characters containing error secondary structures but struggle with those exhibiting error primary structures, as illustrated in Figure 2. This argues that humans
rely more on primary structures than secondary structures

