This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-Fusion: Introducing New Modality to Frozen Large Language Models
Sicheng Mo1 Thao Nguyen2 Xun Huang3 Siddharth Srinivasan Iyer3 Yijun Li3 Yuchen Liu3
Abhishek Tandon3 Eli Shechtman3 Krishna Kumar Singh3 Yong Jae Lee2 Bolei Zhou1 Yuheng Li3
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 University of Wisconsin–Madison 3 Adobe Research
https://sichengmo.github.io/XFusion/

Abstract

is

Diffusion Loss

We propose X-Fusion, a framework that extends pretrained Large Language Models (LLMs) for multimodal
tasks while preserving their language capabilities. XFusion employs a dual-tower design with modality-specific
weights, keeping the LLM’s parameters frozen while integrating vision-specific information for both understanding and generation. Our experiments demonstrate that XFusion consistently outperforms alternative architectures
on both image-to-text and text-to-image tasks. We find that
incorporating understanding-focused data improves generation quality, reducing image data noise enhances overall performance, and feature alignment accelerates convergence for smaller models but has minimal impact on larger
ones. Our findings provide valuable insights into building
efficient unified multimodal models.

dog is cute

.

cute

CE Loss

.

X-Fusion

LLM

Vision

Language

This dog is cute

[BOI]

[EOI]

is

cute

Figure 1. We introduce X-Fusion - a novel framework that adapts
pretrained LLMs (e.g., LLaMA) to new modalities (e.g., vision)
while retaining their language capabilities and world knowledge.

guage with diffusion loss for images. This hybrid architecture has significantly advanced performance, demonstrating greater promise than purely autoregressive approaches
like Chameleon [26]. However, training such models
from scratch demands immense computational resources
(e.g., [28] trained on 2T tokens) and necessitates full retraining for each new modality. Given these shortcomings,
another prominent research direction explores how to reuse
powerful pretrained LLMs and introduce vision abilities to
them [29–31], offering a more practical and efficient way
for unified multimodal model training.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–13] have not only
achieved unprecedented capabilities for language processing tasks (e.g., conversational AI [14–20]), but also
emerged as foundation tools to solve multiple languagerelated challenges (e.g., coding [21–23]). However, as humans, we do not communicate solely through text, but also
extend to other modalities, such as vision. For example, instead of simply saying “This dog is cute”, we might show a
photo of the dog to enhance the message: “[image] is cute”
(Fig. 1). Thus, a truly versatile AI model should not only
understand, reason, and generate textual output, but also
must have abilities to understand, reason, and generate visual information. Moreover, these models should be unified
to process and generate language and vision simultaneously,
creating a more comprehensive interactive experience.
To achieve a unified model, some approaches focus
on training unified vision-language models entirely from
scratch using next-token prediction loss [24–27]. A recent alternative, Transfusion [28], adopts a domain-specific
strategy by combining next-token prediction loss for lan-

Research on adapting LLMs [14–18] with image understanding has shown promising results through “visual instruction tuning” [32–35]. These models typically fine-tune
the LLM to align the text feature space with pretrained vision encoders (e.g., CLIP [36]), thus, might degrade original language capabilities [37, 38]. Unlike image understanding, image generation poses greater difficulties, as it
demands output capabilities in a new feature space. A
large body of work [29, 30, 39–43] tackled this issue by
leveraging pretrained image generation models (e.g., Stable Diffusion [44]). However, as these frameworks are not

228

