This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do It Yourself: Learning Semantic Correspondence from Pseudo-Labels
Olaf Dünkel1 , Thomas Wimmer1,2 , Christian Theobalt1,4 , Christian Rupprecht3 , Adam Kortylewski1,5
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus 2 ETH Zurich 3 University of Oxford
4
Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI 5 University of Freiburg
https://genintel.github.io/DIY-SC

Abstract
Finding correspondences between semantically similar
points across images and object instances is one of the everlasting challenges in computer vision. While large pretrained vision models have recently been demonstrated as
effective priors for semantic matching, they still suffer from
ambiguities for symmetric objects or repeated object parts.
We propose improving semantic correspondence estimation
through 3D-aware pseudo-labeling. Specifically, we train
an adapter to refine off-the-shelf features using pseudolabels obtained via 3D-aware chaining, filtering wrong labels through relaxed cyclic consistency, and 3D spherical
prototype mapping constraints. While reducing the need
for dataset-specific annotations compared to prior work,
we establish a new state-of-the-art on SPair-71k, achieving an absolute gain of over 4% and of over 7% compared
to methods with similar supervision requirements. The generality of our proposed approach simplifies the extension of
training to other data sources, which we demonstrate in our
experiments.
Figure 1. Our method, DIY-SC, is able to find semantic correspondences even for extreme appearance and shape changes. All
matches are computed from the keypoints in the top-left image.

1. Introduction

similar object parts [35] or symmetric objects [63]. In
addition, supervised methods [63] indicate that there are
more effective strategies to combine foundational features
for solving semantic correspondence than simple concatenation [62] or weighted averaging [35]. Recent works
[33, 59, 63] train models in a supervised manner using manual keypoint annotations and achieve strong performance
when evaluated on the same dataset. However, as the required manual annotations are scarce and difficult to obtain,
this strategy is not scalable to larger, more diverse datasets.
It thus remains an open challenge to determine the best way
to extract and enhance knowledge encoded in foundation
models for finding semantic correspondences without relying on labor-intensive keypoint supervision.
Recent works reduce the necessary level of supervision
for learning semantic correspondences by regularizing with

Finding correspondences between images remains a fundamental task in computer vision, having various applications
in tracking [8, 10, 20], mapping and localization [24, 37],
affordance understanding [25], pose estimation [58], analysis of characteristic object parts [16, 50], image and video
generation or editing [12, 39, 53], 3D representation learning [31, 46, 56], or style transfer [23]. One remaining challenge in the correspondence estimation field is the task of
finding matches across different instances of similar objects, i.e., finding semantic correspondences. This is a
highly semantic task with a certain amount of ambiguity,
especially for man-made objects.
Recently, foundation model features have demonstrated
surprisingly high zero-shot performance for this task [49,
62, 63]. However, these features still have various weaknesses for finding correspondences, such as ambiguities for

5834

