This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hipandas: Hyperspectral Image Joint Denoising and Super-Resolution
by Image Fusion with the Panchromatic Image
Shuang Xu1 Zixiang Zhao2 * Haowen Bai3 Chang Yu3
Jiangjun Peng1 Xiangyong Cao3∗ Deyu Meng3,4
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 ETH Zürich 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Macau University of Science and Technology
xs@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) are frequently noisy and
of low resolution due to the constraints of imaging devices. Recently launched satellites can concurrently acquire HSIs and panchromatic (PAN) images, enabling the
restoration of HSIs to generate clean and high-resolution
imagery through fusing PAN images for denoising and
super-resolution. However, previous studies treated these
two tasks as independent processes, resulting in accumulated errors. This paper introduces Hyperspectral Image
Joint Pandenoising and Pansharpening (Hipandas), a novel
learning paradigm that reconstructs high quality HSIs from
noisy low-resolution HSIs (NLRHS) and high-resolution
PAN images. The proposed unsupervised Hipandas framework consists of a guided denoising network, a guided
super-resolution network, and a PAN reconstruction network, utilizing an HSI low-rank prior and a newly introduced detail-oriented low-rank prior. The interconnection
of these networks complicates the training process, necessitating a two-stage training strategy to ensure effective
training. Experimental results on both simulated and realworld datasets indicate that the proposed method surpasses
state-of-the-art algorithms, yielding more accurate and visually pleasing HRHS images. The code is available at
https://github.com/shuangxu96/Hipandas.

single-image restoration, the fusion of auxiliary images
from other modalities potentially leads to improvement
[45, 55]. The recent launch of satellites equipped with
hyperspectral-panchromatic (HS-PAN) imaging systems,
e.g. the PRISMA satellite, presents a new opportunity. PAN
images, distinguished by their high spatial resolution and
lack of noise, serve as an ideal data source for fusion [9, 12].
As illustrated in Fig. 1(a) and (b), guided denoising and
super-resolution can be achieved through pansharpening
and pandenoising techniques, respectively. However, the
images captured by the HS-PAN satellites (e.g. PRISMA)
are typically noisy and low resolution. Currently, enhancing
image quality requires sequentially applying pandenoising
and pansharpening to noisy low-resolution HS (NLRHS)
images. This sequential strategy poses several challenges:
• Denoising and super-resolution are treated as independent
steps, requiring highly precise algorithms for both pandenoising and pansharpening. Inadequate denoising can
lead to noise amplification during super-resolution.
• Denoising may inadvertently smooth essential details,
thereby complicating texture recovery for the superresolution process.
• The inherent interdependence of denoising and superresolution implies that their disjoint execution may not
fully exploit their synergistic potential.
Additional motivation comes from the experimental
findings in [15], which indicate that the performance of networks trained on clean LRHS images is significantly degraded when applied to NLRHS images. This further confirms that solely relying on a model’s robustness to mitigate
the impact of noise in NLRHS images is challenging. However, despite the observation of this phenomenon, no research has been conducted to carefully model noise specifically for HS pansharpening.
Despite the challenges, as shown in Fig. 1(c), the study
explores a novel technique named Hyperspectral Image
Joint Pandenoising and Pansharpening (Hipandas), de-

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging has emerged as a powerful tool in
remote sensing [30]. Nevertheless, the acquisition of hyperspectral images (HSIs) is often impeded by practical limitations. Factors such as atmospheric turbulence and limited
sensor apertures commonly result in noise corruption and
low spatial resolution for HSIs.
Denoising [53, 54] and super-resolution [5, 8, 34] have
been developed to enhance the quality. In contrast to
* Corresponding authors.

12002

