This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StealthAttack:
Robust 3D Gaussian Splatting Poisoning via Density-Guided Illusions
Bo-Hsu Ke

You-Zhe Xie

Yu-Lun Liu

Wei-Chen Chiu

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Abstract
3D scene representation methods like Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) have significantly advanced novel view synthesis. As these methods
become prevalent, addressing their vulnerabilities becomes
critical. We analyze 3DGS robustness against image-level
poisoning attacks and propose a novel density-guided poisoning method. Our method strategically injects Gaussian
points into low-density regions identified via Kernel Density
Estimation (KDE), embedding viewpoint-dependent illusory
objects clearly visible from poisoned views while minimally
affecting innocent views. Additionally, we introduce an adaptive noise strategy to disrupt multi-view consistency, further
enhancing attack effectiveness. We propose a KDE-based
evaluation protocol to assess attack difficulty systematically,
enabling objective benchmarking for future research. Extensive experiments demonstrate our method’s superior performance compared to state-of-the-art techniques. Project page:
https://hentci.github.io/stealthattack/

1. Introduction
3D scene representation methods, such as Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF)[71] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)[42],
have significantly advanced novel view synthesis, accurately
modeling complex scene geometry and appearance. Along
with their popularity, the protection of 3D digital content
encoded in these representations has become a matter of
concern, where we have witnessed the corresponding watermarking or steganography techniques being proposed in
recent years. For instance, GaussianMarker [35] and 3DGSW [38] embed watermarks (mainly binary messages) into
Gaussian parameters of 3DGS with minimal visual impact,
coupled with dedicated decoders to decipher the hidden messages. Moreover, embedding or hiding extraneous information/messages into 3D scene representations is also directly
connected to the risk of data poisoning (where the extraneous information as the poison appears in the training data

Poisoned
Points

Innocent views

Poisoned view

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed Density-Guided Poisoning
Attack for 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). Our method strategically distribute the Gaussian points of the illusory object (i.e.
the red vehicle) among the low-density regions which are discovered along the rays casted from the virtual camera of the poisoned
view (i.e. the target view that we would like to attack), making
the illusory object clearly visible from the poisoned view while
having the minimal interference for the rendering quality on the
other non-target/innocent views.

and is encoded into the 3D representations during model
training), in which the further utilization or visualization of
the poisoned 3D representations would lead to abnormal or
even malicious model behaviours (i.e. the negative impact
stemmed from the poison is triggered). To this end, in this
work, we focus on the investigation of poisoning attacks on
3D scene representation methods, as they become integral
to safety-critical applications. Hence, addressing their security vulnerabilities is not only of utmost importance but also
urgent.
While there exists a prior work of studying the poisoning attack upon NeRF, i.e. IPA-NeRF [40] which effectively
exploits NeRF’s implicit representations to embed targeted
visual illusions (i.e. the illusion as poison will appear while
rendering the scene from a certain viewing direction), its applicability to explicit 3D scene representations (particularly
3DGS) however remains limited and not directly transferable. Considering the rapidly growing application scenarios

27400

