This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PolarAnything: Diffusion-based Polarimetric Image Synthesis
Kailong Zhang1† Youwei Lyu1† Heng Guo1,2 * Si Li1 Zhanyu Ma1 Boxin Shi3,4
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 Xiong’an Aerospace Information Research Institute

3

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

4

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

{zhangkailong, youweilv, guoheng, lisi, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Hard to access
Snapshot polarization camera

Polarization images facilitate image enhancement and 3D
reconstruction tasks, but the limited accessibility of polarization cameras hinders their broader application. This
gap drives the need for synthesizing photorealistic polarization images. The existing polarization simulator Mitsuba relies on a parametric polarization image formation
model and requires extensive 3D assets covering shape and
PBR materials, preventing it from generating large-scale
photorealistic images. To address this problem, we propose PolarAnything, capable of synthesizing polarization
images from a single RGB input with both photorealism
and physical accuracy, eliminating the dependency on 3D
asset collections. Drawing inspiration from the zero-shot
performance of pretrained diffusion models, we introduce a
diffusion-based generative framework with an effective representation strategy that preserves the ﬁdelity of polarization properties. Experiments show that our model generates
high-quality polarization images and supports downstream
tasks like shape from polarization. The project could be
found in https://ﬂzt11.github.io/PA_project/.

Captured pol. images

I0

I45

I90

I135

Captured AoLP

Captured DoLP
90°

1

0°

Gen. pol. images
-90°

Easy to access
RGB camera

Gen. pol. images

RGB image

OR

I0

I45

I90

I135

Gen. AoLP

0

Gen. DoLP
90°

1

0°

PolarAnything
-90°

0

Figure 1. PolarAnything generates polarization images covering
diverse shapes and materials from a single image captured by an
accessible RGB camera while preserving the polarization properties on both AoLP and DoLP. The top and bottom rows show the
polarization images captured by a snapshot polarization camera
and the ones generated by PolarAnything, respectively.

ing learning-based computer vision tasks. In contrast, such
datasets based on RGB images are widely available. Therefore, it is desired to develop a polarization image simulator taking as input RGB images to easily create polarization datasets and make the polarization-based vision algorithms accessible to users even without specialized polarization cameras.
Existing polarization image simulators are either based
on collected measured polarized Bidirectional Reﬂectance
Distribution Function (pBRDF) [3] or a parametric polarized reﬂectance model [4, 19, 28]. Due to the scarcity of
polarization datasets, data-based simulators using measured
pBRDFs are inherently limited in representing diverse realworld scenes. On the other hand, a simulator based on a
parametric pBRDF model, such as Mitsuba [43], still has
a gap in synthesizing polarization properties of real-world
scenes due to its reﬂectance assumption, as demonstrated
by ﬁtting the measured pBRDF in [3]. Moreover, Mitsuba requires 3D assets including both surface geometry
and paired physically-based material maps such as roughness and albedo to render polarization images. Compared
to RGB images, 3D assets are hard to collect, and their
amount is much smaller than that of RGB images. Besides,
even with plenty of 3D assets, selecting and seamlessly inte-

1. Introduction
Polarization-based computer vision tasks, including shapefrom-polarization [1, 2, 39], image dehazing [62], and reﬂection removal [29, 31, 38, 57], leverage additional polarization cues to enhance RGB-based methods. Different
from RGB cameras commonly equipped on mobile phones,
polarization cameras are expensive and inaccessible to most
users, limiting the application range of polarization-based
vision systems. On the other hand, diverse and large-scale
polarization image-based datasets with ground truth (GT)
labels such as depth, surface normals, and semantic segmentation masks rarely exist, but these datasets are important for improving the performance of the correspond* corresponding author.

shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

† equally contributed authors.

26466

