This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Robust Stereo Matching in the Wild with Selective Mixture-of-Experts
Yun Wang1 , Longguang Wang2 , Chenghao Zhang3 , Yongjian Zhang2 ,
Zhanjie Zhang4 , Ao Ma5 , Chenyou Fan6 , Tin Lun Lam7,‡ , Junjie Hu7,‡
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University,
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 4 Zhejiang University, 5 JD.com,
6
South China Normal University, 7 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
ywang3875-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, wanglg9@mail.sysu.edu.cn, zhangchenghao18@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
zhangyj85@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, cszzj@zju.edu.cn, maaoaoma@126.com,
fanchenyou@gmail.com, {tllam,hujunjie}@cuhk.edu.cn
(Bad 3.0)
KITTI 2015

Left Image

Frozen

LoRA-Finetuned

Ours

Bad 2.0: 8.21%

Bad 2.0: 5.64%

MoCha-Stereo (CVPR’ 24)
DLNR (CVPR’ 23)

(Bad 2.0)
Middlebury

(Bad 3.0)
KITTI 2012

`

Selective-IGEV (CVPR’ 24)

Bad 2.0: 13.7%

CFNet (CVPR’ 21)
SAM (Full)

SAM (+SMoE)

DAMV2 (Full)

DAMV2 (+SMoE)

DINOV2 (Full)

DINOV2 (+SMoE)
ETH3D
(Bad 1.0)

(a) Stronger VFMs

(b) Fewer trainable parameters

(c) Superior Zero-shot Performance

Figure 1. Our SMoEStereo largely outperforms previous SoTA domain generalized methods (a). SMoEStereo leverages Visual Foundation
Models (VFMs) through a parameter- and computationally-efficient fine-tuning framework, enabling robust stereo matching (b). The
proposed framework integrated into VFMs (e.g., DAMV2 [74]) demonstrates superior generalization versus other fine-tuning methods (c).

Abstract
Recently, learning-based stereo matching networks have
advanced significantly. However, they often lack robustness
and struggle to achieve impressive cross-domain performance due to domain shifts and imbalanced disparity distributions among diverse datasets. Leveraging Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) can intuitively enhance the model’s
robustness, but integrating such a model into stereo matching cost-effectively to fully realize their robustness remains
a key challenge. To address this, we propose SMoEStereo,
a novel framework that adapts VFMs for stereo matching through a tailored, scene-specific fusion of Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) and Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) modules.
SMoEStereo introduces MoE-LoRA with adaptive ranks and
MoE-Adapter with adaptive kernel sizes. The former dynamically selects optimal experts within MoE to adapt varying scenes across domains, while the latter injects inductive bias into frozen VFMs to improve geometric feature extraction. Importantly, to mitigate computational overhead,

we further propose a lightweight decision network that selectively activates MoE modules based on input complexity, balancing efficiency with accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method exhibits state-of-theart cross-domain and joint generalization across multiple
benchmarks without dataset-specific adaptation. The code
is available at https://github.com/cocowy1/SMoE-Stereo.

1. Introduction

‡ Corresponding author.

Stereo matching is a critical vision task focused on identifying pixel-wise correspondences between rectified stereo
images. It has significant applications in autonomous driving [5], robot navigation [40], and augmented reality [58].
While recent learning-based stereo matching methods have
shown impressive performance on standard benchmarks,
their generalizability across diverse datasets remains limited. This is primarily due to significant scene differences and unbalanced disparity distributions across diverse
datasets in the wild, potentially leading to noisy and distorted feature maps [22, 77], compromising the robustness

21276

