This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hate in Plain Sight: On the Risks of Moderating AI-Generated Hateful Illusions
Yiting Qu1 Ziqing Yang1 Yihan Ma1 Michael Backes1
Savvas Zannettou2 Yang Zhang1 *
1
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security 2 TU Delft

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models have
enabled the creation of a new form of digital art: optical
illusions—visual tricks that create different perceptions of
reality. However, adversaries may misuse such techniques
to generate hateful illusions, which embed specific hate
messages into harmless scenes and disseminate them across
web communities. In this work, we take the first step toward
investigating the risks of scalable hateful illusion generation and the potential for bypassing current content moderation models. Specifically, we generate 1,860 optical illusions using Stable Diffusion and ControlNet, conditioned on
62 hate messages. Of these, 1,571 are hateful illusions that
successfully embed hate messages, either overtly or subtly,
forming the Hateful Illusion dataset. Using this dataset, we
evaluate the performance of six moderation classifiers and
nine vision language models (VLMs) in identifying hateful
illusions. Experimental results reveal significant vulnerabilities in existing moderation models: the detection accuracy falls below 0.245 for moderation classifiers and below
0.102 for VLMs. We further identify a critical limitation in
their vision encoders, which mainly focus on surface-level
image details while overlooking the secondary layer of information, i.e., hidden messages. To address this risk, we
explore preliminary mitigation measures and identify the
most effective approaches from the perspectives of image
transformations and training-level strategies.1
Disclaimer. This paper contains hateful images. Reader
discretion is advised.

Figure 1. A well-known example [20] of an AI-generated optical
illusion: the image hides the word “OBEY,” which becomes more
visible when viewed from a distance or when zoomed out.

1. Introduction

prompts. Powered by these models, a new form of digital art
has emerged and quickly gained popularity on social media
platforms [19, 20]. Take Figure 1 [20] as an example: at first
glance, this image appears to depict a group of well-dressed
people walking through a busy city street at night. However, when viewed from a distance or zoomed out, a hidden message, the word “OBEY,” becomes apparent, which
is formed by the arrangement of people’s clothing in the
drawing. This type of digital art creates an optical illusion,
allowing image creators to embed a hidden message within
seemingly ordinary scenes. We refer to this new digital art
as AI-generated optical illusions.
However, this digital art also has a dark side. According to a recent AI misuse report [1], malicious users
have exploited these models to spread hate through AIgenerated optical illusions. For example, they have created and disseminated numerous images embedding hate
messages, such as the anti-Semitic symbol [8], the NeoNazi symbol [18], and hate slogans like “It’s OK to be
white” [21], all hidden within AI-generated optical illusions
to promote hateful ideologies.2 This misuse allows malicious users to embed hate into seemingly harmless scenes,
thereby subtly and implicitly creating hateful images and
disseminating them across web communities. We refer to

The recent advancement of text-to-image diffusion models [3, 15, 24] has revolutionized image creation. These
models, such as Stable Diffusion [24] and Midjourney [15],
can automatically generate high-quality and realistic images based on users’ text descriptions, often referred to as
* Yang Zhang is the corresponding author.
1 Our
code is available at https : / / github . com /

TrustAIRLab/HatefulIllusion.

19617

2 See

hateful examples at https : / / gnet - research . org /
2023/11/13/for-the-lulz-ai-generated-subliminalhate - is - a - new - challenge - in - the - fight - against online-harm/.

