This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VisualCloze: A Universal Image Generation Framework via Visual In-Context
Learning
Zhong-Yu Li1,4,5 * Ruoyi Du3,5 * Juncheng Yan5,6 Le Zhuo5
Zhen Li7† Peng Gao2,5 Zhanyu Ma3 Ming-Ming Cheng1,4†
1
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 4 VCIP, CS, Nankai University
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory 6 Tsinghua University 7 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract

In-context examples

Recent advances in diffusion models have significantly advanced image generation; however, existing models remain
task-specific, limiting their efficiency and generalizability.
While universal models attempt to address these limitations,
they face critical challenges, including generalizable instruction design, appropriate task distributions, and unified
architectural design. In this work, we propose VisualCloze,
a universal image generation framework, to tackle these
challenges. Unlike existing methods that rely on languagebased task descriptions, leading to task ambiguity and weak
generalization, we integrate visual in-context learning, allowing models to identify tasks from demonstrations. Meanwhile, the inherent sparsity of visual task distributions hampers the learning of transferable knowledge across tasks.
To this end, we introduce Graph200K, a graph-structured
dataset that establishes various interrelated tasks, enhancing task density and knowledge transfer. Furthermore, we
uncover an intrinsic alignment between image infilling and
in-context learning, enabling us to leverage the strong generative priors of pre-trained infilling models without modifying their architectures. Experiments demonstrate that VisualCloze achieves strong performance across various indomain tasks while generalizing to unseen tasks in few-shot
and zero-shot settings. Our codes and dataset are available
at https://visualcloze.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in image generation, propelled by the
progress of diffusion models [14, 30, 78], have led to a
wide range of applications, including image editing [60],
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Understand
the task

Layout + Style +
Subject = ?

Query

?

Fill blank grid
by reasoning

Figure 1. Illustration of our universal image generation framework
based on visual in-context learning. Given one query of a specific
task, the generative model learns the task by observing a few incontext examples presented as demonstrations.

style transfer [55, 71], virtual try-on [10, 11], and personalized generation [34, 48], among others. However, these
tasks typically require task-specific models, which limit efficiency and scalability for real-world applications. In recent years, there has been growing interest in unified generative models [26, 35, 40], which aim to handle diverse image generation tasks within a single framework. However,
key challenges remain despite significant progress, e.g., instruction design, task distribution, and model architecture.
Regarding instructions that guide the model to differentiate distinct tasks and produce expected behavior, existing
methods primarily rely on language instructions [26, 40]
or task-specific tokens [35]. However, the task complexity and inherent gap between vision and language modalities make it hard for the model to understand the task intent based on language description alone. This issue leads
to task confusion [35] and hinders generalization on unseen tasks [32, 61]. In contrast, large language models have

18969

