This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Recursive Feedback on Generation and Appearance Latents for
Pose-Robust Text-to-Image Diffusion
Jiwon Kim1

Pureum Kim1 SeonHwa Kim1 Soobin Park2 Eunju Cha2 * Kyong Hwan Jin1 *
2
1
Korea University
Sookmyung Women’s University

{jwonkim, pureum kim, sunkim0062, kyong jin}@korea.ac.kr, {psb1219j, eunju.cha}@sookmyung.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advancements in controllable text-to-image (T2I)
diffusion models, such as Ctrl-X and FreeControl, have
demonstrated robust spatial and appearance control without requiring auxiliary module training. However, these
models often struggle to accurately preserve spatial structures and fail to capture fine-grained conditions related to
object poses and scene layouts. To address these challenges, we propose a training-free Dual Recursive Feedback (DRF) system that properly reflects control conditions
in controllable T2I models. The proposed DRF consists of
appearance feedback and generation feedback that recursively refines the intermediate latents to better reflect the
given appearance information and the user’s intent. This
dual-update mechanism guides latent representations toward reliable manifolds, effectively integrating structural
and appearance attributes. Our approach enables finegrained generation even between class-invariant structureappearance fusion, such as transferring human motion onto
a tiger’s form. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our method in producing high-quality, semantically
coherent, and structurally consistent image generations.
Our source code is available at https://github.
com/jwonkm/DRF.

Figure 1. Flowchart of Dual Recursive Feedback (DRF). Illustration of a diffusion-based generative model with latent feedback
mechanisms (DRF) for controlling both appearance and generation latent in class-invariant text-to-image synthesis. The proposed
method refines latent updates to achieve fine-grained control, improving results with desired structural and appearance attributes.

1. Introduction

ated images, making the representation of complex structures challenging. To address this, T2I models have progressively incorporated conditional guidance techniques,
enabling more detailed control over the desired image attributes. For instance, approaches such as ControlNet [32]
leverage specific structures (e.g., pose, edge, or depth) to
provide users with finer control, thus allowing the generated images to align more precisely with user intent. Beyond T2I generations, a line of research known as Imageto-Image (I2I) translation [7, 8, 12, 30] extends generating
capabilities by taking an existing source image as input, and
then transforming it according to a text query. Since this
approach leverages the structural or contextual elements of
the original image, I2I offers more precise control than T2I.
Nonetheless, a technical trade-off between reliability and
diversity still remained.
Another strategy for reflecting both the structure to be
incorporated into the generated image and the appearance
to be preserved is to use dedicated images as prompts for
each aspect, such as IP-Adapter [31] and Ctrl-X [14]. By
directly specifying what structures and appearance the user
wants, these methods can better integrate the user’s intent
into the generated results. However, such techniques still

Recent advancements in diffusion models [4, 10, 20, 24, 28]
have led to rapid progress in the field of image generation. Among these developments, the need to generate images that accurately reflect a user’s intended expression has
emerged, resulting in various approaches for incorporating
user intent into Text-to-Image (T2I) generation and Imageto-Image (I2I) translation tasks.
Text-to-Image (T2I) techniques have been developed to
synthesize realistic and creative images solely from textual descriptions. However, T2I methods often face limitations in controlling the spatial composition of the gener* Corresponding author.

15491

