This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Multi-View Indoor 3D Object Detection via
Adaptive 3D Volume Construction
Runmin Zhang1 Zhu Yu1 * Si-Yuan Cao2,3 * Lingyu Zhu4
Guangyi Zhang1 Xiaokai Bai1 Hui-Liang Shen1
1
2

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University

Ningbo Global Innovation Center, Zhejiang University

3

NingboTech University

4

City University of Hong Kong

{runmin zhang, yu zhu, cao siyuan}@zju.edu.cn, lingyzhu-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,
{zhangguangyi, shawnnnkb, shenhl}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
…

This work presents SGCDet, a novel multi-view indoor 3D
object detection framework based on adaptive 3D volume
construction. Unlike previous approaches that restrict the
receptive field of voxels to fixed locations on images, we introduce a geometry and context aware aggregation module
to integrate geometric and contextual information within
adaptive regions in each image and dynamically adjust the
contributions from different views, enhancing the representation capability of voxel features. Furthermore, we propose a sparse volume construction strategy that adaptively
identifies and selects voxels with high occupancy probabilities for feature refinement, minimizing redundant computation in free space. Benefiting from the above designs,
our framework achieves effective and efficient volume construction in an adaptive way. Better still, our network can
be supervised using only 3D bounding boxes, eliminating
the dependence on ground-truth scene geometry. Experimental results demonstrate that SGCDet achieves stateof-the-art performance on the ScanNet, ScanNet200 and
ARKitScenes datasets. The source code is available at
https://github.com/RM-Zhang/SGCDet.

+

Direct
averaging

…

+

Dynamic
adjustment

(a) Single point sampling

(b) Geometry and context aware
aggregation (Ours)

(c) Dense volume construction

(d) Sparse volume construction (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of feature lifting and volume construction
strategies between previous approaches and our SGCDet. (a) The
single point sampling strategy used in previous approaches restricts the receptive field of voxels to a limited region, neglecting contextual information across multiple views. (b) Our geometry and context aware aggregation adaptively integrates geometric
and contextual features within deformable regions across different
views, enhancing the representational capability of voxel features.
(c) Previous approaches construct high-resolution, dense 3D volumes without considering the inherent sparsity of 3D scenes, leading to unnecessary computational overhead. (d) Our sparse volume construction adaptively refines voxels that are likely to contain objects, reducing redundant computational cost in free space.

To bridge the gap between 2D images and 3D representations, the pioneering work ImVoxelNet [29] lifts 2D features along the overall ray. Each voxel then adopts the averaged results across multiple views as its features. However, this approach uses the same weights for features derived from different images, leading to a coarse and errorprone 3D voxel representation. Although the following
works [31, 38] introduce an opacity probability to suppress
voxel features in free space through post-processing, they
still fail to address the occlusion issue during the 2D-to3D projection process. More recent approaches [30, 40]
introduce explicit geometry constrains to assist the feature lifting. Nevertheless, the final performance of these

1. Introduction
Indoor 3D object detection is a fundamental 3D perception
task, with broad applications in embodied AI, AR/VR, and
robotics. Leveraging precise scene geometry as input, point
cloud-based 3D object detectors [11, 18, 26, 28, 32, 43]
have achieved impressive performance. However, capturing accurate scene geometry typically requires high-cost
3D sensors. Recently, there has been a shift towards using
multi-view posed images for 3D object detection.
* Corresponding authors.

5980

