This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthetic Video Enhances Physical Fidelity in Video Synthesis
Qi Zhao1
1

ByteDance Seed

Xingyu Ni2,1
Ziyu Wang3,1
Feng Cheng1
Lu Jiang1*
Bohan Wang4*
2

Peking University

3

ShanghaiTech University

4

Ziyan Yang1

National University of Singapore

Figure 1. Our synthetic-data-enhanced video generation model is capable of producing videos depicting human dancing (rows 1), scenes
featuring large camera orbiting around the object (row 2), and animals against solid-color backgrounds for matting (row 3).

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video generation models [9, 17, 26, 36, 37] have demonstrated strong capabilities in producing high-quality and visually compelling videos of real-world scenarios. Despite
their remarkable progress, these generation videos often
struggle to respect the underlying physical laws of the real
world, indicating a significant gap in applications where
physical fidelity is essential [31, 68, 69]. For instance, while
a video generation model can generate realistic-looking objects or humans within a scene, it may fail to maintain 3D
consistency when the camera moves or when the subjects
undergo deformation.

We investigate how to enhance the physical fidelity of video
generation models by leveraging synthetic videos derived
from computer graphics pipelines. These rendered videos
respect real-world physics, such as maintaining 3D consistency, and serve as a valuable resource that can potentially improve video generation models. To harness this potential, we propose a solution that curates and integrates
synthetic data while introducing a method to transfer its
physical realism to the model, significantly reducing unwanted artifacts. Through experiments on three representative tasks emphasizing physical consistency, we demonstrate its efficacy in enhancing physical fidelity. While
our model still lacks a deep understanding of physics, our
work offers one of the first empirical demonstrations that
synthetic video enhances physical fidelity in video synthesis. Website: https://kevinz8866.github.io/
simulation/

* Corresponding author

In this paper, we explore whether synthetically generated
videos can enhance the physical fidelity of video generation models. Specifically, we utilize synthetic videos rendered through modern computer-generated imagery (CGI)
production pipelines used in gaming and film, such as
Blender [62] and Unreal Engine [19]. By utilizing standard computer graphics techniques, we can generate highquality, physically consistent video content at scale. CGI
production pipelines generate videos via precise 3D asset modeling, animation, and rendering based on predetermined physical rules [13]. This approach allows for highly

12135

