This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViT-EnsembleAttack: Augmenting Ensemble Models for Stronger Adversarial
Transferability in Vision Transformers
Hanwen Cao*, Haobo Lu*, Xiaosen Wang, Kun He†
School of Computer Science and Technology
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{hanwen,haobo,brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn, xswanghuster@gmail.com

Abstract

ial attacks [10, 41], despite their impressive performance
in solving various computer vision tasks. Adversarial examples, carefully designed to deceive DNNs, can be transferred between different models [22, 38], which means that
a perturbation generated on a surrogate model can also
mislead other models, even those with different architectures. This transferability enables a type of adversarial attack known as transfer-based attacks. Transfer-based adversarial examples are trained on surrogate models and can
effectively attack unknown target models. To mitigate the
gap between surrogate models and target models, recent researches [18, 21, 36, 37, 48] have introduced various techniques to improve transferability, such as input transformations [9, 21, 39] and advanced objective functions [18, 46].
Ensemble-based attacks [22] combine the outputs of
multiple surrogate models to generate adversarial examples.
These attacks can be easily integrated with existing transferbased methods, such as gradient-based MI-FGSM [3] or
NI-FGSM [20], and input transformation methods like TIFGSM [4], to further enhance attack performance. Earlier approaches [22] simply average the outputs of ensemble models, yielding modest transferability. Subsequent
work has focused on reducing discrepancies among surrogate models and adjusting ensemble weights. For instance,
Stochastic Variance Reduced Ensemble adversarial attack
(SVRE) [45] utilizes the idea of Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient (SVRG) [16] to reduce the variances of gradient updates; Adaptive Model Ensemble Adversarial Attack (AdaEA) [1] and Stochastic Mini-batch black-box attack with Ensemble Reweighting (SMER) [32] dynamically
adjust model weights based on adversarial contribution.
These methods have enhanced transferability by optimizing the combination of fixed surrogate models. However, we think it is not enough to merely focus on how
to optimize the combination. Prior works don’t investigate the potential contributions of surrogate models themselves in enhancing attack transferability. In other words,
original surrogate models may not be the most effective
surrogates for ensemble-based attacks. This gap motivates

Ensemble-based attacks have been proven to be effective
in enhancing adversarial transferability by aggregating
the outputs of models with various architectures. However, existing research primarily focuses on refining ensemble weights or optimizing the ensemble path, overlooking the exploration of ensemble models to enhance
the transferability of adversarial attacks. To address this
gap, we propose applying adversarial augmentation to the
surrogate models, aiming to boost overall generalization
of ensemble models and reduce the risk of adversarial
overfitting. Meanwhile, observing that ensemble Vision
Transformers (ViTs) gain less attention, we propose ViTEnsembleAttack based on the idea of model adversarial
augmentation, the first ensemble-based attack method tailored for ViTs to the best of our knowledge. Our approach
generates augmented models for each surrogate ViT using
three strategies: Multi-head dropping, Attention score scaling, and MLP feature mixing, with the associated parameters optimized by Bayesian optimization. These adversarially augmented models are ensembled to generate adversarial examples. Furthermore, we introduce Automatic
Reweighting and Step Size Enlargement modules to boost
transferability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
ViT-EnsembleAttack significantly enhances the adversarial
transferability of ensemble-based attacks on ViTs, outperforming existing methods by a substantial margin. Code is
available at https://github.com/TrustworthyAI-Group/TransferAttack.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), including Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [14] and Vision Transformers (ViTs) [5], are inherently vulnerable to adversar* The first two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

2000

