This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Any-SSR: How Recursive Least Squares Works in Continual Learning of Large
Language Models
Kai Tong1 , Kang Pan2 , Xiao Zhang2 , Erli Meng2 , Run He1 , Yawen Cui3 ,
Nuoyan Guo1 , Huiping Zhuang1 *
1
South China University of Technology 2 Xiaomi Corporation
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract

diverse tasks, including natural language understanding
[17, 49], multimodal reasoning [10, 45], and application
in robotics [5, 22]. However, a critical challenge persists
in dynamic real-world environments, where new concepts
and domains of knowledge emerge and vary frequently. To
maintain LLMs’ efficacy, models are required to absorb new
domain knowledge through a fine-tuning (FT) process. Such
a process essentially equals to continual learning (CL) of
LLMs, with an aim to retain previously learned knowledge
while accepting new-domain data.
A main unsolved problem in CL is the issue of catastrophic forgetting [1], where the models could quickly lose
the previous learned knowledge when accepting new tasks.
This phenomenon is particularly severe in LLMs, since
the general capabilities of LLMs encoded within highdimensional parameter spaces can be easily disrupted by FT.
This causes both prior task-specific knowledge and core generative competencies [42]. Unlike traditional CL problems,
prolonged iteration process in LLMs’ continual fine-tuning
induces cumulative parameter drift. This could result in a
severe decline of LLMs’ task-specific abilities, as well as a
significant portion of their general knowledge.
A traditional strategy to counter catastrophic forgetting is
to store a small set of used data as exemplars for replaying
[13, 26]. However, replaying data for LLMs is less practical
due to the huge volume of training data (especially those
from pre-training). Moreover, replaying stored data could
raise intensive computational cost and accompany potential privacy invasion. To avoid this, several techniques utilize parameter-efficient tuning (PET) [12] including prompt
tuning and low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [16] to continually
adapt LLMs to new tasks. These methods mainly use lightweight module with a fixed number of parameters to absorb
knowledge from all downstream tasks [30, 38]. Fine-tuning
the shared module on one task followed by another consecutively induces catastrophic forgetting due to an extreme
imbalanced data distribution [53]. It is hence highly motivated to explore new LLM technique that can continually
absorb new skills in a replay-free fashion while overcoming

Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) on data of
various domains encompassing advanced language-related
tasks. Such a process is essentially a continual learning procedure since it is impractical to re-access the pre-trained
data in most parties. This naturally attracts catastrophic
forgetting of LLMs’ previously learned knowledge, such as
general skills. Existing techniques either leverage previous data to replay, leading to extra computational costs,
or utilize a single parameter-efficient module to learn the
downstream task, constraining new knowledge absorption
with interference among different tasks. To handle these issues, we propose an Analytic Subspace Routing (Any-SSR)
to address these challenges. For each task, we isolate the
learning within a subspace of deep layers’ features via
low-rank adaptation, eliminating knowledge interference
between different tasks. Additionally, we propose an analytic
routing mechanism to properly utilize knowledge learned
in different subspaces. Our approach employs Recursive
Least Squares to train a multi-task router model, allowing the router to dynamically adapt to incoming data without requiring access to historical data. Subsequently, the
router effectively assigns the current task to an appropriate subspace and has a non-forgetting property of previously learned tasks with a solid theoretical guarantee. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves
near-perfect retention of prior knowledge while seamlessly
integrating new information, effectively mitigating the core
limitations of existing methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ZHUANGHP/Any-SSR.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advances in large
language models (LLMs) [6, 27, 36], which have emerged
as foundational technologies driving breakthroughs across
* Corresponding author (e-mail: hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn)

3047

