This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoFusion: Sparse-View 4D Reconstruction via Monocular Fusion
Zihan Wang, Jeff Tan, Tarasha Khurana,* Neehar Peri→ , Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Figure 1. Dynamic Scene Reconstruction from Sparse Views. MonoFusion reconstructs dynamic human behaviors, such as playing the
piano or performing CPR, from four equidistant inward-facing static cameras. We visualize the RGB and depth renderings of a 45→ novel
view between two training views. Training views are shown below for reference.

Abstract

[41], and robotics [63, 80, 81]. Prior work often studies this
problem in the context of dense multi-view videos, which
require dedicated capture studios that are prohibitively expensive to build and are difficult to scale to diverse scenes
in-the-wild. In this paper, we aim to strike a balance between the ease and informativeness of multi-view data collection by reconstructing skilled human behaviors (e.g.,
playing a piano and performing CPR) from four equidistant
inward-facing static cameras (Fig. 1).

We address the problem of dynamic scene reconstruction
from sparse-view videos. Prior work often requires dense
multi-view captures with hundreds of calibrated cameras
(e.g. Panoptic Studio). Such multi-view setups are prohibitively expensive to build and cannot capture diverse
scenes in-the-wild. In contrast, we aim to reconstruct dynamic human behaviors, such as repairing a bike or dancing, from a small set of sparse-view cameras with complete scene coverage (e.g. four equidistant inward-facing
static cameras). We find that dense multi-view reconstruction methods struggle to adapt to this sparse-view setup due
to limited overlap between viewpoints. To address these
limitations, we carefully align independent monocular reconstructions of each camera to produce time- and viewconsistent dynamic scene reconstructions. Extensive experiments on PanopticStudio and Ego-Exo4D demonstrate that
our method achieves higher quality reconstructions than
prior art, particularly when rendering novel views. Code,
data, and data-processing scripts are available on Github.

Problem setup. Despite recent advances in dynamic
scene reconstruction [4, 17–19], current approaches often
require dozens of calibrated cameras [25, 42], are category
specific [68], or struggle to generate multi-view consistent
geometry [37]. We study the problem of reconstructing dynamic human behaviors from an in-the-wild capture studio:
a small set of (4) portable cameras with limited overlap but
complete scene coverage, such as in the large-scale EgoExo4D dataset [21]. We argue that sparse-view limitedoverlap reconstruction presents unique challenges not found
in dense multi-view setups and typical “sparse view” captures with large covisibility (Fig. 2). For dense multi-view
captures, it is often sufficient to rely solely on geometric
and photometric cues for reconstruction, often making use
of classic techniques from (non-rigid) structure from motion [14, 73]. As a result, these methods fail in sparse-view
settings with limited cross-view correspondences.

1. Introduction
Accurately reconstructing dynamic 3D scenes from multiview videos is of great interest to the vision community,
with applications in AR/VR [40, 55], autonomous driving

8252

