This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Key-frame-based Micro-expression Recognition: A Robust and
Accurate Framework Against Key-frame Errors
Zheyuan Zhang1,2 , Weihao Tang3 , Hong Chen1,2 *
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3 University of Auckland
2
Key Laboratory of Interactive Technology and Experience System, Ministry of Culture and Tourism
{zzy1998, chenhong76}@bupt.edu.cn wtan402@aucklanduni.ac.nz
1

Abstract
Micro-expression recognition (MER) is a highly challenging task in affective computing. With the reduced-sized
micro-expression (ME) input that contains key information
based on key-frame indexes, key-frame-based methods have
significantly improved the performance of MER. However,
most of these methods focus on improving the performance
with relatively accurate key-frame indexes, while ignoring
the difficulty of obtaining accurate key-frame indexes and
the objective existence of key-frame index errors, which impedes them from moving towards practical applications. In
this paper, we propose CausalNet, a novel framework to
achieve robust MER facing key-frame index errors while
maintaining accurate recognition. To enhance robustness,
CausalNet takes the representation of the entire ME sequence as the input. To address the information redundancy brought by the complete ME range input and maintain accurate recognition, first, the Causal Motion Position
Learning Module (CMPLM) is proposed to help the model
locate the muscle movement areas related to Action Units
(AUs), thereby reducing the attention to other redundant
areas. Second, the Causal Attention Block (CAB) is proposed to deeply learn the causal relationships between the
muscle contraction and relaxation movements in MEs. Empirical experiments have demonstrated that on popular ME
benchmarks, the CausalNet has achieved robust MER under
different levels of key-frame index noise. Meanwhile, it has
surpassed state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on several standard MER benchmarks when using the provided annotated
key-frames. Code is available at https://github.
com/tony19980810/CausalNet.

Figure 1. Compared with existing advanced methods, CausalNet
ranks first in both robustness and accuracy assessment on the composite dataset including SAMM [4], CASME II [35] and SMIC
[13]. The robustness assessment is based on the mean values of
UAR and UF1 under three different levels of key-frame index errors (see Sec. 4.2), while the accuracy assessment is through the
standard evaluation with the annotated key-frames (see Sec. 4.3).

pressions can be roughly divided into two types: macroexpressions and micro-expressions (MEs). The former exhibits strong facial muscle movements for a long duration
and is relatively easy to recognize. The latter is an involuntary, fleeting, and unconscious facial expression that occurs when a person fails to control their facial expressions.
Therefore, the emotion conveyed by such expressions is relatively more genuine [18, 21]. Nevertheless, when MEs occur, the muscle movements are weak, and the duration is
short (less than 0.5 seconds [5]), which poses a huge challenge for both humans and machines to recognize. Therefore, accurately spotting and recognizing MEs is of great
significance in affective computing [14, 20, 23, 43].

1. Introduction

Onset, apex, and offset frames correspond to the start,
peak, and end of the muscle movements in MEs respectively. Based on the locations of these key-frames, keyframe-based methods with the core idea of “less is more”
[15] filter out redundant frames without obvious expression
information and take partial ME frames as input (e.g., only
the apex frame [27, 32] and the onset-apex dynamic repre-

Expression is the manifestation of emotion directed toward
given stimuli [8, 10, 19, 41, 42]. In the real world, ex* Corresponding authors.

12274

