This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prior2Former - Evidential Modeling of Mask Transformers for
Assumption-Free Open-World Panoptic Segmentation
Sebastian Schmidt1,2,∗ Julius Körner1,2,∗ Dominik Fuchsgruber1
Stefano Gasperini1,3,5 Federico Tombari1,4 Stephan Günnemann1,5
1

Technical University of Munich 2 BMW Group 3 Visualais
4
Google 5 Munich Center for Machine Learning

Mask
Transfomer

Abstract

InD Data
a)
Known Panoptic Segmentation

In panoptic segmentation, individual instances must be separated within semantic classes. As state-of-the-art methods rely on a pre-defined set of classes, they struggle with
novel categories and out-of-distribution (OOD) data. This
is particularly problematic in safety-critical applications,
such as autonomous driving, where reliability in unseen
scenarios is essential. We address the gap between outstanding benchmark performance and reliability by proposing Prior2Former (P2F), the first approach for segmentation vision transformers rooted in evidential learning. P2F
extends the mask vision transformer architecture by incorporating a Beta prior for computing model uncertainty in
pixel-wise binary mask assignments. This design enables
high-quality uncertainty estimation that effectively detects
novel and OOD objects, enabling state-of-the-art anomaly
instance segmentation and open-world panoptic segmentation. Unlike most segmentation models addressing unknown
classes, P2F operates without access to OOD data samples or contrastive training on void (i.e., unlabeled) classes,
making it highly applicable in real-world scenarios where
such prior information is unavailable. Additionally, P2F
can be flexibly applied to anomaly instance and panoptic segmentation. Through comprehensive experiments on
the Cityscapes, COCO, SegmentMeIfYouCan, and OoDIS
datasets, P2F demonstrates state-of-the-art performance
across the board.

1. Introduction
Semantic understanding is essential for any autonomous
agent navigating in the environment or interacting with
it. State-of-the-art methods rely on comprehensive datasets
∗ Equal Contribution

Corresponding author: sebastian95.schmidt@tum.de
Project page: www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/prior2former

Evidential
Mask
Modelling
b) Unknown Instance Segmentation

Figure 1. The proposed Prior2Former allows a) state-of-the-art
panoptic segmentation performance and b) identifies unknown
instances by uncertainty-based evidential learning without any
knowledge beyond the standard in-domain (InD) training data.

that cover a data distribution of interest [10, 12] but cannot operate beyond that, limiting their applicability in realworld settings where unknown scenarios are the norm [20].
In safety-critical applications, such as mobile robotics or
autonomous driving, safe operation in environments outside
the training data distribution is crucial [52]. For example, an
autonomous car must detect objects on the street regardless
of whether their semantic class belongs to the training set
and adapt its trajectory accordingly. Consequently, openworld segmentation [28] and anomaly segmentation [44] recently emerged to study these OOD settings systematically.
Existing methods often approach this problem through
exposure to OOD data [28] or void categories (i.e., unlabeled) [63] during training, or with powerful external models like CLIP [45] familiar with such OOD data [42]. Often used as black boxes, these external models can be large
foundation models with extensive vocabularies that enable
the wrapping methods to significantly expand the pool of
objects they can handle [42]. However, assuming that their
knowledge covers all possible objects is unrealistic, so they
fail whenever the input lies outside of their vocabulary.
As a dense task, segmentation requires a prediction for
every point or pixel of the input. Some datasets annotate
pixels not containing relevant elements as void [14]. Prior
works utilize this by learning the void areas, to which un-

23646

