This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Category-Specific Selective Feature Enhancement for Long-Tailed Multi-Label
Image Classification
Ruiqi Du, Xu Tang*, Xiangrong Zhang, Jingjing Ma
Xidian University, China
24171111300@stu.xidian.edu.cn, tangxu128@gmail.com,
xrzhang@mail.xidian.edu.cn, jjma@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Since real-world multi-label data often exhibit significant
label imbalance, long-tailed multi-label image classification has emerged as a prominent research area in computer vision. Traditionally, it is considered that deep neural networks’ classifiers are vulnerable to long-tailed distributions, whereas the feature extraction backbone remains
relatively robust. However, our analysis from the feature
learning perspective reveals that the backbone struggles to
maintain high sensitivity to sample-scarce categories but retains the ability to localize specific areas effectively. Based
on this observation, we propose a new model for long-tailed
multi-label image classification named category-specific selective feature enhancement (CSSFE). First, it utilizes the
retained localization capability of the backbone to capture
label-dependent class activation maps. Then, a progressive
attention enhancement mechanism, updating from head to
medium to tail categories, is introduced to address the lowconfidence issue in medium and tail categories. Finally,
visual features are extracted according to the optimized
class activation maps and combined with semantic information to perform the classification task. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets highlight our findings’
generalizability and the proposed CSSFE’s superior performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/TangXuGroup/multilabelRSSC/tree/main/CSSFE.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. We set three visual comparison groups: (a) Head category: person; (b) Medium category: cat; (c) Tail category: airplane. The model in the second row was trained on a traditionally
label-balanced multi-label dataset, while the model in the third row
was trained on a long-tailed distribution multi-label dataset. Comparative analysis of class activation maps visualizations between
the second row and the third row (CAMlb vs. CAMlt ), we
observe that the primary impact of long-tailed multi-label distribution on deep neural networks manifests at the confidence level.
Specifically, CAMlb and CAMlt exhibit structural similarity in
overall activation areas, while CAMlt demonstrates significant
attention weight attenuation especially for tail categories.

1. Introduction

bels appears frequently, while the majority has only limited
sample data. This imbalanced distribution poses substantial
challenges to conventional multi-label image classification
models, as they tend to overfit head classes while neglecting
the learning of tail classes [43]. To address these problems,
long-tailed multi-label image classification [24, 37, 38] has
emerged and attracted considerable attention.
There are two baseline strategies to address the head-totail imbalance problem in long-tailed distributions. One
is to re-sample the samples in the datasets during train-

With the advancement of deep learning techniques, the performance of multi-label image classification has been enhanced significantly [6, 7, 46]. However, due to the inherent imbalance in the occurrence frequency of various objects [22, 28, 30], the label distribution of real-world multilabel image datasets typically exhibits the long-tailed phenomenon [14, 15, 32]. In other words, a minority of la* :Corresponding author

3757

