This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Balancing Conservatism and Aggressiveness:
Prototype-Affinity Hybrid Network for Few-Shot Segmentation
Tianyu Zou1
Shengwu Xiong2∗
Ruilin Yao1,4,5
Yi Rong3,1 *
School of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
2
Interdisciplinary Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Wuhan College
3
Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park, Wuhan University of Technology
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

{zoutianyu, xiongsw, yaoruilin, rongyi}@whut.edu.cn

Pascal-5i

COCO-20i

Support

Abstract

PAHNet

SCCAN

SSP

Query

This paper studies the few-shot segmentation (FSS) task,
which aims to segment objects belonging to unseen categories in a query image by learning a model on a small
number of well-annotated support samples. Our analysis
of two mainstream FSS paradigms reveals that the predictions made by prototype learning methods are usually conservative, while those of affinity learning methods tend to
be more aggressive. This observation motivates us to balance the conservative and aggressive information captured
by these two types of FSS frameworks so as to improve the
segmentation performance. To achieve this, we propose
a Prototype-Affinity Hybrid Network (PAHNet), which introduces a Prototype-guided Feature Enhancement (PFE)
module and an Attention Score Calibration (ASC) module
in each attention block of an affinity learning model (called
affinity learner). These two modules utilize the predictions
generated by a pre-trained prototype learning model (called
prototype predictor) to enhance the foreground information
in support and query image representations and suppress
the mismatched foreground-background (FG-BG) relationships between them, respectively. In this way, the aggressiveness of the affinity learner can be effectively mitigated,
thereby eventually increasing the segmentation accuracy of
our PAHNet method. Experimental results show that PAHNet outperforms most recently proposed methods across 1shot and 5-shot settings on both PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i
datasets, suggesting its effectiveness. The code is available
at: https://github.com/tianyu-zou/PAHNet.

Support Mask

Query Mask

Model Prediction

Missing FG

Misidentified BG

Figure 1. Prediction comparison between the prototype learning
method (SSP), affinity learning method (SCCAN), and our PAHNet on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i . SSP shows significant foreground misses (blue circles), while SCCAN exhibits substantial
background misactivation (yellow circles). In contrast, PAHNet
integrates the conservative information from the prototype learning method with the aggressive information from the affinity learning method. As a result, our PAHNet maximizes the foreground
(FG) activation while reducing incorrect FG-BG matches.

1. Introduction

has attracted extensive attention from the academic community and been widely used in industrial applications. In
particular, deep-learning-based semantic segmentation approaches have made rapid progress and demonstrated impressive performance. However, the success of deep learning techniques relies heavily on the availability of largescale well-annotated data. Unfortunately, for semantic segmentation tasks, manually annotating massive samples with
reliable pixel-wise labels is laborious and time-consuming.
Learning deep models with such insufficient training data
will inevitably lead to overfitting problems, resulting in reduced generalization ability in segmenting unseen objects.
To deal with this challenge, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) [2, 28, 30] has been proposed. It emulates the

Over the past decades, semantic segmentation [17, 22, 28]
has emerged as an important task in computer vision, which
* Corresponding author

20561

