This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMReason: An Open-Ended Multi-Modal Multi-Step
Reasoning Benchmark for MLLMs Toward AGI
Huanjin Yao1 , Jiaxing Huang 1 , Yawen Qiu2 , Michael K. Chen1 , Wenzheng Liu4 , Wei Zhang5
Wenjie Zeng2 , Xikun Zhang1 , Jingyi Zhang1 , YuXin Song3 , Wenhao Wu3 , Dacheng Tao1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Baidu Inc.
4
University of California 5 University of Science and Technology of China
Corresponding author

Abstract

Input with Options

Reasoning plays a crucial role in advancing Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) toward Artificial General Intelligence. However, existing MLLM benchmarks often fall short in precisely and comprehensively evaluating
long-chain reasoning abilities from three key aspects: (1)
lack of difficulty and diversity, (2) susceptibility to guessability and memorization, (3) inadequate assessment of intermediate reasoning steps. To fill this gap, we introduce
MMReason, a new benchmark designed to precisely and
comprehensively evaluate MLLM long-chain reasoning capability with diverse, open-ended, challenging questions.
First, we curate challenging questions requiring multi-step
reasoning from various fields (i.e., 6 disciplines) and multiple difficulty levels (i.e., from pre-university to university,
and from foundational to competition tiers). Second, these
questions are reformulated into an open-ended format and
filtered using a multi-model voting technique to eliminate
shortcut cases related to guessing and memorization, ensuring robust reasoning evaluations. Third, we annotate
the questions with detailed step-by-step solutions, and design a reference-based ternary scoring mechanism to reliably assess intermediate reasoning steps. With MMReason, we benchmark popular leading MLLMs and provide an
in-depth analysis of their reasoning capabilities. We hope
MMReason will serve as a valuable resource for advancing
MLLM reasoning research.

Input: Find the perimeter of
trapezoid P Q R S.
Options: ...(D) 38 + 6 2 + 6 3

Evaluation

Output (Guessability)

Intermediate Steps: To find ...,
we need to calculate ... Therefore,
the perimeter of trapezoid P Q R
S is (10 2 + 12 3+ 20) units.
Final Answer: The answer is D:
(38+6 2 +6 3).

Extract Final Answer
Score Final Answer

ScoreFinal = 1

(a) Guessability issues in existing benchmarks.
Remove Input Options

Input: D is a point inside, then
the measure of ∠A is ().
Options: (A) (B) 36° …,

Evaluation

Output (Memorization)

Intermediate Steps:
∵CD bisects ∠ACB，
…
∴∠A=180°-∠ADB-∠BDC=30°
Final Answer: The correct
answer is (B) 36°

Extract Final Answer
Score Final Answer

ScoreFinal = 1

(b) Memorization issues in existing benchmarks.
Input without Options

Input: Find the radius of the
small sphere in terms of R.

Output(Robustness)

Evaluation

Intermediate Steps: First
triangle: 5 + 3 + 13 = 2,
Second: … , Third: … ,
Fourth triangle: ? + 3 + 18 = 29,
? + 3 + 18 = 29, ? = 8
Final Answer: 8

Extract &
Break down
Score Each
Step

Score
Answer

ScoreInter : 0.8 ScoreFinal : 1

(c) New robust questions and methods for long-chain reasoning evaluation.

Figure 1. Existing benchmarks are susceptible to (a) guessability,
where MLLMs arrive at correct answer by guessing despite flawed
reasoning, and (b) memorization, where models recall leaked
question types and answers rather than reasoning. We propose (c)
a robust open-ended benchmark designed to evaluate long-chain
reasoning by assessing both intermediate steps and final results.

long-chain reasoning, and aim to integrate textual and visual information to generate long-chain reasoning steps, ultimately solving complex problems across various domains.
Leading-edge MLLMs, such as GPT-o1 [18], have exhibited exceptional understanding and reasoning abilities, even
surpassing human performance. For example, on MathVista [25], GPT-o1 achieves a score of 73.9%, which significantly outperforms the human performance of 60.3%.
Despite these advancements, a critical question arises: how
well do existing benchmarks truly evaluate the reasoning

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in the reasoning capabilities of
Large Language Models (LLMs) [11, 18, 23, 36, 44]
are progressively paving the way toward AGI. Inspired
by these advances, Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [35, 45, 46, 59] have shifted their focus toward

273

