This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blind Noisy Image Deblurring Using Residual Guidance Strategy
Jun Liu1 * Xi-Le Zhao2 Tingting Wu3 Tieyong Zeng4
1
Northeast Normal University, China
2
Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
4
Beijing Normal-Hong Kong Baptist University, China
{liuheyan,sunjn118,liuj292}@nenu.edu.cn,
xlzhao122003@163.com, wutt@njupt.edu.cn, tieyongzeng@uic.edu.cn

Heyan Liu1

Jianing Sun1

Abstract
Blind deblurring is an ill-posed inverse problem that involves recovering both the clear image and the blur kernel
from a single blurry image. In real photography, longer exposure time can cause blurring and may also introduce high
levels of noise. Although existing blind deblurring methods
produce satisfactory results on blurred images with little or
no noise, they struggle to handle high noise levels. Strong
noise compromises the accuracy of the estimated kernel and
significantly reduces the quality of the deblurring results.
To address this challenge, we propose a Residual Guidance Strategy (RGS) to suppress the influence of noise. Our
method leverages adjacent coarser-scale information in the
image pyramid to guide the blur kernel estimation in the
current scale. Therefore, for blurred images with different noise levels and types, our method still estimates more
accurate blur kernels, which are essential for subsequent
non-blind restoration. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real datasets have demonstrated that our method
consistently outperforms numerous state-of-the-art methods
under high levels of noise quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Image blur is a common issue caused by factors such as
camera shake, inaccurate focus, or object motion, leading
to a degradation in image quality and hindering the performance of subsequent tasks. The goal of image deblurring
is to recover a clear image from a blurred observation. The
formation of a blurry and noisy image B is typically modeled as a convolution of a latent clear image L and an invariant blur kernel K, resulting in:
B = K ⊗ L + N,
* Corresponding author.

(1)

(a) Degraded image

(b) Zhong et al. [43]

(c) Dong et al. [8]

(d) Li et al. [24]

(e) SelfDeblur [29]

(f) VDIP [14]

(g) Zhang et al. [41]

(h) DeblurGan-v2 [19]

(i) Ours

Figure 1. The visual comparison on a challenging example of the
Lai et al. dataset [20] with noise of σ = 0.1.

where ⊗ represents the convolution operation and N denotes additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN).
The challenging blind image deblurring has been extensively studied for decades, largely due to its ill-posed
nature. Though various natural image prior-based approaches [4, 16, 22, 27, 36, 37] and deep learning methods [2, 6, 11, 14, 15, 19, 29, 34, 38–41, 44] have promising
performance in deblurring recently, their deblurring performances decline significantly with increasing noise levels.
Blurry images with considerable noise are commonly
seen in real photography. In fact, it can be tough for ordinary users to capture sharp handheld images, particularly
in low-light conditions [43]. Noise affects both blur kernel
estimation and latent image restoration during the non-blind
deconvolution, further specific reasons for the influence of

11016

