This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpinMeRound: Consistent Multi-View Identity Generation Using Diffusion
Models
Stathis Galanakis1

Alexandros Lattas1
Bernhard Kainz1,2

Stylianos Moschoglou1
Stefanos Zafeiriou1

1

2

Imperial College London, UK
FAU Erlangen–Nürnberg, Germany

Figure 1. SpinMeRound is a multiview diffusion model which generates human portraits from novel viewpoints. Given a single or multiple
views, our method produces high-fidelity images along with precise surface normals, ensuring accurate 3D consistency across perspectives.

Abstract

art multi-view diffusion models. Project page: spin-meround.github.io.

Despite recent progress in diffusion models, generating realistic head portraits from novel viewpoints remains a significant challenge in computer vision. Most current approaches are constrained to limited angular ranges, predominantly focusing on frontal or near-frontal views. Moreover, although the recent emerging large-scale diffusion
models have been proven robust in handling 3D scenes, they
underperform on facial data, given their complex structure and the uncanny valley pitfalls. In this paper, we propose SpinMeRound, a diffusion-based approach designed to
generate consistent and accurate head portraits from novel
viewpoints. By leveraging a number of input views alongside an identity embedding, our method effectively synthesizes diverse viewpoints of a subject whilst robustly maintaining its unique identity features. Through experimentation, we showcase our model’s generation capabilities
in full head synthesis, while beating current state-of-the-

1. Introduction

14346

Recent advancements in deep learning have brought significant progress to fundamental computer vision tasks, notably
in image and video generation [6, 56]. The introduction of
Diffusion Models [16, 28] has transformed these domains
by enabling the generation of high-quality visual content,
facilitated by the use of large-scale datasets [5, 56]. Despite these developments, the task of generating consistent
and accurate head portraits from a single input image still
remains a challenging problem. This difficulty is primarily
attributed to the limited availability of comprehensive 3D
facial datasets, which constrains the training of models capable of reliably capturing and reconstructing the detailed
structure and variations of human faces.
A common practice for modeling human heads from

