This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M-SpecGene: Generalized Foundation Model for RGBT Multispectral Vision
Kailai Zhou1,2 , Fuqiang Yang1 , Shixian Wang1 , Bihan Wen2 , Chongde Zi1 ,
Linsen Chen1 *, Qiu Shen1 , Xun Cao1 *
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
calayzhou@smail.nju.edu.cn {chenls, caoxun}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
RGB-Thermal (RGBT) multispectral vision is essential for
robust perception in complex environments. Most RGBT
tasks follow a case-by-case research paradigm, relying on
manually customized models to learn task-oriented representations. Nevertheless, this paradigm is inherently constrained by artificial inductive bias, modality bias, and data
bottleneck. To address these limitations, we make the initial
attempt to build a Generalized RGBT MultiSpectral foundation model (M-SpecGene), which aims to learn modalityinvariant representations from large-scale broad data in
a self-supervised manner. M-SpecGene provides new insights into multispectral fusion and integrates prior caseby-case studies into a unified paradigm. Considering the
unique characteristic of information imbalance in RGBT
data, we introduce the Cross-Modality Structural Sparsity
(CMSS) metric to quantify the information density across
two modalities. Then we develop the GMM-CMSS progressive masking strategy to facilitate a flexible, easy-tohard, and object-centric pre-training process. Comprehensive experiments validate M-SpecGene’s generalizability across eleven datasets for four RGBT downstream tasks.
The code will be available at https://github.com/
CalayZhou/M-SpecGene.

Figure 1. (a) Manually customized models: task-oriented representations are learned under a case-by-case research paradigm.
(b) Generalized RGBT multispectral foundation model aims to
learn modality-invariant representations by self-supervised learning. The t-SNE visualization of RGB and thermal features indicates M-SpecGene achieves superior cross-modality alignment.

branches to extract features from both RGB and thermal
images, incorporating complex handcrafted modules in the
intermediate feature space, such as channel attention [80],
spatial attention [69], Transformer [41], and graph network
[44]. However, this case-by-case paradigm has several limitations: 1) Artificial inductive bias: Task-oriented, manually customized models, being optimized for a given task,
are effective for that task but may lead to suboptimal results
on others, thereby restricting both the scalability of the designed model and the generalizability of the learned representations. 2) Modality bias: Due to inherent differences
between RGB and thermal modalities, initializing the thermal branch with the ImageNet pretrained model inevitably
introduces modality bias. This bias can potentially impair
the encoded prior knowledge and result in suboptimal feature representations for the thermal modality. 3) Data bottleneck: RGBT multispectral images are harder to obtain

1. Introduction
RGB sensors alone struggle to handle complex environmental conditions, including smog, low light, and high dynamic
range scenarios. RGBT multispectral vision, with its allweather, round-the-clock sensing capabilities, has emerged
as a crucial technology in fields like autonomous driving,
military defense, remote sensing, and industrial inspection.
Currently, most RGBT downstream tasks follow a caseby-case research paradigm. For a given task, task-oriented
representations are learned via fully supervised learning
on small, task-specific datasets, often using models pretrained on ImageNet or trained from scratch. As illustrated
in Fig. 1(a), existing methods commonly use two-stream

7861

