This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latte: Collaborative Test-Time Adaptation of Vision-Language Models in
Federated Learning
Wenxuan Bao

Ruxi Deng Ruizhong Qiu Tianxin Wei Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Jingrui He

{wbao4,ruxid2,rq5,twei10,htong,jingrui}@illinois.edu

Abstract

tween vision and text embeddings. This misalignment may
affect the model’s classification performance, as the learned
embeddings may no longer fully capture the nuanced relationships required in the target domain [43, 47, 48].
Recently, a number of approaches have applied testtime adaptation (TTA) to mitigate domain shift challenges.
TTA enables models to adapt directly to a stream of unlabeled target data samples, without accessing source data,
using techniques such as prompt tuning [9, 29, 40], prompt
weighting [1], entropy minimization [30, 38], distribution
alignment [27], etc. Among these, memory-based algorithms [19, 38, 43, 46] have emerged as an important category. These methods store high-confidence test image embeddings and pseudo-labels in a memory, which is then used
to adjust the classifier based on the similarity between the
new image’s embedding and stored ones. Notably, memorybased algorithms are training-free and require no backpropagation, making them highly efficient and particularly suitable for scenarios with limited computational resources.
Moreover, by leveraging the similarity among test samples,
the performance of these methods often improves as the
amount of test data increases [38], making them well-suited
for adapting to target domains with abundant data.
Despite their promising performance on benchmark
datasets, existing memory-based TTA approaches primarily focus on adaptation to a single domain with abundant
data. However, many real-world applications require adapting VLMs to a series of related but distinct domains, where
each domain may have very limited data. One prominent
example is federated learning (FL) [18, 23], where multiple
clients perform the same task but each client has access to
only a small amount of data drawn from its unique distribution [2, 17]. As shown in Figure 2, when data becomes
more distributed, applying existing memory-based TTA algorithms independently to each client overlooks the relationships among clients and results in performance degradation due to data scarcity. On the other hand, directly
sharing a single, unified memory across clients can prevent
the VLM from being effectively personalized to individual
clients, as each client’s distribution may be different.

Test-time adaptation with pre-trained vision-language models has gained increasing attention for addressing distribution shifts during testing. Among these approaches,
memory-based algorithms stand out due to their trainingfree nature and ability to leverage historical test data. However, existing test-time adaptation methods are typically designed for a single domain with abundant data. In decentralized settings such as federated learning, applying these
methods individually to each client suffers from limited test
data, while directly sharing a single global memory via
the server prevents proper personalization to each client’s
unique distribution. To address this, we propose Latte, a
novel framework where each client maintains a local memory to store embeddings from its own historical test data and
an external memory to store class prototypes from other relevant clients. During communication, each client retrieves
prototypes from similar clients under the server’s coordination to expand its memory. For local adaptation, Latte
utilizes both embedding similarity and uncertainty to enhance model performance. Our theoretical analysis shows
that Latte effectively leverages in-distribution clients while
remaining robust to out-of-distribution clients. Extensive
experiments on domain adaptation and corruption benchmarks validate that Latte achieves superior performance
in decentralized settings, while introducing only negligible communication and computation costs. Our code is
available at https://github.com/baowenxuan/
Latte.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP
[26] and ALIGN [16], have demonstrated impressive zeroshot image classification capabilities by being trained on
massive datasets of image-text pairs. However, when these
models are deployed in specific downstream domains, the
presence of domain shifts can lead to a misalignment be-

133

