This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust 3D Object Detection using Probabilistic Point Clouds
from Single-Photon LiDARs
Felipe Gutierrez-Barragan2 Wei Lin1 Andreas Velten1,2
1
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Ubicept
a)

Abstract

Yin Li1

Scene

Ambient light
(Background)

emitted
light pulse
receiv
light ed
pulse

Challenging
Conditions

Ideal Imaging
Conditions

b)

Raw Timing Histogram
Discernible
signal peak
Signal →

time
Non-discernible
signal peak
Signal →

time
c)

Source

Sensor

Conventional Point Cloud

3D Inference

Erroneous
Point Cloud

Incorrect/Missing
Detections

photon count

LiDAR-based 3D sensors provide point clouds, a canonical 3D representation used in various scene understanding tasks. Modern LiDARs face key challenges in several
real-world scenarios, such as long-distance or low-albedo
objects, producing sparse or erroneous point clouds. These
errors, which are rooted in the noisy raw LiDAR measurements, get propagated to downstream perception models,
resulting in potentially severe loss of accuracy. This is because conventional 3D processing pipelines do not retain
any uncertainty information from the raw measurements
when constructing point clouds.
We propose Probabilistic Point Clouds (PPC), a novel
3D scene representation where each point is augmented
with a probability attribute that encapsulates the measurement uncertainty (or confidence) in the raw data. We further introduce inference approaches that leverage PPC for
robust 3D object detection; these methods are versatile and
can be used as computationally lightweight drop-in modules in 3D inference pipelines. We demonstrate, via both
simulations and real captures, that PPC-based 3D inference methods outperform several baselines using LiDAR as
well as camera-LiDAR fusion models, across challenging
indoor and outdoor scenarios involving small, distant, and
low-albedo objects, as well as strong ambient light. Our
project webpage is at https://bhavyagoyal.github.io/ppc.

Mohit Gupta1,2

photon count

Bhavya Goyal1

Probabilistic Point Cloud (PPC)

Proposed
Inference
Approaches
Robust Inference

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Robust 3D Inference under Challenging Real-World
Conditions: a) A LiDAR provides depth by measuring time delays between emitted and received pulses. b) The raw sensor data
at each LiDAR pixel is a temporal histogram of photon counts vs.
time. The time location of the histogram peak corresponds to the
scene distance, which is then converted to a point in the 3D point
cloud. Under challenging conditions, the signal peaks cannot be
easily discerned from the background, resulting in large errors in
the point clouds and incorrect inference. c) We propose Probabilistic Point Clouds (PPC), a scene representation with a probability
attribute for each point. The figure shows a real LiDAR capture,
where PPC is visualized with heatmap colors. Leveraging PPC,
our proposed approach achieves robust 3D inference even under
challenging scenarios.

LiDARs are a prominent 3D imaging modality driving
several applications, from embodied perception and autonomous vehicles [27, 52], to surveillance [16], and more
recently, deployed even in consumer devices (e.g., Apple
iPhones). LiDARs are based on the time-of-flight (ToF)
principle; a typical LiDAR consists of a laser source that
emits short sub-nanosecond light pulses into the scene and
a sensor that captures the reflected pulses; scene depths are
estimated by computing the time delay between emitted and
received pulses [25] (Fig. 1a). Increasingly, single photon
avalanche diodes (SPADs) [7] are becoming the sensor-ofchoice in LiDARs due to their high sensitivity [35], and

amenability to fabrication of high-resolution arrays [33]. It
is not a surprise that the next generation of LiDAR devices
is dominated by solid-state, high-resolution, and low-cost
SPAD technology.

28417

A typical single-photon LiDAR builds a histogram of
photon counts over time (Fig. 1b). Under ideal imaging
conditions, the peak in the timing histogram can be reliably
detected, resulting in an accurate estimation of the time delay and hence the scene depth (Fig. 1b). This estimated

