This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIMS: Simulating Stylized Human-Scene Interactions
with Retrieval-Augmented Script Generation
Wenjia Wang1
Liang Pan1,2
Zhiyang Dou1
1
1
Yuke Lou
Yifan Wu
Lei Yang2
1

Jidong Mei1
Jingbo Wang2†
2

The University of Hong Kong

Instruction: Please generate a story following this
theme: a boy breaks up with girlfriend, goes back to
his home with personal luggage and gets drunk.

Zhouyingcheng Liao1
Taku Komura1†

Shanghai AI Laboratory

1. Carry a heavy luggage

2. Pickup luggage

9. Side-lie sadly

8. Walk drunkenly

4. Tired and rest

Agent: Sure, I found it is suitable to use style sad,
tired and drunk from our script database.
Agent: I have retrieved the top-k samples from
our sad, tired and drunk database.
5. Sad and cry

Agent: I am now generating long-term scripts
based on Retrieval-Augmented Generation. Here
are the final retrieved keyframes and I will parse
them into condition labels and feed them into the
Finite State Machine to drive the humanoid:

6. Drink a wine

7. Idle drunkenly
3. Put luggage on table

Figure 1. SIMS enables physically simulated characters to perform diverse skills within complex 3D scenes given long-term daily narratives
and scene inputs. Our character could perform versatile skills, including Locomotions, Human Scene Interactions and Dynamic Object
Interactions with diverse styles while accomplishing physically plausible contacts and obstacle avoidance. Left: a dialogue-based retrievalaugmented script generation process. Right: a skillful humanoid performing diverse stylized interactions in a 3D scene.

Abstract
Simulating stylized human-scene interactions (HSI) in physical environments is a challenging yet fascinating task.
Prior works emphasize long-term execution but fall short
in achieving both diverse style and physical plausibility.
To tackle this challenge, we introduce a novel hierarchical framework named SIMS that seamlessly bridges highlevel script-driven intent with a low-level control policy,
enabling more expressive and diverse human-scene interactions. Specifically, we employ Large Language Models with Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to generate coherent and diverse long-form scripts, providing a
rich foundation for motion planning. A versatile multicondition physics-based control policy is also developed,
which leverages text embeddings from the generated scripts
to encode stylistic cues, simultaneously perceiving environmental geometries and accomplishing task goals. By
integrating the retrieval-augmented script generation with
the multi-condition controller, our approach provides a
unified solution for generating stylized HSI motions. We

further introduce a comprehensive planning dataset produced by RAG and a stylized motion dataset featuring
diverse locomotions and interactions. Extensive experiments demonstrate SIMS’s effectiveness in executing various tasks and generalizing across different scenarios, significantly outperforming previous methods. Project page:
https://wenjiawang0312.github.io/projects/sims/.

1. Introduction

* †: equal advising.

Developing skillful characters with a broad repertoire of
motor skills, such as walking, sitting, and reaching—while
facilitating rich interactions with their environments has
long been a desirable goal for animation, robotics, and
VR/AR applications. In particular, achieving long-term,
stylized, and physically plausible interactions with diverse
styles and intricate details is crucial for bringing characters
and narratives to life.
Motion generation has been a popular research topic recent years [32, 49, 52, 60]. Concerning human-scene interactions, previous works [12, 35, 43, 46, 58, 59] have explored long-term motion generation for kinematics-based

14117

