This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geo4D: Leveraging Video Generators for Geometric 4D Scene Reconstruction
Zeren Jiang1 Chuanxia Zheng1 Iro Laina1 Diane Larlus2 Andrea Vedaldi1
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford 2 Naver Labs Europe
{zeren, cxzheng, iro, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

diane.larlus@naverlabs.com

geo4d.github.io

Figure 1. Geo4D repurposes a video diffusion model [102] for monocular 4D reconstruction. It uses only synthetic data for training, yet
generalizes well to out-of-domain real videos. It predicts several geometric modalities, including point maps, disparity maps, and ray maps,
fusing and aligning them to obtain state-of-the-art dynamic reconstruction even for scenes with extreme object and camera motion.

Abstract
We introduce Geo4D, a method to repurpose video diffusion
models for monocular 3D reconstruction of dynamic scenes.
By leveraging the strong dynamic priors captured by largescale pre-trained video models, Geo4D can be trained using only synthetic data while generalizing well to real data
in a zero-shot manner. Geo4D predicts several complementary geometric modalities, namely point, disparity, and ray
maps. We propose a new multi-modal alignment algorithm
to align and fuse these modalities, as well as a sliding window approach at inference time, thus enabling robust and
accurate 4D reconstruction of long videos. Extensive experiments across multiple benchmarks show that Geo4D significantly surpasses state-of-the-art video depth estimation
methods.

ular video. This task is particularly challenging for videos
captured in uncontrolled settings, such as those shot with
handheld cameras or downloaded from the Internet. However, a robust solution to this problem would have a tremendous impact on a wide range of applications, from video
understanding to computer graphics and robotics.
4D reconstruction from videos is related to multi-view
static 3D reconstruction, which is typically addressed using methods from visual geometry like bundle adjustment.
Recent neural networks [89, 92] have emerged as powerful tools that can replace, or at least complement, bundle
adjustment. They excel especially in difficult reconstruction scenarios, involving, e.g., textureless surfaces and occlusions, thanks to the priors they learn from data. Given
the additional challenges involved in 4D reconstruction, we
expect that such priors would benefit this task even more.
In fact, powerful networks like DUSt3R [92], designed for static multi-view 3D reconstruction, have recently been extended to the dynamic case, for example
by MonST3R [113]. However, these models are heavily
engineered to solve specific 3D reconstruction problems.
Most importantly, they require significant amounts of training data with 3D annotations for supervision. Such data

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of feed-forward 4D reconstruction, which involves learning a neural network to reconstruct the 3D geometry of a dynamic scene from a monoc-

20658

