This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynAD: Enhancing Real-World End-to-End Autonomous Driving Models
through Synthetic Data Integration
Jongsuk Kim1 * Jaeyoung Lee1* Gyojin Han1 Dong-Jae Lee1 Minki Jeong2
1
KAIST 2 AI Center, Samsung Electronics
{jskpop, mcneato, hangj0820, jhtwosun, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

minki6.jeong@samsung.com

(Training time)

Recent advancements in deep learning and the availability
of high-quality real-world driving datasets have propelled
end-to-end autonomous driving. Despite this progress, relying solely on real-world data limits the variety of driving
scenarios for training. Synthetic scenario generation has
emerged as a promising solution to enrich the diversity of
training data; however, its application within E2E AD models remains largely unexplored. This is primarily due to the
absence of a designated ego vehicle and the associated sensor inputs, such as camera or LiDAR, typically provided
in real-world scenarios. To address this gap, we introduce
SynAD, the ﬁrst framework designed to enhance real-world
E2E AD models using synthetic data. Our method designates the agent with the most comprehensive driving information as the ego vehicle in a multi-agent synthetic scenario. We further project path-level scenarios onto maps
and employ a newly developed Map-to-BEV Network to derive bird’s-eye-view features without relying on sensor inputs. Finally, we devise a training strategy that effectively
integrates these map-based synthetic data with real driving data. Experimental results demonstrate that SynAD effectively integrates all components and notably enhances
safety performance. By bridging synthetic scenario generation and E2E AD, SynAD paves the way for more comprehensive and robust autonomous driving models.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles are moving from research labs to
roads as deep learning and comprehensive real-world driving datasets [1] are leading to signiﬁcant progress. Recent studies leverage LiDAR [16, 33] or multi-camera images [11–13] from these datasets to extract bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) features [3, 17, 22] for various tasks [10, 18, 21, 35].
These approaches improve the end-to-end autonomous driving (E2E AD) model’s performance by incorporating per* Equal Contribution.

Junmo Kim1

Real dataset

Multi-camera images

BEV
feature

‫ܫݔ‬

‫ܫܤ‬

Synthetic scenario

Maps

MapBEV
feature

‫ݔ &  ݔ‬

‫ܤ & ܤ‬

Multi-camera images

BEV
feature

‫ܫݔ‬

‫ܫܤ‬

(Test time)
Real dataset

End-to-End
Autonomous
Driving Model

End-to-End
Autonomous
Driving Model

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of SynAD. During training, both
real and synthetic data are used to generate BEV and MapBEV
features for the E2E AD model, while only real data is used during
testing to ensure practical applicability.

ception tasks (tracking and mapping), prediction tasks (motion forecasting and occupancy prediction), and planning
tasks either in parallel [28] or in series [11, 12], in an endto-end manner. To better capture the complexities of realworld driving environments, some studies [26, 36] have proposed methods incorporating 3D occupancy understanding.
However, relying solely on real-world datasets introduces a fundamental limitation: the high costs of data collection and labeling lead to a lack of diversity, restricting
the range of scenarios available for training. To mitigate
this issue, some studies [8, 34] generate paths under speciﬁc conditions and utilize CARLA simulator [6] to acquire
corresponding camera data for additional model training.
These approaches enable robust driving in extreme situations but still have limitations since they can only operate in
virtual environments. In parallel, several studies have developed methods to generate realistic driving scenarios from
real-world datasets without relying on simulators. These

25197

