This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STaR: Seamless Spatial-Temporal Aware Motion Retargeting
with Penetration and Consistency Constraints
Xiaohang Yang

Qing Wang
Jiahao Yang
Gregory Slabaugh
Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom

Shanxin Yuan

{xiaohang.yang, qing.wang, jiahao.yang, g.slabaugh, shanxin.yuan}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Motion retargeting seeks to faithfully replicate the
spatio-temporal motion characteristics of a source character onto a target character with a different body shape.
Apart from motion semantics preservation, ensuring geometric plausibility and maintaining temporal consistency
are also crucial for effective motion retargeting. However,
many existing methods prioritize either geometric plausibility or temporal consistency. Neglecting geometric plausibility results in interpenetration, while neglecting temporal
consistency leads to motion jitter. In this paper, we propose
a novel sequence-to-sequence model for seamless SpatialTemporal aware motion Retargeting (STaR), with penetration and consistency constraints. STaR consists of two modules: (1) a spatial module that incorporates dense shape
representation and a novel limb penetration constraint to
ensure geometric plausibility while preserving motion semantics, and (2) a temporal module that utilizes a temporal
transformer and a novel temporal consistency constraint to
predict the entire motion sequence at once while enforcing multi-level trajectory smoothness. The seamless combination of the two modules helps us achieve a good balance between the semantic, geometric, and temporal targets. Extensive experiments on the Mixamo and ScanRet
datasets demonstrate that our method produces plausible
and coherent motions while significantly reducing interpenetration rates compared with other approaches. Code page:
https://github.com/XiaohangYang829/STaR.

Figure 1. STaR performs sequence-to-sequence motion retargeting, guided by a novel limb penetration constraint and a temporal consistency constraint. Unlike existing methods that focus on
limb-body geometric correction, our limb penetration constraint
provides full-body geometric correction. The temporal constraint
module enhances the smoothness of the entire motion trajectory.
STaR effectively reduces the penetration rate while preserving motion semantics and temporal coherence.

1. Introduction

in film production, gaming, and robotic animation. With
the rise of digital avatars in virtual environments, rapid advancements in motion generation and digital avatars have
further intensified research interest in motion retargeting,
which bridges motion capture and character animation. As
the demand for authentic visual effects grows, expectations
for generated motion have become more stringent. Issues
like geometric penetration and unnatural temporal jitter can
significantly undermine realism.
Motion inherently carries information in both its spatial
and temporal dimensions. The spatial relationships among
skeletal joints in each motion frame convey critical information about pose semantics, while their temporal evolution defines the motion trajectory. However, many existing methods primarily focus on the spatial domain, treating motion retargeting as a pose transfer problem. Previous
approaches [1, 11, 16] generally optimize sparse skeletal
rotations and use Forward Kinematics (FK) to derive joint

Motion retargeting is a fundamental task in computer vision
and graphics. It involves transferring motion from one character to another—preserving the source character’s dynamics and style while adapting to the target character’s unique
structure and geometric constraints. It is widely employed
For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC-BY) license to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising.

12947

