This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NAVER: A Neuro-Symbolic Compositional Automaton for Visual Grounding
with Explicit Logic Reasoning
Zhixi Cai, Fucai Ke, Simindokht Jahangard, Maria Garcia de la Banda,
Reza Haffari, Peter J. Stuckey, Hamid Rezatofighi
Monash University
{zhixi.cai,fucai.ke1,simindokht.jahangard,maria.garciadelabanda,
gholamreza.haffari,peter.stuckey,hamid.rezatofighi}@monash.edu

Query

Find a person on the left wearing a blue shirt in front of a car

Car 3

Query

Cars

Car 1

Person 1

Car 2

Person 2

Perception

-Person 1 exists at bbox(...)
 

70%

-Person 2 exists at bbox(...) 80%

-Car 1 exists at bbox(...)
 

70%

-Person 1 is left of Person 2 
 80%

-Person 1 is in front of Car 1 
 90%

-Person 1 wears blue shirt  
 90%

-Person 2 wears blue shirt
60%

...

Target : is left of others, wear
blue shirt, in front of a car

Choose
optimal

“Does the
highlighted
object meet
the query
description?”

Person 1

Logic 

Language 

Interpreter

0.98::Person 1

0.02::Person 2
Target Candidates

Persons

“Yes”
VLM

Answerer

Return
Person 1

Probabilistic Logic

Logic Generation

Logic Reasoning

Answering

Self-Corrected in NAVER Automaton
Figure 1. Overview of NAVER. Given the query “A person on the left wearing a blue shirt in front of a car”, NAVER first identifies the
entities of interest, their relations (e.g. “Person 1 is left of Person 2”, “Person 1 is in front of Car 1”), and attributes (e.g. “Person 1 is
wearing blue shirt”). It then transforms these statements into ProbLog [15] logic expressions, and applies probabilistic reasoning to find
the correct match. The validated output identifies “Person 1” as the correct result, demonstrating NAVER’s ability for complex VG tasks.

Abstract
Visual Grounding (VG) tasks, such as referring expression
detection and segmentation tasks are important for linking visual entities to context, especially in complex reasoning tasks that require detailed query interpretation. This
paper explores VG beyond basic perception, highlighting
challenges for methods that require reasoning like human
cognition. Recent advances in large language methods
(LLMs) and Vision-Language methods (VLMs) have improved abilities for visual comprehension, contextual understanding, and reasoning. These methods are mainly
split into end-to-end and compositional methods, with the
latter offering more flexibility. Compositional approaches
that integrate LLMs and foundation models show promising performance but still struggle with complex reasoning
with language-based logical representations. To address
these limitations, we propose NAVER, a compositional visual grounding method that integrates explicit probabilistic
logic reasoning within a finite-state automaton, equipped
with a self-correcting mechanism. This design improves ro-

24078

bustness and interpretability in inference through explicit
logic reasoning. Our results show that NAVER achieves
SoTA performance compared to recent end-to-end and compositional baselines. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ControlNet/NAVER.

1. Introduction
Grounding referring expressions in image tasks, including
detection and segmentation [21], are fundamental to visual
reasoning and cover a wide range of complexities [57]. This
paper explores a level of visual grounding that emphasizes
reasoning and goes beyond basic perception [60]. This is
challenging for current models because it requires interpreting complex queries, creating layered visual representations, and performing step-by-step reasoning for coherent interpretations and contextually appropriate inferences,
closely resembling human cognitive functions [3]. For example (See Figure 1), the query “find a person on the left
wearing a blue shirt in front of a car” requires the method to
process multiple components simultaneously. This includes

