This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UINavBench: A Framework for Comprehensive
Evaluation of Interactive Digital Agents
Harsh Agrawal˚ , Eldon Schoop˚ , Xinlei Pan˝ , Anuj Mahajan˝ , Ari Seff˝ , Di Feng˝ , Ruijia Cheng,
Andres Romero Mier Y Teran, Esteban Gomez, Abhishek Sundararajan, Forrest Huang,
Amanda Swearngin, Mohana Prasad Sathya Moorthy, Jeff Nichols, Alexander Toshev:
Apple
{hagrawal2, eldon, toshev}@apple.com
˚
First Author ˝ Core Contributors : Project Lead

Abstract
We build a comprehensive online evaluation benchmark for
language-conditioned multi-step task execution on mobile
interfaces. Our benchmark strives to evaluate the multistep planning, reasoning, and visual grounding capabilities of agents, using mobile user interfaces as a concrete
testbed. To build diverse, challenging tasks that reflect
real-world use cases, we propose an exhaustive taxonomy
that allows us to measure progress along multiple decisionmaking abilities including multi-step planning, visual perception, action grounding, and using memory or external knowledge. We also highlight important factors such
as statefulness, safety, and evaluation complexity that are
key to design tasks that can be reliably evaluated. Using this taxonomy, we design 116 tasks across 36 unique
apps. Through an automatic framework, we stage and evaluate several natural baselines with different input representations and planning strategies. We show that the bestperforming agent achieves 40% success on our benchmark.
We further measure agents’ abilities to plan, ground, and
utilize world knowledge highlighting areas of improvement.

18], Android [19–25], and Desktop environments [26–28].
Benchmarks for mobile agents have typically been offline,
consisting of static sets of images or ground truth trajectories against which an agent is evaluated [20–22, 25]. While
offline benchmarks are performant, they do not reflect the
real-world stochasticity of mobile environments, and they
have limited ability to measure how agents recover from
mistakes or re-plan.
In contrast, online benchmarks require agents to interact with realistic dynamic environments. However, building online benchmarks for mobile devices presents the
unique challenges of staging, managing state, and designing evaluations that can account for dynamic content. Recent efforts avoid these challenges by collecting tasks for
small sets of apps which have limited effects on external
databases [24, 25]. More importantly, many of these benchmarks suffer from limited task coverage due to sourcing
tasks from LLMs (which risks sampling tasks the LLM already has knowledge of) or are open-ended, making robust
evaluation harder [25]. Other benchmarks [23] use tasks
from datasets known to have limited diversity [19, 20].

1. Intro

Toward building a more diverse and realistic benchmark,
we introduce UINavBench, a platform that can stage,
watch, and evaluate agents on mobile user interfaces. A
key contribution of our work is a task taxonomy that allows
us to express a variety of axes along which our system can
measure different aspects of agent performance (Fig. 1). We
involved domain experts in HCI, digital agents, robotics,
and AI safety to co-create this taxonomy and parameterize it with 116 carefully designed tasks across 36 apps that
measure agents’ abilities to plan and reason, ground, and integrate memory and knowledge. Our taxonomy categorizes
tasks along several dimensions—such as perceptual complexity, memory requirements, planning, fine-grained interactions, action diversity (clicks, typing, gestures), the number of interactions, unique screens, and multi-app usage—to

Building autonomous agents has been a long-standing goal
in Artificial Intelligence (AI) [1–4]. With recent advances
in Large Language Models (LLMs), and Vision-Language
Models (VLMs), there has been a surge in the development
of interactive digital agents that can automate tasks on mobile phones [5–13]. These agents are designed to automate
everyday activities such as shopping for groceries, planning
trips, and organizing calendars.
Several benchmarks have been introduced to evaluate
these agents’ ability to understand and navigate Web [14–

23353

