This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Image Prior
Hamadi Chihaoui* and Paolo Favaro
University of Bern, Switzerland
hamadi.chihaoui@unibe.ch, paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

Abstract
Zero-shot image restoration (IR) methods based on pretrained diffusion models have recently achieved significant
success. These methods typically require at least a parametric form of the degradation model. However, in realworld scenarios, the degradation may be too complex to
define explicitly without relying on crude approximations.
To handle this general case, we introduce the DIffusion Image Prior (DIIP). We take inspiration from the Deep Image
Prior (DIP) [17], since it can be used to remove artifacts
without the need for an explicit degradation model. However, in contrast to DIP, we find that pretrained diffusion
models offer a much stronger prior, despite being trained
without knowledge from corrupted data. We show that, the
optimization process in DIIP first reconstructs a clean version of the image before eventually overfitting to the degraded input, but it does so for a broader range of degradations than DIP. In light of this result, we propose a blind image restoration (IR) method based on early stopping, which
does not require prior knowledge of the degradation model.
We validate DIIP on various degradation-blind IR tasks, including JPEG artifact removal, waterdrop removal, denoising and super-resolution with state-of-the-art results.

Input

DreamClean [20]

Ours (DIIP)

Ground-truth

Figure 1. In many applications, such as JPEG artifacts removal,
image degradation is often unknown and challenging to model. In
comparison to the recent state-of-the-art DreamClean [20], DIffusion Image Prior (DIIP) consistently produces results that more
effectively preserve the original nature of the image.

1. Introduction
a degraded image, but use instead a frozen pre-trained (diffusion) model (see Figure 1). Although our reconstruction
optimizes only the input noise to the model, while in DIP
the CNN parameters were optimized, we find that the two
processes share the same property of reconstructing a clean
image before converging to the corresponding degraded input. Surprisingly, we find that while in DIP this property
holds primarily for high frequency degradations such as
noise, with pre-trained diffusion models this phenomenon
is observed across a wider range of degradations, including
low-frequency ones such as blurring. This happens despite
the fact that the diffusion model was never exposed to such
degraded data during training to either generate it or to be
adversarial to it. We call this property the DIffusion Image

One of the most well-known dataset training-free and degradation blind methods for image restoration is Deep Image
Prior (DIP) [17]. A notable feature of DIP is its applicability in cases where the degradation model is too complex
to be accurately modeled, such as with JPEG compression.
DIP leverages the implicit prior embedded within a convolutional neural network (CNN). It demonstrates that through
an iterative reconstruction process of a corrupt image with
an untrained CNN (by using direct matching, since the
degradation model is unknown), one can recover a clean image. Inspired by this approach, we explore a similar investigation, where we also exploit the reconstruction process of
* Corresponding author.

24636

