This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Variance-Based Pruning for Accelerating and Compressing Trained Networks
Uranik Berisha12 , Jens Mehnert1 and Alexandru Paul Condurache12
1

Automated Driving Research, Robert Bosch GmbH, 70469 Stuttgart, Germany

2

Institute for Signal Processing, University of Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, Germany

{Uranik.Berisha,JensEricMarkus.Mehnert,AlexandruPaul.Condurache}@de.bosch.com

Abstract

Fixing all three issues simultaneously remains especially
challenging. For example, using the available collection of
trained networks provided by the research community is
a straightforward way to solve the first problem of costly
training. However, this does not address the storage and
inference costs, which can still make the use of these
trained networks impractical for deployment on resourceconstrained hardware [1]. To address these demands, various model pruning techniques have been proposed. These
range from removing individual weights within layers in unstructured pruning [12] to removing entire neurons, layers,
or blocks in structured pruning [1].
While unstructured pruning can often retain a high degree of accuracy in trained networks, it is difficult to translate these theoretical gains into real-world speed-ups [1].
Since modern hardware is optimized for dense matrix multiplications, they cannot exploit the resulting sparsity effectively and therefore cannot solve the inference costs [1, 12].
In contrast, structured pruning leads to straightforward
reductions in both inference costs and memory, but again
requires extensive retraining to recover the lost accuracy resulting from these major structural modifications. For instance, Global Vision Transformer Pruning with HessianAware Saliency (NViT) [27] requires 300 epochs of finetuning despite using trained networks, highlighting how addressing memory and inference speeds alone can still demand large additional training overhead.
On the other hand, dynamic pruning approaches, such
as token pruning, avoid permanently modifying the model
architecture and instead dynamically reduce the number of
features processed by the network [3, 19]. This minimizes
the accuracy drop after pruning, indicating that the model
preserved most important features and representation, thus
providing a better starting point for subsequent fine-tuning.
Token Merging (ToMe) [3] embraces this idea by merging
tokens to reuse the pruned information, thus reducing the
accuracy drop even further and allowing off-the-shelf deployment without any fine-tuning. While this solves the inference costs as well as the training costs, since the methods
do not modify the model structure itself, the memory foot-

Increasingly expensive training of ever larger models
such as Vision Transfomers motivate reusing the vast library
of already trained state-of-the-art networks. However, their
latency, high computational costs and memory demands
pose significant challenges for deployment, especially on
resource-constrained hardware. While structured pruning
methods can reduce these factors, they often require costly
retraining, sometimes for up to hundreds of epochs, or even
training from scratch to recover the lost accuracy resulting
from the structural modifications. Maintaining the provided
performance of trained models after structured pruning and
thereby avoiding extensive retraining remains a challenge.
To solve this, we introduce Variance-Based Pruning, a
simple and structured one-shot pruning technique for efficiently compressing networks, with minimal finetuning. Our
approach first gathers activation statistics, which are used
to select neurons for pruning. Simultaneously the mean activations are integrated back into the model to preserve a
high degree of performance. On ImageNet-1k recognition
tasks, we demonstrate that directly after pruning DeiT-Base
retains over 70% of its original performance and requires
only 10 epochs of fine-tuning to regain 99% of the original
accuracy while simultaneously reducing MACs by 35% and
model size by 36%, thus speeding up the model by 1.44×.

1. Introduction
In both Computer Vision (CV) and Natural Language Processing (NLP), Transformers have become the dominant architecture [8, 21]. In CV, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [8]
and their derivatives, such as Data-efficient image Transformers (DeiTs) [21], Swin-Transformers (Swins) [14] and
ConvNeXts [15], achieve remarkable results but at significant costs in three main areas: training, storage, and inference. These large models require long training times, often
spanning hundreds of epochs to achieve their performance,
extensive memory to store their parameters, and high computational resources for inference causing high latency [21].

4973

