This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OVG-HQ: Online Video Grounding with Hybrid-modal Queries
Runhao Zeng1* , Jiaqi Mao1 ,* Minghao Lai1 , Minh Hieu Phan2 ,
Yanjie Dong1 , Wei Wang1 , Qi Chen2† , Xiping Hu1†
1
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, 2 University of Adelaide
zengrh@smbu.edu.cn, maojiaqi2324@gmail.com, huxp@smbu.edu.cn

Abstract

Ground Truth

Video grounding (VG) task focuses on locating specific
moments in a video based on a query, usually in text
form. However, traditional VG struggles with some scenarios like streaming video or queries using visual cues.
To fill this gap, we present a new task named Online
Video Grounding with Hybrid-modal Queries (OVG-HQ),
which enables online segment localization using text, images, video segments, and their combinations. This task
poses two new challenges: limited context in online settings and modality imbalance during training, where dominant modalities overshadow weaker ones. To address these,
we propose OVG-HQ-Unify, a unified framework featuring
a Parametric Memory Block (PMB) that retain previously
learned knowledge to enhance current decision and a crossmodal distillation strategy that guides the learning of nondominant modalities. This design enables a single model to
effectively handle hybrid-modal queries. Due to the lack of
suitable datasets, we construct QVHighlights-Unify, an expanded dataset with multi-modal queries. Besides, since offline metrics overlook prediction timeliness, we adapt them
to the online setting, introducing oR@n, IoU=m, and online mean Average Precision (omAP) to evaluate both accuracy and efficiency. Experiments show that our OVG-HQUnify outperforms existing models, offering a robust solution for online, hybrid-modal video grounding. Source code
and datasets are available at https://github.com/
maojiaqi2324/OVG-HQ.

Visible frames at time 𝒕

Text query

People are dancing
at a party.

Visual query
Image

Segment

QVHighlights-Unify

Case1:Text

current time 𝒕

Case2:Visual-Text

Start time: 96s
End time: 119s

Case3:Visual

QVHighlights - Text query
People are dancing at a party.

Image-R

Retrieved
From Web

Generated
from text
query

Image-G

Segment-G

Image-C Text-C
“Dancing
not drinking”

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed online video grounding with
hybrid-modal queries task, with two distinguishing characteristics:
online video input and various query configurations. Beyond text
query, it accepts visual queries (images, video segments) and their
combination with text. We also construct a new QVHighlightsUnify dataset by augmenting QVHighlights dataset with images
and video segments and complementary image-text pairs.

1. Introduction

posing strict requirements on complete video accessibility,
which is insufficient for immediate detection in streaming
media. For example, in surveillance, we need to continuously analyze live feeds and instantly ground queries, such
as “group of people gathering near the front door”, so that
security teams can respond immediately, rather than waiting
to process a lengthy offline recording. Second, the current
video grounding task predominantly relies on natural language queries, limiting its application to multi-modal scenarios. As an example, a text-only system might demand
a detailed description such as “a group of individuals congregating near the front door, frequently looking around,
and making brief contact before dispersing in different directions”. In contrast, with multi-modal queries, security
staff could directly upload a past surveillance clip illustrating similar suspicious behavior. With this consideration, we
introduce an extended task called Online Video Grounding
with Hybrid-modal Queries (OVG-HQ).
Unlike the conventional offline video grounding task that
only considers text queries as inputs, our OVG-HQ task ac-

Video grounding [11, 61, 70] is a crucial research task
that identifies the start and end times of target segments in
untrimmed videos based on a given query. However, the
current setting suffers from two critical limitations in realworld applications. First, it considers an offline setting, im* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

21085

