This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NETracer: A Topology-Aware Iterative Tracing Approach for Tubular Structure
Extraction
Chao Liu1 , Yangbo Jiang2 , Nenggan Zheng1, 3, 4B
1
Zhejiang University, China
2
Zhejiang University of Finance and Economics, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center for Artificial Intelligence by MOE
and Zhejiang Provincial Government, China
4
Bengbu University, China
supermeliu@zju.edu.cn, jiangyangbo@zufe.edu.cn, zng@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Challenge
How to choose the most
suitable future node?

Extracting tubular structures from images is a widespread
and challenging task in computer vision. To explore these
continuous structures, iterative tracing methods offer a
promising direction. However, in scenes with dense and
blurred branches, existing tracing methods tend to jump to
adjacent branches during the tracing process, leading to a
significant topological mistake. The reason for this shortcoming is that the tracing model only focuses on the estimation of discrete nodes and ignores their connection attribution. To solve this problem, we introduce NETracer,
a topology-aware iterative tracing method to improve the
continuity and topological accuracy. In our approach, a
node-edge estimation network with local connectivity loss
is trained to produce the future nodes and their connective
edges. Then, a geodesic distance-based search strategy is
employed with the help of predicted edge cues to trace the
future branches more accurately. Additionally, to comprehensively assess the effect of the tracing model, a new tracing metric is proposed to evaluate the local accuracy, continuity, and topological correctness of the traced branches.
We demonstrate that our method outperforms existing segmentation and tracing methods on five 2D road, vessel, and
3D neuron datasets. The code of NETracer is available at
https://github.com/CSDLLab/NETracer.

Node A

Node B
Node C

(a) Ground Truth

(c) Existing Tracing Approaches
Edge-Guided Searching
Node A

ɭ
Node B
Node C

(b) Segmentation Results

(d) Ours Proposed Method

Figure 1. Motivation. (a) 3D neuron image and ground truth. (b)
Segmentation results misinterpret ambiguous branches as a single
entity. (c) Existing tracing approaches overlook the connectivity
between discrete nodes, resulting in topological errors. (d) Integrating edge information can improve the topological accuracy.

1. Introduction

objective is to precisely extract these continuous objects to
align with the image evidence.
Most existing methods tackle this problem as a twostage segmentation task: first, employing a segmentation network [13, 25, 27, 44] to learn the centerline features, followed by the use of a post-processing algorithm
[11, 12, 19, 32] to extract the topological connectivity patterns. However, the major drawback of these approaches
is that they place significant reliance on the segmentation
results from the first stage. When the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) of image evidence is low, segmentation results may
exhibit merging or blurring in localized regions, as illus-

Tubular structure extraction is a crucial and challenging task
in computer vision, such as the reconstruction of neuronal
dendrites or axons [15, 24], the segmentation of retinal vessels [28], and the delineation of road networks from aerial
imagery [5, 33]. These tubular structure can be represented
as a series of nodes and edges connecting them, and our

20593

