This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging BEV Paradigm for Ground-to-Aerial Image Synthesis
Junyan Ye1,2 ,* Jun He1* , Weijia Li1†,
Zhutao Lv1 , Yi Lin1 , Jinhua Yu1 , Haote Yang2 , Conghui He2,3
1
Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Sensetime Research

Abstract
Ground-to-aerial image synthesis focuses on generating
realistic aerial images from corresponding ground street
view images while maintaining consistent content layout,
simulating a top-down view. The significant viewpoint difference leads to domain gaps between views, and dense
urban scenes limit the visible range of street views, making this cross-view generation task particularly challenging. In this paper, we introduce SkyDiffusion, a novel
cross-view generation method for synthesizing aerial images from street view images, utilizing a diffusion model
and the Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) paradigm. The CurvedBEV method in SkyDiffusion converts street-view images
into a BEV perspective, effectively bridging the domain
gap, and employs a "multi-to-one" mapping strategy to address occlusion issues in dense urban scenes. Next, SkyDiffusion designed a BEV-guided diffusion model to generate content-consistent and realistic aerial images. Additionally, we introduce a novel dataset, Ground2Aerial-3,
designed for diverse ground-to-aerial image synthesis applications, including disaster scene aerial synthesis, lowaltitude UAV image synthesis, and historical high-resolution
satellite image synthesis tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that SkyDiffusion outperforms state-of-the-art methods on cross-view datasets across natural (CVUSA), suburban (CVACT), urban (VIGOR-Chicago), and various application scenarios (G2A-3), achieving realistic and contentconsistent aerial image generation. The code, datasets and
more information of this work can be found at https:
//opendatalab.github.io/skydiffusion/.

1. Introduction
In fields such as land cover classification [21, 38], urban
planning [53, 54, 56], and disaster response [10, 40, 52],
the analysis of aerial imagery plays a crucial role. The
cross-view Ground-to-Aerial Image Synthesis task leverages ground street-view images to synthesize corresponding
aerial images at the same location. Street-view images can
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the cross-view image synthesis task. (a)
Challenges of cross-view domain gaps; (b) Challenges of occlusion in dense scenes; (c) Comparing our ground-to-aerial image
synthesis method with existing cross-view synthesis methods.

be captured and uploaded by users on platforms such as
Google Street View or Mapillary, offering high flexibility in
data collection and frequent temporal coverage [1]. Therefore, Ground-to-Aerial Image Synthesis can support rapid
response during natural disasters [22] or fill historical gaps
in high-resolution satellite imagery records [3], among other
applications.
Despite the potential of cross-view synthesis from groundlevel to aerial imagery, significant challenges remain. The
drastic viewpoint differences between street and satellite
views lead to distinct object appearances, resulting in substantial domain gaps across image types[13, 18]. As shown
in Figure 1 (a), in cross-view scenarios, street-view images
primarily capture ground and building facade details, while
satellite views present more rooftop and macroscopic summary information. Even with state-of-the-art diffusion methods, the domain gap between views often results in generated images that are realistic yet not true to reality; the

28451

