This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teaching AI the Anatomy Behind the Scan:
Addressing Anatomical Flaws in Medical Image Segmentation with
Learnable Prior
†

Young Seok Jeon1,*, Hongfei Yang1,*, Huazhu Fu2 , Mengling Feng1,
1
National University of Singapore 2 Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
youngseokjeon74@gmail.com, {hfyang, mornin}@nus.edu.sg, hzfu@ieee.org

Abstract
Imposing key anatomical features, such as the number of
organs, their shapes and relative positions, is crucial for
building a robust multi-organ segmentation model. Current
attempts to incorporate anatomical features include broadening the effective receptive field (ERF) size with dataintensive modules, or introducing anatomical constraints
that scales poorly to multi-organ segmentation. We introduce a novel architecture called the Anatomy-Informed
Cascaded Segmentation Network (AIC-Net). AIC-Net incorporates a learnable input termed “Anatomical Prior”,
which can be adapted to patient-specific anatomy using a
differentiable spatial deformation. The deformed prior later
guides decoder layers towards more anatomy-informed predictions. We repeat this process at a local patch level to enhance the representation of intricate objects, resulting in a
cascaded network structure. AIC-Net is a general method
that enhances any existing segmentation models to be more
anatomy-aware. We have validated the performance of
AIC-Net, with various backbones, on three multi-organ segmentation tasks: abdominal organs, vertebrae, and ribs.
For each respective task, our benchmarks demonstrate improved dice score and Hausdorff distance. Code is available at: https://github.com/Youngseok0001/
aic-net.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Shall we label the gray spot indicated by the blue arrow
adrenal gland? (a) scan slice, (b) ground truth (with adrenal gland
label removed) 3D segmentation around the slice, (c) all baseline
segmentation wrongly segmented the spot as gland, and (d) AICNet gives correct segmentation.

1. Introduction

diologists would never make. In bone segmentation, AI
can confuse nearby vertebrae as they appear similar locally,
leading to mixed predictions. In abdominal organ segmentation tasks, the AI could incorrectly detect the esophagus, a
muscular tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach, resulting in fragmented predictions. These examples
demonstrate that current segmentation models do not reason
in the same way that radiologists do; who has a comprehensive understanding of human anatomy, which enables them
to make a more anatomy-informed judgements, whereas AI
models seem to struggle to grasp such concepts.
So, what causes existing segmentation models to find it
difficult to recognize anatomical features, which humans
can grasp from just a handful of examples, despite being
trained on hundreds of thousands of instances? AI-driven
segmentation models are trained to detect organs solely
from CT/MRI scans [5, 6, 12]. Ideally, a robust model
should extract both local and global features, using global
features to distinguish similar-looking local features. How-

It is becoming increasingly common to encounter AI models with reported performance on par with, or even surpassing, radiologists in various medical segmentation tasks [14].
However, it is highly unlikely that these AI models will replace radiologists anytime soon [32]. Although the models report good statistical results, examining each case frequently uncovers anatomically flawed predictions that ra* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

24024

