This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Multimodal Prototype Learning in Vision-Language Models
Xingyu Zhu1,2 , Shuo Wang1* , Beier Zhu2 , Miaoge Li3 , Yunfan Li4 ,
Junfeng Fang5 , Zhicai Wang1 , Dongsheng Wang6 , Hanwang Zhang2
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Nanyang Technological University,
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 4 Sichuan University,
5
National University of Singapore, 6 Shenzhen University
xyzhuxyz@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

With the increasing attention to pre-trained visionlanguage models (VLMs), e.g., CLIP, substantial efforts have
been devoted to many downstream tasks, especially in testtime adaptation (TTA). However, previous works focus on
learning prototypes only in the textual modality while overlooking the ambiguous semantics in class names. These
ambiguities lead to textual prototypes that are insufficient to
capture visual concepts, resulting in limited performance. To
address this issue, we introduce ProtoMM, a training-free
framework that constructs multimodal prototypes to adapt
VLMs during the test time. By viewing the prototype as a
discrete distribution over the textual descriptions and visual
particles, ProtoMM has the ability to combine the multimodal features for comprehensive prototype learning. More
importantly, the visual particles are dynamically updated
as the testing stream flows. This allows our multimodal
prototypes to continually learn from the data, enhancing
their generalizability in unseen scenarios. In addition, we
quantify the importance of the prototypes and test images by
formulating their semantic distance as an optimal transport
problem. Extensive experiments on 15 zero-shot benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, achieving a
1.03% average accuracy improvement over state-of-the-art
methods on ImageNet and its variant datasets.

visual
difference

Similar class semantics:
0.67 (cosine similarity)
sword lily

Hard to classify accurately
0.58

A photo of a sword lily.

blackberry lily

(b)

0.56

0.53

A photo of blackberry lily.

0.55

Containing the same word “lily”
Similar class semantics:
0.69 (cosine distance)

Hard to classify accurately
0. 65

visual
difference

laptop

……
desk computer

A photo of a laptop.
A photo of desktop computer.

0. 67

0. 65
0. 63

Denoting different types of“computer”
Textual Prototype

Figure 1. Observations of ambiguities in class names from the
Oxford Flowers [33] and ImageNet [9]: (a) The class names “sword
lily” and “blackberry lily” both refer to flowers from the Iridaceae
family and share the word “lily”. (b) The class names “laptop” and
“desktop computer” denote different types of computers.

is to find the optimal prototypes for each category. For example, CoOp [58] and CoCoOp [57] introduce learnable
prompt vectors concatenated to textual prototypes. Another
line of research, including TPT [41] and C-TPT [54], aims
to tune class prompts during inference time for each testing
sample, a strategy known as test-time adaptation.
Despite the improvements brought by these methods, we
empirically find that the ambiguities in class names result in
textual prototypes struggling to differentiate the classes. As
illustrated in Figure 1(a), the two different classes “sword
lily” and “blackberry lily” exhibit high cosine similarity
(0.67) in the CLIP space. This similarity arises not only
from the common word “lily” but also because both flowers belong to the Iridaceae family. As a result, relying on
the description-based prototypes makes it challenging to
classify the images of “sword lily” and “blackberry lily” effectively (0.53 vs. 0.55 and 0.56 vs. 0.58). Furthermore,
consider the class names “laptop” and “desktop computer”
as depicted in Figure 1(b). Although they do not share any

1. Introduction
Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs) [1,
19, 20, 35, 38, 50] have shown remarkable success across a
wide range of visual tasks. These foundation models, e.g.,
CLIP [38], are pre-trained on web-scale image-text pairs,
achieving superior capabilities in addressing zero-shot classification [41, 58–60]. One key factor behind these successes
*Corresponding author.

2501

