This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ADCD-Net: Robust Document Image Forgery Localization via
Adaptive DCT Feature and Hierarchical Content Disentanglement
Kahim Wong1 , Jicheng Zhou1 , Haiwei Wu2 , Yain-Whar Si1 , Jiantao Zhou1 B
1

State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2

School of Information and Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{yc37437, mc35093, fstasp, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo, haiweiwu@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
The advancement of image editing tools has enabled malicious manipulation of sensitive document images, underscoring the need for robust document image forgery detection. Though forgery detectors for natural images have
been extensively studied, they struggle with document images, as the tampered regions can be seamlessly blended
into the uniform document background (BG) and structured text. On the other hand, existing document-specific
methods lack sufficient robustness against various degradations, which limits their practical deployment. This paper
presents ADCD-Net, a robust document forgery localization model that adaptively leverages the RGB/DCT forensic
traces and integrates key characteristics of document images. Specifically, to address the DCT traces’ sensitivity to
block misalignment, we adaptively modulate the DCT feature contribution based on a predicted alignment score, resulting in much improved resilience to various distortions,
including resizing and cropping. Also, a hierarchical content disentanglement approach is proposed to boost the localization performance via mitigating the text-BG disparities. Furthermore, noticing the predominantly pristine nature of BG regions, we construct a pristine prototype capturing traces of untampered regions, and eventually enhance
both the localization accuracy and robustness. Our proposed ADCD-Net demonstrates superior forgery localization performance, consistently outperforming state-of-theart methods by 20.79% averaged over 5 types of distortions. The code is available at https://github.com/
KAHIMWONG/ACDC-Net.

Figure 1. Comparison of ADCD-Net with existing methods: (a)
Sole reliance on RGB forensic traces is insufficient for forgery
detection. (b) Combining RGB and DCT features enhances effectiveness and robustness against JPEG compression but becomes
severely vulnerable to disruptions in DCT block alignment. (c)
ADCD-Net adaptively leverages DCT traces through a predicted
score, simultaneously achieving desirable effectiveness and robustness against various distortions.

1. Introduction

saries to manipulate financial records or other sensitive data
in the document images to conceal malicious activities such
as spreading rumors and committing economic fraud, which
can lead to costly errors in decision-making and significant
financial loss [35]. These manipulations pose significant security threats, making effective tools for detecting tampering in document images more critical than ever [10, 27].
Forgery detection in natural images has been extensively
studied, with various methods focusing on specific types
of image forgery such as splicing [5], copy-move [18],
and inpainting [19, 37]. Some approaches target particular forgery traces, including JPEG artifacts [6, 21, 26],
camera traces [8, 49], and editing traces [12], while oth-

With the rise of image editing tools such as Photoshop,
Canva, and deep inpainting models [38, 43], altering document images has become effortless. This allows adverB Corresponding author

19280

