This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Refer to Any Segmentation Mask Group With Vision-Language Prompts
Shengcao Cao1 Zijun Wei2 Jason Kuen2 Kangning Liu2 Lingzhi Zhang2
Jiuxiang Gu2 HyunJoon Jung2 Liang-Yan Gui1 * Yu-Xiong Wang1→
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Adobe
{cao44,lgui,yxw}@illinois.edu {zwei,kuen,kangningl,lingzzha,jigu,hjung}@adobe.com

Select all spools that are not green.

Water bottles similar to <mask-ref>.

Locate all pillows on <mask-ref>.
Find all players wearing red jerseys.

Select the deer decorations.

All objects on <mask-ref>.

Remove them.

Similar pattern.

Figure 1. Omnimodal referring expression segmentation (ORES) according to arbitrary vision-language prompts. (Left) Our approach, Refer to Any Segmentation Mask Group (RAS), can understand a complex text prompt involving multiple conditions. (Middle)
Reference visual entities can be included as visual prompts to enhance expressivity, addressing the challenge of describing the same details
using language alone. (Right) The grouped segmentation masks conveniently enable various fine-grained downstream applications, such
as object removal and editing. In each pair of images, the left one is the input and the right one is the output. Best viewed on an electronic
device with zoom-in functionality.

Abstract
Recent image segmentation models have advanced to segment images into high-quality masks for visual entities1 ,
and yet they cannot provide comprehensive semantic understanding for complex queries based on both language
and vision. This limitation reduces their effectiveness in
applications that require user-friendly interactions driven
by vision-language prompts. To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel task of omnimodal referring expression segmentation (ORES). In this task, a model produces a group of
masks based on arbitrary prompts specified by text only or
text plus reference visual entities. To address this new challenge, we propose a novel framework to “Refer to Any Segmentation Mask Group” (RAS), which augments segmentation models with complex multimodal interactions and

comprehension via a mask-centric large multimodal model.
For training and benchmarking ORES models, we create
datasets M ASK G ROUPS -2M and M ASK G ROUPS -HQ to
include diverse mask groups specified by text and reference
entities. Through extensive evaluation, we demonstrate superior performance of RAS on our new ORES task, as well
as classic referring expression segmentation (RES) and generalized referring expression segmentation (GRES) tasks.
Project page: https://Ref2Any.github.io.

1. Introduction

* Equal advising.
1 Countable objects and amorphous stuff regions [23, 45].

Referring expression segmentation (RES) [18, 34, 69] enables language-based object segmentation by relating a
text prompt with a segmentation mask for the referred target, and can be generalized (i.e., GRES [34]) for multiple targets. However, real-world applications, such as autonomous driving [9, 52], robotics [14, 37, 64], augmented

21853

