This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ATAS: Any-to-Any Self-Distillation
for Enhanced Open-Vocabulary Dense Prediction
Juan Yeo* Soonwoo Cha∗† Jiwoo Song∗‡ Hyunbin Jin Taesup Kim
Gradudate School of Data Science, Seoul National University

Abstract
Vision-language models such as CLIP have recently propelled open-vocabulary dense prediction tasks by enabling
recognition of a broad range of visual concepts. However,
CLIP still struggles with fine-grained, region-level understanding, hindering its effectiveness on these dense prediction tasks.
We identify two pivotal factors required to address this limitation: semantic coherence and fine-grained vision-language
alignment. Current adaptation methods often improve finegrained alignment at the expense of semantic coherence, and
often rely on extra modules or supervised fine-tuning. To overcome these issues, we propose Any-to-Any Self-Distillation
(ATAS), a novel approach that simultaneously enhances semantic coherence and fine-grained alignment by leveraging a
model’s own knowledge across all representation levels. Unlike prior methods, ATAS uses only unlabeled images and an
internal self-distillation process to refine CLIP’s representations, preserving local semantic consistency while sharpening
local detail recognition. On open-vocabulary object detection and semantic segmentation benchmarks, ATAS achieves
substantial performance gains, outperforming baseline CLIP
models. These results validate the effectiveness of our approach and underscore the importance of jointly maintaining
semantic coherence and fine-grained alignment for advanced
open-vocabulary dense prediction.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary prediction in computer vision [14, 30, 47,
60] aims to recognize a wide range of visual concepts beyond a fixed set of categories. This capability is especially
important for dense prediction tasks like object detection and
semantic segmentation, where models must handle diverse
and previously unseen object classes in complex scenes. The
advent of contrastive Vision-Language Models (VLMs) such
as CLIP [38] has significantly advanced this field. Trained
on large-scale image-text pairs, CLIP learns a broad visual
* Equal contribution, randomly ordered.
† Now at RIST. ‡ Now at Samsung Research.

(a) Visualization of semantic coherence via patch similarity

(b) Performance improvement rates achieved by adapting CLIP to dense
prediction tasks

Figure 1. Overall results of our proposed method. (a) Patch
similarity maps illustrate the cosine similarity between a specific
patch (marked with a red ‘×’) and other patches, revealing semantic
coherence. (b) Downstream dense prediction task performances
present relative gains (%) compared to original CLIP, averaged across
datasets.

semantic space and shows strong zero-shot performance on
classification tasks. However, directly applying CLIP to dense
prediction remains challenging because these tasks demand a
fine-grained, region-level understanding of images, whereas
CLIP’s training is primarily geared towards image-level representation learning. As a result, CLIP’s performance in segmenting or detecting novel objects is limited by its gap in
detailed local feature understanding.
To address these challenges, recent studies have focused
on adapting CLIP for open-vocabulary dense prediction tasks.
Many of these approaches [8, 17, 25, 37, 50] involve auxiliary
components, such as additional modules or further supervised
fine-tuning. Conversely, several studies [23, 33, 43, 47, 58]
have sought to enhance CLIP’s intrinsic capabilities for dense
prediction tasks without external supervision. In particular,

20390

