This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to See in the Extremely Dark
Hai Jiang1,*, Binhao Guan2,*, Zhen Liu2 , Xiaohong Liu3 , Jian Yu4 , Zheng Liu4 ,
†
Songchen Han1 , Shuaicheng Liu2,
1
School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Sichuan University
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 National Innovation Center for UHD Video Technology
jianghai@stu.scu.edu.cn, {guanbinhao@std., liushuaicheng@}uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning-based methods have made promising advances in
low-light RAW image enhancement, while their capability to
extremely dark scenes where the environmental illuminance
drops as low as 0.0001 lux remains to be explored due to
the lack of corresponding datasets. To this end, we propose a paired-to-paired data synthesis pipeline capable of
generating well-calibrated extremely low-light RAW images
at three precise illuminance ranges of 0.01-0.1 lux, 0.0010.01 lux, and 0.0001-0.001 lux, together with high-quality
sRGB references to comprise a large-scale paired dataset
named See-in-the-Extremely-Dark (SIED) to benchmark
low-light RAW image enhancement approaches. Furthermore, we propose a diffusion-based framework that leverages the generative ability and intrinsic denoising property of diffusion models to restore visually pleasing results
from extremely low-SNR RAW inputs, in which an Adaptive Illumination Correction Module (AICM) and a color
consistency loss are introduced to ensure accurate exposure correction and color restoration. Extensive experiments on the proposed SIED and publicly available benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The
code and dataset are available at https://github.
com/JianghaiSCU/SIED.

(a) Input RAW

(b) Ours

(c) Reference

Figure 1. An illustration of our synthesized low-light RAW images at three extremely low illuminance levels of 0.01-0.1 lux,
0.001-0.01 lux, and 0.0001-0.001 lux are shown in (a), with the
restored results from our method in (b) and the reference highquality sRGB images in (c). The input low-light RAW images are
visualized by a simple demosaicing process.

Generally, learning-based methods can be divided into two
categories in terms of their input format: sRGB-based methods [1, 8, 12, 14, 20, 30, 33, 37, 38, 40, 42] and RAW-based
methods [2, 4, 6, 15, 17, 18, 23, 31, 35]. Compared to
the extensively studied sRGB-based LLIE methods, RAWbased approaches have garnered growing attention due to
their ability to exploit more informative low-intensity RAW
signals and superior noise modeling capabilities.
To this date, numerous efforts have concentrated on
transforming low-light noisy RAW images into normallight clean sRGB images, employing either single-stage or
multi-stage training strategies. Single-stage methods [2, 7,
17, 18, 23] attempt to model both the noisy-to-clean and
RAW-to-sRGB transformations within a single network.
However, the hybrid mappings across these two distinct domains inevitably mislead the enhancement process, causing
domain ambiguity issues [15]. Furthermore, the complexity
of multiple nonlinear processes in the RAW-to-sRGB trans-

1. Introduction
Restoring high-quality sharp images from low-light observations is a challenging task, as it requires improving global
and local contrast, suppressing amplified noise, and preserving details, which is critical for realistic applications
such as night-time photography and surveillance. Recent
advances in deep learning-based low-light image enhancement (LLIE) have significantly propelled this field forward.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

7676

