This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ERNet: Efficient Non-Rigid Registration Network for Point Sequences
Guangzhao He

Yuxi Xiao

Zhen Xu

Sida Peng†

Xiaowei Zhou

Zhejiang University
0.14

TCSR

0.12

NICP

ATE3D

0.1
0.08

SuperGraph (Ours)

0.06

NSFP
NDP

0.04
0.02

ERNet (Ours)

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Neural Deformation FPS
Pyramids

(a) ERNet Registered Trajectories

(b) Comparison Results on D-FAUST

(a) SuperGraph Registered Correspondence

(b) Registration Quailty Comparison

Figure 1. (a) Given a source object (center bunny) and a sequence of sparse or partial point clouds (purple bunnies), ERNet efficiently
and accurately predicts feed-forward registrations. The gradient texture on the center bunny corresponds to the colors of its vertex-wise
trajectories shown above. (b) ERNet achieves the lowest Average Trajectory Error in 3D (AT E3D ) among all baselines on the D-FAUST
dataset while delivering over 4x speedup in FPS.

Abstract
Registering an object shape to a sequence of point clouds
undergoing non-rigid deformation is a long-standing challenge. The key difficulties stem from two factors: (i) the
presence of local minima due to the non-convexity of registration objectives, especially under noisy or partial inputs,
which hinders accurate and robust deformation estimation,
and (ii) error accumulation over long sequences, leading
to tracking failures. To address these challenges, we introduce to adopt a scalable data-driven approach and propose
ERNet, an efficient feed-forward model trained on large deformation datasets. It is designed to handle noisy and partial
inputs while effectively leveraging temporal information for
accurate and consistent sequential registration. The key to
our design is predicting a sequence of deformation graphs
through a two-stage pipeline, which first estimates framewise coarse graph nodes for robust initialization, before
refining their trajectories over time in a sliding-window fashion. Extensive experiments show that our proposed approach
The authors are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG.
† Corresponding author.

(i) outperforms previous state of the art on both the DeformingThings4D and D-FAUST datasets, and (ii) achieves more
than 4x speedup compared to the previous best, offering
significant efficiency improvement.

1. Introduction
As Carl Jung once said, “In all chaos there is a cosmos, in all
disorder a secret order.” Predicting structured motion representation, more specifically 3D trajectories, within unordered
point sequences has always been a fundamental challenge in
computer vision and robotics, with wide applications among
dynamic reconstruction, scene understanding, robot manipulation and more. In this work, we target on the problem
of sequential non-rigid registration, which aims to register a
source mesh of an object onto a sequence of observed point
clouds, often sparse or partial, resulting in dense trajectories
of the object over time. Traditional methods [4, 5] generally
formulate this task as an optimization problem that solves
point-wise transformations by minimizing the distance between source and target point clouds. While many follow-up
works [1, 7, 15, 33, 34] have introduced regularizers, such as

27156

