This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAGNet: Large-scale Reasoning-based Affordance Segmentation Benchmark
towards General Grasping
Dongming Wu1 , Yanping Fu2⋆ , Saike Huang3 , Yingfei Liu3† , Fan Jia3 , Nian Liu4 , Feng Dai2 ,
Tiancai Wang3 , Rao Muhammad Anwer4 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan4 , Jianbing Shen5‡
1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3 Dexmal, 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, 5 SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau

I need grip a
hammer.

I need a tool to drive a
nail into the wall.

You can grip its
handle.

Sure, you can utilize the
hammer by gripping its handle.

…

…

Large-scale Reasoning-based Affordance Segmentation Dataset

General Grasping

Figure 1. Large-scale benchmark for reasoning-based affordance segmentation, which sources from various embodied domains: wild,
robot, ego-centric indoor, and simulation. By leveraging the extensive high-quality dataset for training, our model AffordanceNet exhibits
remarkable open-world generalization capabilities, steering further towards robust general-purpose object grasping.

simulation data. They are carefully annotated with an affordance map, while the difficulty of language instructions is
largely increased by removing their category name and only
providing functional descriptions. Furthermore, we propose a comprehensive affordance-based grasping framework, named AffordanceNet, which consists of a VLM pretrained on our massive affordance data and a grasping
network that conditions an affordance map to grasp the
target. Extensive experiments on affordance segmentation
benchmarks and real-robot manipulation tasks show that
our model has a powerful open-world generalization ability. Our data and code is available at this link.

Abstract
General robotic grasping systems require accurate object
affordance perception in diverse open-world scenarios following human instructions. However, current studies suffer
from the problem of lacking reasoning-based large-scale affordance prediction data, leading to considerable concern
about open-world effectiveness. To address this limitation,
we build a large-scale grasping-oriented affordance segmentation benchmark with human-like instructions, named
RAGNet. It contains 273k images, 180 categories, and 26k
reasoning instructions. The images cover diverse embodied data domains, such as wild, robot, ego-centric, and even

1. Introduction

⋆ The work is done during the internship at Dexmal. † Project lead.
‡ Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the Science
and Technology Development Fund of Macau SAR (FDCT) under grants
0102/2023/RIA2 and 0154/2022/A3 and 001/2024/SKL, the Jiangyin Hitech Industrial Development Zone under the Taihu Innovation Scheme
(EF2025-00003-SKL-IOTSC), and the University of Macau SRG202200023-IOTSC grant.

11980

Affordance prediction is a foundational research topic that
significantly contributes to diverse practical applications,
including robotic manipulation [15, 17, 18, 38, 52] and
human-object interaction [3, 20, 22, 51, 57, 58]. It requires

