This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sequential Gaussian Avatars with Hierarchical Motion Context
Wangze Xu1 * Yifan Zhan1,2 Zhihang Zhong1† Xiao Sun1†
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 The University of Tokyo
∆𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕𝒔𝒔 = 𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕 − 𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕−𝒔𝒔

𝓥𝓥𝒕𝒕𝒔𝒔 = 𝐱𝐱 𝒕𝒕 − 𝐱𝐱 𝒕𝒕−𝒔𝒔

𝑵𝑵𝑵𝑵𝑵𝑵 − 𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹 𝑴𝑴𝑴𝑴𝑷𝑷

Gaussian Point 𝐱𝐱

∆𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕𝒔𝒔 , 𝓥𝓥𝒕𝒕𝒔𝒔
Gaussian Velocity 𝓥𝓥

=

Pose Skeleton 𝑷𝑷

𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕

𝜟𝜟𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕𝒔𝒔
𝒔𝒔𝟏𝟏

𝒕𝒕 − 𝒔𝒔𝟏𝟏

…

𝒕𝒕 ∈ 𝓣𝓣, 𝒔𝒔 ∈ 𝓢𝓢

𝐌𝐌𝐌𝐌𝐌𝐌

𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕 , 𝐱𝐱 𝒕𝒕

Skeleton Motion ∆𝑷𝑷

…

-

=

……

𝐱𝐱 𝒕𝒕

𝓥𝓥𝒕𝒕𝒔𝒔

𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕−𝒔𝒔

𝐎𝐎𝐎𝐎𝐎𝐎𝐎𝐎

𝒔𝒔𝟎𝟎

𝒔𝒔𝟎𝟎

𝐱𝐱 𝒕𝒕−𝒔𝒔

𝒕𝒕 − 𝟐𝟐𝒔𝒔𝟎𝟎

𝒕𝒕 − 𝒔𝒔𝟏𝟏

𝒕𝒕

𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕−𝟐𝟐𝒔𝒔𝟎𝟎

𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕−𝒔𝒔𝟏𝟏

𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕 , 𝐱𝐱, ∆𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕 , 𝓥𝓥

𝐆𝐆𝐆𝐆𝐎𝐎𝐆𝐆𝐎𝐎𝐆𝐆𝐆𝐆𝐆𝐆

𝐆𝐆𝐆𝐆

……

𝑷𝑷𝒕𝒕−𝒔𝒔𝟏𝟏

Figure 1. Illustration of the Hierarchical Motion Context Design. We model the motion-dependent appearance variations with both
coarse skeleton condition !P and fine-grained point-wise velocity condition V. !P describes the overall human skeleton motion, which
is derived from the difference between the human poses at adjacent frames. V is the point-wise velocity that indicates finer-grained motion
in local regions. To achieve robust deformation, we propose Spatio-temporal Multi-scale Sampling, which samples the overall motion
trend and inter-frame details via diverse time intervals s for !P and V.

Abstract
The emergence of neural rendering has significantly advanced the rendering quality of 3D human avatars, with the
recently popular 3DGS technique enabling real-time performance. However, SMPL-driven 3DGS human avatars
still struggle to capture fine appearance details due to the
complex mapping from pose to appearance during fitting. In
this paper, we propose SeqAvatar, which excavates the explicit 3DGS representation to better model human avatars
based on a hierarchical motion context. Specifically, we
utilize a coarse-to-fine motion conditions that incorporate
both the overall human skeleton and fine-grained vertex
motions for non-rigid deformation. To enhance the robustness of the proposed motion conditions, we adopt a spatiotemporal multi-scale sampling strategy to hierarchically integrate more motion clues to model human avatars. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms 3DGS-based approaches and renders human

avatars orders of magnitude faster than the latest NeRFbased models that incorporate temporal context, all while
delivering performance that is at least comparable or even
superior. Project page: https://zezeaaa.github.
io/projects/SeqAvatar/

1. Introduction

* This work was done during the author’s internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. † denotes co-corresponding authors.

Recent research on digital humans has highlighted the efficiency of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27], demonstrating its capability for high-quality and real-time rendering.
By defining T-pose human Gaussians in a canonical space
and employing specific warping techniques, we can render
human avatars from diverse perspectives and in any pose.
The canonical Gaussian primitives and warping weights are
then jointly optimized under supervision from video inputs.
Animatable human avatar reconstruction is primarily
hindered by limited modeling of non-rigid warping, forcing a trade-off between rendering quality and animation capability. Current methods [22, 56] incorporate SMPL(-X)
pose priors [43, 51] to guide motion for each observation

13592

