This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Reflection to Perfection: Scaling Inference-Time Optimization for
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models via Reflection Tuning
Le Zhuo1, 4 *, Liangbing Zhao2 *, Sayak Paul3 , Yue Liao1 , Renrui Zhang1 , Yi Xin4
Peng Gao4 , Mohamed Elhoseiny2†, Hongsheng Li1,5†
1
CUHK MMLab, 2 KAUST, 3 Hugging Face, 4 Shanghai AI Lab, 5 CPII under InnoHK

N Parallel Samples

M Sequential Steps

Reflection:

Reposition the bear to the
left. Add realistic details.

Prompt:

A teddy bear is

Refined Prompt:

holding a yellow
kite on his left.

Generator

Verifier

Single-Round Refinement
Round 1: Low Quality

A teddy bear with a joyful
expression is holding a
yellow kite on his left.

Parallel Refinement

Round 2: More Details

Round 1: Misalignment

Corrector

Multi-Rounds Refinement

Round 2: Correct

Round 1: Misalignment

Round 2: Misalignment

Round 3: Correct

\
Prompt: An orange cat joyfully plays a guitar on stage.

Prompt: A cat below a camping backpack.

Prompt: A long-legged big-eye anthropomorphic cheeseburger relaxing on the couch.

Reflection: Add details to guitar, enhance light contrast.

Reflection: Reposition the cat below the bag.

Reflection: Change the rabbit into a human-like cheeseburger.

Figure 1. Overall pipeline of the ReflectionFlow framework with qualitative and quantitative results of scaling compute at inference time.

Abstract
Recent text-to-image diffusion models achieve impressive
visual quality through extensive scaling of training data
and model parameters, yet they often struggle with complex scenes and fine-grained details. Inspired by the selfreflection capabilities emergent in large language models,
we propose ReflectionFlow, an inference-time framework
enabling diffusion models to iteratively reflect upon and refine their outputs. ReflectionFlow introduces three complementary inference-time scaling axes: (1) noise-level scaling to optimize latent initialization; (2) prompt-level scaling for precise semantic guidance; and most notably, (3)
reflection-level scaling, which explicitly provides actionable
reflections to iteratively assess and correct previous generations. To facilitate reflection-level scaling, we construct
GenRef, a large-scale dataset comprising 1 million triplets,
each containing a reflection, a flawed image, and an enhanced image. Leveraging this dataset, we efficiently per-

form reflection tuning on state-of-the-art diffusion transformer, FLUX.1-dev, by jointly modeling multimodal inputs
within a unified framework. Experimental results show that
ReflectionFlow significantly outperforms naive noise-level
scaling methods, offering a scalable and compute-efficient
solution toward higher-quality image synthesis on challenging tasks. All code, checkpoints, and datasets are available
at https://diffusion-cot.github.io/reflection2perfection.

1. Introduction

∗ Equal Contribution

Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [1, 12, 16, 27, 54, 60, 68] have led to remarkable
progress in image synthesis. With the scaling of training
resources, their capability to create high-resolution and photorealistic images steadily improves. Despite their success,
their performance across various domains remains inconsistent, especially when tasked with generating complex human poses, multiple-object compositions, or scenes with
complicated lighting and shadows. To alleviate these limitations, it is necessary to exponentially scale the training

† Corresponding Author

15329

