This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RainbowPrompt: Diversity-Enhanced Prompt-Evolving for Continual Learning
Kiseong Hong
Department of AI
Chung-Ang University
ghdrltjd@cau.ac.kr

Gyeong-hyeon Kim
School of CSE
Chung-Ang University
leonardkkh@cau.ac.kr

Eunwoo Kim*
School of CSE
Chung-Ang University
eunwoo@cau.ac.kr

Abstract
Prompt-based continual learning provides a rehearsal-free
solution by tuning small sets of parameters while keeping
pre-trained models frozen. To meet the complex demands
of sequential tasks, it is crucial to integrate task-specific
knowledge within prompts effectively. However, existing
works rely on either fixed learned prompts (i.e., prompts
whose representations remain unchanged during new task
learning) or on prompts generated from an entangled taskshared space, limiting the representational diversity of the
integrated prompt. To address this issue, we propose a novel
prompt-evolving mechanism to adaptively aggregate base
prompts (i.e., task-specific prompts) into a unified prompt
while ensuring diversity. By transforming and aligning base
prompts, both previously learned and newly introduced, our
approach continuously evolves accumulated knowledge to
facilitate learning new tasks. We further introduce a learnable probabilistic gate that adaptively determines which
layers to activate during the evolution process. We validate our method on image classification and video action
recognition tasks in class-incremental learning, achieving
average gains of 9.07% and 7.40% over existing methods
across all scenarios.

(a) Existing prompt integration

(b) Prompt-evolution (ours)

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of (a) existing prompt integration approaches and (b) the proposed prompt-evolving approach.
(a) Existing approaches integrate prompts using input-conditioned
weights w, with fixed old task prompts (blue box) or those generated between task-shared and task-specific spaces (green box).
(b) Our approach progressively transforms and aligns prompts to
make their representations more adaptable to new tasks.

strategy initially developed for natural language processing
(NLP). Instead of modifying the weights of ViT, prompttuning keeps the model frozen and fine-tunes additional
small sets of parameters called prompts. These prompts act
as task-specific instructions, guiding the model without the
need for direct weight updates.
Existing PCL works either select task-relevant prompts
from a prompt pool [45] or extend this approach by incorporating a task-invariant prompt shared across all tasks [44].
Recent studies attempt to integrate prompts into a unified
prompt [35, 38]. They produce a prompt by combining
prompts via an input-conditioned weighted sum [38] or by
generating task-specific prompts and merging them [35]
(see Fig. 1a). However, they often yield prompts with limited representational diversity. This limitation arises from
relying on learned representations that remain unchanged
without adapting to new tasks [38] or deriving prompts in a
task-shared space vulnerable to task interference and dominance [35]. This reduces adaptability and generalization,
highlighting the need for more effective strategies to balance integration with diversity.
Furthermore, our findings in Fig. 2 reveal that this limitation hinders achieving high accuracy while minimizing
forgetting during sequential task learning. We observe that
existing methods fail to achieve optimal knowledge integra-

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) aims to enable a model to learn
sequential tasks while retaining knowledge from previous
tasks. However, sequential learning faces a major challenge, catastrophic forgetting [9], where learning new tasks
deteriorates performance on previously learned tasks. To
address this, various CL approaches [20, 22, 36] have been
proposed. A recent paradigm in CL, known as promptbased CL (PCL) [33, 45], has shown promise in mitigating
catastrophic forgetting with its rehearsal-free nature, which
applied to a pre-trained vision transformer (ViT) [8]. These
methods leverage prompt-tuning [25], a transfer learning
* Corresponding author.

1130

