This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LUDVIG: Learning-Free Uplifting of 2D
Visual Features to Gaussian Splatting Scenes

1

Juliette Marrie1,2 Romain Menegaux1 Michael Arbel1 Diane Larlus2 Julien Mairal1
2
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
NAVER LABS Europe

Abstract
We address the problem of extending the capabilities of vision foundation models such as DINO, SAM, and CLIP,
to 3D tasks. Specifically, we introduce a novel method to
uplift 2D image features into Gaussian Splatting representations of 3D scenes. Unlike traditional approaches that
rely on minimizing a reconstruction loss, our method employs a simpler and more efficient feature aggregation technique, augmented by a graph diffusion mechanism. Graph
diffusion refines 3D features, such as coarse segmentation
masks, by leveraging 3D geometry and pairwise similarities
induced by DINOv2. Our approach achieves performance
comparable to the state of the art on multiple downstream
tasks while delivering significant speed-ups. Notably, we
obtain competitive segmentation results using only generic
DINOv2 features, despite DINOv2 not being trained on millions of annotated segmentation masks like SAM. When applied to CLIP features, our method demonstrates strong
performance in open-vocabulary object segmentation tasks,
highlighting the versatility of our approach.1

Figure 1. In this paper, we propose a simple, parameter-free
method to uplift any 2D visual features (e.g., CLIP or DINO)
into a 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) representation. Uplifting is
directly implemented into the rendering process, and takes about
2ms per image and feature dimension. The uplifted features can be
leveraged for various 3D tasks, such as segmentation or object removal, based on various inputs, such as scribbles or text prompts.

1. Introduction

models into NeRF or Gaussian Splatting 3D representations. This has led to a surge in methods for languageguided object retrieval [18, 26, 42, 52], scene editing [6,
9, 22], or semantic segmentation [4, 46, 48] in 3D scenes.
The main limitation of these approaches lies in their dependence on optimization, which requires an iterative process to learn a scene-specific 3D representation by minimizing a reprojection error across all training views. While
this loss function is intuitive, a faster and more straightforward method for transferring 2D generic visual features
to already trained Gaussian Splatting 3D models would be
preferable, which is one of the purposes of this work.
In this paper, we demonstrate that a simple, learningfree process is highly effective for uplifting 2D features or
semantic masks into 3D Gaussian Splatting scenes. This
process, which can be viewed as an ‘inverse rendering’ operation, is both computationally efficient and adaptable to
any feature type. We showcase its effectiveness by uplift-

Image understanding has made remarkable progress, driven
by large pretrained models such as CLIP [33], DINO [2,
31], or SAM [20], also called foundation models. A key
factor behind their exceptional generalization capabilities
lies in the size of their training datasets, often composed
of millions or even billions of samples.
Meanwhile, 3D scene representation has also advanced
through machine learning approaches like NeRF [29] and
model fitting techniques such as Gaussian Splatting [17].
These methods typically reconstruct scenes from a few
dozen views captured from different angles, effectively preserving both appearance and geometric details. However,
they are not suited for semantic tasks.
The complementarity of these two families of approaches has been exploited to integrate geometry and
image-level semantics extracted by large 2D pretrained
1 Project page: https://juliettemarrie.github.io/ludvig

7440

