This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Epistemic Uncertainty with Asymmetric Learning for
Diffusion-Generated Image Detection
Yingsong Huang1 *, Hui Guo1 *, Jing Huang2 *, Bing Bai3† and Qi Xiong1†
1
Tencent Inc. 2 Hikvision 3 Microsoft MAI
{hudsonhuang,emmaguo}@tencent.com, huangjing29@hikvision.com
bingbai@microsoft.com, keonxiong@tencent.com

Abstract
The rapid progress of diffusion models highlights the growing need for detecting generated images. Previous research
demonstrates that incorporating diffusion-based measurements, such as reconstruction error, can enhance the generalizability of detectors. However, ignoring the differing impacts of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty on reconstruction error can undermine detection performance. Aleatoric
uncertainty, arising from inherent data noise, creates ambiguity that impedes accurate detection of generated images. As it reflects random variations within the data (e.g.,
noise in natural textures), it does not help distinguish generated images. In contrast, epistemic uncertainty, which
represents the model’s lack of knowledge about unfamiliar patterns, supports detection. In this paper, we propose a novel framework, Diffusion Epistemic Uncertainty
with Asymmetric Learning (DEUA), for detecting diffusiongenerated images. We introduce Diffusion Epistemic Uncertainty (DEU) estimation via the Laplace approximation
to assess the proximity of data to the manifold of diffusiongenerated samples. Additionally, an asymmetric loss function is introduced to train a balanced classifier with larger
margins, further enhancing generalizability. Extensive experiments on large-scale benchmarks validate the state-ofthe-art performance of our method.

Recent approaches have proposed using diffusion measurements, such as reconstruction error [38, 39, 55], as discriminative features for detecting diffusion-generated images. These methods assume that images generated by
the diffusion model and their corresponding reconstructions
share the same distribution. As a result, pre-trained diffusion models can reconstruct generated images more accurately, whereas the reconstruction error for real images is
typically larger.
However, large reconstruction errors are not solely
caused by out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Both aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainty, inherent in the diffusion [3], contribute to reconstruction error. Aleatoric uncertainty reflects the inherent noise and randomness in the data. As it
remains relatively constant across both in-distribution and
OOD samples [25], it does not significantly aid in detecting
diffusion-generated images. This insight motivates a shift
from reconstruction error towards epistemic uncertainty.
Epistemic uncertainty, in contrast, captures the model’s
lack of knowledge about unfamiliar patterns and increases
significantly for samples that fall outside the domain of the
training data [12, 23, 25, 40]. Consequently, epistemic uncertainty provides a more reliable basis for anomaly detection. Figure 1 demonstrates that epistemic uncertainty
more accurately distinguishes real samples from fake ones.
Therefore, for detecting generated images, it is essential
to disentangle the overall uncertainty in diffusion measurements and focus specifically on epistemic uncertainty.
Based on this insight, we propose Diffusion Epistemic
Uncertainty with Asymmetric Learning (DEUA), a novel
framework for detecting diffusion-generated images. Our
framework separates overall uncertainty into aleatoric and
epistemic components, using Diffusion Epistemic Uncertainty (DEU) to identify samples close to the manifold
of diffusion-generated images. We employ the last-layer
Laplace approximation [10, 28] to estimate epistemic uncertainty in the diffusion process. Moreover, during the
training of a classifier, we observe a phenomenon akin to
the “sink class” concept, where there is asymmetric separa-

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of diffusion models [13, 20, 22, 43,
48, 50] has enabled the generation of images that are nearly
indistinguishable from real ones to the human eye. This
raises concerns about potential misuse of generated images
in various fields, such as security risks and privacy violations [24]. Consequently, there is an increasing need for
effective methods to detect diffusion-generated images.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

17097

