This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cracking Instance Jigsaw Puzzles: An Alternative to Multiple Instance Learning
for Whole Slide Image Analysis
Xiwen Chen1 * Peijie Qiu2 * Wenhui Zhu3 * Hao Wang1 Huayu Li 4 Xuanzhao Dong3
Xiaotong Sun5 Xiaobing Yu2 Yalin Wang3 Abolfazl Razi1 Aristeidis Sotiras2†
1
Clemson University, 2 Washington University in St. Louis, 3 Arizona State University,
4
University of Arizona, 5 University of Arkansas
Permutation Invariance:

Abstract

1. Introduction
Histopathological whole slide images (WSIs) are essential in modern digital pathology, supporting tasks such as
cancer diagnosis [35, 36] and survival prediction [20, 39].
However, the gigapixel resolution of WSIs poses significant
computational challenges, hindering the direct application
of traditional deep learning methods (e.g., convolution neural networks) to WSI analysis. To mitigate this issue, the
prevailing studies [21, 26, 37, 46, 50, 57] for WSI analysis
rely on the multiple instance learning (MIL). In this process,
a WSI (a.k.a., bag in the context of MIL) is first patchified

Flatten
Shuffle

MIL
Aggregator

(a) Multiple Instance Learning
Shuffling Equivalence Regularization:

Shuffle

While multiple instance learning (MIL) has shown to be a
promising approach for histopathological whole slide image (WSI) analysis, its reliance on permutation invariance
significantly limits its capacity to effectively uncover semantic correlations between instances within WSIs. Based
on our empirical and theoretical investigations, we argue
that approaches that are not permutation-invariant but better capture spatial correlations between instances can offer
more effective solutions. In light of these findings, we propose a novel alternative to existing MIL for WSI analysis
by learning to restore the order of instances from their randomly shuffled arrangement. We term this task as cracking
an instance jigsaw puzzle problem, where semantic correlations between instances are uncovered. To tackle the instance jigsaw puzzles, we propose a novel Siamese network
solution, which is theoretically justified by optimal transport theory. We validate the proposed method on WSI classification and survival prediction tasks, where the proposed
method outperforms the recent state-of-the-art MIL competitors. The code is available at https://github.
com/xiwenc1/MIL-JigsawPuzzles.

Arbitrary Network
(e.g., CNN)
Share weights
Arbitrary Network
(e.g., CNN)
(b) Cracking Instance Jigsaw Puzzles

Figure 1. An illustrative comparison between (a) the traditional
MIL method and (b) the proposed method for solving instance jigsaw puzzles. Compared to MIL, the proposed method is advantageous in uncovering semantic correlations between instances.

into smaller (e.g., 224 × 224) tiles/instances, and features
are then extracted using pre-trained feature extractors (e.g.,
ResNet [16]). MIL acts as an aggregator, combining features from individual tiles, which are then fed into a simple MLP (e.g., a linear classifier in most cases) to output
the final prediction. However, MIL aggregator designs are
largely constrained by the requirement of permutation invariance (see Fig. 1(a)), a fundamental assumption of the
orthodox MIL problem1 [19, 33]. In what follows, we will
investigate the necessity of this permutation invariance (or
MIL) from both empirical and theoretical perspectives.
Our primary motivation is that, although permutation
invariance is a fundamental assumption for MIL problems, it overlooks the spatial correlations between tiles
1 Technically, methods that violate the permutation-invariance assumption are not considered MIL [19, 33].

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

21353

