This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InsViE-1M: Effective Instruction-based Video Editing with
Elaborate Dataset Construction
Yuhui Wu1,2 , Liyi Chen1 , Ruibin Li1 , Shihao Wang1 , Chenxi Xie1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2 *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 OPPO Research Institute
{yuhui.wu, liyi0308.chen, ruibin.li, shihaow.wang, chenxi.xie}@connect.polyu.hk
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Table 1. Statistics of instruction-based video editing datasets.

Abstract
Instruction-based video editing allows effective and interactive editing of videos using only instructions without
extra inputs such as masks or attributes. However, collecting high-quality training triplets (source video, edited
video, instruction) is a challenging task. Existing datasets
mostly consist of low-resolution, short duration, and limited amount of source videos with unsatisfactory editing
quality, limiting the performance of trained editing models.
In this work, we present a high-quality Instruction-based
Video Editing dataset with 1M triplets, namely InsViE1M. We first curate high-resolution and high-quality source
videos and images, then design an effective editing-filtering
pipeline to construct high-quality editing triplets for model
training. For a source video, we generate multiple edited
samples of its first frame with different intensities of
classifier-free guidance, which are automatically filtered
by GPT-4o with carefully crafted guidelines. The edited
first frame is propagated to subsequent frames to produce
the edited video, followed by another round of filtering for
frame quality and motion evaluation. We also generate and
filter a variety of video editing triplets from high-quality
images. With the InsViE-1M dataset, we propose a multistage learning strategy to train our InsViE model, progressively enhancing its instruction following and editing ability. Extensive experiments demonstrate the advantages of
our InsViE-1M dataset and the trained model over state-ofthe-art works. Codes are available at InsViE.

Datasets

Amount

Resolution

Frames

Real

Filter

InstructVid2Vid [27]
EffiVED [42]
InsV2V [6]
Ours

N/A
155k
404k
1M

N/A
512×512
256×256
1024×576

N/A
8
16
25

✓
✓
×
✓

×
×
×
✓

1. Introduction

poral consistency by over-fitting on each single video, but at
the price of more time consumption. Training-based methods perform video editing by introducing masks [15, 19],
edited first-frame [21], or instructions [5, 6, 42]. Compared
with other kinds of training-based video editing methods,
instruction-based editing is more user-friendly as it only
needs the instruction to represent the expected editing target. Inspired by the success of instruction-based image
editing [12, 16], researchers have proposed several methods [6, 27, 42] to construct instruction-based video editing
datasets and train the models.
However, the training data construction for instructionbased video editing (InsViE) is much more challenging
than that for image editing. InstructVid2Vid [27] and EffiVED [42] create edited videos utilizing one-shot methods
[23, 35], which is highly time consuming. As a result, only
24K videos with 8 frames per video of 256×256 resolution are provided in [42], whose video quantity and quality
are not sufficient to train a robust video editor. InsV2V [6]
synthesizes 400K editing pairs; however, the source videos
are synthetic, and hence the trained models are less effective when editing real-world videos. In addition, the limited video resolution (256×256) of this dataset limits the
application of the trained models. As summarized in Tab. 1,
existing InsViE datasets suffer from low-resolution, short
video duration, and insufficient quantity and quality, making InsViE remain a challenging task.
To address the limitation, we propose to construct
InsViE-1M, an instruction-based video editing dataset, including 1M high-quality training triplets (source video,
edited video, instruction). Specifically, we first collect a
large amount of 1080p real-world source videos and utilize large vision-language models (VLMs) [13] to generate

Promising progress on video editing has been achieved in
recent years. Many previous works [7, 9, 10, 17, 18, 20, 26]
are training-free methods based on pre-trained image/video
generation models [4, 29], yet they are limited in generalization ability, long time consumption and the need of paired
captions. One-shot methods [11, 24, 35] improve the tem* Corresponding author. This research is supported by the PolyU-OPPO
Joint Innovative Research Center.

16692

