This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Generalize without Bias for Open-Vocabulary Action Recognition
Yating Yu1 * Congqi Cao1∗† Yifan Zhang2 Yanning Zhang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
yatingyu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, congqi.cao@nwpu.edu.cn,
yfzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, yanningzhang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

Example of OVAR evaluation videos

(a) In-context UCF101

73.8

Frozen CLIP

72.0

X-CLIP

82.9

Class: Golf Swing

FROSTER

83.5

Open-VCLIP

83.9

Open-MeDe (Ours)

Top-1 Acc. (%)

Leveraging the effective visual-text alignment and static
generalizability from CLIP, recent video learners adopt
CLIP initialization with further regularization or recombination for generalization in open-vocabulary action recognition in-context. However, due to the static bias of CLIP,
such video learners tend to overfit on shortcut static features, thereby compromising their generalizability, especially to novel out-of-context actions. To address this issue, we introduce Open-MeDe, a novel Meta-optimization
framework with static Debiasing for Open-vocabulary action recognition. From a fresh perspective of generalization,
Open-MeDe adopts a meta-learning approach to improve
“known-to-open generalizing” and “image-to-video debiasing” in a cost-effective manner. Specifically, Open-MeDe
introduces a cross-batch meta-optimization scheme that explicitly encourages video learners to quickly generalize to
arbitrary subsequent data via virtual evaluation, steering a
smoother optimization landscape. In effect, the free of CLIP
regularization during optimization implicitly mitigates the
inherent static bias of the video meta-learner. We further
apply self-ensemble over the optimization trajectory to obtain generic optimal parameters that can achieve robust
generalization to both in-context and out-of-context novel
data. Extensive evaluations show that Open-MeDe not only
surpasses state-of-the-art regularization methods tailored
for in-context open-vocabulary action recognition but also
substantially excels in out-of-context scenarios. Code is released at https://github.com/Mia-YatingYu/Open-MeDe.

Performance of OVAR evaluation

Satisfying in-context generalizability

Domain gap: 20.5

(b) Out-of-context UCF-SCUBA

Severly affected by static bias

25.3
28.9

Class: Golf Swing

33.5

Frozen CLIP

X-CLIP
FROSTER
Open-VCLIP

Open-MeDe (Ours)

Top-1 Acc. (%)

16.4
24.6

Figure 1. Performance comparison (Top-1 Acc (%)) under various
open-vocabulary evaluation settings where the video learners except for CLIP are tuned on Kinetics-400 [26] with frozen text encoders. The satisfying in-context generalizability on UCF101 [43]
(a) can be severely affected by static bias when evaluating on
out-of-context UCF-SCUBA [30] (b) by replacing the video background with other images.

1. Introduction

ers [3, 48, 52, 57]. Recently, the emergence of image-based
visual-language (I-VL) pre-training, such as CLIP [39] and
ALIGN [23], has shown promising zero-shot inference in
image-based tasks. Inspired by this success, recent attempts [3, 4, 8, 34, 36, 49] have been made to adapt
CLIP for general action recognition via additional temporal
modeling following the “pre-train, prompt and fine-tune”
paradigm [47]. Broadly, these video learners optimize the
learnable parameters from the start point of CLIP, pursuing decent performance on the training videos, known as
standard fine-tuning objectives. However, adapting CLIP to
the video domain, especially for OVAR, is extremely challenging, as the video learners with standard fine-tuning objectives often lead to overfitting, which achieves improved
specialization at the cost of generalization degradation.
To build an improved zero-shot video learner, OpenVCLIP [53] and FROSTER [21] propose to regularize the
fine-tuning process curbing deviation from CLIP’s gener-

Open-vocabulary action recognition (OVAR) aims to identify test videos whose classes are not previously encountered during the training phase, which challenges the generalization and zero-shot capabilities of the video learn* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

12800

