This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When and Where do Data Poisons Attack Textual Inversion?
Jeremy Styborski1∗ Mingzhi Lyu2∗ Jiayou Lu1 Nupur Kapur1 Adams Wai-Kin Kong1
1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{styb0001,lyum0002,jiayou001,nupur003,AdamsKong}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Poisoning attacks pose significant challenges to the robustness of diffusion models (DMs). In this paper, we systematically analyze when and where poisoning attacks textual inversion (TI), a widely used personalization technique
for DMs. We first introduce Semantic Sensitivity Maps,
a novel method for visualizing the influence of poisoning
on text embeddings. Second, we identify and experimentally verify that DMs exhibit non-uniform learning behavior across timesteps, focusing on lower-noise samples. Poisoning attacks inherit this bias and inject adversarial signals predominantly at lower timesteps. Lastly, we observe
that adversarial signals distract learning away from relevant concept regions within training data, corrupting the
TI process. Based on these insights, we propose Safe-Zone
Training (SZT), a novel defense mechanism comprised of 3
key components: (1) JPEG compression to weaken highfrequency poison signals, (2) restriction to high timesteps
during TI training to avoid adversarial signals at lower
timesteps, and (3) loss masking to constrain learning to relevant regions. Extensive experiments across multiple poisoning methods demonstrate that SZT greatly enhances the
robustness of TI against all poisoning attacks, improving
generative quality beyond prior published defenses.
Code: www.github.com/JStyborski/Diff_Lab
Data: www.github.com/JStyborski/NC10

Figure 1. Applying SZT to TI mitigates poison signals and recovers shape, color, and texture of desired concepts. NovelConcepts10 training data poisoned by ADM+. Generation prompt: “A
R∗ with a wheat field in the background”

1. Introduction

not found in the model training data.
Unfortunately, the surge in generative AI corresponds to
misfortune for artists and copyright owners, who may see
their works easily reproduced by retrained generative models. Consequently, the subfield of data poisoning for generative AI has focused on how to inject images with signals
that nullify their use in training datasets for generative models. Individuals looking to protect their data are encouraged
to “poison” their images with imperceptible adversarial perturbations such that generative models will fail to learn to
recreate the novel concepts contained within.
The concept of data poisoning stems from adversarial examples (AEs) [17, 36, 49, 70], where the inputs are slightly
perturbed in order to maximize loss. Intuitively, these AEs
learn to incorporate signals that maximally mislead AI models into making incorrect predictions. The AE method is
likewise effective against generative models; multiple stateof-the-art poisoning methods for generative models apply
the AE method to the diffusion model (DM) objective to inject poison signals into images [6, 39, 61, 78]. Although
the textual inversion (TI) technique is widely used to adapt
DMs to novel concepts, there are no systematic studies that
identify when and where AEs attack the TI process.

The image quality and prompt fidelity offered by diffusionbased image generation models such as DALL-E 2 [57],
Stable Diffusion [58], and Imagen [60] have popularized (or
vilified) the use of AI-generated images in the art, marketing, and media industries. The subsequent proliferation of
personalization and editing methods [15, 20, 25, 35, 59, 82]
and tools [2, 7, 72] allows anyone, even non-experts and
non-artists, to quickly retrain existing models to generate
their desired images, including images of novel concepts
* Equal contribution, may cite either first

19439

