This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonSTeR : a Unified Model for Motion, Scene, Text Retrieval
Luca Collorone1,* , Matteo Gioia1,* , Massimiliano Pappa1 ,
Paolo Leoni1 , Giovanni Ficarra1,3 , Or Litany2 , Indro Spinelli1 , Fabio Galasso1
1

2

Sapienza University of Rome

3

Technion, NVIDIA

{name.surname}@uniroma1.it

WSense

or.litany@gmail.com

Abstract
Intention drives human movement in complex environments, but such movement can only happen if the surrounding context supports it. Despite the intuitive nature of this
mechanism, existing research has not yet provided tools
to evaluate the alignment between skeletal movement (motion), intention (text), and the surrounding context (scene).
In this work, we introduce MonSTeR, the first MOtioNScene-TExt Retrieval model. Inspired by the modeling of
higher-order relations, MonSTeR constructs a unified latent space by leveraging unimodal and cross-modal representations. This allows MonSTeR to capture the intricate
dependencies between modalities, enabling flexible but robust retrieval across various tasks.
Our results show that MonSTeR outperforms trimodal
models that rely solely on unimodal representations. Furthermore, we validate the alignment of our retrieval scores
with human preferences through a dedicated user study.
We demonstrate the versatility of MonSTeR’s latent space
on zero-shot in-Scene Object Placement and Motion Captioning. Code and pre-trained models are available at
github.com/colloroneluca/MonSTeR.

“A

MonSTeR

96.8 %

person walks
to the chair
near the table
and sits down”

MonSTeR

33.2 %

Figure 1. MonSTeR can estimate coherence among text, motion,
and scene by embedding them into a unified latent space. In the
left image, all three modalities are coherent. However, in the right
image, this coherence decreases, as there is no chair available in
the scene.

1. Introduction

movements (motion), and environments (scene) to create a
scenario where human-scene interaction can naturally take
place. Also, multiple captions could potentially describe
the motion in Fig. 1 in isolation, but given the scene context, it is evident that the provided one is the most accurate.
This confirms that exists a strong interdependence between
these modalities.
However, existing human motion generation and retrieval approaches are far from effectively leveraging this
trimodal relation and fully capturing the interdependence
between texts, motions and the environment in which they
occur. In fact, recent retrieval models [10, 13, 27, 39] are
unable to incorporate environmental context, causing motions to be depicted in an empty space and overlooking their
intrinsic connection to the scene. Similarly, the methods for
evaluating Human Scene Interaction models fail to provide
a global measure of coherence/realism [4, 34, 35]. In fact,
they try to obtain a score based on a number of different
metrics, including person-scene interpenetration or distance
to the target location. By contrast, we argue that these eval-

“She asked me to stay and she told me to sit anywhere. But I looked around and I noticed there
wasn’t a chair.”
— Norwegian Wood, The Beatles
Humans can navigate and interact with environments by
balancing their intentions with the opportunities presented
by their surroundings. For instance, when the intended action is to “sit on a chair” and the corresponding movement
is performed, it would be perplexing if the environment
lacked a chair (Fig 1). This highlights the necessity for
strong coherence and plausibility among intentions (text),
* Authors contributed equally.

10940

