This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond the Frame: Generating 360◦ Panoramic Videos from Perspective Videos
Rundong Luo1

Matthew Wallingford2
1

Cornell University

Ali Fahardi2
2

Noah Snavely1

Wei-Chiu Ma1

University of Washington

Figure 1. 360◦ videos generated by our model, Argus† . Starting from an input perspective video with arbitrary camera motion (red box),
Argus generates a full 360◦ panoramic video (visualized as environmental maps), where the red box indicates the input view in the generated
frame. The blue, orange, and purple boxes show sampled perspectives from the generated 360◦ video. Best viewed in Adobe Acrobat Reader
for the embedded videos.

Abstract
360◦ videos have emerged as a promising medium to represent our dynamic visual world. Compared to the “tunnel
vision” of standard cameras, their borderless field of view offers a more complete perspective of our surroundings. While
existing video models excel at producing standard videos,
their ability to generate full panoramic videos remains elusive. In this paper, we investigate the task of video-to-360◦
generation: given a perspective video as input, our goal is
to generate a full panoramic video that is consistent with
the original video. Unlike conventional video generation
tasks, the output’s field of view is significantly larger, and
the model is required to have a deep understanding of both
the spatial layout of the scene and the dynamics of objects to
maintain spatio-temporal consistency. To address these challenges, we first leverage the abundant 360◦ videos available
online and develop a high-quality data filtering pipeline to
curate pairwise training data. We then carefully design a
series of geometry- and motion-aware operations to facilitate the learning process and improve the quality of 360◦

video generation. Experimental results demonstrate that
our model can generate realistic and coherent 360◦ videos
from in-the-wild perspective video. In addition, we showcase its potential applications, including video stabilization,
camera viewpoint control, and interactive visual question
answering. View more high-resolution video results here* .

1. Introduction
Remarkable advances in video generation have led to impressive capabilities, driven in part by large-scale video data
from the web [4, 5, 18, 20, 34]. Models can now produce
high-quality video clips based on an input image, allowing
us to step into the world behind the pixels. While these
models achieve impressive fidelity, they still provide us only
a narrow slice of the four-dimensional scene. Unlike the real
world where we can freely look around and observe events as
† Argus is named after a figure in Greek mythology with many eyes,

14336

symbolizing the ability to observe from multiple perspectives.
* This file contains embedded videos best viewed in Adobe Acrobat
Reader. High-resolution results are available on our project page.

