This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoScape: Geometry-Consistent Long-Horizon Scene Generation
Jiacheng Chen→ 2 Ziyu Jiang→ † 1 Mingfu Liang3 Bingbing Zhuang1
Jong-Chyi Su1 Sparsh Garg1 Ying Wu3 Manmohan Chandraker1,4
1

NEC Labs America

2

Simon Fraser University

3

Northwestern University

0s

5s

5s

10s

10s

15s

15s

20s

4

UC San Diego

Figure 1. AutoScape generates long-horizon and 3D-consistent driving scenes from a single input image, producing high-quality videos over
a temporal span of 20 seconds. Click the images on the right column within Adobe Reader to play three example videos.

Abstract
This paper proposes AutoScape, a long-horizon driving
scene generation framework. At its core is a novel RGB-D
diffusion model that iteratively generates sparse, geometrically consistent keyframes, serving as reliable anchors
for the scene’s appearance and geometry. To maintain
long-range geometric consistency, the model 1) jointly handles image and depth in a shared latent space, 2) explicitly
conditions on the existing scene geometry (i.e., rendered
point clouds) from previously generated keyframes, and 3)
steers the sampling process with a warp-consistent guidance. Given high-quality RGB-D keyframes, a video diffusion model then interpolates between them to produce dense
and coherent video frames. AutoScape generates realistic
and geometrically consistent driving videos of over 20 seconds, improving the long-horizon FID and FVD scores over
the prior state-of-the-art by 48.6% and 43.0%, respectively.
Project page: https://auto-scape.github.io.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in high-quality video generation are rapidly
transforming various applications, ranging from robotics to
mixed reality, where the synthesis of realistic visual data is

crucial. A particular example is autonomous driving, where
the photorealistic generation of driving videos plays a crucial
role in simulation and verification. But despite promising
prospects, generating 3D driving scenes that remain coherent
and consistent over long horizons remains a fundamental
challenge. Current generative methods, while achieving impressive photorealism [15, 17, 23, 81, 82, 89], often struggle
with maintaining physical realism [17] and suffer from quality degradation during auto-regressive generation [12, 15],
making spatiotemporal coherence over long horizons a critical unsolved challenge.
We introduce AutoScape, a novel framework that addresses the challenges of long-horizon 3D-consistent driving
scene generation by leveraging explicit geometry awareness.
Given the observation that degrading geometric consistency
is the key bottleneck of long-horizon scene or video generation, we decompose the problem hierarchically into sparse
RGB-D keyframe generation and dense video interpolation.
The core idea is to train a powerful RGB-D diffusion model
to generate highly consistent keyframes, which serve as reliable anchors for the scene’s global appearance and geometry,
robustly handling a large span. Given the reliable anchors, a
video diffusion model then interpolates between keyframes,
refining rendered point clouds into a coherent video.
Our RGB-D diffusion model generates high-quality
keyframes with three key designs: 1) joint RGB-D mod-

* Equal Contribution. † Project Lead.

25700

