This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forensic-MoE: Exploring Comprehensive Synthetic Image Detection Traces
with Mixture of Experts
Mingqi Fang1,2 , Ziguang Li1 , Lingyun Yu1, *, Quanwei Yang1 , Hongtao Xie1 , Yongdong Zhang1,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{mqfang, zg321, yangquanwei}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {yuly, htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, synthetic images have evolved incredibly realistic with the development of generative techniques. To avoid
the spread of misinformation and identify synthetic content,
research on synthetic image detection becomes urgent. Unfortunately, limited to the singular forensic perspective, existing methods struggle to explore sufficient traces encountered with diverse synthetic techniques. In response to this,
we argue that different synthetic images encompass a variety of forensic traces, and utilizing multiple experts to explore traces from diverse perspectives will be beneficial.
Accordingly, a novel detector with the Mixture of multiple
forensic Experts is proposed, named Forensic-MoE. To integrate multiple experts and enhance the knowledge interaction, Forensic-MoE follows an adapter-backbone architecture. Specifically, multiple adapters trained on different
synthetic images serve as the trace exploration experts, and
they are uniformly integrated into a pretrained backbone
model to learn the detection prior and encourage the expert
interaction. By guiding multiple experts to align with each
other and collaborate, Forensic-MoE can integrate comprehensive and discriminative detection traces from multiple
perspectives. Moreover, for the discrimination improvement of each expert, a multi-stage structure is proposed
for efficient trace perception, and a patch decentralization
strategy is applied to encourage the model’s attention on
every local region. Code will be available in https:
//github.com/fangmq77/Forensic-MoE

Figure 1. Comparison with previous methods. Previous methods generally utilize a singular universal detector and suffer from
a limited forensic perspective. In contrast, we propose to integrate
multiple experts from diverse forensic perspectives, thus improving the detection performance.

1. Introduction

the entertainment industry, the potential abuse of generative
models also raises widespread social concerns about privacy
and security. Previous experience of “Seeing is Believing”
is being dissolved in public perception. Therefore, effective
and generalizable synthetic image detection becomes urgent
and necessary in the era of AI-generated content.
As shown in the top of Figure 1, previous methods
[7, 10, 13, 22, 34, 37, 41, 53, 56] try to explore detection
trace through searching for a universal forensic perspective,
such as the artifact capture [22, 53], reconstruction error
comparison[7, 37, 56], and utilizing pretrained model features [10, 13, 34, 41]. However, with the continuous emergence of new synthetic techniques, this singular perspective
makes it hard to maintain discrimination against all synthetic techniques. The target of finding universal traces is
accompanied by the sacrifice of specialized knowledge.
To compare the pros and cons between universal and specialized forensic schemes, a preliminary experiment is designed. Specifically, we respectively utilize the ProGAN
[24] and SDv1.4 [46] images to train two widely-used detectors [55] as the specialized experts. For comparison, a
universal detector is trained with the mixture of these two

Recently, with the revolution of generative techniques like
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5, 15, 18, 24,
25] and Diffusion Models [11, 19, 46, 50, 58], everyone is
able to generate controllable and high-quality images without specific expertise. Despite the successful application in
* Corresponding author.

17772

