This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Uniﬁed Framework for Motion Reasoning and Generation
in Human Interaction
Jeongeun Park1 Sungjoon Choi*1,2 Sangdoo Yun*3
1
Korea University 2 RLWRLD 3 Naver AI Lab
https://molam-motion-language.github.io/
Motion QA
User

Motion Editing
User

What happened
before this motion?

User

Make the right person's
motion more respectful.

MoLaM

Reaction Generation

Generate a reactive
motion

MoLaM
MoLAM

Motion-to-Text

Text-to-Motion

User

User

Describe the motion

MoLaM

Before this scene,
two individuals were
having a heated
argument.

Generate motion where
two people face each
other, raise hands above
their heads, step
forward, and clap.

MoLaM

MoLaM

One person pats the
other on the back with
their right hand, who
then turns to look.

Multi-turn Motion-text Conversation
User

User

MoLaM

What is happening in this motion?

First person sits on a chair.
The other leans in,
whispering near the first
person's left ear.

MoLaM

The man standing up seems
overly cautious. Can you
make him appear more
relaxed and trusting?

Figure 1. We introduce MoLaM, the Interactive Motion-language model, a uniﬁed architecture that combines language and motion
for two-person interactive scenarios. The ﬁgure highlights its capabilities across various tasks including motion-to-text, text-to-motion,
reaction generation, motion editing, and multi-turn motion reasoning, all within a single framework.

Abstract
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have greatly enhanced their ability to generate natural and
contextually relevant text, enabling more human-like AI interactions. However, generating and understanding interactive human-like motion, where multiple individuals engage in coordinated movements, remains challenging due
to the complexity of modeling these coordinated interactions. Furthermore, a uniﬁed and versatile model is required to handle diverse interactive scenarios, such as chat
systems that dynamically adapt to user instructions and
assigned roles. To tackle these problems, we introduce
MoLaM, the Interactive Motion-LAnguage Model, which
integrates both language and motion modalities to effectively understand, generate, and control interactive motions in multi-turn conversational contexts. Unlike previous studies primarily focusing on uni-directional tasks (e.g.,
* Corresponding authors. Works done during Jeongeun Park was an
intern at Naver AI Lab.

10698

text-to-motion or motion-to-text), MoLaM employs a uniﬁed architecture capable of simultaneously understanding
and generating both motion and text modalities. Given
the lack of an appropriate dataset to address this challenge, we introduce Inter-MT2 , a large-scale instructiontuning dataset containing 82.7K multi-turn interactive motion instructions, spanning 153K interactive motion samples. Inter-MT2 covers diverse instructional scenarios including editing, question answering, and story generation,
with interactive motions leveraging off-the-shelf large language models and motion diffusion models. We extensively
evaluate the versatility of MoLaM across multiple interactive motion-related tasks: motion-to-text, text-to-motion,
reaction generation, motion editing, and reasoning about
motion sequences. Remarkably, MoLaM is the ﬁrst model
capable of effectively addressing all these tasks with a single uniﬁed framework, achieving competitive performance
compared to task-speciﬁc methods.

