This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CaptionSmiths: Flexibly Controlling Language Pattern in Image Captioning
Kuniaki Saito*

Donghyun Kim†

Kwanyong Park‡

Atsushi Hashimoto*

Yoshitaka Ushiku*
Prior Approach

Abstract
An image captioning model flexibly switching its language
pattern, e.g., descriptiveness and length, should be useful since it can be applied to diverse applications. However, despite the dramatic improvement in generative visionlanguage models, fine-grained control over the properties
of generated captions is not easy due to two reasons: (i) existing models are not given the properties as a condition
during training and (ii) existing models cannot smoothly
transition its language pattern from one state to the other.
Given this challenge, we propose a new approach, CaptionSmiths, to acquire a single captioning model that can handle diverse language patterns. First, our approach quantifies three properties of each caption, length, descriptiveness, and uniqueness of a word, as continuous scalar values, without human annotation. Given the values, we represent the conditioning via interpolation between two endpoint vectors corresponding to the extreme states, e.g., one
for a very short caption and one for a very long caption. Empirical results demonstrate that the resulting model
can smoothly change the properties of the output captions
and show higher lexical alignment than baselines. For instance, CaptionSmiths reduces the error in controlling caption length by 506% despite better lexical alignment. Code
will be available on https://github.com/omronsinicx/captionsmiths.

CaptionSmiths
blue jay bird on tree branch
with bare branches

blue bird on a tree

Continuous Conditioning
Discrete Conditioning
Captioning
Model

Length

Length

Captioning
Model

Uniqueness
Descriptiveness

GT: A blue jay is sitting on the branch of a tree.

Figure 1. Left: Existing approach performs discrete state switching to control the caption length. Right: Our approach takes continuous values to control the length, uniqueness of words, and descriptiveness of the caption, achieving flexible and interpretable
control for the generated caption.

1. Introduction

Tailoring a foundational model for a specific application can lead to a high-performance model, but it often requires adapting its output language patterns. For example,
some users prefer detailed, lengthy captions, while others
favor concise descriptions. These preferences are defined
by human-interpretable criteria, such as caption length or
the use of fine-grained versus general categories to describe
a concept. However, unlike wordsmiths, humans skilled
in crafting language, current captioning models struggle to
control language patterns based on applications’ demand.
Simply training powerful foundation models on diverse
datasets does not offer precise control over these language
patterns, as standard models tend to generate “average” captions from the training data, potentially losing the unique
style of captions [26, 40]. While training separate models
for each application might mitigate this issue, it comes with
significant costs, such as collecting image-caption pairs and
training individual models for each application. To overcome these limitations, we aim to develop a single model
capable of smoothly adapting its behavior based on interpretable conditions as inputs.
Existing works tackle the challenge by conditioning the
model on the pattern of the target caption [6, 8, 38], such
as length and dataset type. Their models are trained to
generate a caption given an image and the condition, such
as clustering captions by their length and conditioning the

Image captioning is an important computer vision task,
having a wide range of applications e.g., describing the
surrounding environment to assist visually impaired individuals. We have seen dramatic improvements in this
task [14, 19] with the help of vision and language foundation models such as CLIP [32] and Llama [34]. Recent
trends in vision-language models focus on linking powerful image encoders with language models (LMs), leveraging large-scale image-text datasets [3, 5, 23, 24, 43].
* OMRON SINIC X, kuniaki.saito@sinicx.com
† Korea University
‡ University of Seoul

19872

