This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

mmCooper: A Multi-agent Multi-stage Communication-efﬁcient and
Collaboration-robust Cooperative Perception Framework

1

Bingyi Liu1 , Jian Teng1 , Hongfei Xue2* , Enshu Wang3 *, Chuanhui Zhu1 , Pu Wang2 , Libing Wu3
Wuhan University Of Technology, 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 3 Wuhan University
{byliu, tengjian, zhuchuanhui}@whut.edu.cn,
{hongfei.xue, Pu.Wang}@charlotte.edu, {wanges17, wu}@whu.edu.cn
Abstract

Collaborative perception signiﬁcantly enhances individual vehicle perception performance through the exchange
of sensory information among agents. However, realworld deployment faces challenges due to bandwidth constraints and inevitable calibration errors during information exchange. To address these issues, we propose mmCooper, a novel multi-agent, multi-stage, communicationefﬁcient, and collaboration-robust cooperative perception
framework. Our framework leverages a multi-stage collaboration strategy that dynamically and adaptively balances
intermediate- and late-stage information to share among
agents, enhancing perceptual performance while maintaining communication efﬁciency. To support robust collaboration despite potential misalignments and calibration errors,
our framework prevents misleading low-conﬁdence sensing
information from transmission and reﬁnes the received detection results from collaborators to improve accuracy. The
extensive evaluation results on both real-world and simulated datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the mmCooper framework and its components.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of autonomous driving systems [19,
57], perception devices such as cameras and LiDARs have
been widely deployed. Although perception technologies have witnessed rapid advancements driven by deep
learning-based algorithms, the traditional single-vehicle
perception paradigms [23, 30, 52] cannot meet the safety
and reliability requirements of autonomous vehicles due to
unavoidable factors such as object occlusion and limitations
in detection range [1, 6, 14, 27, 61].
Beneﬁting from infrastructure improvements and the advancement of Internet of Vehicles (IoVs) technologies like
V2X [25, 26], autonomous vehicles can achieve multi* Corresponding authors.
Our code is available at https : / /
github.com/tengjjj/mmCooper.

28396

vehicle collaborative perception by sharing perception information [5, 47], which signiﬁcantly enhances the performance of perception systems. Although cooperative perception has made progress recently, its practical deployment
still faces challenges such as communication resource constraints [8, 13], localization errors [31, 34], and low information fusion efﬁciency [46, 55].
In cooperative perception systems, the effectiveness of
fusion strategies signiﬁcantly affects both perception performance and communication efﬁciency. The fusion strategies can be divided into three categories: early, intermediate, and late fusion methods. Speciﬁcally, early fusion
methods [7, 61] aggregate raw sensor observations from all
agents, providing abundant information but requiring immense bandwidth, making this approach costly for communication. Intermediate fusion methods [8, 13, 53–55]
partially mitigate this issue by sharing encoded features
rather than raw data to reduce communication overhead.
However, transmitting the feature map of the entire sensing scenario still results in substantial bandwidth consumption [13]. Late fusion methods [38, 40] on the other hand,
minimize communication demands by sharing lightweight
perception results among agents. However, this approach is
highly sensitive to environmental noise, as even minor disturbances can degrade collaborative quality [31]. Overall,
these above single-stage cooperative perception approaches
face challenges in managing the trade-off between perception accuracy and communication efﬁciency, raising a compelling question: Can we improve the perception performance while preserving communication efﬁciency by strategically sharing information across multiple stages to harness the strengths of each fusion stage?
In addition, the data exchanged by agents inevitably experiences misalignment and contains calibration errors during the synchronization process due to communication delays and pose noise [15, 41]. These calibration errors can
produce misleading features and proposals in subsequent
steps, thereby affecting the performance of the perception
system. While existing intermediate fusion methods at-

