This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class-Wise Federated Averaging for Efficient Personalization
Gyuejeong Lee
SAKAK Inc.

Daeyoung Choi*
The Cyber University of Korea

regulation.lee@sakak.co.kr

choidy@cuk.edu

Abstract

model by aggregating local models weighted by client sample sizes. However, this approach performs poorly with
non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) data
due to its lack of personalization capability [9, 16, 32]. This
limitation stems from how deep networks encode information. Deep networks develop pathways, where a pathway
represents a union of weights from input to output [13],
and encode class-specific information in these pathways
[1, 12, 13]. Pathways demonstrate distinct patterns across
different classes based on the class proportion [19, 25, 28].
However, FedAvg’s aggregation weighting factor, which
only considers client sample sizes, fails to reflect classspecific pathways, limiting its personalization capability.

Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative model training across distributed clients without centralizing data.
However, existing approaches such as Federated Averaging (FedAvg) often perform poorly with heterogeneous data distributions, failing to achieve personalization owing to their inability to capture class-specific information effectively.
We propose Class-wise Federated Averaging (cwFedAvg), a novel personalized FL
(PFL) framework that performs Federated Averaging for
each class, to overcome the personalization limitations of
FedAvg. cwFedAvg creates class-specific global models
via weighted aggregation of local models using class distributions, and subsequently combines them to generate personalized local models. We further propose Weight Distribution Regularizer (WDR), which encourages deep networks
to encode class-specific information efficiently by aligning empirical and approximated class distributions derived
from output layer weights, to facilitate effective class-wise
aggregation. Our experiments demonstrate the superior
performance of cwFedAvg with WDR over existing PFL
methods through efficient personalization while maintaining the communication cost of FedAvg and avoiding additional local training and pairwise computations.

This study addresses the personalization limitation of
FedAvg, motivated by class-specific pathways. We change
the aggregation weighting factor of FedAvg using the class
distributions of clients and create multiple global models
specialized for each class using an adapted weighting factor. Based on this, we propose Class-wise Federated Averaging (cwFedAvg), a class-wise extension of FedAvg that
performs Federated Averaging separately for each class.
cwFedAvg implements a two-step aggregation process:
first, we create class-specific global models by aggregating
local models weighted by their respective client and class
sample proportions; then, we generate personalized local
models by aggregating these class-specific global models
weighted by the class distribution of each client.

1. Introduction

We identify two requirements to further improve the
effectiveness of cwFedAvg: model weights (pathways)
must strongly correlate with empirical class distributions to
capture class-specific information effectively, and privacysensitive class distributions must be securely shared with
the server. We analyze how empirical class distribution affects pathways and propose Weight Distribution Regularizer (WDR) to address these requirements. WDR strengthens the correlation between empirical class distributions and
model weights by minimizing the distance between the empirical and approximated class distributions derived from
the ω2 -norms of output layer weight vectors. Additionally,
it enables privacy-preserving sharing of class distributions
using the approximated distribution as a proxy. Finally, we

Deep networks demand large-scale training data for superior performance [15]; however, data collection faces
significant challenges due to prohibitive costs and privacy constraints [11]. This limitation necessitates developing communication-efficient and privacy-preserving approaches to effectively utilize distributed data from sources
such as data silos and edge devices [16, 27]. Federated
learning (FL) addresses this challenge by enabling client
collaboration through model aggregation without collecting client data [11, 18]. A foundational approach, Federated Averaging (FedAvg) [18], creates a single global
* Corresponding author

1773

