This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuMa: A Subspace Mapping Approach for Robust and Effective Concept
Erasure in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Kien Nguyen1

Anh Tran1
Cuong Pham2,1
Qualcomm AI Research
2
Posts and Telecommunications Institute of Technology (PTIT)
1

{kienn, anhtra, pcuong}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
The rapid growth of text-to-image diffusion models has
raised concerns about their potential misuse in generating harmful or unauthorized contents. To address these
issues, several Concept Erasure methods have been proposed. However, most of them fail to achieve both robustness, i.e., the ability to robustly remove the target concept.,
and effectiveness, i.e., maintaining image quality. While
few recent techniques successfully achieve these goals for
NSFW concepts, none could handle narrow concepts such
as copyrighted characters or celebrities. Erasing these narrow concepts is critical in addressing copyright and legal
concerns. However, erasing them is challenging due to their
close distances to non-target neighboring concepts, requiring finer-grained manipulation. In this paper, we introduce
Subspace Mapping (SuMa), a novel method specifically designed to achieve both robustness and effectiveness in easing these narrow concepts. SuMa first derives a target subspace representing the concept to be erased and then neutralizes it by mapping it to a reference subspace that minimizes the distance between the two. This mapping ensures
the target concept is robustly erased while preserving image quality. We conduct extensive experiments with SuMa
across four tasks: subclass erasure, celebrity erasure, artistic style erasure, and instance erasure and compare the
results with current state-of-the-art methods. Our method
achieves image quality comparable to approaches focused
on effectiveness, while also yielding results that are on par
with methods targeting completeness.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image models (T2I) at a large scale have achieved
notable success in producing lifelike images [4, 20, 23, 26,
28, 37]. This progress is not only a result of enhanced algorithms and computing resources but also the extensive
datasets gathered from the Internet [30]. Unfortunately,

these datasets often contain copyrighted works, artistic creations [14, 31, 32], NSFW content, and personal images,
raising ethical and legal concerns [18].
Some publicly available models, like Stable Diffusion
(SD) [24], trained on vast web-scraped datasets, can generate inappropriate content, including copyrighted images,
offensive material, and deepfakes, raising serious community concerns. To address this, researchers have attempted
to filter out such content, resulting in the release of Stable Diffusion 2.0 [25]. However, this version, despite the
filtering efforts, delivers lower image quality than its predecessor, with some explicit content still slipping through.
Another approach involves post-processing filters, such as
NSFW detectors, which flag inappropriate outputs and replace them with blank images. Yet, these safeguards can be
easily bypassed once the model is publicly accessible [18].
Recent research has concentrated on fine-tuning text-toimage (T2I) diffusion models to ‘forget’ inappropriate content, giving rise to Concept Erased Models (CEMs) as a
practical approach to mitigate such issues. The first generation of these models, which we term Effective Concept
Erased Models (E-CEMs), demonstrates success in removing inappropriate content while maintaining image quality
comparable to the original outputs [2, 7, 16, 18, 19]. However, recent studies have uncovered significant vulnerabilities in these methods [22, 35, 39]. For instance, UnlearnDiff [39] identifies combinations of existing tokens within
current models capable of reconstructing the target concept,
effectively bypassing the erasing mechanism. Additionally,
CCE [22] leverages Textual Inversion [6] to derive a new token that regenerates the erased concept. Collectively, these
findings suggest that E-CEMs fail to robustly eliminate target concepts from the model’s latent space, leaving them
susceptible to regeneration through adversarial techniques.
The second generation, which we call Robust Concept Erased Models (R-CEMs), addresses vulnerabilities revealed by adversarial attacks. Early approaches, like RACE
[15], use an iterative framework based on E-CEM, identifying adversarial tokens and erasing them. AdvUnlearn

19587

