This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled Diffusion Sparks Adaptive Scene Generation
Yunsong Zhou1,2∗ Naisheng Ye1,3∗ William Ljungbergh4 Tianyu Li1 Jiazhi Yang1
Zetong Yang5 Hongzi Zhu2 Christoffer Petersson4 Hongyang Li1
1

OpenDriveLab at Shanghai AI Lab 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Zenseact 5 GAC R&D Center

3

Zhejiang University

https://opendrivelab.com/Nexus

(a) Full-sequence Denoising

(b) Next-token Prediction

Abstract
Controllable scene generation could reduce the cost of diverse data collection substantially for autonomous driving.
Prior works formulate the traffic layout generation as a
predictive progress, either by denoising entire sequences at
once or by iteratively predicting the next frame. However,
full sequence denoising hinders online reaction, while the
latter’s short-sighted next-frame prediction lacks precise
goal-state guidance. Further, the learned model struggles
to generate complex or challenging scenarios due to a large
number of safe and ordinary driving behaviors from open
datasets. To overcome these, we introduce Nexus, a decoupled scene generation framework that improves reactivity and goal conditioning by simulating both ordinary and
challenging scenarios from fine-grained tokens with independent noise states. At the core of the decoupled pipeline is
the integration of a partial noise-masking training strategy
and a noise-aware schedule that ensures timely environmental updates throughout the denoising process. To complement challenging scenario generation, we collect a dataset
consisting of complex corner cases. It covers 540 hours
of simulated data, including high-risk interactions such as
cut-in, sudden braking, and collision. Nexus achieves superior generation realism while preserving reactivity and goal
orientation, with a 40% reduction in displacement error. We
further demonstrate that Nexus improves closed-loop planning by 20% through data augmentation and showcase its
capability in safety-critical data generation.

Uniform
Noise

Reactivity

Goal Orientation

Update
Decoupled Denoising
Guide
Independent
Noise

Next Scene Chunk

Scene Chunk
Reactivity

(c) Nexus

Agent State

Goal Orientation

Env Interaction

Goal

Trajectory

Figure 1. Nexus is a noise-decoupled prediction pipeline designed
for adaptive driving scene generation, ensuring both timely reaction and goal-directed control. Unlike prior approaches that use
(a) full-sequence denoising or (b) next-token prediction, (c) Nexus
introduces independent yet structured noise states, enabling more
controlled and interactive scene generation. It leverages low-noise
goals to steer generation while incorporating environmental updates dynamically, which are captured in subsequent denoising.

1. Introduction

a cost-effective alternative for producing diverse scenarios
with rare driving behaviors [34]. Besides delivering realistic
visuals [14, 28, 58, 66], crafting reasonable and diverse traffic layouts is vital for an adaptive generator to be applicable. This drives two key requirements: 1) Reactivity, which
incorporates environmental feedback to model interactions
between agents and adjust scene evolution dynamically in
response to real-time variations in driving decisions. 2)
Goal orientation, which ensures controlled, non-stochastic
scene generation guided by predefined future states, allowing the synthesis of realistic safety-critical scenarios with a
well-defined outcome.

Diversity is crucial for autonomous driving datasets, as
data-driven solutions struggle with the scarcity of critical
long-tail scenarios. Due to the high cost of collecting rare
long-tail driving data, high-fidelity world generators offer

In this field, diffusion models [6, 59] show promising
results in generating realistic scene layouts conditioned on

∗ Equal contribution.

27760

