This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FED-PsyAU: Privacy-Preserving Micro-Expression Recognition via
Psychological AU Coordination and Dynamic Facial Motion Modeling
Jingting Li†1,2 , Yu Qian†1,3 , Lin Zhao1,2 , Su-Jing Wang*1,2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Science and Mental Health, Institute of Psychology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China
2
Department of Psychology, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
School of Computer, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, 212100, China
1

†

Equal contribution, ∗ Corresponding author (wangsujing@psych.ac.cn)

Abstract
Micro-expressions (MEs) are brief, low-intensity, often localized facial expressions. They could reveal genuine emotions individuals may attempt to conceal, valuable in contexts like criminal interrogation and psychological counseling. However, ME recognition (MER) faces challenges,
such as small sample sizes and subtle features, which hinder efficient modeling. Additionally, real-world applications encounter ME data privacy issues, leaving the task
of enhancing recognition across settings under privacy
constraints largely unexplored. To address these issues,
we propose a FED-PsyAU research framework. We begin with a psychological study on the coordination of upper and lower facial action units (AUs) to provide structured prior knowledge of facial muscle dynamics. We then
develop a DPK-GAT network that combines these psychological priors with statistical AU patterns, enabling
hierarchical learning of facial motion features from regional to global levels, effectively enhancing MER performance. Additionally, our federated learning (FL) framework advances MER capabilities across multiple clients
without data sharing, preserving privacy and alleviating the
limited-sample issue for each client. Extensive experiments
on commonly-used ME databases demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Our implementation is publicly available at https://github.com/MELABIPCAS/FED-PsyAU.git.

1. Introduction
Micro-expressions (MEs) [9], resulting from conflicts between voluntary and involuntary expressions, reveal true
emotions, making them valuable in non-contact emotion detection applications like criminal interrogation and psychological counseling. MEs are characterized by their brief duration, low intensity, localized occurrence, and occasional

14453

asymmetry [10]. These traits not only restrict large-scale
data collection and annotation but also make it challenging for deep learning networks to effectively model their
motion characteristics. Some methods focus on regions
of interest (ROIs) [4, 21, 31, 49], while others utilize attention mechanisms [3, 14, 33] and transformer-based architectures [24, 50, 57] to capture salient features. Meantime, MEs are often complex manifestations involving the
combination of multiple AUs. In contrast, individual action units (AUs) correspond to specific, anatomically-based
facial muscle movements. Focusing on AUs allows us
to model more fundamental and consistent facial appearance changes. Certain approaches use AU labels to construct adjacency matrices for graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) [24, 39]. Yet, to the best of our knowledge, these
methods often apply AU annotations directly without fully
exploiting the anatomical structure and coordinated AU dynamics, limiting the network’s understanding on ME.
To address these challenges, we leverage the theory
that distinct neural pathways control upper and lower facial movements, resulting in two different motion patterns.
Based on this, we conduct a psychological study to investigate upper/lower facial AU coordination, providing crucial
prior knowledge on structural motion relationships underpinning MEs. Using both psychological priors and datadriven AU patterns, we design a Graph Attention Network
(GAT) [47] based on dynamic prior knowledge, applied
separately to the upper and lower regions. A final global
GAT captures the topological relationships of muscle movements across the face. The resulting feature, combined with
full-face optical flow (OF), is input into a subsequent dualstream network, effectively integrating structural and dynamic information to enhance ME recognition (MER).
Besides, as mentioned earlier, although MEs have valuable applications in many privacy-sensitive contexts, the
sensitivity of biometric data makes it impractical to aggre-

