This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ToF-Splatting: Dense SLAM using Sparse Time-of-Flight Depth
and Multi-Frame Integration
Matteo Poggi 1
Valerio Cambareri 2
Andrea Conti 1,2 *
3
Martin R. Oswald
Stefano Mattoccia 1
1

University of Bologna, Italy 2 Sony DepthSensing Solutions, Belgium 3 University of Amsterdam, Netherlands

Figure 1. Overview of our ToF-Splatting method. Our method combines sparse ToF depth, multi-view geometry from a buffer of
keyframes, and monocular cues (left) to perform into a unique end-to-end dense SLAM framework enabled by a Gaussian Splatting.

Abstract
Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensors provide efficient active
depth sensing at relatively low power budgets; among
such designs, only very sparse measurements from lowresolution sensors are considered to meet the increasingly
limited power constraints of mobile and AR/VR devices.
However, such extreme sparsity levels limit the seamless
usage of ToF depth in SLAM. In this work, we propose
ToF-Splatting, the first 3D Gaussian Splatting-based SLAM
pipeline tailored for using effectively very sparse ToF input
data. Our approach improves upon the state of the art by
introducing a multi-frame integration module, which produces dense depth maps by merging cues from extremely
sparse ToF depth, monocular color, and multi-view geometry. Extensive experiments on both real and synthetic sparse
ToF datasets demonstrate the advantages of our approach,
as it achieves state-of-the-art tracking and mapping performances on reference datasets.

against a 3D scene representation (i.e., the map) and the update of this representation with data from the current camera
view. It is a fundamental task with applications in AR/VR,
robotics, and autonomous navigation [14, 18]. In recent
years, SLAM witnessed a revolution [33] following the success of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [13] as scene representations from
the adjacent field of novel view synthesis.

1. Introduction

In this paper we focus on SLAM pipelines that leverage
RGB-D video inputs, i.e., where color images and dense
depth maps are collected by synchronized, accurate color
and depth sensors. Beyond global scale, depth sensors provide accurate local geometry that grants better tracking and
mapping quality. A common choice for active depth sensing
are Time-of-Flight (ToF) cameras. Despite the increased accuracy provided by reliable depth measurements, the power
consumption and cost of such sensors constrain their adoption to high-end industrial or automotive applications. A recent trend to favor ToF sensor integration in handheld consumer devices is to reduce the specifications of ToF sensors
to provide low-resolution but more reliable depth measurements. Among other examples, LiDAR (an instance of ToF)
appears in consumer mobile phones [20] and is known to
feature up to at most 576 dots (interpolated to 256 × 192
resolution via depth completion). Other recent ToF sensors provide only up to 64 depth points but consume a re-

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [6, 8, 36,
43] entails the joint estimation of the current camera pose
∗ work started while visiting University of Amsterdam.

28344

