This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise2Score3D: Tweedie’s Approach for Unsupervised Point Cloud Denoising
Xiangbin Wei1 Yuanfeng Wang2 Ao XU3
Dongyong Sun4 Keren Li1 2 Yang Li5
1

Lingyu Zhu4
Qi Qin 1 2 6 *

Shenzhen University 2 Quantum Science Center of Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area
3
Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen 4 YunJi Intelligent Engineering Co., Ltd.
5
Nanjing University 6 City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Building on recent advances in Bayesian statistics and image denoising, we propose Noise2Score3D, a fully unsupervised framework for point cloud denoising. Noise2Score3D
learns the score function of the underlying point cloud distribution directly from noisy data, eliminating the need for
clean data during training. Using Tweedie’s formula, our
method performs denoising in a single step, avoiding the
iterative processes used in existing unsupervised methods,
thus improving both accuracy and efficiency. Additionally, we introduce Total Variation for Point Clouds as a denoising quality metric, which allows for the estimation of
unknown noise parameters. Experimental results demonstrate that Noise2Score3D achieves state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmarks among unsupervised learning methods in Chamfer distance and point-to-mesh metrics. Noise2Score3D also demonstrates strong generalization ability beyond training datasets. Our method, by addressing the generalization issue and challenge of the absence of clean data in learning-based methods, paves the
way for learning-based point cloud denoising methods in
real-world applications.

and deep learning-based approaches. Traditional methods
[3–6, 12, 13, 17, 22, 33, 37, 56] have the advantage of
lower computational complexity and less data dependency,
but they often rely on predefined geometric priors and cumbersome optimization techniques. As a consequence, it is
sometimes challenging to strike a balance between the detail preservation and denoising effectiveness.
With the continuous emergence of neural network architectures designed for point clouds [38, 39, 47, 50], deep
learning-based denoising methods have recently shown
promising performance [14, 21, 32, 35, 36, 41]. In supervised settings, training denoising models requires pairs of
noisy and clean data. However, in many real-world scenarios, obtaining clean data is difficult or impractical. Therefore, unsupervised denoising has become a compelling research area. Meanwhile, various unsupervised image denoising methods have been proposed [7, 25, 28, 28, 30] etc.
These methods are particularly important in practical applications where obtaining clean images or multiple noisy
realizations of the same image is difficult or impossible.
Inspired by this, we propose Noise2Score3D, an unsupervised point cloud denoising method that, using only
noisy point clouds as input, predicts the score function
and applies the Tweedie’s formula to estimate the clean
point positions based on the predicted score. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance among unsupervised
methods and offers improved generalization ability across
different datasets, as well as noise levels without re-training.
Noise2Score3D also achieves high efficiency, as denoising
is performed in one step with known noise parameters. Our
source-code is publicly available at here.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a method for estimating the score function
of point clouds from noisy inputs based on the amortized
residual denoising autoencoder with the KPConv network
architecture [47].
• Combining score estimation with Tweedie’s formula,
we propose an unsupervised learning framework for
point cloud denoising. Experiments demonstrate that

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of 3D scanners and depth cameras,
the capture and processing of 3D point clouds have become
commonplace [40]. However, the captured data are often
corrupted by noise due to factors like sensor errors and environmental conditions, which can significantly affects downstream tasks. Removing noise from point clouds—which
consist of discrete 3D points sampled irregularly from continuous surfaces—is a long-standing challenge due to their
irregular and unstructured nature and the difficulty in distinguishing noise from fine geometric details. Existing
work includes traditional optimization-based approaches
* Corresponding authors

25993

