This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

No More Sibling Rivalry: Debiasing Human-Object Interaction Detection
Bin Yang1∗
1 ShanghaiTech University

Yulin Zhang1∗

Hong-Yu Zhou3

Sibei Yang2†

2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University

3 School of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Detection transformers have been applied to humanobject interaction (HOI) detection, enhancing the localization and recognition of human-action-object triplets in
images. Despite remarkable progress, this study identiﬁes
a critical issue—“Toxic Siblings” bias—which hinders the
interaction decoder’s learning, as numerous similar yet distinct HOI triplets interfere with and even compete against
each other both input side and output side to the interaction
decoder. This bias arises from high confusion among sibling triplets/categories, where increased similarity paradoxically reduces precision, as one’s gain comes at the expense
of its toxic sibling’s decline. To address this, we propose
two novel debiasing learning objectives—“contrastive-thencalibration” and “merge-then-split”—targeting the input
and output perspectives, respectively. The former samples
sibling-like incorrect HOI triplets and reconstructs them
into correct ones, guided by strong positional priors. The
latter ﬁrst learns shared features among sibling categories
to distinguish them from other groups, then explicitly reﬁnes
intra-group diﬀerentiation to preserve uniqueness. Experiments show that we signiﬁcantly outperform both the baseline (+9.18% mAP on HICO-Det) and the state-of-the-art
(+3.59% mAP) across various settings.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection [28, 38, 39, 81]
aims to detect humans and objects in an image and, importantly, to recognize their interactions as human-actionobject triplets. Its capability to understand objects and relationships within scenes [10, 21, 40, 62, 75] potentially
enables diverse applications in image captioning [33, 64],
visual question answering [1, 54], robotics [13], and humancomputer interaction [24, 49]. Similar to object detection, HOI detection involves multiple target triplets per
image. To handle targets as direct set predictions, recent
∗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author is Sibei Yang.

Figure 1. Illustration of “Toxic Siblings” biases in input and
output level between highly similar HOI triplets and classes. (a)(b): Input level biases mislead HOI recognition by introducing
similar HOIs within images. For example, in (a), the interaction
between the marked person and the stool is misclassiﬁed from
standing to sitting, inﬂuenced by other nearby sibling HOIs humans
who are all seated with the stool. (c) Real confusion matrix in some
HOI categories: Output level bias misclassiﬁes rare interactions,
such as “releasing a bird” and “eating a pizza”, by confusing them
to sibling common interactions.

approaches [4, 39, 60] often employ the Detection Transformer (DETR) [5, 59, 61, 86] architecture, with sequential detectors: an object detector for identifying humans
and objects, followed by an interaction detector for recognizing interactions. In turn, compared to object detection [17, 55, 57, 59], action-object categories in HOI increase quadratically. Meanwhile, a multitude of distinct
human-action-object triplets (HOIs) may share identical human, action, or object components. Consequently, accurately recognizing subtle variations among the vast array of
similar HOIs poses a signiﬁcant challenge, often leading to

22707

