This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HccePose(BF): Predicting Front & Back Surfaces to Construct Ultra-Dense
2D-3D Correspondences for Pose Estimation
Yulin Wang
Southeast University

Mengting Hu
Southeast University

Hongli Li
Purdue University

Chen Luo*
Southeast University

yulinwang@seu.edu.cn

220240361@seu.edu.cn

li5125@purdue.edu

chenluo@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In pose estimation for seen objects, a prevalent pipeline involves using neural networks to predict dense 3D coordinates of the object surface on 2D images, which are then
used to establish dense 2D-3D correspondences. However,
current methods primarily focus on more efficient encoding
techniques to improve the precision of predicted 3D coordinates on the object’s front surface, overlooking the potential benefits of incorporating the back surface and interior
of the object. To better utilize the full surface and interior
of the object, this study predicts 3D coordinates of both the
object’s front and back surfaces and densely samples 3D
coordinates between them. This process creates ultra-dense
2D-3D correspondences, effectively enhancing pose estimation accuracy based on the Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm. Additionally, we propose Hierarchical Continuous Coordinate Encoding (HCCE) to provide a more accurate and efficient representation of front and back surface coordinates. Experimental results show that, compared
to existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on the BOP
website, the proposed approach outperforms across seven
classic BOP core datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/WangYuLin-SEU/HCCEPose.

~

~

Qf

M
Input Image

Predicted Front & Back
Surface Coordinates

Predicted Mask
3D

2D

~
Pf
~
Pm
~
Pb

~

Qb

~
Qf

~

Qm

~

RANSAC-PnP

Qb

Ultra-Dense 2D-3D Correspondences

Predicted
Object Pose

Figure 1. Pose estimation based on ultra-dense 2D-3D correspondences. For the input image, the network predicts the object mask
and the coordinates of the object’s front and back surfaces. Based
on the predicted coordinates, we perform dense sampling of 3D
coordinates between the front and back surfaces to construct ultradense 2D-3D correspondences, and use the RANSAC-PnP solver
[14] to compute the object pose. Here, Q̃f , Q̃b , and Q̃m represent
the sets of 3D coordinates for the object’s front surface, back surface, and interior of the object, respectively. Their corresponding
sets of 2D coordinates are denoted as P̃f , P̃b , and P̃m .

24] leverage neural networks to predict the 3D coordinates
of the object’s front surface from 2D images, constructing
denser 2D-3D correspondences that significantly enhance
the pose estimation accuracy achieved by PnP. However,
existing studies typically focus only on the front surface
of the object, overlooking the potential benefits of incorporating the back surface and interior of the object. Therefore, this paper proposes utilizing neural networks to simultaneously predict the coordinates of both the object’s front
and back surfaces, along with densely sampling 3D coordinates between these surfaces, further enhancing the density
of the 2D-3D correspondences. By leveraging this ultradense 2D-3D correspondence, the RANSAC-PnP solver
can achieve more precise object poses (see Fig. 1).
The accuracy of object pose estimation using the PnP algorithm heavily depends on the precision of the predicted
surface coordinates. To enhance the accuracy of both front
and back surface coordinate predictions, this paper proposes

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, pose estimation
[1, 2] holds significant value across various applications, including automated product picking in warehouses [3], sheet
metal assembly in industrial settings [4], and object tracking in virtual reality [5]. In pose estimation for seen objects,
some studies [6–13] predefine 3D keypoints on the surface
of a given object and use neural networks to predict the
2D projections of them on 2D images, establishing sparse
2D-3D correspondences. These correspondences are then
used with the Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm [14] to
compute the object pose. Subsequently, some methods [15–
* Corresponding author.

7166

