This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plug-in Feedback Self-adaptive Attention in CLIP for
Training-free Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Zhixiang Chi1 ,

Yanan Wu2 , Li Gu3 , Huan Liu4 , Ziqiang Wang3 , Yang Zhang5
Yang Wang3 , Konstantinos N Plataniotis1
1
University of Toronto 2 China Agricultural University 3 Concordia University
4
McMaster University 5 Beijing Jiaotong University
zhixiang.chi@mail.utoronto.ca https://github.com/chi-chi-zx/FSA

Abstract

Intermediate improvement

CLIP exhibits strong visual-textual alignment but struggle
with open-vocabulary segmentation due to poor localization. Prior methods enhance spatial coherence by modifying intermediate attention. But, this coherence isn’t consistently propagated to the final output due to subsequent
operations such as projections. Additionally, intermediate
attention lacks direct interaction with text representations,
such semantic discrepancy limits the full potential of CLIP.
In this work, we propose a training-free, feedback-driven
self-adaptive framework that adapts output-based patchlevel correspondences back to the intermediate attention.
The output predictions, being the culmination of the model’s
processing, encapsulate the most comprehensive visual and
textual semantics about each patch. Our approach enhances semantic consistency between internal representations and final predictions by leveraging the model’s outputs
as a stronger spatial coherence prior. We design key modules, including attention isolation, confidence-based pruning for sparse adaptation, and adaptation ensemble, to effectively feedback the output coherence cues. Our method
functions as a plug-in module, seamlessly integrating into
four state-of-the-art approaches with three backbones (ViTB, ViT-L, ViT-H). We further validate our framework across
multiple attention types (Q-K, self-self, and Proxy augmented with MAE, SAM, and DINO). Our approach consistently improves their performance across eight benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation seeks to localize
segments and align visual features with novel class descriptions [6, 49, 53]. CLIP models [9, 39], trained on web-scale
datasets [40, 52], have demonstrated remarkable zero-shot
performance in open-vocabulary tasks due to strong visualtext alignment [28, 39, 58]. However, adapting CLIP for

better segmentation
Text features

CLIP
Attentions
Q-K
Proxy
Self-Self

Patch
predictions

Adapted outputs
CLIP
Attentions
Q-K
Proxy
Self-Self
Attention
adaptation
Feedback loop

Text features
Patch
predictions

Feedback output
semantic cues

Figure 1. Comparison with the existing training-free methods.
Top: Prior works refine intermediate attention but face limitations:
(1) improvements may not propagate to final segmentation; (2) attention lacks direct class information. Bottom: We introduce a
feedback-driven self-adaptive mechanism that reintegrates semantic outputs with visual and textual cues into CLIP. Our approach is
orthogonal to existing methods and serves as a plug-in.

semantic segmentation remains challenging [64] since its
pretraining primarily contrasts global image-text representations, limiting fine-grained localization and causing spatial misalignment in patch-level features [27, 44].
Previous efforts to enhance visual localization have
primarily focused on fine-tuning CLIP for segmentation
tasks [7, 37, 45, 51, 59]. However, fine-tuning compromises CLIP’s robust generalization [12, 13, 47, 64]. Consequently, recent studies have shifted toward a training-free
paradigm, addressing the factors contributing to localization degradation in CLIP. ClearCLIP [26] identifies residual
connections as a major source of noisy segmentation, while

22815

