This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preacher: Paper-to-Video Agentic System
Jingwei Liu1,2 * Ling Yang6† Hao Luo2,3 Fan Wang2 Hongyan Li1,4,5 ‡ Mengdi Wang6 ‡
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba group, 310023, Hangzhou, China
3
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
PKU-Wuhan Institude of Artificial Intelligence
6
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University

(a)
“AQUAPORINS IN PLANTS”

Research
Paper

Maurel C, Boursiac Y, Luu D-T,
Santoni V, Shahzad Z, Verdoucq L.
Physiol Rev 95: 1321–1358 (2015).

(b)

…

Cai, S., Qi, K., Yang, S. et al.
Nature
Nature, 19 December (2024).

…

(a)

(c)

“A reinforced lunar
dynamo recorded by
Chang'e-6 farside basalt”

…

…

“On the Existence of
Hermitian-Yang-Mills Connections
in Stable Vector Bundles ”
K. Uhlenbeck. ,. S.T. Yau.
Commun.Pure Appl.Math.,
Vol. XXXIX S257-293 (1986).

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

86s

(b)
Video
Abstract 89s
(c)
69s

Figure 1. Preacher can generate long video abstract conditioning on input paper with diverse topics.

Abstract
The paper-to-video task converts a research paper into a
structured video abstract, distilling key concepts, methods,
and conclusions into an accessible, well-organized format.
While state-of-the-art video generation models demonstrate
potential, they are constrained by limited context windows,
rigid video duration constraints, limited stylistic diversity,
and an inability to represent domain-specific knowledge. To
address these limitations, we introduce Preacher, the first
paper-to-video agentic system. Preacher employs a topdown approach to decompose, summarize, and reformulate
the paper, followed by bottom-up video generation, synthesizing diverse video segments into a coherent abstract.

To align cross-modal representations, we define key scenes
and introduce a Progressive Chain of Thought (P-CoT) for
granular, iterative planning. Preacher successfully generates high-quality video abstracts across five research fields,
demonstrating expertise beyond current video generation
models. Code will be released at: https://github.com/GenVerse/Paper2Video

1. Introduction

* Work done during an internship at DAMO Academy.
† Contributed equally. Ling Yang, yangling0818@163.com

According to Scopus data * , over three million scientific papers have been published since 2022, with an annual rise.
As the volume of academic publications continues to grow,
the need for effective dissemination and visibility has become increasingly critical. Among various dissemination
strategies, video abstracts [18] offer a compelling means of

‡ Corresponding Authors: Hongyan Li, Mengdi Wang

* https://www.elsevier.com/products/scopus

17129

