This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QR-LoRA: Efficient and Disentangled Fine-tuning via QR Decomposition for
Customized Generation
Jiahui Yang1,2,3 Yongjia Ma3 Donglin Di2 Jianxun Cui*1
Hao Li3 Wei Chen3 Yan Xie3 Xun Yang4 Wangmeng Zuo1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Chongqing Research Institute of HIT 2 Li Auto
Single Content Image

[s]

Cnt

"A [c] dog"
Single Style Image

USTC

"[c] rendered
in [s] style"

SDXL

❆

3

[c]
SD3

❆
🔥

QR-LoRA
FLUX.1 dev
Sty

"A cat in [s] style"
Figure 1. Given a single content and a single style image, we present QR-LoRA, a method to achieve efficient and disentangled control
of content and style features through orthogonal decomposition. Our approach reduces trainable parameters while maintaining superior
disentanglement properties, enabling flexible manipulation of visual attributes with enhanced initialization. Best viewed with zoom-in.

Abstract
Existing text-to-image models often rely on parameter fine-tuning techniques such as Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) to customize visual attributes. However, when combining multiple LoRA models for content-style fusion tasks,
unstructured modifications of weight matrices often lead to
undesired feature entanglement between content and style
attributes. We propose QR-LoRA, a novel fine-tuning framework leveraging QR decomposition for structured parameter updates that effectively separate visual attributes. Our
key insight is that the orthogonal Q matrix naturally minimizes interference between different visual features, while
the upper triangular R matrix efficiently encodes attributespecific transformations. Our approach fixes both Q and R
matrices while only training an additional task-specific ∆R

matrix. This structured design reduces trainable parameters to half of conventional LoRA methods and supports
effective merging of multiple adaptations without crosscontamination due to the strong disentanglement properties
between ∆R matrices. Experiments demonstrate that QRLoRA achieves superior disentanglement in content-style
fusion tasks, establishing a new paradigm for parameterefficient, disentangled fine-tuning in generative models. The
project page is available at: https://luna-ai-lab.
github.io/QR-LoRA/

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author

Feature disentanglement and control in generative models
have been a long-standing challenge, particularly in the
domain of image synthesis where precise manipulation of
visual attributes is crucial for practical applications. Re-

17587

