This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is Tracking really more challenging in First Person Egocentric Vision?
Matteo Dunnhofer1,2
1

Zaira Manigrasso1

University of Udine, Italy

2

Christian Micheloni1

York University, Canada

Figure 1. We isolate the real impact of first person vision (FPV) in object tracking evaluation. (a) Previous benchmarks claimed
the challenges of tracking in FPV by comparing algorithm performance on third person vision (TPV) datasets having mismatched object
categories and contexts. This inconsistency makes it difficult to isolate the true impact of the FPV viewpoint. (b) This paper addresses this
problem by directly evaluating object tracking in synchronized FPV and TPV videos of the same human-object activity.

level vision-based assistive systems, including 3D object localization [17, 45, 61], episodic memory [15, 37], and handobject interaction understanding [6, 10, 14].

Abstract
Visual object tracking and segmentation are becoming fundamental tasks for understanding human activities in egocentric vision. Recent research has benchmarked state-ofthe-art methods and concluded that first person egocentric
vision presents challenges compared to previously studied
domains. However, these claims are based on evaluations
conducted across significantly different scenarios. Many of
the challenging characteristics attributed to egocentric vision are also present in third person videos of human-object
activities. This raises a critical question: how much of the
observed performance drop stems from the unique first person viewpoint inherent to egocentric vision versus the domain of human-object activities? To address this question,
we introduce a new benchmark study designed to disentangle such factors. Our evaluation strategy enables a more
precise separation of challenges related to the first person perspective from those linked to the broader domain
of human-object activity understanding. By doing so, we
provide deeper insights into the true sources of difficulty in
egocentric tracking and segmentation, facilitating more targeted advancements on this task.

Despite its promising applications, 2D visual object
tracking remains an open problem in egocentric vision. This
limitation stems from the early stage of research in this domain, where the unique challenges of this problem are not
yet fully understood. Indeed, recent benchmarking studies
[6, 10, 49] scratched the surface of the problem by evaluating generalistic state-of-the-art methodologies on a set
of egocentric videos to assess their effectiveness. These
studies concluded that object tracking in FPV poses greater
challenges than the more general settings found in established benchmarks [13, 20, 28, 43, 55], and that current
tracking models lack the necessary mechanisms to effectively handle these difficulties.
A significant issue with these claims lies in the fact that
the supporting comparisons have been conducted in vastly
different domains, with limited alignment in terms of object categories, motion patterns, interactions, and contextual characteristics. For example, the TREK-150 [10] and
VISOR [6] benchmarks were introduced to evaluate visual object tracking (VOT) and video object segmentation
(VOS) algorithms exclusively within kitchen environments,
whereas the EgoTracks [49] benchmark, although covering a broader range of object categories and scenarios, still
lacks alignment with the objects and contexts typically featured in widely used benchmarks [13, 20, 28, 40, 43, 53].
Many works in egocentric vision [10, 15, 16, 49] refer
to these datasets as representations of third person vision
(TPV) scenarios, where target objects are passively ob-

1. Introduction
Recent studies [6, 10, 49] have highlighted the importance
of visual object tracking and segmentation [28, 43, 53] for
understanding activities in egocentric first person vision
(FPV). The instance-based localization of objects within 2D
egocentric video frames is an intermediate task for high-

5879

