This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VCA: Video Curious Agent for Long Video Understanding
Zeyuan Yang†
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Delin Chen†
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

yangzeyuan@umass.edu

delinchen@umass.edu

Xueyang Yu
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Maohao Shen
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

xueyangyu@umass.edu

maohao@mit.edu

Chuang Gan
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
ganchuang1990@gmail.com

GPT-4o

Qwen2-VL

Abstract

Ours

Ours

Qwen2-VL CoT
VideoTree

VideoAgent

Accuracy (%)

Accuracy (%)

Long video understanding poses unique challenges due
to their temporal complexity and low information density. Recent works address this task by sampling numerous frames or incorporating auxiliary tools using LLMs,
both of which result in high computational costs. In this
work, we introduce a curiosity-driven video agent with
self-exploration capability, dubbed as “VCA”. Built upon
VLMs, VCA autonomously navigates video segments and
efficiently builds a comprehensive understanding of complex video sequences. Instead of directly sampling frames,
VCA employs a tree-search structure to explore video segments and collect frames. Rather than relying on external
feedback or reward, VCA leverages VLM’s self-generated
intrinsic reward to guide its exploration, enabling it to capture the most crucial information for reasoning. Experimental results on multiple long video benchmarks demonstrate
our approach’s superior effectiveness and efficiency.

GPT-4o
GPT-4o
VideoTree
VideoAgent
VideoAgent

GPU Hours

Number of Frames

Figure 1. Accuracy v.s. Computation Cost and Number of
Observed Frames. Compared to baselines, our agent demonstrates superior performance with higher efficiency (observing
fewer frames and incurring comparable or lower computational
cost) on EgoSchema, using both GPT-4o and Qwen2-VL-72B.

1. Introduction

troduce 3D operations [8, 57]. Recent approach [32, 75]
leverages the long-sequence reasoning capabilities of Large
Language Models (LLMs) [1, 64] for long-form video question answering, often by converting videos into densely
and uniformly sampled frames [33, 38, 55]. However, this
approach is usually inefficient due to the inherent imbalance and varying information density across video segments [61, 78]. Some segments are rich in critical details
necessary for answering questions, while others contain
only trivial information [66]. Uniform sampling [49, 60],
which might focus on redundant frames that increase the
computational burden and may overlook frames with essential information, often fails to efficiently utilize the video’s
dynamic structure for question answering [17, 62].
To address this limitation, recent approaches [29, 34, 36,
68] employ complex architectures [63, 85] or specialized
preprocessing techniques [44, 65] to improve the efficiency

There is a growing demand for developing long-form video
understanding techniques [48, 69] capable of extracting
valuable information from extended visual narratives, such
as surveillance footage, documentaries, and instructional
videos. Analyzing these videos [53, 71], which can range
from minutes to hours, requires models that can process
multimodal data and perform reasoning over extremely long
sequences [4, 31, 60].
Previous works commonly utilize two-stream networks
to capture spatial and temporal information [18, 19] or in† Equal Contribution

20168

