This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoRAverse: A Submodular Framework to Retrieve Diverse Adapters for
Diffusion Models
Mert Sonmezer∗
Middle East Technical University

Matthew Zheng
Virginia Tech

Pinar Yanardag
Virginia Tech

mert.sonmezer@metu.edu.tr

matthewz03@vt.edu

pinary@vt.edu

A full moon rising above a mountain at night

A modern racecar

A cup

SD v1.5

Ours

SD v1.5

Ours

An origami ﬂower

Figure 1. Diverse Adapter Selection. LoRAverse enhances image diversity by employing a submodular algorithm to select a diverse
and representative set of LoRA adapters. This approach begins by clustering the adapters based on their semantic meanings. From these
clusters, the algorithm selects models that not only maximize diversity but also maintain strong alignment with the user-provided prompt,
ensuring both variety and relevance in the generated images.

Abstract
Low-rank Adaptation (LoRA) models have revolutionized
the personalization of pre-trained diffusion models by enabling fine-tuning through low-rank, factorized weight matrices specifically optimized for attention layers. These
models facilitate the generation of highly customized content across a variety of objects, individuals, and artistic
styles without the need for extensive retraining. Despite the
availability of over 100K LoRA adapters on platforms like
Civit.ai, users often face challenges in navigating, selecting, and effectively utilizing the most suitable adapters due
to their sheer volume, diversity, and lack of structured organization. This paper addresses the problem of selecting

the most relevant and diverse LoRA models from this vast
database by framing the task as a combinatorial optimization problem and proposing a novel submodular framework.
Our quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate
that our method generates diverse outputs across a wide
range of domains.

1. Introduction

* This work was conducted while the author was a research intern at
Virginia Tech.

LoRA [35] models have emerged as a powerful technique
for model personalization. They can efficiently fine-tune
pre-trained diffusion models without the need for extensive
retraining or significant computational resources. They are
designed to optimize low-rank, factorized weight matrices
specifically for the attention layers and are typically used in
conjunction with personalization methods such as Dream-

17879

