This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E GOA DAPT: Adaptive Multisensory Distillation and Policy Learning
for Efficient Egocentric Perception
Sanjoy Chowdhury1,2,† Subrata Biswas2,3† Sayan Nag4 Tushar Nagarajan5
Calvin Murdock2 Ishwarya Ananthabhotla2 Yijun Qian2
Vamsi Krishna Ithapu2 Dinesh Manocha1 Ruohan Gao1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Meta Reality Labs 3 Worcester Polytechnic Institute
4
University of Toronto 5 FAIR, Meta AI
{sanjoyc, dmanocha, rhgao}@umd.edu

{tusharn, cmurdock, ishwarya, ithapu}@meta.com

sayan.nag@mail.utoronto.ca

sbiswas@wpi.edu

Abstract
Modern perception models, particularly those designed
for multisensory egocentric tasks, have achieved remarkable performance but often come with substantial computational costs. These high demands pose challenges for
real-world deployment, especially in resource-constrained
environments. In this paper, we introduce E GOA DAPT, a
framework that adaptively performs cross-modal distillation and policy learning to enable efficient inference across
different egocentric perception tasks, including egocentric
action recognition, active speaker localization, and behavior anticipation. Our proposed policy module is adaptable
to task-specific action spaces, making it broadly applicable. Experimental results on three challenging egocentric
datasets EPIC-Kitchens, EasyCom, and Aria Everyday Activities demonstrate that our method significantly enhances
efficiency, reducing GMACs by up to 89.09%, parameters
up to 82.02%, and energy up to 9.6×, while still on-par
and in many cases outperforming, the performance of corresponding state-of-the-art models.

Figure 1. We introduce E GOA DAPT, a unified framework combining cross-modal distillation and policy learning for efficient
multisensory egocentric perception. It optimizes the use of constituent modalities for efficient inference and is adaptable to various egocentric perception tasks, including action recognition, active speaker localization, and behavior anticipation.

1. Introduction

source constraints, but also to enable faster response times,
reduced latency, and improved overall system performance,
all of which are crucial for delivering an engaging and interactive AR/VR experience.
Despite significant progress in egocentric video understanding [7, 10, 12, 21, 22, 27, 33, 40, 42, 52, 53, 55, 58],
most current approaches still rely on computationally expensive clip-based models, similar to those used for conventional third-person view videos [50, 54, 77]. While effective in analyzing and understanding users and their environments, these models often fail to account for the necessity of resource efficiency, particularly in scenarios where
power, memory, or thermal constraints are limiting factors.
A key observation is that many egocentric perception
models process multiple sensory modalities such as RGB

Recent developments in augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) are revolutionizing the way people interact
with the digital world. These systems often rely on the ability to recognize user behaviors such as eye gaze, head motion, and hand-object interactions and understand the surrounding contexts using multisensory data streams. However, achieving real-time inference in such applications remains a challenge due to the substantial computational demands of state-of-the-art egocentric perception models. Efficient computation is essential not only for managing re† Work done during an internship at Meta.

10741

