This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contact-Aware Refinement of Human Pose Pseudo-Ground Truth
via Bioimpedance Sensing
Maria-Paola Forte Nikos Athanasiou* Giulia Ballardini* Jan Ulrich Bartels
Katherine J. Kuchenbecker Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Stuttgart and Tübingen, Germany
{forte,ballardini,jub,kjk}@is.mpg.de

No Contact

Self-Contact

No Contact

Self-Contact

Multi-HMR
with BioTUCH Multi-HMR

RGB Image

Self-Contact

{nikos.athanasiou,black}@tue.mpg.de

Figure 1. Human pose estimation methods struggle to reconstruct self-contact along the camera’s viewing axis. BioTUCH uses sharp
changes in the bioimpedance signal measured between the wrists to estimate the beginning and end of such contacts. For all frames between
these points (red segments of the signal), BioTUCH optimizes the results of off-the-shelf methods (such as Multi-HMR) to create plausible
contact. Five selected poses (at the indicated time points) and their reconstructions are shown, with zoomed-in views of the contact regions.

Abstract

initializes the pose using an off-the-shelf estimator and introduces contact-aware pose optimization during measured
self-contact: reprojection error and deviations from the input estimate are minimized while enforcing vertex proximity
constraints. We validate our approach using a new dataset
of synchronized RGB video, bioimpedance measurements,
and 3D motion capture. Testing with three input pose estimators, we demonstrate an average of 11.7% improvement
in reconstruction accuracy. We also present a miniature
wearable bioimpedance sensor that enables efficient largescale collection of contact-aware training data for improving pose estimation and generation using BioTUCH. Code
and data are available at biotuch.is.tue.mpg.de

Capturing accurate 3D human pose in the wild would provide valuable data for training pose estimation and motion generation methods. While video-based estimation approaches have become increasingly accurate, they often fail
in common scenarios involving self-contact, such as a hand
touching the face. In contrast, wearable bioimpedance
sensing can cheaply and unobtrusively measure groundtruth skin-to-skin contact. Consequently, we propose a
novel framework that combines visual pose estimators with
bioimpedance sensing to capture the 3D pose of people by
taking self-contact into account. Our method, BioTUCH,
* Equal contribution.

5071

