This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HouseCrafter: Lifting Floorplans to 3D Scenes with 2D Diffusion Models
Yiwen Chen1 , Hieu T. Nguyen1 , Vikram Voleti2 , Varun Jampani2 , Huaizu Jiang1
1
Northeastern University, 2 Stability AI
{chen.yiwe, nguyen.trungh, h.jiang}@northeastern.edu, {vikram.voleti, varun.jampani}@stability.ai

Figure 1. Overview of HouseCrafter: Our method lifts a 2D floorplan into a 3D scene using diffusion models, ensuring realistic geometry
and structure. Top: Camera poses (triangles N) are sampled based on the floorplan. A 2D diffusion model is then used to generate RGB-D
images batch-by-batch, where the generation of the k-th batch (red) is conditioned on the nearby poses (blue) from the previous batch and
the floorplan. The RGB-D images are then fused into a 3D mesh. Bottom: Our method generates a scene in explicit mesh form, which
allows users to interact with the environment.

Abstract
We introduce HouseCrafter, a novel approach that can lift
a 2D floorplan into a complete large 3D indoor scene (e.g.,
a house). Our key insight is to adapt a 2D diffusion model,
which is trained on web-scale images, to generate consistent
multi-view color (RGB) and depth (D) images across different locations of the scene. Specifically, the RGB-D images
are generated autoregressively in batches along sampled
locations derived from the floorplan. At each step, the diffusion model conditions on previously generated images to
produce new images at nearby locations. The global floorplan and attention design in the diffusion model ensures the
consistency of the generated images, from which a 3D scene
can be reconstructed. Through extensive evaluation on the
3D-FRONT dataset, we demonstrate that HouseCrafter can

generate high-quality house-scale 3D scenes. Ablation studies also validate the effectiveness of different design choices.
We will release our code and model weights.

1. Introduction
Interactable 3D environments are crucial for delivering truly
immersive user experiences in AR, VR, gaming, and beyond.
Typically, this process has been labor-intensive, demanding
meticulous effort from skilled human artists and designers,
especially for intricate indoor settings with numerous furniture pieces and decorative objects. The development of
automated tools for generating realistic 3D scenes can significantly improve this process, streamlining the creation of
complex virtual environments, which enables faster iteration
cycles and empowers novice users to bring their creative

28440

