This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SFUOD: Source-Free Unknown Object Detection
Keon-Hee Park
Kyung Hee University
Yongin, Republic of Korea

Seun-An Choe
Kyung Hee University
Yongin, Republic of Korea

Gyeong-Moon Park*
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea

pgh2874@khu.ac.kr

dragoon0905@khu.ac.kr

gm-park@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Source-free object detection adapts a detector pre-trained
on a source domain to an unlabeled target domain without
requiring access to labeled source data. While this setting
is practical as it eliminates the need for the source dataset
during domain adaptation, it operates under the restrictive
assumption that only pre-defined objects from the source
domain exist in the target domain. This closed-set setting
prevents the detector from detecting undefined objects. To
ease this assumption, we propose Source-Free Unknown
Object Detection (SFUOD), a novel scenario which enables the detector to not only recognize known objects
but also detect undefined objects as unknown objects. To
this end, we propose CollaPAUL (Collaborative tuning and
Principal Axis-based Unknown Labeling), a novel framework for SFUOD. Collaborative tuning enhances knowledge adaptation by integrating target-dependent knowledge
from the auxiliary encoder with source-dependent knowledge from the pre-trained detector through a cross-domain
attention mechanism. Additionally, principal axes-based
unknown labeling assigns pseudo-labels to unknown objects by estimating objectness via principal axes projection
and confidence scores from model predictions. The proposed CollaPAUL achieves state-of-the-art performances
on SFUOD benchmarks, and extensive experiments validate
its effectiveness. Our code is available at SFUOD.

Figure 1. Description of the proposed SFUOD. Yellow and skyblue boxes denote known objects (e.g., “Car”, “Bus”). Red boxes
denote unknown objects (e.g., “Person”, “Bicycle”).

jects not defined in the source domain. In real-world applications (e.g., self-driving), detectors must recognize unknown objects to handle unforeseen events (e.g., identifying
pedestrians or animals on the road to prevent accidents), but
SFOD limits the detector from detecting unknown objects.
To address the limitation of detecting unknown objects
in source-free object detection, we propose a novel SourceFree Unknown Object Detection (SFUOD) scenario. The
SFUOD scenario requires not only adapting a sourcetrained detector to the target domain for known objects but
also detecting undefined objects as unknown. As shown
in Figure 1, traditional source-free object detection adapts
a detector to recognize only pre-defined objects from the
source domain (e.g., “Car”, “Bus”). In contrast, the detector can also detect unknown objects (e.g., “Person”, “Bicycle”) in our new scenario. Since unknown objects frequently appear in the real world, the proposed SFUOD is
a realistic and challenging scenario as it simultaneously requires knowledge transfer for known objects and detecting
unknown objects.
In the SFUOD scenario, existing SFOD methods struggle with both adapting to known objects and detecting unknown ones. Existing approaches like DRU [14] use the
Mean Teacher (MT) framework [28], where a teacher model
generates pseudo-labels for a student model, and the teacher
is updated via exponential moving average (EMA) [28]
to mitigate domain shift by transferring source-dependent
knowledge into the target domain. However, since the
teacher model trained in the source domain lacks knowledge

1. Introduction
Domain adaptive object detection [1, 5, 6, 12, 16, 29] aims
to transfer knowledge from a source to a target domain and
is widely studied for its practical applications. Especially,
source-free object detection (SFOD) [3, 10, 14, 15, 18, 23,
30] focuses on adapting source-trained models to the unlabeled target domain without requiring access to labeled
source data. SFOD is a realistic scenario that addresses data
privacy and storage constraints. However, SFOD assumes
a closed-set scenario, where the source and target domains
share the same set of class labels, struggling to detect ob* Corresponding author.

3499

