This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleSRN: Scene Text Image Super-Resolution with Text Style Embedding
Shengrong Yuan1 , Runmin Wang1, ,* Ke Hao1 , Xuqi Ma1 , Changxin Gao2 , Li Liu3 , Nong Sang2
1
School of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Electronic Science, National University of Defense Technology
{shengrongyuan, runminwang, ke, xqma}@hunnu.edu.cn, {cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn, liliu@oulu.fi

Abstract

BICUBIC

Scene text image super-resolution (STISR) focuses on enhancing the clarity and readability of low-resolution text
images. Existing methods often rely on text probability distribution priors derived from text recognizers to guide the
super-resolution process. While effective in capturing general structural information of text, these priors lack the ability to preserve specific text style details, such as font, stereoscopic effect and spatial transformation, leading to a loss
of visual quality and stylistic consistency. To address these
limitations, we propose a Style embedding-based scene text
image Super-Resolution Network (StyleSRN), which introduces a text style embedding mechanism to preserve and
enhance text style features during the super-resolution process. The proposed architecture includes Style Enhancement Blocks for capturing multi-scale cross-channel dependencies, and Style Content Fusion Blocks that effectively integrates text content with style information, ensuring that
the structure and style of the restored text are not distorted. Furthermore, we introduce a Text Style Loss based
on the Gram matrix to supervise the reconstruction process
at the style level, thereby maintaining the stylistic consistency of the restored text images. Extensive experiments on
the TextZoom dataset and five scene text recognition benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method. Code is
available at: https://github.com/Yuanssr/StyleSRN.

1. Introduction
Scene text images contain both visual and linguistic modalities, which can be extracted and analyzed to enhance various applications, including autonomous driving [32], visual question answering [1], and card recognition [13], etc.
However, due to the limitations of imaging conditions of
sensing devices, such as shooting jitter and low-focus cameras, scene text images often suffer from varying degrada* Corresponding author

TSRN
TATT
LEMMA
Ours

HR

Figure 1. Comparison of super-resolution results between previous methods and ours. Methods without text priors such as
TSRN [30] retains less style information, while text priors-guided
methods such as TATT [17] and LEMMA [7] almost completely
lose the style information.

tion, including blur, distortion, etc. Unlike general object
images, scene text images possess more complex character structures and fine-grained stroke-level details, making
even slight degradation challenging to recognize. Such lowresolution scene text images significantly hinder the performance of downstream tasks such as scene text detection,
optical character recognition, and scene text recognition.
Thus, restoring both the visual style quality and character
structures of these degraded images is crucial.
In recent years, many super-resolution methods specifically designed for scene text images have used the unique
properties of text to improve restoration. Early approaches
primarily focused on extracting sequential information from
text images. Wang et al. [30] proposed a sequential residual
block to capture the inherent sequential nature of text images. Chen et al. [2] introduced a text-focus loss function
that emphasizes character positions and content, thereby
improving recognition accuracy. More recently, methods
that incorporate deep character classification information
obtained from text recognizers have become the norm.
Ma et al. [18] highlighted the benefits of integrating text

18693

