This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InvRGB+L: Inverse Rendering of Complex Scenes with
Unified Color and LiDAR Reflectance Modeling
Xiaoxue Chen1,2

Bhargav Chandaka2 Chih-Hao Lin2 Ya-Qin Zhang1 David Forsyth2
Hao Zhao1,3 Shenlong Wang2
1
AIR, Tsinghua University 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 3 BAAI
Inputs

Inverse Rendering
Normal

Scene Editing

Rough

Albedo Reflectance

Videos

LiDAR (w/ Intensity)
Albedo
Normal

Night Simulation

Relighting

Object Insertion

Night Simulation

Relighting

Object Insertion

Normal
Rough

Albedo Reflectance
Reflectance
Rough

Videos

LiDAR (w/ Intensity)

Figure 1. Overview: InvRGB+L takes RGB and LiDAR sequences as input and outputs a 3D scene with high-fidelity geometry, consistent
albedo across RGB and LiDAR spectra, and roughness. Our representation enables photorealistic object insertion and night simulations.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present InvRGB+L, a novel inverse rendering model that
reconstructs large, relightable, and dynamic scenes from a
single RGB+LiDAR sequence. Conventional inverse graphics methods rely primarily on RGB observations and use
LiDAR mainly for geometric information, often resulting
in suboptimal material estimates due to visible light interference. We find that LiDAR’s intensity values—captured
with active illumination in a different spectral range—offer
complementary cues for robust material estimation under
variable lighting. Inspired by this, InvRGB+L leverages
LiDAR intensity cues to overcome challenges inherent in
RGB-centric inverse graphics through two key innovations:
(1) a novel physics-based LiDAR shading model and (2)
RGB–LiDAR material consistency losses. The model produces novel-view RGB and LiDAR renderings of urban and
indoor scenes and supports relighting, night simulations,
and dynamic object insertions—achieving results that surpass current state-of-the-art methods in both scene-level urban inverse rendering and LiDAR simulation.

Inverse rendering is challenging because image observations are wildly ambiguous. The same image can be interpreted as a yellow wall lit by white light or as a wall that
is half yellow and half white (Fig. 2); a dark region might
be interpreted as a wet area or as a cast shadow. Errors like
these in material recovery result in scene renderings that can
be jarringly bad. Even strong material priors only partially
mitigate these ambiguities (Fig. 2, middle).

27176

LiDAR intensity provides strong cues for inverse rendering. LiDAR sensors emit laser pulses that reflect off surfaces. As is well known, time-of-flight yields geometry.
We demonstrate the returned power (analogous to RGB intensity, Fig.2) provides rich surface material information.
LiDAR derived material cues are extremely robust to wide
changes in illumination conditions, because there is very
little cross-talk between the narrow-band infrared used by
LiDAR and typical illuminants indoors and outdoors. But
material properties change very slowly with wavelength. So
LiDAR returned power can, for example, tell that the albedo
of the wall in Fig 2 is the same in the darker and lighter regions. We show that LiDAR intensity is a powerful cue that
disentangles material properties and illumination effects in
ways that complement SOTA methods for RGB data.

