This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discontinuity-aware Normal Integration for Generic Central Camera Models
Francesco Milano1⋆

Manuel López-Antequera2
1

Roland Siegwart1

Robert Thiel2

ETH Zurich, 2 Meta

Abstract
Recovering a 3D surface from its surface normal map, a
problem known as normal integration, is a key component
for photometric shape reconstruction techniques such as
shape-from-shading and photometric stereo. The vast majority of existing approaches for normal integration handle
only implicitly the presence of depth discontinuities and are
limited to orthographic or ideal pinhole cameras. In this
paper, we propose a novel formulation that allows modeling
discontinuities explicitly and handling generic central cameras. Our key idea is based on a local planarity assumption,
that we model through constraints between surface normals
and ray directions. Compared to existing methods, our approach more accurately approximates the relation between
depth and surface normals, achieves state-of-the-art results
on the standard normal integration benchmark, and is the
first to directly handle generic central camera models.

1. Introduction
The problem of reconstructing a 3D surface from its surface normal map, also known as normal integration, has
long been studied in computer vision. Its importance lies in
its several applications for shape reconstruction, in particular as a necessary step to recover the surface from the output
of photometric stereo [34] or shape-from-shading [20] techniques, which estimate normals from image shading.
Classically, normal integration has been studied predominantly under the assumption that the surface to be reconstructed is smooth [28]. This assumption, however,
breaks in the presence of depth discontinuities, which naturally arise due to occlusions. While a number of methods for discontinuity-preserving integration have been proposed, these tend to introduce simplifying assumptions on
the statistics of the discontinuities [3, 29] or model their
magnitude only implicitly [1, 7, 35]. Moreover, the vast majority of the existing methods for discontinuity-preserving
normal integration tackle the case of orthographic projection [3, 29, 36]; an exception is represented by the recently
⋆ Work mainly performed during an internship at Meta.

Naina Dhingra2

proposed methods of BiNI [7] and of Kim et al. [24], which
allow handling normals observed by an ideal pinhole camera, which more closely resembles real-world scenarios.
All the leading methods are derived from partial differential equations (PDEs) which relate normals to the depth
map describing the surface, and typically base their formulation on functionals that discretely approximate these
PDEs [7, 21, 24, 28]. In this work, we propose a novel
formulation not derived from differential constraints, but
based instead on the simple assumption that the surface is
composed of local planes separated by discontinuities. We
model this assumption through conditions between the surface normal and the ray direction associated with each pixel.
We show experimentally that this results in a more accurate
approximation of the ground-truth relation between depth
and normals. Additionally, by relying on ray directions, our
approach is to the best of our knowledge the first to directly
handle generic central camera models, thereby extending
the case of an ideal pinhole. Furthermore, our mathematical formulation explicitly takes discontinuities into account.
In order to recover both the depth map and the discontinuity values, we adopt an iterative optimization process
based on the bilateral weighting scheme of BiNI. In particular, we adapt their semi-smooth assumption to our formulation and extend its optimization scheme to iteratively
estimate depth and discontinuities. We additionally provide
important novel insights on the optimization convergence,
in light of our formulation. Experimental results show that
our method captures discontinuities more accurately than
existing methods and sets a new state of the art in the standard normal integration benchmark [31]. We provide extensive ablations on the hyperparameters of our method and
further demonstrate it on normal maps from non-ideal pinhole cameras and real-world data, showing effective surface
reconstruction also under these conditions.
In summary, our main contribution is a novel formulation for discontinuity-aware normal integration based on a
local planarity assumption and ray directions, that: (i) more
accurately describes the relation between depth and surface
normals, (ii) achieves state-of-the-art results on the standard
normal integration benchmark, and (iii) shows for the first
time direct applicability to generic central camera models.

26026

