This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boundary Probing for Input Privacy Protection When Using LMM Services
Xiaofei Hui1 Haoxuan Qu1 Ping Hu2 Hossein Rahmani1 Jun Liu1,†
1
Lancaster University 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{x.hui, h.qu5, h.rahmani, j.liu81}@lancaster.ac.uk, chinahuping@gmail.com

Abstract
Alongside the rapid development of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) like GPT-4V, privacy concerns also rise. As
LMMs are commonly deployed as cloud services, users
are typically required to upload their personal images and
videos to the cloud to access these services, raising great
concerns about visual privacy leakage. In this paper, we investigate the critical but underexplored problem of keeping
LMM’s good performance while protecting visual privacy
information in the input data. We tackle this problem in the
practical scenario where the LMM remains a black box, i.e.,
we can only access its input and output without knowing
the LMM’s internal information. To address such a challenging problem, we propose a new Privacy-Aware Boundary Probing (PABP) framework, which, from a novel perspective, converts this problem into a privacy optimization
problem guided by the decision boundary between the “satisfactory” and “unsatisfactory” LMM utility states. We propose two tailored schemes, Gradually-Expanding-Probing
(GEP) and Prior-Guided-Probing (PGP), to maintain satisfactory LMM performance while achieving privacy protection. We show the effectiveness of our framework on different benchmarks.

Figure 1. Illustration of our problem. We aim to obtain an
anonymization model that maintains the LMM cloud service’s utility as “satisfactory” while protecting the privacy information in the
uploaded images and videos. This is particularly difficult, as the
personal data needs to be properly anonymized while remaining
understandable by a fixed off-the-shelf LMM, which was originally trained to process raw data.

ChatGPT), users are required to upload their personal images and videos to the cloud to access these services. As
these images and videos often contain sensitive personal
information such as faces, gender, and identifiable landmarks [50], users can unknowingly expose their personal information to the cloud. Furthermore, the uploaded personal
data can be collected by service providers for analysis and
LMM training [17, 49], aggravating privacy risks [28]. Due
to concerns about LMM services violating privacy regulations [1], multiple countries have begun investigating and
enforcing restrictions on LMM services [2, 47, 48].
Given the growing reliance on LMM services in daily
life and the increasing privacy concerns, achieving visual
privacy protection in the input data when using LMM services has become an urgent and critical problem. However, how to effectively tackle this emergent problem still
remains underexplored. Existing methods for balancing privacy and model utility (performance) typically require retraining the utility model (e.g., action recognition model)
to perform the task with the anonymized data as input,
thus maintaining utility while achieving privacy protection
[16, 36, 63]. Yet, this is hardly practical in our case, as
LMMs (the utility model in our problem) are usually deployed as proprietary platforms and APIs, where the inter-

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development and advancement of large multimodal models (LMMs) such as
GPT-4V [24]. These LMMs, equipped with strong capabilities in understanding image and video content and impressive abilities to follow instructions, have demonstrated
remarkable performance across a wide variety of tasks, such
as visual reasoning, scene understanding, and human behavior analysis [32, 34]. As a result, people have become
increasingly reliant on LMMs in their daily life [3, 33, 38].
However, alongside the widespread usage of LMMs,
concerns about privacy leakage have intensified [20, 66].
Since LMMs are usually deployed as cloud services (e.g.,
†

Corresponding Author

467

