This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StolenLoRA: Exploring LoRA Extraction Attacks via Synthetic Data
Yixu Wang1,2† , Yan Teng2 *, Yingchun Wang2 , Xingjun Ma1 *
1

Fudan University

2

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract

core knowledge. Despite the wide adoption of LoRA, the
lightweight and compactness of LoRA parameters raise a
new safety concern: they might be more vulnerable to model
extraction (ME) attacks. An ME attack extracts the functionality [17, 22, 28, 39] of a victim model by training a substitute model based on the outputs of the victim model for
a certain number of specially designed queries. While ME
attacks have been extensively studied for traditional models
[29, 40, 42, 43, 46, 47], the vulnerability of LoRA adaptations to ME attacks remains largely unexplored[25]. This
gap is significant, as the public availability of a large number of pre-trained models, coupled with the compactness
of LoRA parameters, makes it easier to replicate LoRAadapted models and compromise intellectual property.
To address this gap, we introduce the concept of LoRA
Extraction, a novel direction of ME attacks specifically targeting LoRA-adapted models (i.e., ViTs [4, 12, 20]), based
on a publicly available pre-trained model. Unlike traditional ME which focuses on replicating the entire model’s
functionality, LoRA extraction centers on stealing the efficient adaptations encoded within the compact LoRA parameters. The adversary’s objective is to reconstruct the
victim’s LoRA-adapted model by training their own LoRAadapted substitute that achieves similar downstream performance using a pre-trained foundation model that is publicly
available. This attack can manifest in two scenarios: the
identical-backbone scenario, where the attacker uses the
same pre-trained ViT model as the victim, and the more
challenging cross-backbone scenario, where the attacker
uses a different pre-trained ViT.
Existing traditional ME methods largely depend on sample selection from existing datasets or synthetic data generation. Sample selection methods [28, 29, 42, 46] typically require searching extensive datasets for in-distribution
samples, making them computationally expensive and less
practical for LoRA extraction. This impracticality arises because 1) inference in LoRA-adapted models is slower due to
the large-scale parameters of LoRA-adapted models, and 2)
finding appropriate samples is challenging, particularly for
domain-specific data fine-tuned with LoRA. Alternatively,
synthetic data generation approaches [18, 23, 40, 47] often rely on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8]

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods like
LoRA have transformed vision model adaptation, enabling
the rapid deployment of customized models. However, the
compactness of LoRA adaptations introduces new safety
concerns, particularly their vulnerability to model extraction attacks. This paper introduces a new focus of
model extraction attacks named LoRA extraction that extracts LoRA-adaptive models based on a public pre-trained
model. We then propose a novel extraction method called
StolenLoRA which trains a substitute model to extract
the functionality of a LoRA-adapted model using synthetic
data. StolenLoRA leverages a Large Language Model to
craft effective prompts for data generation, and it incorporates a Disagreement-based Semi-supervised Learning
(DSL) strategy to maximize information gain from limited
queries. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
StolenLoRA, achieving up to a 96.60% attack success rate
with only 10k queries, even in cross-backbone scenarios
where the attacker and victim models utilize different pretrained backbones. These findings reveal the specific vulnerability of LoRA-adapted models to this type of extraction
and underscore the urgent need for robust defense mechanisms tailored to PEFT methods. We also explore a preliminary defense strategy based on diversified LoRA deployments, highlighting its potential to mitigate such attacks.

1. Introduction
Adapting large-scale pre-trained foundation models via
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) such as Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) [11, 15] has become a popular approach
for obtaining high-performance models for diverse downstream tasks. LoRA enables efficient adaptation of large
models to a new task by fine-tuning only low-rank matrices added to specific layers, reducing computational cost
and memory usage while preserving the pre-trained model’s
* Corresponding authors:
< tengyan@pjlab.org.cn, xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn >
†
Work done during internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.

263

