This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IRGPT: Understanding Real-world Infrared Image with Bi-cross-modal
Curriculum on Large-scale Benchmark
Zhe Cao
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China

Jin Zhang
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China

Ruiheng Zhang*
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China

zhe.cao@bit.edu.cn

jinzhang@bit.edu.cn

ruiheng.zhang@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

What material is the
signboard in the image
made of ?

Real-world infrared imagery presents unique challenges for
vision-language models due to the scarcity of aligned text
data and domain-speciﬁc characteristics. Although existing
methods have advanced the ﬁeld, their reliance on synthetic
infrared images generated through style transfer from visible images, which limits their ability to capture the unique
characteristics of the infrared modality. To address this, we
propose IRGPT, the ﬁrst multi-modal large language model
for real-world infrared images, built upon a large-scale
InfraRed-Text Dataset (IR-TD) comprising over 260K authentic image-text pairs. The proposed IR-TD dataset contains real infrared images paired with meticulously handcrafted texts, where the initial drafts originated from two
complementary processes: (1) LLM-generated descriptions
of visible images, and (2) rule-based descriptions of annotations. Furthermore, we introduce a bi-cross-modal curriculum transfer learning strategy that systematically transfers
knowledge from visible to infrared domains by considering
the difﬁculty scores of both infrared-visible and infraredtext. Evaluated on a benchmark of 9 tasks (e.g., recognition,
grounding), IRGPT achieves state-of-the-art performance
even compared with larger-scale models.

Metal

/8-6:

Galss

-6:USOTO

Plastic

Translucent
material

7]KT

/TZKXT<2

Figure 1. Exist MLLMs exhibit hallucinations when interpreting
real-world infrared images, while IRGPT effectively suppresses
this phenomenon.

to deeply understand real-world natural images through the
medium of corresponding text. However, infrared images, a
distinctive and widely utilized image type, have been overlooked by multi-modal large language models (MLLMs),
leading to frequent hallucinations when these models process infrared imagery. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the salient
metallic signboard in the image is erroneously identiﬁed as
a non-metallic material object.
In the ﬁeld of infrared images, the scarcity of large-scale
image-text datasets poses challenges to the development
of infrared MLLMs. Prior studies [11, 14] have explored
methods to obtain infrared-text paired data. However, these
methods using visible images to synthesize infrared counterparts create a modality gap, as the synthesised data quality directly depends on generative models. Moreover, such
data strictly adheres to the training distribution of the generative model, neglecting the authenticity of infrared images.
To establish a realistic and effective infrared-text dataset
(IR-TD) for advancing infrared MLLMs, we also leverage
visible images as a medium to employ a new-path approach
to obtain infrared-text pairs. On the one hand, we manually choose visible-infrared image pairs and utilize LLMs
to generate draft descriptions for visible images, which are
then carefully adapted to annotate corresponding infrared

1. Introduction
With the advancement of large model technologies, VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) designed for visible images have
achieved signiﬁcant breakthroughs [19, 48]. This success
can be attributed to two main factors: the availability of
large-scale aligned image-text datasets [13, 31] and the
powerful visual perception capabilities provided by pretrained vision encoders [8, 16] for Large Language Models
(LLMs). VLMs such as LLaVA [24] and Qwen [45] have
demonstrated exceptional vision capabilities, enabling them
* Corresponding author

166

