This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Proactive Scene Decomposition and Reconstruction
Baicheng Li1,2

Zike Yan3

Dong Wu1,2

Hongbin Zha1,2†

1

2

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
AIR, Tsinghua University

libc@pku.edu.cn

yanzike@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

riserwu@stu.pku.edu.cn

zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Figure 1. We introduce a dynamic SLAM system to tackle the proactive scene decomposition and reconstruction from egocentric live
streams (first row). Only objects that are under proactive interactions will be decomposed (second) to maintain a consistent granularity.
This fashion leads to photorealistic modeling of the environment (third to fifth rows), enabling progressive scene decomposition (fifth row)
and robust object tracking (third and fourth rows).

Abstract

tent dynamic scene modeling is achieved with photorealistic
and efficient rendering. The efficacy is validated in multiple
real-world scenarios with promising advantages.

Human behaviors are the major causes of scene dynamics
and inherently contain rich cues regarding the dynamics.
This paper formalizes a new task of proactive scene decomposition and reconstruction, an online approach that leverages human-object interactions to iteratively disassemble
and reconstruct the environment. By observing these intentional interactions, we can dynamically refine the decomposition and reconstruction process, addressing inherent ambiguities in static object-level reconstruction. The proposed
system effectively integrates multiple tasks in dynamic environments such as accurate camera and object pose estimation, instance decomposition, and online map updating,
capitalizing on cues from human-object interactions in egocentric live streams for a flexible, progressive alternative
to conventional object-level reconstruction methods. Aided
by the Gaussian splatting technique, accurate and consis-

1. Introduction
Understanding the ever-changing environment is vital but
fundamentally challenging for the vision and robotics communities. While many existing methods attempt to solve
this problem by breaking down complex environments into
manageable and semantically meaningful components, they
often rely on passive data acquisition and pre-defined models to tackle 4D reconstruction or dynamic SLAM problems. While these methods can be effective in certain scenarios, they often struggle to capture the true dynamic nature of the environments, resulting in incomplete or inaccurate models. A key issue is the lack of consideration for
human activity, which is often the dominant force in shap-

9780

