This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lifting the Structural Morphing for Wide-Angle Images Rectification: Unified
Content and Boundary Modeling
Wenting Luan1 Siqi Lu1 Yongbin Zheng1 * Wanying Xu1
Lang Nie2 Zongtan Zhou1 Kang Liao3
1

2

National University of Defense Technology
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Nanyang Technological University
Thin-plate Transformation

Abstract

Rectification
Mesh

The mainstream approach for correcting distortions in
wide-angle images typically involves a cascading process
of rectification followed by rectangling. These tasks address distorted image content and irregular boundaries separately, using two distinct pipelines. However, this independent optimization prevents the two stages from benefiting each other. It also increases susceptibility to error
accumulation and misaligned optimization, ultimately degrading the quality of the rectified image and the performance of downstream vision tasks. In this work, we observe
and verify that transformations based on motion representations (e.g., Thin-Plate Spline) exhibit structural continuity
in both rectification and rectangling tasks. This continuity
enables us to establish their relationships through the perspective of structural morphing, allowing for an optimal solution within a single end-to-end framework. To this end,
we propose ConBo-Net, a unified Content and Boundary
modeling approach for one-stage wide-angle image correction. Our method jointly addresses distortion rectification
and boundary rectangling in an end-to-end manner. To further enhance the model’s structural recovery capability, we
incorporate physical priors based on the wide-angle camera model during training and introduce an ordinal geometric loss to enforce curvature monotonicity. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ConBo-Net outperforms state-ofthe-art two-stage solutions. The code and dataset are available at https://github.com/lwttttt/ConBo-Net

1. Introduction
Wide-angle lenses are widely used in diverse fields, such as
video surveillance [36], autonomous driving [10, 13, 33],
* Corresponding author

Rectangling
Mesh

Morphing

Input

Learning the
potential

Cascade
Error
Caused
Blurred
Result
vs.

PSNR > 0.6dB!
Directly
Utilize
Features
Clarity

intermediate state

Figure 1. Comparison of two paradigms for distortion correction.
The upper branch represents the traditional cascaded correction
strategy, which includes independent rectification and rectangling
stages. The lower branch is our ConBo-Net, which uses the ThinPlate Spline (TPS) as a bridge to build a joint optimization strategy
for the rectification and rectangling, learning the optimal solution
for the TPS during the structural morphing.

and robotic applications[7, 8], due to their extremely wide
field-of-view. Unfortunately, because of the physical characteristics, images captured by wide-angle lenses often suffer significant radial distortion. This phenomenon harms
the model performance at the data level, making it difficult to provide accurate scene perception information for
downstream vision tasks, such as object detection[5, 52],
image segmentation[9, 19, 47], and SLAM[6, 12]. To recover the geometric attributes of real-world scenes from distorted images, existing solutions typically adopt a cascaded
two-stage pipeline, such as the upper branch in Fig. 1.
Distortion rectification either through physics-based
parameter regression[25, 34, 42, 48] or pixel-wise
generation[22, 23, 25] to recover geometric fidelity. However, these methods still face significant challenges. First,
the highly nonlinear relationship between image content
and physical distortion parameters, as well as the ambiguous geometric constraints, make it difficult for correction
models to accurately regress from a single observation. Ad-

25529

