This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lumina-Image 2.0: A Uniﬁed and Efﬁcient Image Generative Framework
Qi Qin1,2, *, Le Zhuo1∗ , Yi Xin1,4,∗ , Ruoyi Du1∗ , Zhen Li3∗‡ , Bin Fu1,6∗ , Yiting Lu1∗ , Xinyue Li1 ,
Dongyang Liu1,3, , Xiangyang Zhu1 , Will Beddow7 , Erwann Millon7 , Victor Perez7 ,
Wenhai Wang1 , Yu Qiao1 , Bo Zhang1 , Xiaohong Liu5 , Hongsheng Li3 , Chang Xu2‡ , Peng Gao1,6†‡
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2 The University of Sydney, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
4
Shanghai Innovation Institute, 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
6
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 Krea AI
Abstract

We introduce Lumina-Image 2.0, an advanced text-to-image
(T2I) model that surpasses previous state-of-the-art methods
across multiple benchmarks. Lumina-Image 2.0 is characterized by two key features: (1) Uniﬁcation – it adopts a uniﬁed
architecture (Uniﬁed Next-DiT) that treats text and image tokens as a joint sequence, enabling natural cross-modal interactions and allowing seamless task expansion. Besides, since
high-quality captioners can provide semantically well-aligned
text-image training pairs, we introduce a uniﬁed captioning
system, Uniﬁed Captioner (UniCap), which can generate detailed and accurate multilingual captions for our model. This
not only accelerates model convergence, but also enhances
prompt adherence, multi-granularity prompt handling, and
task expansion with customized prompt templates. (2) Efﬁciency – to improve the efﬁciency of our proposed model, we
develop multi-stage progressive training strategies to optimize our model, alongside inference-time acceleration strategies without compromising image quality. We evaluate our
model on academic benchmarks and T2I arenas, with results
conﬁrming that it matches or exceeds existing state-of-theart models across various metrics, highlighting the effectiveness of our methods. We have released our training details,
code, and models at https://github.com/AlphaVLLM/Lumina-Image-2.0.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generative models have made signiﬁcant strides over the past years. Notable open-source models [5, 9, 27, 51, 56–58, 67, 70, 72, 83] have shown signiﬁcant
improvements in both image ﬁdelity and prompt adherence,
* Equal Contribution
† Project Leader
‡ Corresponding Authors (zhenli1031@gmail.com; c.xu@sydney.edu.au;
gaopeng@pjlab.org.cn)
 Work done during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

20031

thereby broadening the scope of their applicability in diverse
downstream tasks [24, 28, 30, 74, 79]. From these advancements, (1) the scalable text-conditional Diffusion Transformer
(DiT) architectures, and (2) the large-scale, high-quality textimage datasets are witnessed as the most important factors for
developing text-conditional image generative models.
However, existing models still exhibit notable limitations in
both aspects. First, many text-conditional Diffusion Transformers [6, 15, 21, 35, 43, 70, 82] continue to rely on crossattention mechanisms to inject textual information. This
paradigm treats text embeddings as ﬁxed external features,
thus limiting the efﬁciency of multimodal fusion and may
even introduce uni-directional bias when using text embedding extracted from causal large language models [42, 73].
Moreover, extending these models to new tasks often requires
speciﬁc architecture designs [75, 79]. Second, although recent efforts [5, 6, 29] have highlighted the importance of
collecting high-quality image captions, the lack of a dedicated
captioning system tailored for T2I generation has resulted in
inaccurate and insufﬁciently image captions for text-image
paired training data. The limitations in both architecture and
data quality constrain the expressiveness of text and visual
representations, ultimately impairing the model’s ability to
faithfully follow user instructions in generating high-quality
images.
Driven by the aforementioned challenges, we present
Lumina-Image 2.0, a uniﬁed and efﬁcient T2I generative
framework that comprises three key components: (1) a Uniﬁed Next-DiT model for generating images that faithfully
aligned with the text input, (2) a Uniﬁed Captioner (UniCap) for producing high-quality text-image pairs, and (3) a
series of speciﬁc designs for efﬁcient training and inference.
Speciﬁcally, to address architectural limitations, our Uniﬁed
Next-DiT model utilizes a joint self-attention mechanism,
enabling our model to process both textual and visual tokens
in a fully end-to-end manner, similar to decoder-only transformers in recent large language models [12, 23, 46, 63]. This

