This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Dataset Condensation using Supervised Contrastive Learning
Nicole Hee-Yeon Kim
Hwanjun Song*
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{nicolekim, songhwanjun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Dataset condensation aims to compress large dataset into
smaller synthetic set while preserving the essential representations needed for effective model training. However, existing methods show severe performance degradation when
applied to noisy datasets. To address this, we present robust dataset condensation (RDC), an end-to-end method
that mitigates noise to generate a clean and robust synthetic
set, without requiring separate noise-reduction preprocessing steps. RDC refines the condensation process by integrating contrastive learning tailored for robust condensation,
named golden MixUp contrast. It uses synthetic samples to
sharpen class boundaries and to mitigate noisy representations, while its augmentation strategy compensates for the
limited size of the synthetic set by identifying clean samples from noisy training data, enriching synthetic images
with real-data diversity. We evaluate RDC against existing
condensation methods and a conventional approach that
first applies noise cleaning algorithms to the dataset before performing condensation. Extensive experiments show
that RDC outperforms other approaches on CIFAR-10/100
across different types of noise, including asymmetric, symmetric, and real-world noise. Code is available at https:
//github.com/DISL-Lab/RDC-ICCV2025.

(a) Clean Dataset.

(b) Noisy Dataset.

Figure 1. Condensed images generated by a dataset condensation
method, Acc-DD [52], with CIFAR-10 datasets with clean and
noisy labels, where the asymmetric label noise of 40% are injected
following these rules: airplane!car, car!bird, and horse!ship.

bels that may not be true [40], significantly degrading the
quality of condensed data. Consequently, existing condensation methods that assume clean, well-curated data face
limitations in practical applications.
Noise, commonly arising from data collection errors
(e.g., sensor inaccuracies) [18], labeling errors (e.g., human
or algorithmic misannotations) [25, 36], or external attacks
(e.g., label flip attack) [47], directly impacts the effectiveness of dataset condensation, leading to significant performance degradation. Figure 1 illustrates the detrimental impact of noise on one of the state-of-the-art (SOTA) dataset
condensation methods, Acc-DD [52]. In (a), the representations remain well-preserved in the absence of noise. However, in (b), with 40% of asymmetric noise, noise interference is evident. For instance, in the condensation process
for the ship class, the presence of noise from the horse class
results in a distorted representation, where the synthesized
ship erroneously exhibits horse-like legs.
While two-stage approaches that apply dataset cleaning
methods [4, 46] prior to condensation can help mitigate the
problem, this approach is not a complete solution. Firstly,
completely removing noise through dataset cleaning is inherently difficult, especially in large-scale datasets where
subtle or systematic noise often persists [42]. Secondly,
dataset cleaning processes are resource-intensive, requiring

1. Introduction
The unprecedented growth of deep learning has raised
significant concerns about computational resource sustainability in model training [45]. While various efficiency
techniques like model compression [1] and data augmentation [17] have been proposed, their effectiveness remains
limited. Dataset condensation emerges as a direct solution
by distilling large-scale datasets into compact synthetic versions that preserve essential learning signals [43]. However,
existing dataset condensation methods still have an unresolved critical issue: real-world datasets contain noisy la* Corresponding author.

2857

