This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Losses Reweighting: Empowering Multi-Task Learning
via the Generalization Perspective
Hoang Phan1,∗ , Lam Tran2,∗ , Quyen Tran2 , Ngoc Tran3 , Tuan Truong2,† ,
Qi Lei1 , Nhat Ho4 , Dinh Phung2,5 , Trung Le5
1

New York University, 2 Qualcomm AI Research+ , 3 Vanderbilt University, 4 University of Texas at Austin, 5 Monash University

Abstract

promoting positive task transfer.
However, learning such a shared backbone faces
performance degradation due to gradient conflict [78], where
task-specific gradients may differ in direction and magnitude,
resulting in tasks canceling each other and a subset of
tasks being under-optimized. To tackle this, a common
approach is to manipulate task gradients to find a better
update direction so that all task losses decrease in a more
balanced manner. This has been found to consistently exhibit
improved performance [5, 45]. However, existing state-ofthe-art methods in this vein [28, 44, 46, 62, 71, 78] often
overlook the geometrical properties of the loss landscape,
focusing solely on minimizing the empirical error in the
optimization process, which can easily be prone to overfitting
problems [30, 81].
Meanwhile, the overfitting problem in modern neural
networks is often attributed to high-dimensional and
nonconvex loss functions, which result in complex loss
landscapes containing multiple local optima. Consequently,
understanding the loss surface is crucial for training robust
models, and developing flat minimizers remains one of
the most effective strategies [30, 33, 40, 53]. Specifically,
recent studies [24, 82] demonstrate that directly minimizing
empirical risk often leads to a loss landscape with many
sharp minima, resulting in poor generalization to unseen data.
This issue is apparently further exacerbated when optimizing
multiple objectives simultaneously, as in the context of multitask learning. In fact, sharp minima of each constituent
objective might appear at different locations, which can
result in large generalization errors on the associated task.
Therefore, finding a common flat and low-loss valued region
for all tasks is desirable for improving the current methods
of multi-task learning.
Contribution. To address the above desideratum, we
propose a novel MTL training method that enhances existing
gradient manipulation strategies by promoting the learning of
flat loss landscapes across all tasks. Specifically, we penalize
each task’s sharpness, the gap between the largest and the
empirical losses within a weight perturbation [20, 82], to
improve the generalization of all tasks. This is theoretically

Multi-task learning (MTL) trains deep neural networks
to optimize several objectives simultaneously using a
shared backbone, which leads to reduced computational
costs, improved data efficiency, and enhanced performance
through cross-task knowledge sharing. Although recent
gradient manipulation techniques aim to find a common
descent direction that benefits all tasks, conventional
empirical loss minimization still leaves models vulnerable
to overfitting and gradient conflicts. To address this,
we introduce a novel MTL framework that leverages
weight perturbation to regulate gradient norms, thus
improving generalization. By carefully modulating weight
perturbations, our approach harmonizes task-specific
gradients, reducing conflicts and encouraging more robust
learning across tasks. Theoretical insights reveal that
controlling the gradient norm through weight perturbation
directly contributes to better generalization. Extensive
experiments across diverse applications demonstrate that
our method significantly outperforms existing gradientbased MTL techniques in terms of task performance and
overall model robustness.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, deep learning has emerged as a
powerful tool for functional approximation, demonstrating
superior performance and even surpassing human abilities in
various applications. Despite these impressive achievements,
training massive independent neural networks for individual
tasks demands significant computational and storage
resources, as well as extended runtime. Consequently, multitask learning has become a preferable approach in many
situations [47, 74, 80] as it aims to learn a shared network
among tasks, reducing redundant feature calculations while
∗

Equal contributions.
Work done while at Qualcomm AI Research.
+
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
†

2440

