This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAP

: Evaluation of Persuasive and Creative Image Generation
Aysan Aghazadeh
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA

Adriana Kovashka
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA

aya34@pitt.edu

kovashka@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract
We address the task of advertisement image generation
and introduce three evaluation metrics to assess Creativity, prompt Alignment, and Persuasiveness (CAP) in generated advertisement images. Despite recent advancements in
Text-to-Image (T2I) methods and their performance in generating high-quality images for explicit descriptions, evaluating these models remains challenging. Existing evaluation methods focus largely on assessing alignment with explicit, detailed descriptions, but evaluating alignment with
visually implicit prompts remains an open problem. Additionally, creativity and persuasiveness are essential qualities that enhance the effectiveness of advertisement images,
yet are seldom measured. To address this, we propose three
novel metrics for evaluating the creativity, alignment, and
persuasiveness of generated images. We show that current
T2I models struggle with creativity, persuasiveness, and
alignment when the input text is implicit messages. We further introduce a simple yet effective approach to enhance
T2I models’ capabilities in producing images that are better aligned, more creative, and more persuasive. Code is
available at https://aysanaghazadeh.github.io/CAP/

Figure 1. Human-created ads (a, d) convey their message through
creative and persuasive visual storytelling, blending the implicit
message seamlessly into the visuals. The T2I baseline (b, e), on
the other hand, depicts relevant entities but without the underlying
intent. This highlights the need for better metrics for persuasiveness, creativity, and abstract text-image alignment. Ours (c, f)
demonstrates how improving visual storytelling can enhance ad
generation by aligning visuals with the intended message effectively. Texts on the right form the prompt to T2I models.

1. Introduction

while (f) also shows a relevant ominous shadow.
Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) models, such as
Stable Diffusion [34, 37] and DALLE3 [4], excel at generating high-quality photorealistic images from explicit and
detailed prompts that describe objects, their attributes and
relations. However, a user of a T2I method for ad generation might simply know what message they want the ad
to convey, and may not have thought about the exact objects the image should depict. Thus, they may use visually
implicit or abstract prompts (i.e. ones that do not precisely
describe how the image should look in terms of objects).
Further, existing T2I generation metrics, like FID [18]
and CLIPScore [17], assess image fidelity and explicit textimage alignment but do not capture qualities that are important for evaluating ads, such as creativity and persuasiveness. Our work addresses this gap by proposing the first
benchmark on creative and persuasive ad generation, using three novel metrics: Creativity, text-image Alignment,

Advertisements (ads) impact consumer decisions and appear across various media, from billboards to social platforms. Persuasive, effective ads satisfy some or all of the
following three criteria: (1) convey their message clearly,
(2) convey their message in a creative and memorable way,
and (3) impact their intended audience (e.g. convince the
audience to buy a product). Thus ads must do more than
simply show a set of relevant objects. For example, in
Fig. 1, images (a), (b), (c) feature Gatorade. However, (b)
only shows a bottle and two cans, while (c) includes a creative slogan and an athlete running while holding the bottle,
and is more likely to persuade the audience to buy Gatorade.
Similarly, on the topic of child abuse, (e) shows a child,

16970

