This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-grained Abnormality Prompt Learning for Zero-shot Anomaly Detection
Jiawen Zhu1

Yew-Soon Ong2 Chunhua Shen3 Guansong Pang1 *
1
Singapore Management University, Singapore
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Zhejiang University, China

Abstract

Previous Works
Handcrafted Text Prompting

Current zero-shot anomaly detection (ZSAD) methods show
remarkable success in prompting large pre-trained visionlanguage models to detect anomalies in a target dataset
without using any dataset-specific training or demonstration. However, these methods often focus on crafting/learning prompts that capture only coarse-grained semantics of abnormality, e.g., high-level semantics like
‘damaged’, ‘imperfect’, or ‘defective’ objects.
They therefore have limited capability in recognizing diverse abnormality details that deviate from these general
abnormal patterns in various ways. To address this limitation, we propose FAPrompt, a novel framework designed
to learn Fine-grained Abnormality Prompts for accurate
ZSAD. To this end, a novel Compound Abnormality Prompt
learning (CAP) module is introduced in FAPrompt to
learn a set of complementary, decomposed abnormality
prompts, where abnormality prompts are enforced to model
diverse abnormal patterns derived from the same normality
semantic. On the other hand, the fine-grained abnormality patterns can be different from one dataset to another.
To enhance the cross-dataset generalization, another novel
module, namely Data-dependent Abnormality Prior learning (DAP), is introduced in FAPrompt to learn a samplewise abnormality prior from abnormal features of each test
image to dynamically adapt the abnormality prompts to individual test images. Comprehensive experiments on 19
real-world datasets, covering both industrial defects and
medical anomalies, demonstrate that FAPrompt substantially outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both imageand pixel-level ZSAD tasks. Code is available at https:
// github.com/ mala-lab/ FAPrompt.

1. Introduction
Anomaly Detection (AD) is a critical task in computer vision, aiming to identify instances that deviate significantly
from the majority of data. It has a wide range of real-world
* Corresponding author: Guansong Pang (gspang@smu.edu.sg)

Coarse Learnable Text Prompting

a blurry photo of a flawless [carpet].
a bright photo of the perfect [carpet].
...
a photo of a damaged [carpet].
a bright photo of the defective [carpet].
...

...

[object]

...

[damaged object]

...

[object]

...
Learnable Normal Token
Learnable Abormal Token

...

[object]

...
...

[object]

...

[object]

10 Individual Abnormality Prompts

Normal Samples
Abnormal Samples

(1) AnomalyCLIP

(2) AnomalyCLIP Ensemble *

(3)

Figure 1. Top: FAPrompt vs. previous methods. Bottom: 2D t-SNE visualization of the prompt-wise anomaly score maps of
three methods on samples from a BTAD dataset [35], with the
maps generated based on the similarities between text prompt embeddings and image embeddings, as defined in Eq. 3.

applications, e.g., industrial inspection and medical imaging analysis [8, 37]. Traditional AD methods often rely
on application-specific, carefully curated datasets to train a
specialized detection model, making them inapplicable for
application scenarios where such data access is not possible due to data privacy issue, or where the test data significantly differs from the training set due to substantial distribution shifts arising from new deployment environments or
other natural variations in datasets. To address this, Zeroshot Anomaly Detection (ZSAD) has emerged as a promising solution, enabling models to detect anomalies in unseen
datasets without dataset-specific training.
In recent years, large pre-trained vision-language models
(VLMs) such as CLIP [39] have demonstrated impressive
zero/few-shot recognition capabilities across a broad range
of vision tasks. To leverage VLMs for ZSAD, existing
methods [11, 17, 20, 25, 66] use craft/learn text prompts to
extract the normal/abnormal textual semantics from VLMs
for matching visual anomalies. Handcrafted text prompting methods such as WinCLIP [25] and AnoVL [17] attempt to capture a range of abnormality semantics for better ZSAD by using a wide variety of pre-defined textual
description templates as text prompts. Others [20, 64–66]

22241

