This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BézierGS: Dynamic Urban Scene Reconstruction with Bézier Curve Gaussian
Splatting

1

Zipei Ma1,2∗ Junzhe Jiang1∗ Yurui Chen1 Li Zhang1,2†
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute
github.com/fudan-zvg/BezierGS

Figure 1. Our proposed BézierGS effectively captures the motion of dynamic elements while accurately distinguishing between static and
dynamic components in the scene. (a) We render a dynamic vehicle instance at three different timestamps and visualize the trajectory of its
Gaussian primitives, demonstrating the model’s ability to accurately represent target trajectories. (b) By leveraging our explicit modeling
of dynamic objects, our approach enables flexible scene manipulation, such as removing dynamic instances, showcasing its capability for
high-fidelity reconstruction and editing of dynamic environments.

Abstract
The realistic reconstruction of street scenes is critical for
developing real-world simulators in autonomous driving.
Most existing methods rely on object pose annotations, using these poses to reconstruct dynamic objects and move
them during the rendering process. This dependence on
high-precision object annotations limits large-scale and extensive scene reconstruction. To address this challenge,
we propose Bézier curve Gaussian splatting (BézierGS),
which represents the motion trajectories of dynamic objects using learnable Bézier curves. This approach fully
leverages the temporal information of dynamic objects and,
* Equal contribution to this work.
† Corresponding author (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn).

through learnable curve modeling, automatically corrects
pose errors. By introducing additional supervision on dynamic object rendering and inter-curve consistency constraints, we achieve reasonable and accurate separation
and reconstruction of scene elements. Extensive experiments on the Waymo Open Dataset and the nuPlan benchmark demonstrate that BézierGS outperforms state-of-theart alternatives in both dynamic and static scene components reconstruction and novel view synthesis.

1. Introduction
Modeling dynamic 3D street scenes is fundamental to modern autonomous driving, as it enables realistic and controllable simulations for tasks such as perception [2, 23, 26, 46],

25519

