This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vector Contrastive Learning For Pixel-Wise Pretraining In Medical Vision
Yuting He1 Shuo Li1,2, *
1
Dept. of BME, 2 Dept. of CDS, Case Western Reserve University, US, Cleveland
{yuting.he4, shuo.li11}@case.edu

a) Pixel-wise features
on image grid

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) has become a cornerstone of selfsupervised pretraining (SSP) in foundation models; however, extending CL to pixel-wise representation—crucial
for medical vision—remains an open problem. Standard
CL formulates SSP as a binary optimization problem (binary CL) where the excessive pursuit of feature dispersion leads to an “over-dispersion” problem, breaking pixelwise feature correlation thus disrupting the intra-class distribution. Our vector CL reformulates CL as a vector
regression problem, enabling dispersion quantification in
pixel-wise pretraining via modeling feature distances in regressing displacement vectors. To implement this novel
paradigm, we propose the COntrast in VEctor Regression
(COVER) framework. COVER establishes an extendable
vector-based self-learning, enforces a consistent optimization flow from vector regression to distance modeling, and
leverages a vector pyramid architecture for granularity
adaptation, thus preserving pixel-wise feature correlations
in SSP. Extensive experiments across 8 tasks, spanning 2 dimensions and 4 modalities, show that COVER significantly
improves pixel-wise SSP, advancing generalizable medical
visual foundation models. Codes will be publicly available
at https://github.com/YutingHe-list/COVER.

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning (CL) [4, 7–9, 14, 37, 50] has become
a cornerstone of self-supervised pretraining (SSP) [30] in
medical visual foundation models (MVFMs) [6, 21, 33, 55,
62, 71]. However, applying CL in a pixel-wise manner, an
approach pivotal for disentangling the clinically critical semantics within medical images [70], remains an open problem. Current preliminary works [6, 55, 62] adopt imagewise contrast strategies derived from natural image studies [7–9, 14, 37], which emphasize global representations
[60]. In medical images, the global context is often similar
due to the consistent anatomies in human body [34], lead* Corresponding author: shuo.li11@case.edu

b) Binary CL excessively c) Over-dispersion disru- d) Ideal dispersion prespts intra-class distribution erves feature correlations
disperse features
Embedding space

Blurred
Ground truth

Distinct

Minimize
Maximize

Figure 1. Over-dispersion problem: Binary CL excessively pursues to disperse features, disrupting intra-class distribution and
struggling models to disentangle the underlying semantics.

ing to a lack of global diversity that will cause CL models to converge to trivial solutions [45, 58]. Recent evidence highlights the critical importance of local features
[29, 60, 64, 70] and leading results [15, 41, 65] in medical
images increasingly incorporate pixel-wise methods. This
observation raises a fundamental question: Can CL be reformulated as a truly pixel-wise SSP for MVFMs?
An obstacle to answering this question is the overdispersion problem [23, 45, 58]. The standard CL formulates the SSP as a binary optimization problem (termed binary CL), where feature distances in positive or negative
pairs are directly minimized or maximized [36], leading
to excessive dispersion of features without degree modeling (Fig.1-b). However, recent findings indicate that excessive pursuit of dispersion will disrupt intra-class distribution
[56, 58]. This rigid contrast imposes significant limitations
on medical vision tasks that require high sensitivity to subtle variations and structures, like thin vessels and subtle lesions, which risk being blurred or indistinguishable (Fig.1c). While some attempts [5, 63] softened the contrast or introduced regularization [58] to mitigate this problem, they
remain fundamentally reliant on the binary CL.
In pixel-wise pretraining, the over-dispersion problem
renders the binary CL particularly ineffective (Fig.1 a-c).
Pixel-wise features are distributed across the image grid,
where semantics vary continuously [13], making them inherently correlated. Unlike discrete classification tasks,
continuous signals lack a natural definition of distinct categories [16, 49], leading to ambiguity near proximity divisions. The excessive pursuit of dispersion breaks these
correlations so that it aggravates the disruption of the inherent intra-class distribution, struggling pretrained models to

19827

