This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-based Visual Vibrometry
Xinyu Zhou1
1

Peiqi Duan2,3

Yeliduosi Xiaokaiti2,3

Chao Xu1

Boxin Shi2,3∗

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence
Science and Technology, Peking University
mode @ 16.07Hz
2

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

3

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

{zhouxiny, duanqi0001, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, yongqiye@stu.pku.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn
Excitation

(c) Subtle Motion

(d) Modal Analysis
mode @ 16.07Hz

+
0

−

Vibrating object

(b) Frame + Event stream
(a) Hybrid camera system
Pixel Displacement

Motion Spectrum

Figure 1. Overview of event-based visual vibrometry. A hybrid camera system, comprising a frame-based camera and an event camera, is
utilized to capture subtle object vibrations (a). We propose an event-based subtle motion estimation method that leverages the event stream
and a reference frame as input (b). The subtle motion field is extracted at each pixel location across time (c). This motion field can be
further analyzed to extract the global motion spectrum and independent vibration modes (d). Each mode is characterized by a resonant
mode @ 35.85Hz
frequency and a corresponding mode shape, which manifest as distinct peaks in the motion spectrum.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Vibrations are pervasive phenomena that arise from a wide
range of sources, including engines, percussive impacts,
and musical instruments. These vibrations typically exhibit small amplitudes and a broad spectrum of frequencies,
spanning from a few Hz to MHz, and carry an immense
amount of information. Vibration analysis is an established
tool in various engineering and scientific fields, including
the remote acquisition of audio signals [8], the monitoring
of human heart rate [38, 56], and the estimation of material
properties [2, 9, 13].

Visual vibrometry has emerged as a powerful technique
for remote acquisition of audio and the physical properties
of materials. To capture high-frequency vibrations, framebased approaches often require a high-speed video camera
and bright lighting to compensate for the short exposure
time. In this paper, we introduce event-based visual vibrometry, a new high-speed visual vibration sensing method using an event camera. By leveraging the high temporal resolution and low bandwidth characteristics of event cameras,
event-based visual vibrometry enables high-speed vibration
sensing under ambient lighting conditions with improved
data efficiency. Specifically, we leverage a hybrid camera
system and propose an event-based subtle motion estimation framework that integrates an optimization-based approach based on the event generation model and a motion
refinement network. We demonstrate our method by capturing vibration caused by audio sources and estimating material properties for various objects.

∗ Corresponding author

Various devices have been used to measure and analyze vibrations. Among these, contact sensors [48] and
laser vibrometers [11] are two widely used traditional vibration sensors, both of which are specialized instruments
and only measure the vibration of a single surface point.
Recently, much progress has been made on visual vibrometry [2, 4, 9, 13], an emerging technique that utilizes generalpurpose video cameras for vibration measurement. In
contrast to traditional vibration sensors, video-based approaches enable spatially dense measurements of surface
motion. However, the acquisition of high-frequency vi-

24666

