This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LaneDiffusion: Improving Centerline Graph Learning via Prior Injected BEV
Feature Generation
Zijie Wang1,2 *, Weiming Zhang3 *, Wei Zhang3 *, Xiao Tan3 , Hongxing Liu3 , Yaowei Wang4,5 , Guanbin Li1,2,5,6†
1

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Shenzhen Loop Area Institute, 3 Baidu Inc.
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 5 Pengcheng Laboratory
6
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
wangzj75@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Centerline graphs, crucial for path planning in autonomous
driving, are traditionally learned using deterministic methods. However, these methods often lack spatial reasoning
and struggle with occluded or invisible centerlines. Generative approaches, despite their potential, remain underexplored in this domain. We introduce LaneDiffusion, a novel
generative paradigm for centerline graph learning. LaneDiffusion innovatively employs diffusion models to generate
lane centerline priors at the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) feature level, instead of directly predicting vectorized centerlines. Our method integrates a Lane Prior Injection Module (LPIM) and a Lane Prior Diffusion Module (LPDM) to
effectively construct diffusion targets and manage the diffusion process. Furthermore, vectorized centerlines and
topologies are then decoded from these prior-injected BEV
features. Extensive evaluations on the nuScenes and Argoverse2 datasets demonstrate that LaneDiffusion significantly outperforms existing methods, achieving improvements of 4.2%, 4.6%, 4.7%, 6.4% and 1.8% on finegrained point-level metrics (GEO F1, TOPO F1, JTOPO
F1, APLS and SDA) and 2.3%, 6.4%, 6.8% and 2.1%
on segment-level metrics (IoU, mAPcf , DETl and TOPll ).
These results establish state-of-the-art performance in centerline graph learning, offering new insights into generative models for this task. Code will be available at:
https://github.com/ZJWang9928/LaneDiffusion.

Surrounding Views

Surrounding Views

GT

CGNet

Ours

Figure 1. The Motivation. This illustration presents two challenging cases where the state-of-the-art deterministic approach,
CGNet, encounters difficulties in handling occlusions or ambiguous visual cues. Our generative framework LaneDiffusion offers a
supplementary solution that specifically mitigates these challenges
through probabilistic modeling.

1. Introduction

cient planning and control of self-driving vehicles in complex driving scenarios [27, 50]. However, the learning of
centerline graphs remains challenging, as it requires highly
accurate detection of invisible, logical lane centerlines and
robust reasoning about their topological connections.
Most previous centerline graph learning methods are
deterministic [35, 38, 39], whereas generative approaches
have received little attention. Despite significant progress,
deterministic methods still exhibit inherent limitations. For
instance, the state-of-the-art deterministic approach CGNet
[15] employs three effective modules to improve lane continuity from different perspectives. However, as illustrated
in Fig. 1, it struggles to capture the full complexity and
dynamics of real-world driving in some complex scenar-

The topology of drivable lanes, typically represented as centerline graphs, is critical for autonomous driving, as it provides precise path information essential for safe and effi* Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at Baidu.
† Corresponding author.

27052

