This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Cross-Modal Interaction in Multimodal Diffusion Transformers
Zhengyao Lv1→ Tianlin Pan2,3→ Chenyang Si2→ Zhaoxi Chen4
Wangmeng Zuo5 Ziwei Liu4† Kwan-Yee K. Wong1†
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Nanjing University 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Nanyang Technological University 5 Harbin Institute of Technology
cszy98@gmail.com
zhaoxi001@ntu.edu.sg
SD3.5

pantianlin23@mails.ucas.ac.cn
cswmzuo@gmail.com

SD3.5 + TACA

chenyang.si@nju.edu.cn

ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

FLUX.1-Dev

kykwong@cs.hku.hk
FLUX.1-Dev + TACA

a clock on the top of a sheep

a car on the right of a bee

The wooden picture frame and glass photo display the metallic trophy on the bookshelf

Figure 1. We propose TACA, a parameter-efficient method that dynamically rebalances cross-modal attention in multimodal diffusion
transformers to improve text-image alignment.

Abstract

demonstrating its ability to improve text-image alignment
in terms of object appearance, attribute binding, and spatial
relationships. Our findings highlight the importance of balancing cross-modal attention in improving semantic fidelity
in text-to-image diffusion models. Our codes are publicly
available at https://github.com/Vchitect/TACA.

Multimodal Diffusion Transformers (MM-DiTs) have
achieved remarkable progress in text-driven visual generation. However, even state-of-the-art MM-DiT models like FLUX struggle with achieving precise alignment
between text prompts and generated content. We identify two key issues in the attention mechanism of MMDiT, namely 1) the suppression of cross-modal attention
due to token imbalance between visual and textual modalities and 2) the lack of timestep-aware attention weighting, which hinder the alignment. To address these issues, we propose Temperature-Adjusted Cross-modal Attention (TACA), a parameter-efficient method that dynamically rebalances multimodal interactions through temperature scaling and timestep-dependent adjustment. When
combined with LoRA fine-tuning, TACA significantly enhances text-image alignment on the T2I-CompBench benchmark with minimal computational overhead. We tested
TACA on state-of-the-art models like FLUX and SD3.5,

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [13, 40], driven by iterative denoising processes, have emerged as a powerful paradigm in generative
modeling and various visual generation tasks [26, 46, 47,
52]. The field has witnessed significant architectural evolution, beginning with U-Net-based designs [38] that dominated early diffusion models [9, 28, 33, 37]. Recent advances introduced transformer-based architectures through
Diffusion Transformers (DiT) [5, 30], demonstrating superior scalability and training stability. This progression
culminated in Multimodal Diffusion Transformers (MMDiT) [10], which unify text and visual tokens through a
concatenated self-attention mechanism, resulting in state-

*Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

5934

