This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Embodied Navigation with Auxiliary Task of Action Description Prediction
Haru Kondoh1 Asako Kanezaki1,2
1
Institute of Science Tokyo 2 RIKEN AIP
kondo.h.4aa3@m.isct.ac.jp

kanezaki@comp.isct.ac.jp

Abstract

1H[W$FWLRQ0RYHIRUZDUG
3DVW$FWLRQ'HVFULSWLRQ
,FURVVHGWKHFRXFKWXUQHGULJKWDW
WKHGHVNDQGOHIWWKHOLYLQJURRP

The ﬁeld of multimodal robot navigation in indoor environments has garnered signiﬁcant attention in recent years.
However, as tasks and methods become more advanced,
the action decision systems tend to become more complex
and operate as black-boxes. For a reliable system, the ability to explain or describe its decisions is crucial; however,
there tends to be a trade-off in that explainable systems cannot outperform non-explainable systems in terms of performance. In this paper, we propose incorporating the task
of describing actions in language into the reinforcement
learning of navigation as an auxiliary task. Existing studies
have found it difﬁcult to incorporate describing actions into
reinforcement learning due to the absence of ground-truth
data. We address this issue by leveraging knowledge distillation from pre-trained description generation models, such
as vision-language models. We comprehensively evaluate
our approach across various navigation tasks, demonstrating that it can describe actions while attaining high navigation performance. Furthermore, it achieves state-of-theart performance in the particularly challenging multimodal
navigation task of semantic audio-visual navigation.

)XWXUH$FWLRQ'HVFULSWLRQ
,ZLOOHQWHUWKHNLWFKHQDQGVWRSLQ
IURQWRIWKHVLQN

$JHQW2EVHUYDWLRQV
5*%

'HSWK

$XGLR/HIW

$XGLR5LJKW

Figure 1. Overview of this study. The robot generates action descriptions of its past actions or future plans during navigation, such
as moving toward a sounding object in the case of semantic audiovisual navigation, based on visual and auditory observations.

and the performance of the main task [21, 26, 57]. Using
imitation learning (IL), there have been attempts to predict
the instruction sentences given to the model [32, 80], in the
context of instruction following tasks such as vision-andlanguage navigation [4]. However, the lack of ground-truth
sentences in RL makes it difﬁcult to extend these IL methods to RL, and this fact has limited the range of applications.
We propose a method to describe the system’s actions in
natural language, aiming for an explainable navigation system. We deﬁne multiple types of action descriptions and
focus on the afﬁnity between this action description generation learning and navigation learning. Surprisingly, by formulating the action description as an auxiliary task through
knowledge distillation from pre-trained models, such as
large vision-language models (VLMs), to RL models, we
developed a method that enables RL agents to describe actions without compromising navigation performance.
Figure 1 represents an overview of this research. During navigation, the RL agent also needs to describe what
it has done in the past or what it should do in the future
while making action decisions based on observations. We

1. Introduction
The development of robots that recognize their environment
and autonomously navigate to a speciﬁed target has received
particular attention in the last decade. Recently, multimodal
navigation tasks have been proposed that can handle language [4, 53, 81] and can observe auditory information
[9, 28]. Furthermore, various methods have been proposed
to improve navigation performance, such as end-to-end reinforcement learning (RL) methods [4, 9, 25] and methods
that utilize large language models (LLMs) [47, 73, 79]. As
tasks become more complex and challenging, models become increasingly complex and black-boxed, making explainability crucial to addressing resulting lack of transparency. However, in general, prior research on explainability has been plagued by the trade-off between explainability

7025

