This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large Multi-modal Models Can Interpret Features in Large Multi-modal Models
Kaichen Zhang1,2 , Yifei Shen2,3 , Bo Li1,2 , Ziwei Liu1,2
1
S-Lab, NTU, Singapore, 2 LMMs-Lab Team
{zhan0564,libo0013,ziwei.liu}@e.ntu.edu.sg
3

Microsoft Research Asia

yshenaw@connect.ust.hk
Feature #3

Prompt
Human : <image>

LLM Layer
activations

SAE

Dataset Examples that
activates on “Canoes and
kayaks on water”

LLM Layer

Based on the image,
tell me a story about
Alice and Bob

...

...

Original
Once upon a time, in a cozy living room, …

LLM Layer

Encoder

LLM Layer

Completion with feature #3 clamped to a high value

…

paddling. The water was calm, and the sky
was a clear blue, suggesting a beautiful day
for a paddle. As they paddled, they talked
about their day, … and the peacefulness of
the water.

Decoder
MLP
VIT

As they approached the shore, …

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. a) The Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) is trained on LLaVA-NeXT data by integrating it into a specific layer of the model, with all
other components frozen. b) The features learned by the SAE are subsequently interpreted through the proposed auto-explanation pipeline,
which analyzes the visual features based on their activation regions. c) It is demonstrated that these features can be employed to steer the
model’s behavior by clamping them to high values.

Abstract

potential strategies for their rectification. These findings offer new insights into the internal mechanisms of LMMs and
suggest parallels with cognitive process of the human brain.
We opensource our codebase and checkpoints at Github

Recent advances in Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) lead
to significant breakthroughs in both academia and industry. One question that arises is how we, as humans, can
understand their internal neural representations. This paper takes an initial step towards addressing this question
by presenting a versatile framework to identify and interpret the semantics within LMMs. Specifically, 1) we first
apply a Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) to disentangle the representations into human understandable features. 2) We
then present an automatic interpretation framework to interpreted the open-semantic features learned in SAE by the
LMMs themselves. We employ this framework to analyze
the LLaVA-NeXT-8B model using the LLaVA-OV-72B model
and demonstrate that these features can effectively steer the
model’s behavior. Our results contribute to a deeper understanding of why LMMs excel in specific tasks, including EQ
tests, and illuminate the nature of their mistakes along with
*

1. Introduction
Recently Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) [3, 8, 22, 23,
38] have significantly advanced the field of computer vision, achieving remarkable success in various applications
such as personal assistant, medical diagnosis, and embodied agents [26, 41]. These models have been integrated into
commercial products to assist people’s daily life [2, 28] and
hold large potential to transform the future. Despite their
success, the opaque nature of LMMs often leads to unexpected behaviors, such as the hallucination of non-existent
objects and relationships within images [15], as well as vulnerability to jailbreak attacks [7, 35]. These challenges underscore the critical importance of understanding and controlling the neural representations of LMMs.

Corresponding author.

3650

