This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobileViCLIP: An Efficient Video-Text Model for Mobile Devices
Min Yang1 Zihan Jia1 Zhilin Dai1 Sheng Guo2 Limin Wang1,3,
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
MyBank, Ant Group 3 Shanghai AI Lab
yangminmcg1011@hotmail.com, zihanjia@smail.nju.edu.cn, daizhilin1@gmail.com,
guosheng1001@gmail.com , lmwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
InternVideo2-L14

MobileViCLIP-Small

Efficient lightweight neural networks are with increasing attention due to their faster reasoning speed and easier deployment on mobile devices. However, existing video
pre-trained models still focus on the common ViT architecture with high latency, and few works attempt to build efficient architecture on mobile devices. This paper bridges
this gap by introducing temporal structural reparameterization into an efficient image-text model and training it
on a large-scale high-quality video-text dataset, resulting
in an efficient video-text model that can run on mobile devices with strong zero-shot classification and retrieval capabilities, termed as MobileViCLIP. In particular, in terms
of inference speed on mobile devices, our MobileViCLIPSmall is 55.4× times faster than InternVideo2-L14 and
6.7× faster than InternVideo2-S14. In terms of zeroshot retrieval performance, our MobileViCLIP-Small obtains similar performance as InternVideo2-L14 and obtains
6.9% better than InternVideo2-S14 on MSR-VTT. The code
is available at https:// github.com/ MCG- NJU/
MobileViCLIP.

MobileCLIP-B

ViCLIP

InternVideo2-B14
InternVideo-L

MobileCLIP-S2
InternVideo2-S14
MobileCLIP-S0
CLIP4CLIP

VideoCLIP

CLIP

50M

100M

200M

400M

600M

Figure 1. Comparison of latency and the R@1 scores for zeroshot text-to-video retrieval on video retrieval dataset MSRVTT [69]. The latency is measured on iPad Air 2020 with iOS 18.
MobileViCLIP achieves the best trade-off of recall and latency.

1. Introduction

sibility of deployment on mobile devices with limited storage capability. Also, excessive computing resource requirements (tens of A100 GPUs are required), too long training
time (thousands of hours of GPU training time), and a large
amount of pre-training datasets (ensemble of datasets larger
than 100M) increase the training cost and make these works
difficult to reproduce for a university lab.
Parameter-efficient transfer learning (PETL) [30, 33, 44,
71] is becoming a promising and efficient paradigm for
adapting large image-text models for video understanding
due to their huge numbers of parameters and the high computational cost of full fine-tuning. These methods have successfully transferred image representations to video recognition tasks and obtained good zero-shot recognition results on several action classification datasets [5, 19, 24, 50].
However, these transfer learning methods often focus on the
simple video classification task and fail to directly investigate the visual-textual representations on more complex
video-text tasks. We argue that video-text models are expected to be more flexible and can handle a more diverse of
downstream video understanding tasks. Furthermore, de-

Large vision-text models [9, 27, 51, 72] have demonstrated excellent zero-shot performance in a wide range of
downstream tasks. Learning transferable video-text representations is becoming a fundamental task in video understanding. With the advent of high-quality video-language
datasets [2, 8, 42, 64] for large-scale pre-training, several
powerful video-text foundation models [28, 63, 65] have
emerged. They are typically trained from scratch and have
achieved excellent results on various downstream tasks including video-text retrieval and action recognition. However, to ensure performance, most of these works use ViTL [15] or larger backbones. The model size limits its posCorresponding author.

20824

