This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Massive Satellite Imagery with Efficient Masked Image Modeling
Fengxiang Wang1 , Hongzhen Wang2,3 *, Di Wang4,5 , Zonghao Guo3 , Zhenyu Zhong6 ,
Long Lan1 *, Wenjing Yang 1 *, Jing Zhang4 *
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
2
Xiaomi Corp. 3 Tsinghua University 4 School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
5
Zhongguancun Academy 6 Nankai University

Abstract
Masked Image Modeling (MIM) has become an essential
method for building foundational visual models in remote
sensing (RS). However, the limitations in size and diversity
of existing RS datasets restrict the ability of MIM methods
to learn generalizable representations. Additionally, conventional MIM techniques, which require reconstructing all
tokens, introduce unnecessary computational overhead. To
address these issues, we present a new pre-training pipeline
for RS models, featuring the creation of a large-scale RS
dataset and an efficient MIM approach. We curated a highquality dataset named OpticalRS-13M by collecting publicly available RS datasets and processing them through
exclusion, slicing, and deduplication. OpticalRS-13M comprises 13 million optical images covering various RS tasks,
such as object detection and pixel segmentation. To enhance efficiency, we propose SelectiveMAE, a pre-training
method that dynamically encodes and reconstructs semantically rich patch tokens, thereby reducing the inefficiencies of traditional MIM models caused by redundant background pixels in RS images. Extensive experiments show
that OpticalRS-13M significantly improves classification,
detection, and segmentation performance, while SelectiveMAE increases training efficiency over 2× times. This highlights the effectiveness and scalability of our pipeline in
developing RS foundational models. The dataset, source
code, and trained models will be released at SelectiveMAE
(https://github.com/MiliLab/SelectiveMAE) .

Figure 1. Advantages of SelectiveMAE on finetuning performance
and pre-training efficiency. The accuracy is evaluated on the DIOR
detection dataset [1] with different versions of ViT [2]. The training efficiency is measured by Data Throughput/Minute, i.e., the
processed images per minute, on 8 ×NVIDIA A100 GPUs.

detection [10], and semantic segmentation [11]. However,
each task typically demands substantial computational resources to train specialized models and learn task-specific
feature representations.
Recent advances in self-supervised learning, particularly
Masked Image Modeling (MIM) techniques [13, 14], have
significantly improved the pre-training of visual foundation
models [15–20]. This progress has led to the emergence of
remote sensing foundation models (RSFMs), which provide
general feature representations and achieve state-of-the-art
performance across various remote sensing tasks [21]. However, RSFMs still face two key challenges: (i) Compared
to ImageNet-21k [22], existing RS datasets [23–26] are significantly smaller (approximately 1 million vs. 14 million
samples), limiting the effective MIM training of large models; and (ii) these datasets primarily capture global scene
semantics [23–25] but lack the diversity and fine-grained
details essential for downstream tasks, hindering the generalization of learned representations.
To address these challenges, taking an example of visible light RS imagery, we propose a new pipeline to collect,
create, and efficiently process a large RS dataset. Firstly, we
reviewed publicly available remote sensing datasets from the
past decade and selected them based on the DiRS (Diver-

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, advances in remote sensing (RS) technology and data acquisition have enhanced applications in
ecosystem monitoring [3], natural disaster management [4],
among others [5, 6]. These rely on essential capabilities such
as scene classification [7, 8], object detection [9], change
* Corresponding authors

6935

