This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArgMatch: Adaptive Refinement Gathering for Efficient Dense Matching
Yuxin Deng1 Kaining Zhang2 Linfeng Tang1 Jiaqi Yang3 Jiayi Ma1 *
1
Wuhan University, China 2 Hunan University, China
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
{acuo.dyx, zkn707196, linfeng0419, jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract

Residual
Offset
Estimator

Establishing dense correspondences is crucial yet computationally demanding in multi-view tasks. Although coarseto-fine schemes mitigate computational costs, their efficiency remains limited by the substantial demands of heavy
feature extractors and global matchers. In this paper,
we propose Adaptive Refinement Gathering, a refinement
pipeline that reduces reliance on these costly components
without sacrificing accuracy. The pipeline consists of (i)
a content-aware offset estimator that leverages content information for lightweight correlation volume encoding and
decoding; (ii) a locally consistent match rectifier robust to
large global initial errors; (iii) a locally consistent upsampler that yields fewer artifacts around depth-discontinuous
edges. Additionally, we introduce an adaptive gating strategy that, in conjunction with local consistency, dynamically modulates the contribution of different components
and pixels. This enables adaptive gradient backpropagation and allows the network to fully exploit its capacity.
Compared to the state-of-the-art, our lightweight network,
termed ArgMatch, achieves competitive performance in serval tasks, while significantly reducing the computational
cost. Codes are available in https://github.com/
ACuOoOoO/argmatch.

jqyang@nwpu.edu.cn

+

Bilinear
Upsampler

(a) Classical Refinement Pipeline
ContentAware
Estimator

Match
Rectifier

Feedforward
Backpropagation
Adaptive
Backpropagation
Gated Gathering
Locally
Consistent
Upsampler

(b) Adaptive Refinement Gathering (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between the classic refinement pipeline
and ours. In feedforward, a novel rectifier and upsampler facilitate the offset estimator to refine the matches. During training, the
gated gathering and the local consistency mechanism dynamically
propagate gradients to each component.

1. Introduction

ing first initializes coarse matches at low resolution. These
are then refined via local matching, which samples candidate correspondences within local windows, computes the
correlation volume (CV), and decodes CVs to obtain residual offsets. The refined matches are subsequently upsampled, typically using bilinear interpolation, to higher resolutions for further refinement. Despite the widespread adoption of coarse-to-fine strategies, the overall efficiency remains constrained by redundant feature representation [10,
12] and complex global initialization [12, 58], etc.
We argue that the redundancy present in existing methods cannot be eliminated without compromising performance, primarily due to the ineffective design of the refiners. Specifically: (i) Existing CV-based refiners require
highly distinctive, high-dimensional features to sharpen
CVs for accurate residual offset estimation. (ii) They are inherently limited to correcting errors in local windows. Addressing larger errors requires a more robust but often complex global initialization. (iii) They are not effectively cooptimized with other components, hindering overall capacity utilization of the model. When errors exceed the scope
of the local window, existing optimization strategies compel
the refiner to fix the errors, rather than propagating gradients
to earlier modules for rational optimization.
In this work, we propose a novel and effective refinement pipeline, named adaptive refinement gathering, to ad-

Finding dense pixel correspondences between images is
a fundamental step for many tasks, such as 3D reconstruction [34] and visual localization [32]. To this end,
corresponding features across images must be accurately
matched. However, brute-force global matching of all features incurs a computational complexity proportional to the
square of the image resolution, making it intractable for
high-resolution cases. To address this challenge, a coarseto-fine scheme is inherently employed [10, 12, 37, 41, 58].
In classic coarse-to-fine schemes, global feature match* Corresponding author.

27369

