This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Future-Aware Interaction Network For Motion Forecasting
Shijie Li ♢

Chunyu Liu □ Xun Xu ♢ Si Yong Yeo △ Xulei Yang ♢,B
♢ 2
I R, A*STAR □ CEPRI * △ LKCMedicine, NTU†
B
Corresponding author

Abstract
Motion forecasting is a crucial component of autonomous
driving systems, enabling the generation of accurate and
smooth future trajectories to ensure safe navigation to the
destination. In previous methods, potential future trajectories are often absent in the scene encoding stage, which
may lead to suboptimal outcomes. Additionally, prior
approaches typically employ transformer architectures for
spatiotemporal modeling of trajectories and map information, which suffer from the quadratic scaling complexity
of the transformer architecture. In this work, we propose
an interaction-based method, named Future-Aware Interaction Network, that introduces potential future trajectories
into scene encoding for a comprehensive traffic representation. Furthermore, a State Space Model (SSM), specifically
Mamba, is introduced for both spatial and temporal modeling. To adapt Mamba for spatial interaction modeling,
we propose an adaptive reordering strategy that transforms
unordered data into a structured sequence. Additionally,
Mamba is employed to refine generated future trajectories
temporally, ensuring more consistent predictions. These enhancements not only improve model efficiency but also enhance the accuracy and diversity of predictions. We conduct
comprehensive experiments on the widely used Argoverse 1
and Argoverse 2 datasets, demonstrating that the proposed
method achieves superior performance compared to previous approaches in a more efficient way. The code is available here.

(a) Query-based

(b) Intention-based

Figure 1. Query-based method (QCNet[4]) usually struggles to
avoid unrealistic predictions (e.g., incorrectly predicting a left
turn) due to the separate optimization of historical and future
states. The proposed interaction-based method captures a more
comprehensive representation of traffic scenarios by jointly optimizing the current state and future potential trajectories, leading
to a deeper understanding and effectively reducing such errors.

nature of motion forecasting, where multiple plausible future trajectories can exist, still pose significant challenges
to its practical application.
Recent works [4–6] typically encode the entire scenario
into multiple tokens, with each token representing an individual scene element, agent’s historical trajectory or a
lane segment. The future trajectories will either originate
directly from the agent’s current state with a Multilayer
perception (MLP) or be represented as several learnable
queries that denote driver intention. These queries aggregate relevant information from the encoded representations
and are ultimately used to decode the future trajectories. We
categorize these approaches as MLP-based[5] and Querybased[4] methods, respectively as indicated in Fig. 2. We
observe these approaches usually introduce future trajectories after the scene encoding stage which results in the separate optimization of historical and future states, which may
be suboptimal, as indicated in Fig. 1.
The Transformer [7] is widely adopted for spatiotemporal modeling in motion forecasting tasks; however, its
computational complexity scales quadratically with sequence length. In scenarios where numerous agents coexist,
this creates significant challenges in maintaining efficiency
while ensuring safety in such complex environments. Al-

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting is a critical component of autonomous
driving systems. It serves as a bridge between the perception module [1, 2] and the planning module [3] by predicting accurate future trajectories, enabling safe and smooth
navigation to the destination. However, the complexity of
real-world traffic scenarios and the inherently multimodal
* CEPRI is China Electric Power Research Institute, Beijing, China.
† LKCMedicine, NTU is Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang

Technological University, Singapore.

7505

