This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fewer Denoising Steps or Cheaper Per-Step Inference: Towards
Compute-Optimal Diffusion Model Deployment
Zhenbang Du*, Yonggan Fu∗ , Lifu Wang∗ , Jiayi Qian, Xiao Luo,
Yingyan (Celine) Lin
Georgia Institute of Technology
{zdu89,jiayiqian,celine.lin}@gatech.edu

Abstract

noising process, which gradually refines outputs to achieve
high-quality results, along with advanced model architectures. However, both the iterative nature and model complexity of diffusion models make them computationally intensive, posing a significant challenge for deployment on
resource-constrained platforms, where computational resources, memory, and power are limited. Efficient deployment of diffusion models on these platforms is therefore
highly desirable to broaden the accessibility of generative
AI, enabling real-time applications that can operate within
the strict constraints of on-device resources.
With the increasing demand for rapid diffusion model
deployment, where a given diffusion model is expected to
be instantly compressed and deployed without fine-tuning,
a critical question arises: Under a post-training setting, is
it more effective to optimize for fewer denoising steps or
to reduce the per-step inference cost? This question is particularly important because each approach entails different
trade-offs: Reducing the number of denoising steps introduces greater variability in feature changes between steps,
which can amplify the negative impact of compression on
output fidelity; Conversely, using more denoising steps reduces these step-to-step differences, preserving redundancy
and making it easier to apply post-training compression
without sacrificing quality. However, there is a limited exploration of how these two strategies perform in terms of
fidelity-efficiency trade-offs, and investigating this could
provide valuable guidelines for efficient diffusion model deployment in real-world applications.
To address this research question, we propose PostDiff,
a training-free diffusion model compression framework designed to enhance the per-step inference efficiency of pretrained diffusion models at both the input level and module level in a post-training manner. Our techniques are
training-free and can thus be instantly applied to emerging
diffusion models for rapid deployment, enabling a comparative study of their effectiveness versus reducing denoising
steps. Specifically, at the input level, we propose a mixedresolution denoising scheme that adopts a lower generation

Diffusion models have shown remarkable success across
generative tasks, yet their high computational demands
challenge deployment on resource-limited platforms. This
paper investigates a critical question for compute-optimal
diffusion model deployment: Under a post-training setting
without fine-tuning, is it more effective to reduce the number of denoising steps or to use a cheaper per-step inference? Intuitively, reducing the number of denoising steps
increases the variability of the distributions across steps,
making the model more sensitive to compression. In contrast, keeping more denoising steps makes the differences
smaller, preserving redundancy, and making post-training
compression more feasible. To systematically examine this,
we propose PostDiff, a training-free framework for accelerating pre-trained diffusion models by reducing redundancy
at both the input level and module level in a post-training
manner. At the input level, we propose a mixed-resolution
denoising scheme based on the insight that reducing generation resolution in early denoising steps can enhance
low-frequency components and improve final generation fidelity. At the module level, we employ a hybrid module
caching strategy to reuse computations across denoising
steps. Extensive experiments and ablation studies demonstrate that (1) PostDiff can significantly improve the fidelityefficiency trade-off of state-of-the-art diffusion models, and
(2) to boost efficiency while maintaining decent generation
fidelity, reducing per-step inference cost is often more effective than reducing the number of denoising steps. Our code
is available at https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/PostDiff.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have rapidly advanced as a powerful tool
for various generative tasks, such as image synthesis and
video generation. Their success stems from the iterative de* Equal contribution.

3001

