This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenHaze: Pioneering Controllable One-Step Realistic Haze Generation
for Real-World Dehazing
Sixiang Chen1 Tian Ye1 Yunlong Lin2 Yeying Jin3 Yijun Yang1
Haoyu Chen1 Jianyu Lai1 Song Fei1 Zhaohu Xing1 Fugee Tsung1,4 Lei Zhu1,4 *
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Xiamen University 3 Tencent
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Generative Model Empowers Realistic Haze Generation, Driving Real-World Dehazing to Peak!
Controllable One-Step Haze Gen.

× 1 𝑶𝒏𝒍𝒚
GenHaze
Haze Image (Reference)

Advance Dehazing Performance

Baseline

Baseline

Clean Image

Generated Haze

Haze Image (Reference)

Clean Image

Generated Haze

Baseline*(Ours)

Baseline*(Ours)

Finetuning
Baseline-related Content

GenHaze

Baseline*-related Content

Figure 1. We propose GenHaze, a controllable one-step haze generation model. The core principle of GenHaze is to use the existing
latent diffusion models (LDM) [67], and adapt it to the haze generation task via our clean-to-haze generation protocol. Based on GenHaze,
we can significantly unleash the real-world dehazing potential of existing baselines in a simple way!

Abstract

baselines can be unleashed in a simple and efficient manner.
Extensive experiments indicate that GenHaze achieves visually convincing and quantitatively superior hazy images. It
also significantly improves multiple existing dehazing models across 7 non-reference metrics with minimal fine-tuning
epochs. Our work demonstrates that LDM possesses the
potential to generate realistic degradations, providing an
effective alternative to prior generation pipelines.

Real-world image dehazing is crucial for enhancing visual
quality in computer vision applications. However, existing
physics-based haze generation paradigms struggle to model
the complexities of real-world haze and lack controllability,
limiting the performance of existing baselines on real-world
images. In this paper, we introduce GenHaze, a pioneering
haze generation framework that enables the one-step generation of high-quality, reference-controllable hazy images.
GenHaze leverages the pre-trained latent diffusion model
(LDM) with a carefully designed clean-to-haze generation
protocol to produce realistic hazy images. Additionally, by
leveraging its fast, controllable generation of paired highquality hazy images, we illustrate that existing dehazing

1. Introduction
Image dehazing aims to restore a clean image from a
haze image, ultimately enhancing real-world visual quality.
However, acquiring paired real-world haze and clear images
is virtually impossible. Consequently, existing methods
*corresponding authors.

9194

