This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What Makes for Text to 360-degree Panorama Generation with Stable Diffusion?
Chang-Bin Zhang2
Qiang Zhang3,4
Jing Zhang1
Jinhong Ni1 *
1
Australian National University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Beijing Innovation Center of Humanoid Robotics
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{jinhong.ni,jing.zhang}@anu.edu.au

cbzhang@connect.hku.hk

Abstract
Recent prosperity of text-to-image diffusion models, e.g.
Stable Diffusion, has stimulated research to adapt them to
360-degree panorama generation. Prior work has demonstrated the feasibility of using conventional low-rank adaptation techniques on pre-trained diffusion models to generate panoramic images. However, the substantial domain gap between perspective and panoramic images raises
questions about the underlying mechanisms enabling this
empirical success. We hypothesize and examine that the
trainable counterparts exhibit distinct behaviors when finetuned on panoramic data, and such an adaptation conceals
some intrinsic mechanism to leverage the prior knowledge
within the pre-trained diffusion models. Our analysis reveals the following: 1) the query and key matrices in the
attention modules are responsible for common information
that can be shared between the panoramic and perspective domains, thus are less relevant to panorama generation; and 2) the value and output weight matrices specialize in adapting pre-trained knowledge to the panoramic domain, playing a more critical role during fine-tuning for
panorama generation. We empirically verify these insights
by introducing a simple framework called UniPano, with
the objective of establishing an elegant baseline for future
research. UniPano not only outperforms existing methods
but also significantly reduces memory usage and training
time compared to prior dual-branch approaches, making it
scalable for end-to-end panorama generation with higher
resolution. The code is available1 .

1. Introduction
Creating 360-degree panoramic images has gained substantial attention due to its significant potential [20, 49]. Despite
the considerable advancement in text-to-image synthesis re* Work partially done at The University of Hong Kong.
1 https://github.com/jinhong-ni/UniPano

jony.zhang@x-humanoid.com

cently [31–33], generating panoramas from text prompts remains challenging from the following aspect. Panoramic
images encompass the entire surrounding view with a 360degree horizontal and 180-degree vertical field of view, typically represented using equirectangular projection geometry. This results in distinctive features such as a 2 : 1 aspect ratio and spherical distortion, setting them apart from
standard square perspective images. On top of this, due
to the high cost of capturing panoramic images in practice, the panoramic datasets are often relatively scarce, e.g.
Matterport3D [5] contains 10,800 panoramic images. The
lack of data complicates the training of generative models,
as conventional perspective diffusion models [33] generally
require billions of text-image pairs for training [36].
To mitigate data scarcity, the typical strategy is to finetune pre-trained diffusion models for downstream applications [17, 35, 53]. However, as stated in [16], the fundamental structural differences between panoramic and perspective images intuitively suggest that the embedded perspective knowledge within the pre-trained diffusion models may
not be readily transferable. Aligning with this intuition,
prior work [16, 18, 42] has proposed generating multiple
perspective images according to predefined camera poses
and stitching them into a panorama. Contrary to the aforementioned intuition, another line of work [52] has demonstrated that fine-tuning pre-trained diffusion models on limited panoramic data using conventional low-rank adaptation
(LoRA) [14] still yields effective text-to-panorama generation results. This empirical success suggests the presence of
some intrinsic mechanism that enables LoRA to effectively
leverage prior knowledge from the pre-trained perspective
diffusion models, thereby circumventing the structural differences. This motivates us to explore the following question: What exactly makes for fine-tuning Stable Diffusion
for text-to-panorama generation?
We base our analysis on the LoRA fine-tuning paradigm
to study the behaviors and ideally functionalities of all trainable counterparts, particularly their impact on panorama
generation, with the ultimate goal of elucidating the mecha-

16555

