This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EditCLIP: Representation Learning for Image Editing
Qian Wang

Aleksandar Cvejic

Abdelrahman Eldesokey

Peter Wonka

KAUST, Saudi Arabia

Exemplar-Based Image Editing
Query Image

Input

Output Image

Method A

Method B

Method C

E C D

E C D

E C D

E C D

E C D

E C D

Instruction-Based

Exemplar

Automated Evaluation of Image Editing

Exemplar-Based

“Make the sky stormy”

Human

E EditCLIP (Ours)

C CLIP

D Directional CLIP

Figure 1. EditCLIP provides a unified representation of image edits by encoding the transformation between an image and its edited
counterpart within the CLIP space. We demonstrate the effectiveness of EditCLIP embeddings in exemplar-based image editing and
automated evaluation of image editing pipelines, where it achieves better alignment with human assessment.

Abstract
We introduce EditCLIP, a novel representation-learning
approach for image editing. Our method learns a unified
representation of edits by jointly encoding an input image and its edited counterpart, effectively capturing their
transformation. To evaluate its effectiveness, we employ
EditCLIP to solve two tasks: exemplar-based image editing and automated edit evaluation. In exemplar-based image editing, we replace text-based instructions in InstructPix2Pix [4] with EditCLIP embeddings computed from
a reference exemplar image pair. Experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods while being more efficient and versatile. For automated evaluation, EditCLIP assesses image edits by measuring the similarity between the EditCLIP embedding of
a given image pair and either a textual editing instruction or the EditCLIP embedding of another reference image

pair. Experiments show that EditCLIP aligns more closely
with human judgments than existing CLIP-based metrics,
providing a reliable measure of edit quality and structural
preservation. The code and model weights are available at
https://github.com/QianWangX/EditCLIP.

1. Introduction

15960

Image editing is a fundamental task in creative domains
such as design and digital art, enabling creators to iteratively
refine their creations to align with their artistic vision. Recent advancements in diffusion models [12, 28, 34–36] have
revolutionized image editing [3–5, 17, 20, 23, 27, 37, 45,
46], leveraging their deep semantic understanding of images and artistic styles to apply highly realistic edits. Traditionally, diffusion-based editing approaches rely on textual
instructions to specify the desired edits. Then, the internal dynamics of a diffusion model are manipulated to localize regions of interest and apply the edit. While effective,

