This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R-LiViT: A LiDAR-Visual-Thermal Dataset Enabling Vulnerable Road User
Focused Roadside Perception
Jonas Mirlach1 * Lei Wan1,2 * Andreas Wiedholz1 * Hannan Ejaz Keen1 Andreas Eich3
1
XITASO GmbH 2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 3 LiangDao GmbH
{jonas.mirlach, lei.wan, andreas.wiedholz, hannan.keen}@xitaso.com, andreas.eich@liangdao.de

Figure 1. Illustrative visualization of an R-LiViT frame, with the right side depicting the same location at night.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the domain of autonomous driving, research and development of early perception systems rely on large-scale
datasets like KITTI [10] and nuScenes [4], which focus primarily on the vehicle perspective. However, in order to deal
with occlusion, roadside perception systems play a critical
role in achieving high-level autonomous driving and improving traffic management systems. By deploying roadside sensors, it is possible to detect road users more reliably
and share this information with nearby vehicles to enhance
the perception capabilities of connected and automated vehicles. Additionally, these systems can transmit data to
traffic management platforms, enabling effective monitoring and control of traffic flow. The development of such
systems requires high-quality annotated sensor data.

In autonomous driving, the integration of roadside perception systems is essential for overcoming occlusion challenges and enhancing the safety of Vulnerable Road Users
(VRUs). While LiDAR and visual (RGB) sensors are commonly used, thermal imaging remains underrepresented in
datasets, despite its acknowledged advantages for VRU detection in extreme lighting conditions. In this paper, we
present R-LiViT, the first dataset to combine LiDAR, RGB,
and thermal imaging from a roadside perspective, with a
strong focus on VRUs. R-LiViT captures three intersections
during both day and night, ensuring a diverse dataset. It
includes 10,000 LiDAR frames and 2,400 temporally and
spatially aligned RGB and thermal images across 150 traffic scenarios, with 7 and 8 annotated classes respectively,
providing a comprehensive resource for tasks such as object
detection and tracking. The dataset1 and the code for reproducing our evaluation results2 are made publicly available.

* Equal contribution
1 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16356714

Although several roadside perception datasets have been
published [2, 29, 33, 39], the majority predominantly emphasize vehicles while giving less attention to
Vulnerable Road User
s (VRUs), such as
pedestrians and cyclists.
Moreover, these datasets tend to focus primarily on LiDAR
and visual (RGB) modalities. Recent research has demonstrated that, particularly for pedestrian detection, incorporating thermal imaging can be highly beneficial [12]. Ther-

2 https://github.com/XITASO/r-livit

28375

