This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-LRM: Long-sequence Large Reconstruction Model for Wide-coverage
Gaussian Splats
Chen Ziwen1 * Hao Tan2
1

Kai Zhang2 Sai Bi2 Fujun Luan2
Li Fuxin1 Zexiang Xu3

Oregon State University

2

Adobe Research
Input Views

Abstract
We propose Long-LRM, a feed-forward 3D Gaussian reconstruction model for instant, high-resolution, 360 widecoverage, scene-level reconstruction. Specifically, it takes in
32 input images at a resolution of 960⇥540 and produces the
Gaussian reconstruction in just 1 second on a single A100
GPU. To handle the long sequence of 250K tokens brought
by the large input size, Long-LRM features a mixture of the
recent Mamba2 blocks and the classical transformer blocks,
enhanced by a light-weight token merging module and Gaussian pruning steps that balance between quality and efficiency. We evaluate Long-LRM on the large-scale DL3DV
benchmark and Tanks&Temples, demonstrating reconstruction quality comparable to the optimization-based methods
while achieving an 800⇥ speedup w.r.t. the optimizationbased approaches and an input size at least 60⇥ larger
than the previous feed-forward approaches. We conduct
extensive ablation studies on our model design choices
for both rendering quality and computation efficiency. We
also explore Long-LRM’s compatibility with other Gaussian variants such as 2D GS, which enhances Long-LRM’s
ability in geometry reconstruction. Project page: http:
//arthurhero.github.io/projects/llrm/

3

Yicong Hong2

Hillbot
Novel Views

Wide-coverage
Gaussian Reconstruction

Ours (1sec), PSNR: 30.78

3D GS (13min), PSNR: 24.74

Ours (1sec), PSNR: 26.86

3D GS (13min), PSNR: 25.57

Figure 1. Long-LRM reconstructs a real-world scene with wide
viewing coverage from 32 images at a resolution of 960 ⇥ 540
in just 1 second. As a feed-forward generalizable model, LongLRM achieves instant Gaussian reconstruction with high rendering
quality comparable to the optimization-based 3D Gaussian splatting
methods, which require over 10 minutes to converge on each scene.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from multi-view images is a fundamental
problem in computer vision, with applications ranging from
3D content creation, VR/AR, to autonomous driving and
robotics. Recently, NeRF [36] and various radiance fieldbased methods [2, 6, 37, 56] have shown great potential in
reconstructing high-quality 3D scenes from a set of posed images via differentiable rendering. However, these models are
slow to reconstruct and not generalizable to unseen scenes,
as they require optimization for each scene independently.
While 3D Gaussian splatting (GS) [23] has significantly
advanced reconstruction and rendering efficiency, it still typically requires at least 10 minutes to optimize for each scene

and cannot achieve instant reconstruction.
To address this, generalizable 3D GS models [46, 48]
have been proposed to enable fast feed-forward GS reconstruction, avoiding per-scene optimization. Several methods [4, 7, 30, 64] have shown promising scene-level reconstruction results on real 3D captures by regressing per-pixel
Gaussian primitives. In particular, GS-LRM [64], following
the principles of 3D large reconstruction models (LRMs)
[17, 25, 52] and using transformer blocks [50] without 3D
inductive biases such as epipolar attention or sweeping volumes, has achieved state-of-the-art novel-view rendering
quality on multiple challenging datasets. However, these pre-

* Research partially done when Chen Ziwen was an intern at Adobe
Research

4349

