This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CharaConsist: Fine-Grained Consistent Character Generation
Mengyu Wang1,3 , Henghui Ding2†, Jianing Peng1,3 , Yao Zhao1,3 , Yunpeng Chen4 , Yunchao Wei1,3†
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Big Data, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Visual Intelligence + X International Joint Laboratory of the Ministry of Education
4
Alkaid Pte. Ltd., Singapore
mengyu.wang@bjtu.edu.cn, henghui.ding@gmail.com, wychao1987@gmail.com

A Ph.D. student
working on a paper

Attending the
conference

Well…
hold on

Achieving excellent
experimental results!

Making an oral
presentation

Waiting for the
paper decision…

Accepted!

Taking a vacation
while at it

It’s a dream
🥹😭

Going back to
hard work

Figure 1. CharaConsist achieves fine-grained consistency maintaining. The left part shows that, CharaConsist enables more flexible
storytelling, supports controllable scene transitions, and achieves character consistency within a fixed scene, across different scenes, and
across resolutions. The right part highlights CharaConsist’s ability to preserve extensive background details with complete consistency.

Abstract
In text-to-image generation, producing a series of consistent
contents that preserve the same identity is highly valuable
for real-world applications. Although a few works have
explored training-free methods to enhance the consistency
of generated subjects, we observe that they suffer from the
following problems. First, they fail to maintain consistent background details, which limits their applicability.
Furthermore, when the foreground character undergoes
large motion variations, inconsistencies in identity and
clothing details become evident. To address these problems,
we propose CharaConsist, which employs point-tracking
attention and adaptive token merge along with decoupled
control of the foreground and background. CharaConsist

enables fine-grained consistency for both foreground and
background, supporting the generation of one character in
continuous shots within a fixed scene or in discrete shots
across different scenes. Moreover, CharaConsist is the first
consistent generation method tailored for text-to-image DiT
model. Its ability to maintain fine-grained consistency, combined with the larger capacity of latest base model, enables
it to produce high-quality visual outputs, broadening its
applicability to a wider range of real-world scenarios. The
source code has been released at CharaConsist.git.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding authors: Henghui Ding and Yunchao Wei.

Text-to-image (T2I) generation has advanced significantly
in recent years [18, 21], especially with the widespread
emergence of Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) [3, 12, 17].
Their successful scaling-up has led to significant improve-

16058

