This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DisCo: Towards Distinct and Coherent Visual Encapsulation in Video MLLMs
Jiahe Zhao1,2 Rongkun Zheng1 Yi Wang3,4 Helin Wang5 Hengshuang Zhao1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Shanghai Innovation Institute 5 Fudan University
zhaojiahe22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, hszhao@cs.hku.hk

red ball

(a)

grass

In video Multimodal Large Language Models (video
MLLMs), the visual encapsulation process plays a pivotal
role in converting video contents into representative tokens for LLM input. While linear projectors are widely
employed for encapsulation, they introduce semantic indistinctness and temporal incoherence when applied to videos.
Conversely, the structure of resamplers shows promise in
tackling these challenges, but an effective solution remains
unexplored. Drawing inspiration from resampler structures, we introduce DisCo, a novel visual encapsulation
method designed to yield semantically distinct and temporally coherent visual tokens for video MLLMs. DisCo integrates two key components: (1) A Visual Concept Discriminator (VCD) module, assigning unique semantics for
visual tokens by associating them in pair with discriminative concepts in the video. (2) A Temporal Focus Calibrator (TFC) module, ensuring consistent temporal focus of visual tokens to video elements across every video
frame. Through extensive experiments on multiple video
MLLM frameworks, we demonstrate that DisCo remarkably outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods across
a variety of video understanding benchmarks, while also
achieving higher token efficiency thanks to the reduction
of semantic indistinctness. The codes will be available at
https://github.com/ZJHTerry18/DisCo.

white dog

Linear Projector

Abstract

(b)

×2
Distinct
Frame 1 Frame 2
Coherent

Resampler

×2
Distinct
Frame 1 Frame 2
Coherent

DisCo (Ours)

(c)

×1

×1

×1

Distinct
Frame 1 Frame 2
Coherent

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustrations of different visual encapsulation methods
in video MLLMs. (a) Linear projector directly projects tokens
of each frame, leading to repetitive semantics for objects appearing in multiple frames, and is incapable of modeling cross-frame
temporal coherence. (b) Resampler utilizes attention mechanism
to derive tokens, which is prone to redundant extraction of same
semantics, and cannot guarantee coherent attention across frames.
(c) Our proposed Disco can generate high-quality tokens with distinct semantics and coherent temporal correlations.

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [2, 3, 9,
19, 35, 44, 68] have spearheaded the advancement of visionlanguage learning, gaining impressive visual understanding abilities on a myriad of open-world tasks. While
the early exploitations were made on image inputs, recent
studies have yielded profound breakthroughs on empowering MLLMs for video understanding [10, 30, 37, 49, 54,
60, 81], contributing to a multitude of real-world appli* Corresponding author.

21710

cations like robotics [51], autonomous driving [66], and
AIGC [11]. In contrast to images, video data is characterized by a substantially larger volume of visual information, coupled with inherent temporal complexities, which
presents a formidable challenge in effectively encapsulating video inputs to facilitate optimal comprehension by the
language model.
For MLLMs, the visual connector [7, 23, 35, 39, 85]
emerges as a pivotal component for the encapsulation of
visual features into working tokens for LLM. Currently,
a major stream of video MLLMs adopt linear projectors [38, 41, 43, 65] for visual encapsulation. While lin-

