This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ContraGS: Codebook-Condensed and Trainable Gaussian Splatting for Fast,
Memory-Efficient Reconstruction
Sankeerth Durvasula1† , Sharanshangar Muhunthan1 , Zain Moustafa1 , Richard Chen1 , Ruofan Liang1
Yushi Guan1 , Nilesh Ahuja2 , Nilesh Jain2 , Selvakumar Panneer2 , Nandita Vijaykumar1
1
2
University of Toronto
Intel
{sankeerth,zain,ruofan,guanyushi,nandita}@cs.toronto.edu
{shangar.muhunthan,riixardo.chen}@mail.utoronto.ca
{nilesh.ahuja,nilesh.jain,selvakumar.panneer}@intel.com

Figure 1. ContraGS: A 3D scene is modeled using 3D Gaussian Splatting [25]. A codebook stores a compressed representation of the
3DGS scene as common vectors of 3DG parameters. ContraGS enables learning parameters of a codebook-compressed 3DG scene by
posing the parameter estimation as a Bayesian inference problem. ContraGS proposes split/merge/update on each codebook vector to
explore the state space of codebook-compressed models.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) is a state-of-art technique to model real-world scenes with high quality and
real-time rendering. Typically, a higher quality representation can be achieved by using a large number of 3D
Gaussians. However, using large 3D Gaussian counts significantly increases the GPU device memory for storing
model parameters. A large model thus requires powerful GPUs with high memory capacities for training and
has slower training/rendering latencies due to the inefficiencies of memory access and data movement. In this
work, we introduce ContraGS, a method to enable training directly on compressed 3DGS representations without
reducing the Gaussian Counts, and thus with a little loss
in model quality. ContraGS leverages codebooks to compactly store a set of Gaussian parameter vectors throughout
the training process, thereby significantly reducing mem-

ory consumption. While codebooks have been demonstrated to be highly effective at compressing fully trained
3DGS models, directly training using codebook representations is an unsolved challenge. ContraGS solves the problem of learning non-differentiable parameters in codebookcompressed representations by posing parameter estimation
as a Bayesian inference problem. To this end, ContraGS
provides a framework that effectively uses MCMC sampling
to sample over a posterior distribution of these compressed
representations. With ContraGS, we demonstrate that ContraGS significantly reduces the peak memory during training (on average 3.49×) and accelerated training and rendering (1.36× and 1.88× on average, respectively), while
retraining close to state-of-art quality.

1. Introduction
3D Gaussian Splatting [25] (3DGS) is a state-of-art technique for modeling real-world scenes with high quality and

28935

