This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Move to Understand a 3D Scene: Bridging Visual Grounding and Exploration for
Efficient and Versatile Embodied Navigation
Ziyu Zhu1,2∗† , Xilin Wang2,4 , Yixuan Li2,3 , Zhuofan Zhang1,2 , Xiaojian Ma2 , Yixin Chen2 ,
Baoxiong Jia2 , Wei Liang3 , Qian Yu4 , Zhidong Deng1† B, Siyuan Huang2 B, Qing Li2 B
1
Tsinghua University 3 Beijing Institute of Technology 4 Beihang University
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI, China
Project page: mtu3d.github.io
Goal Type

Image.

Image

Description

Task plan

Question

Task: Set up living room for fun!
How many pillows
on the bed?

A table for dinner.
Step1: Turn on TV.
Step3: Take some
snacks from Box.

Step4: Sit on sofa
and relax.
Step2: Turn on the Stove.

Exploring step

Start position

Grounding step

Target position

Figure 1. MTU3D is a versatile embodied navigation model capable of processing diverse inputs, including object categories, image
snapshots, natural language descriptions, task plan sequences, and questions. It iteratively explores the environment and performs visual
grounding to reach the target location. Through large-scale Vision-Language-Exploration pre-training, it achieves state-of-the-art performance across various benchmarks including open-vocabulary, multi-modal lifelong, and sequential navigation.

Abstract

ploring, which represents unexplored locations as frontier
queries and jointly optimizes object grounding and frontier
selection. 3) End-to-end trajectory learning that combines
Vision-Language-Exploration pre-training over a million
diverse trajectories collected from both simulated and realworld RGB-D sequences. Extensive evaluations across various embodied navigation and question-answering benchmarks show that MTU3D outperforms state-of-the-art reinforcement learning and modular navigation approaches by
14%, 23%, 9%, and 2% in success rate on HM3D-OVON,
GOAT-Bench, SG3D, and A-EQA, respectively. MTU3D’s
versatility enables navigation using diverse input modalities, including categories, language descriptions, and reference images. The deployment on a real robot demonstrates
MTU3D’s effectiveness in handling real-world data. These
findings highlight the importance of bridging visual grounding and exploration for embodied intelligence.

Embodied scene understanding requires not only comprehending visual-spatial information that has been observed
but also determining where to explore next in the 3D physical world. Existing 3D Vision-Language (3D-VL) models primarily focus on grounding objects in static observations from 3D reconstruction, such as meshes and point
clouds, but lack the ability to actively perceive and explore
their environment. To address this limitation, we introduce Move to Understand (MTU3D), a unified framework
that integrates active perception with 3D vision-language
learning, enabling embodied agents to effectively explore
and understand their environment. This is achieved by
three key innovations: 1) Online query-based representation learning, enabling direct spatial memory construction
from RGB-D frames, eliminating the need for explicit 3D
reconstruction. 2) A unified objective for grounding and ex-

8120

