This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoMobility: Zero-Shot 3D Mobility Analysis from Monocular Videos
Hongyi Zhou1

Yulan Guo2

Xiaogang Wang3 * Kai Xu1 *

1

National University of Defense Technology
2
Sun Yat-sen University
3
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University

Abstract
Accurately analyzing the motion parts and their motion attributes in dynamic environments is crucial for advancing
key areas such as embodied intelligence. Addressing the
limitations of existing methods that rely on dense multiview images or detailed part-level annotations, we propose an innovative framework that can analyze 3D mobility from monocular videos in a zero-shot manner. This
framework can precisely parse motion parts and motion attributes only using a monocular video, completely eliminating the need for annotated training data. Specifically, our
method first constructs the scene geometry and roughly analyzes the motion parts and their initial motion attributes
combining depth estimation, optical flow analysis and point
cloud registration method, then employs 2D Gaussian splatting for scene representation. Building on this, we introduce an end-to-end dynamic scene optimization algorithm
specifically designed for articulated objects, refining the
initial analysis results to ensure the system can handle ‘rotation’, ‘translation’, and even complex movements (‘rotation+translation’), demonstrating high flexibility and versatility. To validate the robustness and wide applicability
of our method, we created a comprehensive dataset comprising both simulated and real-world scenarios. Experimental results show that our framework can effectively analyze articulated object motions in an annotation-free manner, showcasing its significant potential in future embodied
intelligence applications. The project page is at: https:
//monomobility.github.io/MonoMobility.

Monocular Video

Result

Time

Figure 1. Our method could parse the motion parts of articulated
objects and their corresponding motion attributes from a monocular video (top left). Under the constraints of motion attributes, the
parsed parts can be driven to move realistically (bottom).

cient robot interaction with these items, whether it involves
pulling out drawers or pressing pump heads, hinges on a
precise grasp of the objects’ structure and movement characteristics within the scene, particularly the identification of
their motion parts and motion attributes. Consequently, the
ability to accurately parsing the motion parts and their motion attributes of articulated objects in dynamic settings is
not only foundational but also of paramount importance.
Currently, substantial research efforts have been directed
towards the analysis of articulated objects [1–4, 6, 9–
11, 16–18, 22–26, 29–36, 38, 39, 41, 44, 45, 48, 50].
Shape2Motion [44] predicts motion parts and their attributes from 3D point clouds of articulated objects. However, this data-driven method often struggles with unseen
data, leading to suboptimal performance. PARIS [25] and
Weng et al. [45] employ dense RGB(D) multi-view images of the initial and final states to reconstruct both static
and dynamic parts of articulated objects, as well as analyze the motion attributes of these parts. Nevertheless, obtaining dense multi-view images with precise pose information poses significant challenges, making it difficult to apply
these techniques in real-world settings with limited fields of
view. Furthermore, these methods primarily operate at the

1. Introduction
Accurately parsing the motion parts and their motion attributes of articulated objects within dynamic environments
is a critical cornerstone for embodied intelligence and related disciplines. For instance, our daily surroundings
are populated with numerous articulated objects, including
drawers, swivel chairs, staplers, and pump bottles. Effi* Xiaogang Wang and Kai Xu are corresponding authors.

8800

