This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RealGeneral: Unifying Visual Generation via Temporal In-Context Learning
with Video Models
Yijing Lin, Mengqi Huang, Shuhan Zhuang, Zhendong Mao†
University of Science and Technology of China
{lyijing, huangmq, zhuangsh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zdmao@ustc.edu.cn

Figure 1. Results from RealGeneral, demonstrate the ability to produce high-quality images from diverse input conditions.

Abstract
Unifying diverse image generation tasks within a single
framework remains a fundamental challenge in visual generation. While large language models (LLMs) achieve unification through task-agnostic data and generation, existing visual generation models fail to meet these principles.
Current approaches either rely on per-task datasets and
large-scale training or adapt pre-trained image models with
task-specific modifications, limiting their generalizability.
In this work, we explore video models as a foundation for
unified image generation, leveraging their inherent ability
to model temporal correlations. We introduce RealGen-

eral, a novel framework that reformulates image generation as a conditional frame prediction task, analogous to incontext learning in LLMs. To bridge the gap between video
models and condition-image pairs, we propose (1) a Unified Conditional Embedding module for multi-modal alignment and (2) a Unified Stream DiT Block with decoupled
adaptive LayerNorm and attention mask to mitigate crossmodal interference. RealGeneral demonstrates effectiveness in multiple important visual generation tasks, e.g., it
achieves a 14.5% improvement in subject similarity for customized generation and a 10% enhancement in image quality for canny-to-image task. Project Page: realgeneral web;
GitHub Link: https://github.com/Lyne1/RealGeneral

† Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

14994

