This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffTell: A High-Quality Dataset for Describing Image Manipulation Changes
Zonglin Di1 ,* Jing Shi2 , Yifei Fan2 , Hao Tan2 , Alexander Black3 , John Collomosse2,3 , Yang Liu1
1
University of California, Santa Cruz, 2 Adobe Research, 3 CVSSP, University of Surrey
{zdi, yangliu}@ucsc.edu, {jingshi, yifan, hatan, collomos}@adobe.com, {alex.black, j.collomosse}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
The image difference captioning (IDC) task is to describe
the distinctions between two images. However, existing
datasets do not offer comprehensive coverage across all
image-difference categories. In this work, we introduce a
high-quality dataset, DiffTell, with various types of image
manipulations, including global image alterations, objectlevel changes, and text manipulations. Data quality is controlled through careful human review and filtering. Additionally, to scale up the data collection without prohibitive
human labor costs, we explore the possibility of automatically filtering for quality control. We demonstrate that both
traditional methods and recent multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) exhibit performance improvements on the
IDC task after training on the DiffTell dataset. Through extensive ablation studies, we provide a detailed analysis of
the performance gains attributed to DiffTell. Experiments
show DiffTell significantly enhances the availability of resources for IDC research, offering a more comprehensive
foundation and benchmark for future investigations. The
dataset is available at https://huggingface.co/
datasets/zodi1121/DiffTell.

the entire system is given in Appendix A. IDC has been researched with various algorithms [17, 48, 59–61, 65, 73].
However, the image domain and the types of visual differences in the current IDC dataset are limited or small-scale,
as summarized in Table 1. This makes the generalization
ability of the current model unsatisfactory. Although some
datasets are larger, such as OneDiff [20], they tend to be
noisy and lack human verification. Thus, a comprehensive,
clean IDC dataset on a large scale is needed.

1. Introduction

The IDC dataset consists of the data triplet, including
one image pair (the original and the manipulated) and one
language caption describing the difference between them.
The formal definition is given in Section 3.1. As shown in
Table 1, existing datasets focus either on domain-specific
images, such as Spot-the-diff [22], which uses frames of
the surveillance videos, or rendered scenes with limited geometric objects and change types (color, texture, add, drop,
remove) in CLEVR [46]. Even though image editing request (IER) has various types of editing on the real natural images, it is limited in volume (→ 4K) since manual human editing is costly and time-consuming, making
it harder to scale up [59]. Given the development of generative AI and image editing technologies, language-guided
AI-manipulated image data have been created using data
triplets: the before-edited image, the after-edited image, and
the language editing request. InstructPix2Pix [9] leverages
GPT-3 [10] to scale up possible editing commands and resort to prompt2prompt [18] for automatic editing. However,
we find that it has a high error rate exceeding 60%. MagicBrush [74] provides 10K manually annotated real image
editing triplets with careful quality control, but only contains local edits. It has showcased the importance of highquality data for language-guided image editing. Therefore,
we identify the need for an IDC dataset that is varied in manipulation types and maintains high quality on a large scale.

Given the tremendous progress in image generation [51,
53], disseminating AI-modified fake images can lead to
widespread misinformation, erosion of public trust, and manipulation of public opinion on critical issues. Emerging
open standards, such as C2PA (Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity, 2023), outline provenance frameworks that utilize perceptual hashing techniques to link images found in the public domain with a federated database
of original content [7, 47]. Upon retrieving the source image, image difference captioning (IDC) models can describe
the discrepancies between the circulated manipulated image and its original, enabling individuals to make more informed and nuanced trust assessments. The overview of
* This work was done when ZD interned at Adobe Research

To better support research in image difference captioning, we introduce the DiffTell dataset, specifically created
to encompass a broader range of editing types, including
both real and synthetic image pairs, while maintaining careful quality control. We categorize image differences into
four categories: background change, local object change,

24580

