This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ATLAS: Decoupling Skeletal and Shape Parameters for Expressive Parametric
Human Modeling
Jinhyung Park1,2
Yichen Xu1

Javier Romero1 Shunsuke Saito1 Fabian Prada1 Takaaki Shiratori1
Federica Bogo1 Shoou-I Yu1 Kris Kitani1,2 Rawal Khirodkar1
1
Meta 2 Carnegie Mellon University
https://jindapark.github.io/projects/atlas

SMPL-X

ATLAS

Shoulders ↓

Weight ↑

Shoulders ↓

Weight ↑

▪ Height ↓
▪ Arms ↓

▪ Shoulders ↓
▪ Height ↓
▪ Arms ↓

▪ Height →
▪ Arms →

▪ Shoulders →
▪ Height →
▪ Arms →

Figure 1. ATLAS enables precise, decoupled control of skeletal and surface attributes. Here, we customize a mesh to reduce shoulder
width and increase body weight. This level of control is difficult to accomplish in prior work [38] due to undesirable correlations between
joints and vertices, e.g. adjusting shoulder width affects the entire body and increasing weight reverses the shoulder adjustment. With
ATLAS’s decoupled skeleton and shape, this customization is a simple two-step deterministic edit.

our mesh representation in the human skeleton. This decoupling enables enhanced shape expressivity, fine-grained
customization of body attributes, and keypoint fitting independent of external soft-tissue characteristics. ATLAS outperforms existing methods by fitting unseen subjects in diverse poses more accurately, and quantitative evaluations
show that our non-linear pose correctives more effectively
capture complex poses compared to linear models.
“ATLAS—a structure bearing human form.”

Abstract
Parametric body models offer expressive 3D representation of humans across a wide range of poses, shapes, and
facial expressions, typically derived by learning a basis
over registered 3D meshes. However, existing human mesh
modeling approaches struggle to capture detailed variations across diverse body poses and shapes, largely due
to limited training data diversity and restrictive modeling
assumptions. Moreover, the common paradigm first optimizes the external body surface using a linear basis, then
regresses internal skeletal joints from surface vertices. This
approach introduces problematic dependencies between internal skeleton and outer soft tissue, limiting direct control
over body height and bone lengths. To address these issues, we present ATLAS, a high-fidelity body model learned
from 600k high-resolution scans captured using 240 synchronized cameras. Unlike previous methods, we explicitly decouple the shape and skeleton bases by grounding

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant advancements in humancentric applications, including 3D digitization of avatars for
virtual reality [32, 50, 55, 57], efficient and performant motion capture [11, 40, 60, 61], physically plausible humanobject interaction [6, 9, 54], and generative human character
generation [31, 39, 44]. Supporting these methods are parametric models of the human body [5, 33, 38, 53, 58, 59] —

6508

