This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RePoseD: Efficient Relative Pose Estimation With Known Depth Information
Yaqing Ding1 , Viktor Kocur2 , Václav Vávra1 , Zuzana Berger Haladová2 , Jian Yang3 ,
Torsten Sattler4 and Zuzana Kukelova1
1
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University in Bratislava
3
PCA Lab, VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
4
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
Matches in RGB

Corresponding Depth

Abstract
Recent advances in monocular depth estimation methods (MDEs) and their improved accuracy open new possibilities for their applications. In this paper, we investigate how monocular depth estimates can be used for relative pose estimation. In particular, we are interested in answering the question whether using MDEs improves results
over traditional point-based methods. We propose a novel
framework for estimating the relative pose of two cameras from point correspondences with associated monocular depths. Since depth predictions are typically defined
up to an unknown scale or even both unknown scale and
shift parameters, our solvers jointly estimate the scale or
both the scale and shift parameters along with the relative pose. We derive efficient solvers considering different types of depths for three camera configurations: (1)
two calibrated cameras, (2) two cameras with an unknown
shared focal length, and (3) two cameras with unknown
different focal lengths. Our new solvers outperform stateof-the-art depth-aware solvers in terms of speed and accuracy. In extensive real experiments on multiple datasets and
with various MDEs, we discuss which depth-aware solvers
are preferable in which situation. The code is available
at https://github.com/kocurvik/mdrp.

Minimal Solver selection

based on the depth

Local Optimization

with error selection

Scale-invariant solver

Sampson error

(Unidepth, Moge)

(Suggested)

Affine-invariant solver

Reprojection error

(DA, MiDas)

(If you trust the depth)

Poses, Intrinsics

and Geometry

Figure 1. Given point matches and their corresponding depths
from a pair of images, we propose the use of different minimal
solvers for relative pose estimation, according to the properties
of the depth data. For local optimization, the Sampson error is
generally more robust across varying depth conditions, while the
reprojection error may yield better results when the depth measurements are highly reliable.

1. Introduction

dences are needed to estimate the 5 degrees of freedom of
the relative pose (3 for rotation and two for the translation
up to an unknown scale) [28, 37, 51, 60]. The relative
pose of two cameras with unknown shared focal length can
be estimated from 6 correspondences [28, 37, 38, 59]. If
the full intrinsic calibration is unknown and/or both cameras have different calibrations, the relative pose can be estimated from 7 or 8 correspondences [29].
Due to noise in the measurements and the presence of outlier correspondences, algorithms for relative
pose estimation are usually employed in RANSAC-style
hypothesize-and-verify frameworks [23]. The number of
RANSAC iterations grows exponentially with the number
of correspondences needed to estimate the pose. As such, a
considerable amount of work focuses on reducing the number of correspondences necessary for pose estimation. This
is typically done by using additional information, such as
point coplanarity [10, 29], the gravity direction from an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) [15–17, 24, 36, 50, 62], or
information about the local feature geometry such as the
scale and rotation of features [3, 27, 46] or local affine
frames [5, 6, 22].
Recently, learning-based methods [9, 26, 30, 48, 53, 64,
67, 68] have achieved significant success in predicting depth

Relative pose estimation is a core problem in a wide range
of computer vision applications, including Structure-fromMotion (SfM) [57], visual localization [55, 61, 71], and autonomous robots [43]. Typically, the relative pose of cameras is estimated from 2D-2D image point correspondences
that are established using feature matching. Given 2D-2D
matches, the relative pose [28, 37, 38, 51, 59, 60] of two
cameras can be estimated using the epipolar geometry constraints [29]. For two calibrated cameras, 5 point correspon-

14876

