This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diving into the Fusion of Monocular Priors for Generalized Stereo Matching
Chengtang Yao1,2 , Lidong Yu3 , Zhidan Liu1,2 , Jiaxi Zeng1,2 , Yuwei Wu1,2 ,* Yunde Jia2,1 *
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3
NVIDIA
{zdliu, wuyuwei, jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn
{yao.c.t.adam, yvlidong, jiaxizeng.jx}@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Stereo matching provides dense depth for various downstream applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics,
AR/MR, etc. These applications require stereo matching to generalize across different scenes from wild worlds.
However, the generalization of stereo matching becomes
poor in ill-posed regions due to occlusion, texture-less, and
non-Lambertian surfaces (e.g., reflective or transparent surfaces). Fusion of monocular priors is proven to help correct
the ill-posed binocular matching results [9, 15, 18, 22, 23,
33, 47, 54]. But the monocular prior trained on the limited
data distribution of stereo datasets is susceptible to domain
bias and can only capture significantly biased monocular
features for certain scenes [13, 30].
Taking advantage of large-scale scenes and the easily
collected ground truth of monocular depth, the vision foundation model can provide an unbiased monocular prior
[16, 48, 49]. Recently, some methods have made great
progress in fusing the unbiased monocular prior into the
stereo matching to improve the generalization in ill-posed
regions [3, 8, 46]. In this paper, we dive into the fusion
mechanism and find three main problems limiting a full exploration of the unbiased monocular prior. The first problem lies in the natural gap between the affine-invariant relative depth from monocular depth and absolute depth from
disparity. Although we can forcibly align the two kinds of
depth with a complex mutual refinement, these alignments
could involve heavy computation and greatly harm the efficiency [8, 46]. The other problem exists in the fusion with
monocular feature maps in an iterative refinement structure
[7, 43, 47]. The implicit feature fusion makes the fusion
more biased to the binocular information due to the iterative update training scheme, where the over-confidence of
the disparity update causes local optima, as shown in Figure
1. An additional fusion of monocular depth could alleviate

The matching formulation makes it naturally hard for the
stereo matching to handle ill-posed regions like occlusions
and non-Lambertian surfaces. Fusing monocular priors
has been proven helpful for ill-posed matching, but the biased monocular prior learned from small stereo datasets
constrains the generalization. Recently, stereo matching
has progressed by leveraging the unbiased monocular prior
from the vision foundation model (VFM) to improve the generalization in ill-posed regions. We dive into the fusion
process and observe three main problems limiting the fusion of the VFM monocular prior. The first problem is the
misalignment between affine-invariant relative monocular
depth and absolute depth of disparity. Besides, when we
use the monocular feature in an iterative update structure,
the over-confidence in the disparity update leads to local
optima results. A direct fusion of a monocular depth map
could alleviate the local optima problem, but noisy disparity
results computed at the first several iterations will misguide
the fusion. In this paper, we propose a binary local ordering map to guide the fusion, which converts the depth map
into a binary relative format, unifying the relative and absolute depth representation. The computed local ordering
map is also used to re-weight the initial disparity update,
resolving the local optima and noisy problem. In addition,
we formulate the final direct fusion of monocular depth to
the disparity as a registration problem, where a pixel-wise
linear regression module can globally and adaptively align
them. Our method fully exploits the monocular prior to
support stereo matching results effectively and efficiently.
We significantly improve the performance from the experiments when generalizing from SceneFlow to Middlebury
and Booster datasets while barely reducing the efficiency.
* Corresponding author.

14887

