This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Class Representation via Semantically Related Instances for Robust
Long-Tailed Learning with Noisy Labels
Yuhang Li1 Zhuying Li1 Yuheng Jia1 2 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{yuhangli, zhuyingli, yhjia}@seu.edu.cn
1

Abstract

The problem of learning from long-tailed noisy data, referred to as Long-Tailed Noisy Label Learning (LTNLL),
presents significant challenges in deep learning. LTNLL
datasets are typically affected by two primary issues:
class imbalance and label noise. While previous methods
have addressed these problems separately, the simultaneous presence of both in real-world applications remains underexplored. In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective method, Instances Benefitting Classes (IBC). Our philosophy is to simultaneously overcome overfitting to noisy
classes and transfer knowledge between semantically related classes. At the instance level, we propose selecting
top-k semantically similar classes and use them to construct soft labels. Specifically, we soften noisy hard labels
by reducing the probability of noisy classes and reallocating this probability to the semantically similar classes. This
reduces the model’s overconfidence in noisy classes while
enhancing its focus on tail classes. We next propose a novel
shot-specific multi-expert ensemble learning framework to
make knowledge transfer more targeted, where we maintain multiple shot-specific soft labels for each instance, with
each expert supervised by one of these labels. By integrating these experts, we demonstrate that IBC exhibits more
separable representations, improving both overall and partition performance. Extensive experiments show that IBC
outperforms existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on a
variety of benchmark and real-world datasets, achieving
improvements ranging from 1.89% to 4.99% on the CIFAR10 and CIFAR-100 datasets across all settings. The source
code is available at https://github.com/yhliml/IBC.

Figure 1. Overall comparison with previous methodologies. (a)
Under-represented tail classes; (b) RCAL [41] leverages head
classes for calibrating the macro-statistics (means and covariances) of tail classes, leading to over-calibration; (c)/(f) A simplification of Label Smoothing: Instances are leveraged to boost
randomly selected classes, which provides minimal benefit to the
representations. (d)/(e) Our method, IBC, boosts class representation through semantically related instances, leading to improved
representation for tail classes.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has significantly advanced many areas of
computer vision over the past few years, largely due to
* Corresponding author.

1516

