This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instruction-based Image Editing with Planning, Reasoning, and Generation
Liya Ji
HKUST

Chenyang Qi
HKUST

Qifeng Chen*
HKUST

lji@connect.ust.hk

cqiaa@connect.ust.hk

cqf@ust.hk

Input
Image

Ours w/o planning

Ours

Ours

Input

Change the sky to a dramatic cloudy one and enhance the autumnal feel. -> CoT Planning -> 1. Replace the sky with a dramatic cloudy one. 2. Change the tree‘s
foliage to autumnal colors. 3. Change the reflection in the water to match the new foliage colors.

Color the tie
blue

Let it be a single
sink

Have there be trees Put a policeman in
the intersection
in the background

Change the background to a warm, glowing springtime atmosphere. -> CoT Planning
-> Replace the background with a warm, glowing springtime atmosphere.

Figure 1. We propose an instruction-based editing method with a Planning, Reasoning, and Generation framework that can edit the image
with human language, empowered by the (multi-modal) large language model. Row 1 and Row 2 right: Our model could generate more
fulfilling contents using instructions obtained by chain-of-thought; Row 2 left: Ours can further reason for the accurate editing region
(shown at top right of sub-figures) based on the provided instructions.

Abstract
Editing images via instruction provides a natural way
to generate interactive content, but it is a big challenge
due to the higher requirement of scene understanding and
generation. Prior work utilizes a chain of large language
models, object segmentation models, and editing models
for this task. However, the understanding models provide
only single modality ability, restricting the editing quality.
We aim to bridge understanding and generation via a new
multi-modality model that provides the intelligent abilities
to instruction-based image editing models for more complex cases. To achieve this goal, we individually separate
the instruction editing task with the multi-modality chain

of thought prompts, i.e., Chain-of-Thought (CoT) planning, editing region reasoning, and editing. For Chain-ofThought planning, the large language model could reason
the appropriate sub-prompts considering the instruction
provided and the ability of the editing network. For editing
region reasoning, we train an instruction-based editing region generation network with a multi-modal large language
model. Finally, a hint-guided instruction-based editing network is proposed for editing image generations based on the
sizeable text-to-image diffusion model to accept the hints for
generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate our method
has competitive editing abilities on complex real-world images. The source code will be publicly available.

1 Corresponding authors

17506

