This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAD-Assistant: Tool-Augmented VLLMs as Generic CAD Task Solvers
Dimitrios Mallis1

Ahmet Serda Karadeniz1

Sebastian Cavada1

dimitrios.mallis@uni.lu

ahmet.karadeniz@uni.lu

sebastian.cavada.dev@gmail.com

Danila Rukhovich1

Niki Foteinopoulou1

Kseniya Cherenkova1,2

danila.rukhovich@uni.lu

niki.foteinopoulou@uni.lu

kseniya.cherenkova@uni.lu

1

Handdrawn Image
Parameteriztion

Anis Kacem1

Djamila Aouada1

anis.kacem@uni.lu

djamila.aouada@uni.lu

SnT, University of Luxembourg

Visual Editing

CAD Sketch
Autoconstraining

2

Artec3D, Luxembourg

Handdrawn sketch
to 3D solid

CAD Question Answering

3D Reverse Engineering

How many holes are visible
on the surface of the object
Transform the image
into a CAD sketch.

Execute the drawn
CAD command

Add constraints to this
CAD sketch

Reverse-engineer this scan by a
cross section on the z plane.

Extrude this sketch
into a 3D Solid.

Two holes are visible

Figure 1. CAD-Assistant is a tool-augmented VLLM framework for AI-assisted CAD. Our framework generated FreeCAD [11] code
that is executed within CAD software directly and can process multimodal inputs, including textual queries, sketches, drawn commands
and 3D scans. This figure showcases various examples of generic CAD queries and the responses generated by CAD-Assistant.

Abstract

solvers across diverse workflows. Code implementation
of the CAD-Assistant framework is publicly available https://github.com/dimitrismallis/CAD-

We propose CAD-Assistant, a general-purpose CAD
agent for AI-assisted design. Our approach is based on
a powerful Vision and Large Language Model (VLLM)
as a planner and a tool-augmentation paradigm using
CAD-specific tools. CAD-Assistant addresses multimodal user queries by generating actions that are iteratively executed on a Python interpreter equipped with
the FreeCAD [11] software, accessed via its Python API.
Our framework is able to assess the impact of generated CAD commands on geometry and adapts subsequent
actions based on the evolving state of the CAD design.
We consider a wide range of CAD-specific tools including a sketch image parameterizer [21], rendering modules, a 2D cross-section generator, and other specialized routines. CAD-Assistant is evaluated on multiple CAD benchmarks, where it outperforms VLLM baselines and supervised task-specific methods. Beyond existing benchmarks, we qualitatively demonstrate the potential of tool-augmented VLLMs as general-purpose CAD

Assistant.

1. Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) refers to the use of computer software to assist in the creation, modification, analysis, or optimization of a design [5]. Recently, there
has been a significant research interest in the automation of CAD pipelines. Examples include, 3D reverseengineering [13, 23, 37, 55], CAD generation [47, 49, 58,
61], edge parametrization [9, 72], CAD from multiview
images [17, 68], hand-drawn CAD sketch parametrization [21, 22] and text-guided CAD editing [26]. Still, most
efforts to date have centered around fixed workflows, and
the development of CAD agents to address generic tasks remains largely unexplored. In this work, we advocate that
the creation of CAD agents capable of interacting with and

7284

