This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransiT: Transient Transformer for Non-line-of-sight Videography
Ruiqian Li* Siyuan Shen* Suan Xia* Ziheng Wang Xingyue Peng
Chengxuan Song Yingsheng Zhu Tao Wu Shiying Li† Jingyi Yu†
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
{lirq1, shensy2023, xiasa2022, wangzh1, pengxy2023, songchx2022, zhuys2022,
wutao, lishy1, and yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
High quality and high speed videography using Non-Lineof-Sight (NLOS) imaging benefit autonomous navigation,
collision prevention, and post-disaster search and rescue
tasks. Current solutions have to balance between the frame
rate and image quality. High frame rates, for example, can
be achieved by reducing either per-point scanning time or
scanning density, but at the cost of lowering the information density at individual frames. Fast scanning process further reduces the signal-to-noise ratio and different scanning
systems exhibit different distortion characteristics. In this
work, we design and employ a new Transient Transformer
architecture called TransiT to achieve real-time NLOS recovery under fast scans. TransiT directly compresses the
temporal dimension of input transients to extract features,
reducing computation costs and meeting high frame rate
requirements. It further adopts a feature fusion mechanism as well as employs a spatial-temporal Transformer
to help capture features of NLOS transient videos. Moreover, TransiT applies transfer learning to bridge the gap
between synthetic and real-measured data. In real experiments, TransiT manages to reconstruct from sparse transients of 16×16 measured at an exposure time of 0.4 ms per
point to NLOS videos at a 64 × 64 resolution at 10 frames
per second. Our code, demo, and dataset are available at
https://wangzh1.github.io/TransiT/.

nize hidden moving targets in scenarios as such are crucial
in domain specific applications, ranging from robotics and
autonomous driving to post-disaster rescue efforts.
We observe that hidden targets can potentially be captured using a classic non-line-of-sight (NLOS) setup, where
an intermediate surface, either naturally existing or intentionally placed, serves as a relay wall [9, 10]. Fig. 1 illustrates a typical NLOS scenario under a confocal setting,
which simplifies the classic setup from a five-dimensional
(5D) configuration into 3D [27]. After a laser beam illuminates a point on the relay wall, a portion of the photons
bounce off and scatter in a spherical wavefront onto a hidden object. A single-photon detector then records a transient, including the number of photons that arrive back at
the same point over a specific time interval. Although this
scheme is originally designed to recover static objects, it
can be extended to reconstruct dynamic scenes by applying frame-by-frame methods. Lindell et al. [17] pioneer the
reconstruction of NLOS videos at a resolution of 32 × 32
whereas Liu et al. [19] and their follow-up work [26] use a
higher resolution scan of 181 × 131. These methods require
a high sampling rate to ensure high resolution results, which
significantly reduces the frame per second (FPS), leading to
artifacts such as motion blur and discontinuity.
SPAD arrays allow multiple-pixel detection in a single
shot and can improve the FPS; however, they face issues
such as crosstalk, as well as high computation and memory
costs [26, 29, 42]. Alternatively, several attempts aim to reduce per point scanning time by using a single-pixel SPADbased setup [5, 24, 28]. Lindell et al. [17] raster scan a
uniform grid of 64 × 64 at 2 FPS on a full relay wall of 2
m × 2 m. Isogawa et al. [14] enhance the FPS by adopting
a circular scanning strategy within a small scanning range.
Ye et al. [39] exploit transients of 16 × 16 and recover an
NLOS video at 4 FPS by reducing the sampling density and
incorporating plug-and-play (PnP) regularization and compressed sensing priors. To improve spatial resolution, recent works resort to learning-based approaches [16, 33] to
upsample transients from 8×8 and 16×16 to 32×32. They

1. Introduction
Human and machine vision capture dynamic information
from the surrounding environment and interpret these variations to avoid hazards and make timely decisions. However, a moving object does not necessarily lie within the
line-of-sight (LOS), e.g., a pedestrian at corners may be occluded by obstacles. The capabilities to detect and recog* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors

27542

