This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GVDepth: Zero-Shot Monocular Depth Estimation for Ground Vehicles based
on Probabilistic Cue Fusion
Karlo Koledić

Luka Petrović

Ivan Marković

Ivan Petrović

University of Zagreb Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
{karlo.koledic, luka.petrovic, ivan.markovic, ivan.petrovic}@fer.unizg.hr

Abstract

Input image

Generalizing metric monocular depth estimation presents a
significant challenge due to its ill-posed nature, while the
entanglement between camera parameters and depth amplifies issues further, hindering multi-dataset training and
zero-shot accuracy. This challenge is particularly evident
in autonomous vehicles and mobile robotics, where data
is collected with fixed camera setups, limiting the geometric diversity. Yet, this context also presents an opportunity:
the fixed relationship between the camera and the ground
plane imposes additional perspective geometry constraints,
enabling depth regression via vertical image positions of
objects. However, this cue is highly susceptible to overfitting, thus we propose a novel canonical representation that
maintains consistency across varied camera setups, effectively disentangling depth from specific parameters and enhancing generalization across datasets. We also propose
a novel architecture that adaptively and probabilistically
fuses depths estimated via object size and vertical image position cues. A comprehensive evaluation demonstrates the
effectiveness of the proposed approach on five autonomous
driving datasets, achieving accurate metric depth estimation for varying resolutions, aspect ratios and camera setups. Notably, we achieve comparable accuracy to existing
zero-shot methods, despite training on a single dataset with
a single-camera setup. Project website: https://unizgferlamor.github.io/gvdepth/

Vertical Canonical Representation

Depth of ground plane
Composition

Camera intrinsics & extrinsics
Estimated depth
Point of interest

Orthogonal projection
onto ground plane

Figure 1. Proposed Vertical Canonical Representation. We introduce a novel intermediate representation that enables exploitation of underlying planar geometry priors, facilitating learning and
generalization across varying camera setups. Under this representation, camera parameters and depth are completely disentangled,
enabling depth regression via known depth of the ground plane.

1. Introduction

In addition to the environmental domain gap, MDE is
particularly sensitive to the domain gap induced by the perspective geometry parameters of the camera system. This
issue is present in most supervised [1, 8, 18, 26, 41] and
self-supervised methods [10, 11, 33, 42–45] that are trained
on a dataset collected with a single camera system. Models tend to overfit to this perspective geometry bias, leading to significant performance degradation when inferring
depth with different cameras. Unfortunately, training a
MDE model on data with a wide distribution of perspective
geometries is far from trivial. Due to the inherent ambiguity
of the MDE problem and entanglement of depth and camera parameters [27], many methods resort to relative depth
estimation with unknown shift and scale [6, 14, 28, 34, 36,
38, 39]. Recently, zero-shot metric depth estimation has
been achieved with various approaches, including embedding [12], estimating [3, 27] or disentangling the camera

Accurate 3D reconstruction is one of the fundamental
computer vision challenges, with far-reaching applications
across various fields. Unlike multi-view approaches that
rely on complex dense matching and pose estimation,
learning-based Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) exploits semantic and geometric cues to infer pixel-wise depth
maps from a single image. However, these cues are often
specific to a narrow distribution of the training data, resulting in poor generalization to out-of-distribution scenarios.

26126

