This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnimateAnyMesh: A Feed-Forward 4D Foundation Model
for Text-Driven Universal Mesh Animation

1

Zijie Wu1,2 , Chaohui Yu2,3 , Fan Wang2 , Xiang Bai*
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Hupan Lab
{zjw1031,xbai}@hust.edu.cn, {huakun.ych,fan.w}@alibaba-inc.com

https://animateanymesh.github.io/AnimateAnyMesh/

The clothes is swaying

The robot is bending knees

The dog is walking

The object is running

The character is raising her arms

The dragon is flying

Figure 1. We present AnimateAnyMesh: the first feed-forward universal mesh animation framework that enables efficient motion generation for arbitrary 3D meshes. Given a static mesh and prompt, our method generates high-quality animations in only a few seconds.

Abstract

work marks a substantial step forward in making 4D content creation more accessible and practical.

Recent advances in 4D content generation have attracted
increasing attention, yet creating high-quality animated 3D
models remains challenging due to the complexity of modeling spatio-temporal distributions and the scarcity of 4D
training data. In this paper, we present AnimateAnyMesh,
the first feed-forward framework that enables efficient textdriven animation of arbitrary 3D meshes. Our approach
leverages a novel DyMeshVAE architecture that effectively
compresses and reconstructs dynamic mesh sequences by
disentangling spatial and temporal features while preserving local topological structures. To enable high-quality
text-conditional generation, we employ a Rectified Flowbased training strategy in the compressed latent space. Additionally, we contribute the DyMesh Dataset, containing
over 4M diverse dynamic mesh sequences with text annotations. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
generates semantically accurate and temporally coherent
mesh animations in a few seconds, significantly outperforming existing approaches in both quality and efficiency. Our

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author

The revolution in 3D content creation has transformed various domains like VR/AR and gaming. While recent generative models [21, 31, 37, 38, 71, 82, 86, 87, 96, 98] excel at
producing high-quality 3D assets, 4D content generation remains challenging due to the complexity of spatio-temporal
modeling and scarcity of high-quality 4D assets.
Existing 4D generation approaches fall into two categories: per-scene optimization methods [4, 24, 56, 83, 99]
and multi-view dynamic video generation methods [25, 34,
95]. The former employs SDS [52] with pre-trained generative models but suffers from high computational costs
and inconsistency. The latter fine-tunes video generation
models [11, 19, 62, 79] on multi-view renderings of 4D
assets [14, 15], followed by per-scene 4D reconstruction.
Although inference efficiency improves, the need for postprocessing impedes real-time application. Moreover, these
methods, which typically adopt dynamic 3DGS [26] or

13557

