This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAESTRO: Task-Relevant Optimization via Adaptive Feature Enhancement
and Suppression for Multi-task 3D Perception
Changwon Kang1*

Jisong Kim1*
1

Hongjae Shin2*

Junseo Park2

†

Jun Won Choi2

Hanyang University and 2 Seoul National University

{changwonkang, jskim}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr, {hjshin, jspark}@spa.snu.ac.kr, junwchoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The goal of multi-task learning is to learn to conduct multiple tasks simultaneously based on a shared data representation. While this approach can improve learning efficiency,
it may also cause performance degradation due to task conflicts that arise when optimizing the model for different objectives. To address this challenge, we introduce MAESTRO, a structured framework designed to generate taskspecific features and mitigate feature interference in multitask 3D perception, including 3D object detection, bird’seye view (BEV) map segmentation, and 3D occupancy
prediction. MAESTRO comprises three components: the
Class-wise Prototype Generator (CPG), the Task-Specific
Feature Generator (TSFG), and the Scene Prototype Aggregator (SPA). CPG groups class categories into foreground
and background groups and generates group-wise prototypes. The foreground and background prototypes are assigned to the 3D object detection task and the map segmentation task, respectively, while both are assigned to the 3D
occupancy prediction task. TSFG leverages these prototype
groups to retain task-relevant features while suppressing irrelevant features, thereby enhancing the performance for
each task. SPA enhances the prototype groups assigned for
3D occupancy prediction by utilizing the information produced by the 3D object detection head and the map segmentation head. Extensive experiments on the nuScenes
and Occ3D benchmarks demonstrate that MAESTRO consistently outperforms existing methods across 3D object detection, BEV map segmentation, and 3D occupancy prediction tasks.

Figure 1. Performance comparison across three perception
tasks. MAESTRO consistently outperforms both the Baseline
multi-task-learning (Baseline-MTL) model and the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) single-task-learning (SOTA-STL) models across all tasks.

1. Introduction

must continuously understand their surroundings to enable
reliable planning. To capture different aspects of the driving
environment, various perception tasks have been explored.
For example, 3D object detection models have been developed to identify and localize dynamic objects [13, 15, 20–
22, 38, 41, 46, 52]. Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) map segmentation models provide road-level information—such as lanes,
road boundaries, and crosswalks—in the BEV domain [27,
30–32, 43, 56], offering crucial guidance on safely drivable
areas. 3D occupancy prediction models discretize the environment into 3D voxels, assigning each voxel an occupancy
state and semantic label to construct a dense and structured
3D representation of the scene [3, 12, 23, 36, 40, 53]. As
a unified perception system, these models must be executed
simultaneously and in real time to support safe and effective
planning in autonomous driving.
While these perception models can be designed and optimized independently, training and deploying separate models for each task, as shown in Figure 2 (a), results in inefficiencies in both computation and data utilization. Since

Accurate and computationally-efficient perception is essential for safe autonomous driving, as autonomous vehicles
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

28313

