This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Gallery to Wrist: Realistic 3D Bracelet Insertion in Videos
Chenjian Gao1 , Lihe Ding1 , Rui Han2 , Zhanpeng Huang2∗ , Zibin Wang2 , Tianfan Xue1,3∗
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{cjgao, dl023, tfxue}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
wangzb02@gmail.com, {hanrui, huangzhanpeng}@sensetime.com,

Project Page: https://cjeen.github.io/BraceletPaper/

(b) Rendering Bracelet on the Wrist

(a) Video Frames and 3D Bracelet

(c) Realism Enhancement

Figure 1. We propose a hybrid pipeline for inserting 3D objects into videos, combining 3D Gaussian Splatting rendering for temporal
consistency and a 2D diffusion-based enhancement for photorealistic lighting. In this example, a virtual bracelet is inserted onto a wrist
in a dynamic scene. The 3D representation ensures temporal consistency and correct handling of occlusions as the wrist moves, while the
2D image priors enhance realism by synthesizing realistic shading. Our approach bridges the gap between 3D rendering and 2D diffusion
models, achieving both temporal coherence and realism.

Abstract
Inserting 3D objects into videos is a longstanding challenge in computer graphics with applications in augmented
reality, virtual try-on, and video composition. Achieving
both temporal consistency, or realistic lighting remains difficult, particularly in dynamic scenarios with complex object motion, perspective changes, and varying illumination.
While 2D diffusion models have shown promise for produc-

ing photorealistic edits, they often struggle with maintaining temporal coherence across frames. Conversely, traditional 3D rendering methods excel in spatial and temporal consistency but fall short in achieving photorealistic
lighting. In this work, we propose a hybrid object insertion pipeline that combines the strengths of both paradigms.
Specifically, we focus on inserting bracelets into dynamic
wrist scenes, leveraging the high temporal consistency of
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for initial rendering and refining the results using a 2D diffusion-based enhancement

* Corresponding Authors.

25712

