This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Good Teacher Adapts Their Knowledge for Distillation
Chengyao Qian Trung Le Mehrtash Harandi
Monash University, Australia
{Chengyao.Qian, trunglm, mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is an effective method for enhancing a small model, named student, by training it under the supervision of larger teacher models. However, existing studies indicate that a substantial capacity gap between the student and teacher can lead to poor learning
for the student model. This capacity gap problem limits
the applicability of KD and necessitates careful selection
of the teacher’s size. Despite its importance, the underlying
cause of the capacity gap problem remains underexplored.
In this paper, we reveal that a substantial disparity in the
output distributions of teacher and student models is a key
factor behind this issue. To demonstrate this, we decompose the KD loss into two components: class-wise similarity
and intra-class distribution, and analyze the contribution of
each term. Our analysis shows that a large distributional
mismatch can lead to poor student learning. Inspired by
this observation, we propose the Adapted Intra-class Distribution (AID) method, wherein the teacher model is finetuned to optimize its intra-class distribution to better align
with the student’s capacity prior to knowledge distillation.
This approach effectively bridges the capacity gap between
teacher and student models and consistently achieves stateof-the-art performance across a diverse range of architectures.

Figure 1. Capacity gap problem is caused by the disparity of intraclass distribution between teacher and student. Our method finetunes the pre-trained teacher models before KD to let the intraclass distribution of teacher match the student’s capacity.

proaches train student models to replicate the prediction
probabilities of the teacher [11, 12, 32], whereas featurebased approaches guide the student to mimic the teacher’s
internal representations [24, 28]. Although feature-based
techniques provide richer information, they often require
extra parameters to align the teacher’s features with the student’s. Recent findings have revealed a notable limitation
of KD: student models trained under large teacher models
frequently perform worse than those guided by mid-sized
teachers known as the capacity gap problem [22].
To alleviate this capacity gap, some approaches have
employed mid-sized teacher models as the bridge to assist smaller student models [22, 31]. However, this strategy introduces significant additional training overhead due
to the extra mid-sized teachers. Moreover, studies [5, 34]
indicate that teacher models that are not fully trained (i.e.,
early-stopped) are more effective for training small students
than fully trained teachers. While this approach improves
student performance, it requires retraining teacher models,
which increases computational resource demands and training time.
In this study, we study the capacity gap problem in KD
and demonstrate that teacher must adapt their intra-class

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved remarkable success
in computer vision tasks [9, 20, 27]. However, their high
performance comes at the cost of significant computational resource demands, which limits their applicability on
resource-constrained devices, e.g. mobile devices and embedded systems. To overcome the limitation of high computational costs, knowledge distillation (KD) has been proposed. This technique aims to enhance the performance of
small student models by learning the implicit knowledge
from large teacher models [11].
KD methods can be divided into two main categories:
logit-based and feature-based distillation. Logit-based ap-

1239

