This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Linearity to Non-Linearity:
How Masked Autoencoders Capture Spatial Correlations
Anthony Bisulco*
University of Pennsylvania
3317 Chestnut St, Philadelphia PA

Rahul Ramesh*
University of Pennsylvania
3317 Chestnut St, Philadelphia PA

abisulco@seas.upenn.edu

rahulram@seas.upenn.edu

Randall Balliestro
Brown University
115 Waterman St, Providence, RI

Pratik Chaudhari
University of Pennsylvania
3317 Chestnut St, Philadelphia PA

randall balestriero@brown.edu

pratikac@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

re Range Spectr
atu
um
Fe
Me

Au
to

ange
rt R
ho

R

Short Range

Medium Range

Long
Ra
n

S

Masking Ratio

MAE
Pretraining

Features Encoded

Long Range

ge

Patch Size

dium

ge
an

Masked Autoencoders (MAEs) have emerged as a powerful pretraining technique for vision foundation models. Despite their effectiveness, they require extensive hyperparameter tuning (masking ratio, patch size, encoder/decoder layers) when applied to novel datasets. While prior theoretical works have analyzed MAEs in terms of their attention
patterns and hierarchical latent variable models, the connection between MAE hyperparameters and performance
on downstream tasks is relatively unexplored. This work
investigates how MAEs learn spatial correlations in the input image. We analytically derive the features learned by
a linear MAE and show that masking ratio and patch size
can be used to select for features that capture short- and
long-range spatial correlations. We extend this analysis to
non-linear MAEs to show that MAE representations adapt
to spatial correlations in the dataset, beyond second-order
statistics. Finally, we discuss some insights on how to select
MAE hyper-parameters in practice.

er
cod
en

MAE Adaptable Features

Figure 1. MAEs (Black Arrow) can adapt the spatial scale of features they encode through two key hyperparameters: patch size
and masking ratio. Generally, increasing either of these hyperparameters yields features with a broader spatial extent. Selecting
these hyperparameters allows MAEs to be used for datasets with
different spatial scales. In contrast, standard autoencoders (Green
Arrow) learn short-range spatial features. On the right side of the
figure, we show an example of feature spatial scales ranging from
local textures to objects to global scenes.

In this work, we aim to better understand MAEs by analyzing their underlying mechanisms and their role in representation learning.
A key challenge in applying MAEs to new datasets or
modalities is the need for extensive cross-validation to tune
hyperparameters such as patch size and masking ratio. Suboptimal choices can lead to degraded task performance and
unnecessary computational cost. Exhaustive search over
these parameters is often impractical, as MAEs’ long training times make full cross-validation prohibitively expensive
for large datasets or high-dimensional inputs. As a step towards addressing this challenge, we aim to study how masking ratio and patch size affect the representations learned by

1. Introduction
Masked autoencoders (MAEs) are a powerful pretraining
technique for images [20, 54] and video [17, 46, 48] playing a key role in pretraining for foundational models such
as Segment Anything [28], InternVideo [49], EVA [16], and
Unified IO [35]. Despite their success, MAEs are not yet
well understood—key design choices such as masking ratio, patch size, and model depth heavily rely on heuristics.
* Equal Contribution

AB supported by NSF FRR 2220868, NSF IIS-RI 2212433, ARO MURI
W911NF-20-1-0080, and ONR N00014-22-1-2677, and AB, RR, and PC supported
by NSF IIS-2145164, CCF-2212519, ONR N00014-22-1-2255, and DSO Laboratories, Singapore.

16441

