This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dream-to-Recon: Monocular 3D Reconstruction with Diffusion-Depth
Distillation from Single Images
Philipp Wulff1

Felix Wimbauer1,2
1

Dominik Muhle1,2,3

Technical University of Munich

2

MCML

3

Daniel Cremers1,2

SE3 Labs

philippwulff.github.io/dream-to-recon

Single Image
Occupancy Field
Inference: Monocular 3D Reconstruction

Synthesize GT

Reconstruction Loss

Pre-trained
Depth Predictor

Synthetic Occupancy Field (SOF)
Training: Distilling Synthetic GT

Fine-tuned RGB
Diffusion Model

Single Image

Synthetic GT from Single Images

Figure 1. Dream-to-Recon. We leverage fine-tuned diffusion models for inpainting and a pre-trained depth predictor to generate highquality scene geometry from a single image, as seen on the right side. Afterwards, we distill a feed-forward scene reconstruction model,
which performs on par with reconstruction methods trained with multi-view supervision. The color in the plots indicates the up-coordinate.

Abstract

Traditionally, this task has been mainly approached via
monocular depth estimation (MDE), where a network predicts per-pixel distance values for a given single image.
Through architectural improvements, scaled-up datasets
with high-quality ground-truth, and cross-dataset training,
these methods have achieved strong generalization capabilities and can be used in an off-the-shelf way [1, 38, 44, 65].
In particular, MDE methods are now even able to predict
metric-scale depth maps. While MDE is already useful for
many applications, it has a severe limitation: Depth maps
are only a 2D projection of the 3D scene, and do not capture the scene’s full 3D structure. Consequently, it is not
possible to infer information about areas that are beyond
the parts visible in the input image. This limitation makes
pure MDE unsuitable for many 3D understanding tasks, e.g.
planning the path of a vehicle into a parking spot that was
only partially observed.

Volumetric scene reconstruction from a single image is crucial for a broad range of applications like autonomous driving and robotics. Recent volumetric reconstruction methods
achieve impressive results, but generally require expensive
3D ground truth or multi-view supervision. We propose to
leverage pre-trained 2D diffusion models and depth prediction models to generate synthetic scene geometry from a single image. This can then be used to distill a feed-forward
scene reconstruction model. Our experiments on the challenging KITTI-360 and Waymo datasets demonstrate that
our method matches or outperforms state-of-the-art baselines that use multi-view supervision, and offers unique advantages, for example regarding dynamic scenes. For more
details and code, please check out our project page.

To address this shortcoming, a new line of work aims
to infer a volumetric 3D reconstruction of the scene from a
single image [4, 27, 28, 37, 53, 60]. Here, the 3D geometry
is either represented as a discrete voxel grid [4, 28, 53] or
as a continuous density field [27, 37, 60]. Many approaches
are trained in a fully-supervised way using dense 3D annotations. However, such 3D ground truth is difficult and expensive to obtain, e.g. by accumulating Lidar scans from a

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D geometry of a scene from a single
image is fundamental for a wide range of applications, in
particular for autonomous driving and robotics. A dense
reconstruction of the environment enables machines to react to their surroundings and to reason about further actions
such as path planning.

9352

