This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Cross-modal Backward-compatible Representation
Learning for Vision-Language Models
Young Kyun Jang1
Google DeepMind

1

2

Ser-nam Lim2
University of Central Florida
sernam@gmail.com

kyun0914@gmail.com

Backward-compatible Training (BT)

Abstract

Query Sample

Query Embedding
New Image
Encoder

Modern retrieval systems often struggle with upgrading to
new and more powerful models due to the incompatibility of
embeddings between the old and new models. This necessitates a costly process known as backfilling, which involves
re-computing the embeddings for a large number of data
samples. In vision, Backward-compatible Training (BT) has
been proposed to ensure that the new model aligns with the
old model’s embeddings. This paper extends the concept of
vision-only BT to the field of cross-modal retrieval, marking the first attempt to address Cross-modal BT (XBT). Our
goal is to achieve backward-compatibility between VisionLanguage Pretraining (VLP) models, such as CLIP, for the
cross-modal retrieval task. To address XBT challenges, we
propose an efficient solution: a projection module that maps
the new model’s embeddings to those of the old model. This
module, pretrained solely with text data, significantly reduces the number of image-text pairs required for XBT learning, and, once it is pretrained, it avoids using the old model
during training. Furthermore, we utilize parameter-efficient
training strategies that improve efficiency and preserve the
off-the-shelf new model’s knowledge by avoiding any modifications. Experimental results on cross-modal retrieval
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of XBT and its potential to enable backfill-free upgrades when a new VLP model
emerges.

Backwardcompatible
Training

Gallery Samples
⋯

Old Image
Encoder

Uni-modal
Retrieval

Gallery

Cross-modal Backward-compatible Training (XBT)
Query Sample

New VLP

Query Embedding

Image Encoder
Text Encoder

Gallery Samples

Old VLP

Cross-modal
Backwardcompatible
Training

⋯

Image Encoder

⋯

Text Encoder

Cross-modal
Retrieval

Gallery

Figure 1. A conceptual visualization of Backward-compatible
Training (BT, left) and its extension, the Cross(X)-modal version
(XBT, right). Circles and squares denote data samples of images
and text, respectively. XBT uses Vision-Language Pretraining
(VLP) models as baselines to achieve cross-modal, backwardcompatible representation learning, allowing the new, improved
model to be compatible with the fixed old model.

1. Introduction
As the volume and variety of data grow exponentially in
our multimedia-rich era, developing and maintaining efficient multi-modal retrieval systems becomes increasingly
challenging. These systems, which provide data samples
relevant to a user’s query, must handle diverse data types,
from text and images to audio and video. This growth
puts a premium on the scalability and performance of these
systems, necessitating continuous advancements in algorithms and technology. Embedding-based deep models for

retrieval have emerged as a key solution, transforming highdimensional data into a lower-dimensional dense embedding
space [11, 15, 16, 30, 37, 46]. These models capture the semantic meanings of data samples, enabling the quantification
of similarities for retrieval.
However, it is important to note that the embedding spaces
generated by different deep models are not inherently compatible with each other. This incompatibility restricts the

1783

