This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedMVP: Federated Multimodal Visual Prompt Tuning for Vision-Language
Models
Mainak Singha1
Subhankar Roy2
Sarthak Mehrotra3
Ankit Jha4
5
3
1,6
Moloud Abdar
Biplab Banerjee
Elisa Ricci
1

2

University of Trento, Italy
4

LNMIIT Jaipur, India

5

3

University of Bergamo, Italy

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India
6

The University of Queensland, Australia

Abstract

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy

Server

Pred

In federated learning, textual prompt tuning adapts
Vision-Language Models (e.g., CLIP) by tuning lightweight
input tokens (or prompts) on local client data, while keeping network weights frozen. After training, only the prompts
are shared by the clients with the central server for aggregation. However, textual prompt tuning suffers from overfitting to known concepts, limiting its generalizability to
unseen concepts. To address this limitation, we propose
Multimodal Visual Prompt Tuning (FedMVP) that conditions the prompts on multimodal contextual information –
derived from the input image and textual attribute features
of a class. At the core of FedMVP is a PromptFormer module that synergistically aligns textual and visual features
through a cross-attention mechanism. The dynamically
generated multimodal visual prompts are then input to the
frozen vision encoder of CLIP, and trained with a combination of CLIP similarity loss and a consistency loss. Extensive evaluation on 20 datasets, spanning three generalization settings, demonstrates that FedMVP not only preserves
performance on in-distribution classes and domains, but
also displays higher generalizability to unseen classes and
domains, surpassing state-of-the-art methods by a notable
margin of +1.57% − 2.26%. Code is available at https:
//github.com/mainaksingha01/FedMVP.

Vision
Encoder

Pred

Text
Encoder

Prompt
Generator

Clients

Vision
Encoder

PromptFormer

CLASS

Trainable

Frozen

Attributes

(a) Unimodal contextual prompts
(FedTPG)

Text
Encoder

CLASS

Unimodal prompts

Multimodal prompts

(b) Multimodal contextual prompts
(Ours)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of federated prompt tuning methods: (a)
a textual prompt tuning method (e.g., FedTPG [21]) encodes unimodal contextual information, i.e., class names, in the learnable
prompts, (b) our proposed method FedMVP injects multimodal
contextual information – image and attributes – into the prompts.

A successful learning paradigm involves training neural networks on large and centralized datasets, enabling models
to learn robust and generalizable representations [22, 34].
However, practical constraints often prevent centralized
training (e.g., privacy regulations) creating a critical need
for decentralized training frameworks that achieve high performance without central data access. As a solution, federated learning (FL) [16] enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model without requiring direct
data sharing. In FL, clients train models locally and trans-

17869

mit only model updates (e.g., gradients or parameters) to a
central server, which aggregates these updates to improve
the global model. The research in FL is primarily aimed
at: reducing communication rounds between clients and
server [31, 32], faster and lightweight training algorithms
on clients [19, 23] and improving generalization while exhibiting high data heterogeneity across clients [25, 33].
Pretrained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) (e.g.,
CLIP [22]), have emerged as promising candidates for FL
due to their strong generalization capabilities. However,
the high communication overhead and computational demands of parameter-heavy VLMs pose challenges for FL,
especially in bandwidth- or compute-constrained environments (e.g., robots). To make CLIP viable for the FL setting, prompt tuning (e.g., CoOp [36], VPT [11]) has been
adopted as a preferred technique that appends lightweight
learnable tokens (or prompts) to the input tokens of the
CLIP image and/or text encoder. Each client trains the
prompts on the local data, while keeping the CLIP backbone
frozen, and then dispatches these prompts to the server,
where they are updated through aggregation and sent back.
This speeds up client training as each client needs access

