This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Importance-Based Token Merging for Efficient Image and Video Generation
Haoyu Wu1
Jingyi Xu1
1
Stony Brook University

Hieu Le†2,3
2
EPFL

Dimitris Samaras†1
3
UNC-Charlotte

Prompt: “A cute owl wearing a wizard hat.”

Abstract
Token merging can effectively accelerate various vision systems by processing groups of similar tokens only
once and sharing the results across them. However, existing token grouping methods are often ad hoc and random, disregarding the actual content of the samples. We
show that preserving high-information tokens during merging—those essential for semantic fidelity and structural
details—significantly improves sample quality, producing
finer details and more coherent, realistic generations. To do
so, we propose an importance-based token merging method
that prioritizes the most critical tokens in computational resource allocation, leveraging readily available importance
scores, such as those from classifier-free guidance in diffusion models. Experiments show that our approach significantly outperforms baseline methods across multiple applications, including text-to-image synthesis, multi-view image
generation, and video generation with various model architectures such as Stable Diffusion, Zero123++, AnimateDiff,
or PixArt-α.

(a) Spatial [3]

(b) Importance-based (Ours)

Figure 1. Importance-based Token Merging. Our method prioritizes important tokens during token merging, resulting in images
with greater details in essential areas compared to ToMeSD [3]. In
the second row, we show the regions (in white) where computation
(e.g., attention) will take place after token merging.

1. Introduction
The rise of powerful diffusion models such as DALLE [76], Stable Diffusion (SD) [79], or Imagen [80] has dramatically changed the landscape of generative AI [2, 17,
26, 79, 80, 90]. At their core, these models operate by iteratively denoising through multiple passes of a backbone
network, processing a substantial number of tokens, which
are particularly computationally intensive. To reduce the
computational demands, prior work [3, 4, 36] has explored
merging similar tokens and sharing the results across member tokens.
However, such a merging process can also significantly
degrade image quality, losing some important details and
structure. This typically happens when merging occurs in
highly informative image regions, where critical visual details are compressed or discarded. One major reason is that
existing methods rely on ad hoc heuristics for grouping tokens, often based on spatial proximity or fixed patterns.

Thus, the destination tokens, where the other tokens will
merge into, are chosen randomly within predefined regions,
sometimes pushing important visual elements into less relevant areas. This leads to suboptimal resource allocation,
where crucial textures, edges, or fine-grained structures are
lost, while regions that are less important retain more detail
than necessary, as can be seen in Fig. 1 (a).
To address this limitation, we propose a novel token selection method that prioritizes computational resources in
areas of high visual and semantic importance. Compared
to existing approaches, our method ensures more effective
merging decisions by using guidance from actual content
relevance. Rather than treating all tokens equally, we use
per-token importance signals to identify key or salient regions and ensure that the merging procedure prioritizes pre-

† equal contribution

4983

