This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OracleFusion: Assisting the Decipherment of Oracle Bone Script
with Structurally Constrained Semantic Typography
Caoshuo Li1,3∗‡, Zengmao Ding5∗ , Xiaobin Hu2∗ , Bang Li5† , Donghao Luo2† , AndyPianWu4 ,
Chaoyang Wang4 , Chengjie Wang2 , Taisong Jin1,3† , SevenShu4 , Yunsheng Wu2 , Yongge Liu5 , Rongrong Ji1,3
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China. 2 Tencent YouTu Lab.
3
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China. 4 Tencent Digital Culture Lab.
5
Key Laboratory of Oracle Bone Inscriptions Information Processing, Ministry of Education of China,
School of Computer & Information Engineering, Anyang Normal University, Anyang, China.
licaoshuo@stu.xmu.edu.cn, 200912004@stu.aynu.edu.cn, libang@aynu.edu.cn,
{jintaisong, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn, {xiaobinhu, michaelluo}@tencent.com
Project page:https://github.com/lcs0215/OracleFusion

Abstract

a. Process of OBS Decipherment

As one of the earliest ancient languages, Oracle Bone
Script (OBS) encapsulates the cultural records and intellectual expressions of ancient civilizations. Despite the
discovery of approximately 4,500 OBS characters, only
about 1,600 have been deciphered. The remaining undeciphered ones, with their complex structure and abstract
imagery, pose significant challenges for interpretation. To
address these challenges, this paper proposes a novel twostage semantic typography framework, named OracleFusion. In the first stage, this approach leverages the Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) with enhanced Spatial Awareness Reasoning (SAR) to analyze the glyph structure of the OBS character and perform visual localization
of key components. In the second stage, we introduce Oracle Structural Vector Fusion (SOVF), incorporating glyph
structure constraints and glyph maintenance constraints to
ensure the accurate generation of semantically enriched
vector fonts. This approach preserves the objective integrity
of the glyph structure, offering visually enhanced representations that assist experts in deciphering OBS. Extensive
qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that
OracleFusion outperforms state-of-the-art baseline models in terms of semantics, visual appeal, and glyph maintenance, significantly enhancing both readability and aesthetic quality. Furthermore, OracleFusion provides expertlike insights on unseen oracle characters, making it a valuable tool for advancing the decipherment of OBS.
‡ Work was done during the internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
* Equal contributions. † Corresponding authors.

19893

Scenes Restoring

Ancient Character

Tears
Eyes

Scene

眔

Contextual
Information

Evolution

Tears
streaming
from the eyes

Meaning

Modern Character

b. An Undeciphered Case of OBS
The state that
fruits are drooping
on the tree
The branches are
lush with abundant
fruits

OBS

Scene

The melons which
are hanging from
the vines

垂
茁
瓜

Figure 1. Illustration of OBS decipherment process.

