This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VSC: Visual Search Compositional Text-to-Image Diffusion Model

1

Do Huu Dat1*

Nam Hyeon-Woo2

VinUniversity

2

Po-Yuan Mao3

Dept. of EE, POSTECH

3

Tae-Hyun Oh2,4

Academia Sinica

4

KAIST


   
   

   
   

  
 

Figure 1. Left: Original pipeline and generated image of Diffusion Model. Right: VSC individually “search” for visual information of each
binding pair by generating images for each separate pair (“red car” and “yellow bicycle”). Finally, VSC uses them as references to generate
the correct compositional image.

Abstract

of binding pairs in the prompt.

Text-to-image diffusion models have shown impressive capabilities in generating realistic visuals from natural-language
prompts, yet they often struggle with accurately binding
attributes to corresponding objects, especially in prompts
containing multiple attribute-object pairs. This challenge
primarily arises from the limitations of commonly used text
encoders, such as CLIP, which can fail to encode complex
linguistic relationships and modiﬁers effectively. Existing approaches have attempted to mitigate these issues through attention map control during inference and the use of layout information or ﬁne-tuning during training, yet they face performance drops with increased prompt complexity. In this work,
we introduce a novel compositional generation method that
leverages pairwise image embeddings to improve attributeobject binding. Our approach decomposes complex prompts
into sub-prompts, generates corresponding images, and computes visual prototypes that fuse with text embeddings to
enhance representation. By applying segmentation-based localization training, we address cross-attention misalignment,
achieving improved accuracy in binding multiple attributes
to objects. Our approaches outperform existing compositional text-to-image diffusion models on the benchmark T2I
CompBench, achieving better image quality, evaluated by
humans, and emerging robustness under scaling the number
*Work is done as an intern at POSTECH

1. Introduction
Compositionality is a fundamental ability that enables humans to naturally comprehend the world. It allows us to
quickly recognize new objects through their components or
construct complex sentences by combining words. This skill
empowers us to make “inﬁnite use of ﬁnite mean” [6], endlessly reusing and recombining familiar concepts in diverse
ways. In terms of developing compositional AI systems,
diffusion models rise as the most feasible component due to
their inherent enormous mode coverage and ﬂexible controllability. The diffusion model’s possession of compositional
generalization has been proved with synthetic data and the
dataset CelebA, where the images are easily decomposed
into gender and race [26]. Additionally, diffusion models for
generating images from text prompts are capable of creating
remarkably realistic visuals, allowing users to shape the content of generated images by crafting detailed and complex
natural-language prompts.
Despite these capabilities, these models often fail to fully
utilize compositionality and produce inaccurate images when
provided with more intricate descriptions. A prevalent issue is improper binding, as illustrated in the left side of
Fig. 1, where descriptive words fail to correctly inﬂuence
the visual characteristics of speciﬁc nouns they are intended
to modify. For instance, the prompt specifying “A photo

19153

