This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Verbalized Representation Learning for Interpretable Few-Shot Generalization
Cheng-Fu Yang1* Da Yin1* Wenbo Hu1 Heng Ji2 Nanyun Peng1 Bolei Zhou1 Kai-Wei Chang1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
cfyang@cs.ucla.edu
What makes these two sh di erent?

What do these sh have in common?

Inter-Class Di erence Intra-Class Commonality
Color of the head

Pattern of the head

iNaturalist

Prior Work (70B)
Ours (7B)

Vision-Language Model
Thalassoma Bifasciatum

Both sh feature a white stripe around their
neck. However, sh on the left has an
irregular white and orange pattern on its
head. The right one has a solid blue head.

Thalassoma Pavo

Thalassoma Pavo

The right one has more stripe on its body.
However, both sh display irregular,
mosaic-like patterns on their heads,
predominantly in white and orange hues.

Test Image

Features

[

…

Thalassoma Pavo

…

Downstream Classi ers

+24%

[ 40 48.5 57 65.5 74
Novel Object Classi cation

+14%

(b) VRL for Few-shot Classi cation60 65.5 71 76.5 82

(a) Verbalized Representation Learning (VRL)

Figure 1. (a) Humans can identify key differences between similar species and recognize common traits within a class, even when appearance varies, and express these insights in concise language. Similarly, our Verbalized Representation Learning (VRL) extracts meaningful
features by querying Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to capture inter-class discriminative features and intra-class commonalities. (b)
These verbalized features are mapped to numerical vectors through the VLM and can be used by downstream classifiers. Our VRL demonstrates superior performance in few-shot classification compared to prior work, achieving a 24% absolute gain on iNaturalist and a 14% on
Novel Object Classification, even with a much smaller model.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Humans have a remarkable capability to recognize certain
objects after seeing only a few examples. As suggested by
[33], it is significantly enhanced by inherent language understanding. Language, with its representational strength,
serves as a primary resource for conveying knowledge about
visual objects. A single, precise description can effectively
capture visual distinctions observed across different object
categories. For example, in Fig. 1 (a), a human can identify the key difference between two fish species based on
the pattern of their heads, even if both share a white stripe
around the neck and a yellow body. As a result, we argue that developing verbalized features offers a valuable
complement to improve model’s generalization under lowresource conditions. In addition, incorporating language
into image classification models also increases the interpretability of the visual system, facilitating transparent and
reliable decision making and effective model auditing.

Humans recognize objects after observing only a few examples, a remarkable capability enabled by their inherent language understanding of the real-world environment.
Developing verbalized and interpretable representation can
significantly improve model generalization in low-data settings. In this work, we propose Verbalized Representation
Learning (VRL), a novel approach for automatically extracting human-interpretable features for object recognition
using few-shot data. Our method uniquely captures interclass differences and intra-class commonalities in the form
of natural language by employing a Vision-Language Model
(VLM) to identify key discriminative features between different classes and shared characteristics within the same
class. These verbalized features are then mapped to numeric vectors through the VLM. The resulting feature vectors can be further utilized to train and infer with downstream classifiers. Experimental results show that, at the
same model scale, VRL achieves a 24% absolute improvement over prior state-of-the-art methods while using 95%
less data and a smaller model. Furthermore, compared to
human-labeled attributes, the features learned by VRL exhibit a 20% absolute gain when used for downstream classification tasks. 1
fi

fifi ff fifi

fi
fi

ff
fi

Prior works [15, 16] have explored integrating language
into visual classifiers with a bottleneck of textual attributes,
where the model first predicts relevant attributes and subsequently uses them to classify the image. However,
these attributes often require human annotations or predefined ontologies. Development of Large-scale Vision-andLanguage Models (VLMs) like CLIP [39] and GPT-4V [1]
have enabled recent bottleneck methods [12, 32, 38, 48, 50]

1 The code is available at: https://github.com/joeyy5588/VRL.

1602

