This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DuoCLR: Dual-Surrogate Contrastive Learning
for Skeleton-based Human Action Segmentation
Haitao Tian
University of Ottawa, Canada
htian026@uottawa.ca

Abstract
In this paper, a new contrastive representation learning
framework is proposed to enhance action segmentation
via pretraining using trimmed (single action) skeleton sequences. Unlike previous representation learning works
that are tailored for action recognition and that develop isolated sequence-wise representations, the proposed framework focuses on exploiting multi-scale representations in
conjunction with cross-sequence variations. More specifically, it proposes a novel data augmentation strategy,
“Shuffle and Warp”, which exploits diverse multi-action
permutations. The latter effectively assist two surrogate
tasks that are introduced in contrastive learning: Cross
Permutation Contrasting (CPC) and Relative Order Reasoning (ROR). In optimization, CPC learns intra-class similarities by contrasting representations of the same action
class across different permutations, while ROR reasons
about inter-class contexts by predicting relative mapping
between two permutations. Together, these tasks enable a
Dual-Surrogate Contrastive Learning (DuoCLR) network
to learn multi-scale feature representations optimized for
action segmentation. In experiments, DuoCLR is pretrained on a trimmed skeleton dataset and evaluated on
an untrimmed dataset where it demonstrates a significant
boost over state-the-art comparatives in both multi-class
and multi-label action segmentation tasks. Lastly, ablation
studies are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of each
component of the proposed approach.

Figure 1. Limitation of traditional skeleton-based contrastive
learning. (a): Distinct feature similarity matrices obtained from
feature extraction on trimmed (upper) vs. untrimmed (lower)
skeleton videos. Entry (i, j) represents the feature similarity (Eq.
(1)) between action classes i and j. The feature extractor is learned
on NTU RGB+D using AimCLR [18]. Trimmed and untrimmed
videos are both sampled from PKU Part 1. For untrimmed videos,
action-specific features are extracted via post-segmentation in the
feature space using frame annotations (detailed in Sec. 3.3). (b):
Trend of contrastive learning performance (detailed in Table 1) in
skeleton action segmentation by publication year.

1. Introduction

[12, 29, 35] has become a widely used modality in contrastive learning as it depicts the trajectories of key body
joints and provides a compact and robust depiction of human motion that is resilient to environmental variations.
Existing research primarily involves trimmed (single action) skeleton sequences into contrastive learning, where the
model treats each sequence as an instance and learns intraaction temporal representations (i.e., similarities) through
instance discrimination [6, 9, 46, 47]. The learned representations have been effectively transferred into trimmedsequence-based downstream tasks such as action recognition [1, 9, 17, 20, 28, 38, 42, 48, 54] and action retrieval
[13, 18, 24, 34, 49].
However, complex human-centric video understanding
applications such as action segmentation often involve
untrimmed long skeleton videos exhibiting multiple actions and complex action correlations. While focusing
on sequence-wise instance discrimination tasks, traditional
contrastive learning generally neglects the exploitation of
inter-sequence temporal dependencies (i.e., contexts) that

Contrastive learning [4, 5, 18] opens a new opportunity for
taking advantage of the growing volume of unlabeled data
for learning a rich latent feature representation aware of underlying data structures and semantics without human annotations. This approach effectively reduces the need for
extensive labeled data in downstream task fine-tuning. In
human-centric video understanding, human skeleton data

13772

