This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning 3D Scene Analogies with Neural Contextual Scene Maps
Junho Kim1 , Gwangtak Bae1 , Eun Sun Lee1 , and Young Min Kim1, 2
1
2

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University
{82magnolia, tak3452, eunsunlee, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. Overview of the 3D scene analogy task. (a) Given two scenes with regions possibly having similar contexts, (b) the 3D scene
analogy task aims to find a dense 3D mapping between the corresponding regions. (c) The estimated maps can then be used for applications
such as object placement or motion trajectory transfer.

Abstract

Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
in identifying scene analogies and transferring trajectories
or object placements in diverse indoor scenes, indicating its
potential for robotics and AR/VR applications. Project page
including the code is available through this link: https:

Understanding scene contexts is crucial for machines to
perform tasks and adapt prior knowledge in unseen or noisy
3D environments. As data-driven learning is intractable to
comprehensively encapsulate diverse ranges of layouts and
open spaces, we propose teaching machines to identify relational commonalities in 3D spaces. Instead of focusing on
point-wise or object-wise representations, we introduce 3D
scene analogies, which are smooth maps between 3D scene
regions that align spatial relationships. Unlike well-studied
single instance-level maps, these scene-level maps smoothly
link large scene regions, potentially enabling unique applications in trajectory transfer in AR/VR, long demonstration
transfer for imitation learning, and context-aware object rearrangement. To find 3D scene analogies, we propose neural contextual scene maps, which extract descriptor fields
summarizing semantic and geometric contexts, and holistically align them in a coarse-to-fine manner for map estimation. This approach reduces reliance on individual feature
points, making it robust to input noise or shape variations.

//82magnolia.github.io/3d_scene_analogies/.

1. Introduction
The 3D world is rich in contextual information, shaped by
the interplay of object placements and surrounding open
spaces [5, 66]. The function of an object is often flexible,
shifting according to its location and spatial relationship to
nearby elements; a table might serve as a TV stand in one
context or as a tea table beside a sofa in another. Capturing these nuanced, high-dimensional relationships is challenging. Decades of research in cognitive psychology [27–
29, 31, 52, 73] suggest that humans rely on analogical reasoning to relate familiar scenes from past experiences to
new observations. In Figure 1, humans can intuitively relate areas near a sofa-and-table setup in one room to simi-

7828

