This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object-level Correlation for Few-Shot Segmentation
Chunlin Wen1 , Yu Zhang1 ,* Jie Fan2 , Hongyuan Zhu4 , Xiu-Shen Wei1 ,
Yijun Wang1 , Zhiqiang Kou1 , Shuzhou Sun 3,5
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
Samsung Electronics (China) R&D Centre 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), A*STAR Singapore 138632
5
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis (CMVS), University of Oulu
Support Image Support Feature

Abstract

Support Target Feature

Support Mask

Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) aims to segment
objects of novel categories in the query images given only a
few annotated support samples. Existing methods primarily
build the image-level correlation between the support target
object and the entire query image. However, this correlation
contains the hard pixel noise, i.e., irrelevant background
objects, that is intractable to trace and suppress, leading to
the overfitting of the background. To address the limitation of
this correlation, we imitate the biological vision process to
identify novel objects in the object-level information. Target
identification in the general objects is more valid than in the
entire image, especially in the low-data regime. Inspired by
this, we design an Object-level Correlation Network (OCNet)
by establishing the object-level correlation between the support target object and query general objects, which is mainly
composed of the General Object Mining Module (GOMM)
and Correlation Construction Module (CCM). Specifically,
GOMM constructs the query general object feature by learning saliency and high-level similarity cues, where the general
objects include the irrelevant background objects and the
target foreground object. Then, CCM establishes the objectlevel correlation by allocating the target prototypes to match
the general object feature. The generated object-level correlation can mine the query target feature and suppress the
hard pixel noise for the final prediction. Extensive experiments on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i show that our model
achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

Hard Pixel Noise
(Irrelevant Background Objects)

Feature Comparison/
Matching
Image-level Correlation

Query Image Query Feature

Prediction

(a) Image-level Correlation Methods
Support Image Support Feature

Support Target Feature

Support Mask

Feature Comparison/
Matching
Object-level Correlation

Prediction

General
Object Mask
Query Image Query Feature

General Object Feature

(b) Object-level Correlation Methods

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) previous image-level correlation
method and (b) our object-level correlation method. (a) Previous
image-level correlation methods focus on building the correlation
between the support target feature and the entire query feature,
leading to the hard pixel noise, such as, the real background object
(books) and the irrelevant novel object (persons). (b) Our objectlevel correlation method is devoted to target selection from the
general object feature by imitating the biological vision process. In
this way, the generated correlation focuses on the target objects and
suppresses the hard pixel noise.

1. Introduction

Moreover, semantic segmentation performance tends to be
unsatisfactory when meeting the unseen novel classes. Under
such circumstances, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS)
[38] is proposed by introducing few-shot learning [41, 53]
into semantic segmentation. The FSS model aims to segment target novel objects in the original (query) image with
a few reference (support) images. The key point for FSS
is constructing the correlation between support and query
information.
Previous traditional methods [6, 32, 38, 42, 58] focus
on building the image-level correlation between the support
target feature and the entire query feature by comparison

Semantic segmentation [1, 2, 16, 31, 36], a fundamental
task in computer vision [12, 19, 20, 40, 45], has achieved
significant progress in academia and industry. But these
achievements primarily rely on large pixel-level annotated
datasets, which demand extensive time and human effort.
* Corresponding author: zhang yu@seu.edu.cn

23689

