This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Empirical Study of Autoregressive Pre-training from Videos
Jathushan Rajasegaran1,2 Ilija Radosavovic2 Rahul Ravishankar2 Yossi Gandelsman2
Christoph Feichtenhofer1 Jitendra Malik1,2
1
Meta FAIR 2 University of California, Berkeley
Abstract
We empirically study autoregressive pre-training from unlabeled videos. To perform our study, we construct a series of
autoregressive video models, called Toto. We treat videos as
sequences of visual tokens and train transformer models to
autoregressively predict future tokens. Our models are pretrained on a diverse dataset of unlabeled videos and images
comprising over 1 trillion visual tokens. We explore different architectural, training, and inference design choices.
We evaluate the learned visual representations on a range of
downstream tasks including image recognition, video classification, object tracking, and robotic manipulation. Our
results demonstrate that, despite minimal inductive biases,
autoregressive video pre-training leads to competitive performance across all benchmarks. Finally, we find that scaling our video models results in similar scaling curves to
those seen in language models, albeit with a different rate.
https://brjathu.github.io/toto

video, not images. According to the web, YouTube alone
has 156 million hours of video, and 30 thousand hours of
video are being uploaded every hour. While there are concerns that most of the text available on the Internet has already been used by the leading language models, in video
we are barely started on the journey of big data exploitation.
Learning from this data brings a number of challenges.
The vast majority of the video data is unlabeled, or at least
not consistently labeled. Therefore, an effective learning
approach should be able to learn from pixels alone. Indeed,
human children form rich representations and models of the
world purely from observing raw video [38], which further motivates the setting of learning from unlabeled videos.
What is the right video architecture and the training objective? And what is the right visual “element” to operate over?
In this paper, we empirically study autoregressive pretraining from unlabeled videos. To perform our empirical
study, we construct a family of autoregressive video models
which we call Toto. We treat videos as sequences of visual tokens and train a transformer model on the next token
prediction task. We use a causal transformer model with
improvements from the LLaMa [55] architecture. We use
dVAE [45] to tokenize frames into discrete tokens. Treating videos as sequences of tokens enables us to jointly train
on both videos and images using a unified format. We
construct a diverse dataset of videos and images comprising over 1 trillion visual tokens. Our models are first pretrained on this dataset and then evaluated on various downstream tasks. We extract visual representations using attention pooling from relevant layers of the model.
We evaluate our models on a range of downstream tasks
from image and video recognition, video forecasting, semisupervised tracking, object permanence and robotic manipulation tasks in both simulation and the real world. We consider different design choices for core components of our
approach. In the case of tokenizers, we consider dVAE [45],
VQGAN [47] and continuous patch-normalized [25] tokens. We also consider different model architectures including LLaMA [55], GPT2 [41] and Mamba [23].
We find that, for tokenization autoregressive models
based on discrete and continuous patch-normalized [25]

1. Introduction
In a paper published in 1951, Shannon, having just published the foundational papers of information theory, proposed a “guessing game” of next word prediction to estimate the entropy of English [51]. Nearly 70 years later,
training a high-capacity transformer neaural network [58]
on this task, provided the generative pre-training backbone
for Large Language Models [5, 13, 40, 41].
Less well known is the fact that in 1954, Fred Attneave
[2] proposed an analog of Shannon’s task for images. To
quote “We may divide the picture into arbitrarily small elements which we “transmit” to a subject (S) in a cumulative
sequence, having them guess at the color of each successive element until they are correct. This method of analysis
resembles the scanning process used in television and facsimile systems and accomplishes the like purpose of transforming two spatial dimensions into a single sequence in
time”. Of course this leaves open the question of what is
the “element”. Is it a pixel? A patch? A semantic entity?
While Attneave was concerned with images, in the context of 2024, we have to note the “Big Visual Data” is in

19108

