This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GMMamba: Group Masking Mamba for Whole Slide Image Classification
Tingting Zheng1,2

Hongxun Yao1,2* Kui Jiang1 Yi Xiao3 Sicheng Zhao4
1
Harbin Institute of Technology
2
China Mobile 5G Application Innovation Joint Research, Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Wuhan University 4 Tsinghua University
{23b903051@stu.hit, jiangkui@hit, xiao yi@whu, schzhao@tsinghua, h.yao@hit}.edu.cn

Abstract
0.95

1. Introduction
Histopathology slides are indispensable for cancer diagnosis, providing critical insights into tissue morphology
and cellular structures [3, 9, 30]. However, the complexity of biological structures in these slides complicates the
detection of subtle pathological variations [26, 34]. Recent

20G
40G
ACMIL

0.90
Accuracy

Recent advances in selective state space model (Mamba)
have shown great promise in whole slide image (WSI) classification. Despite this, WSIs contain explicit local redundancy (similar patches) and irrelevant regions (uninformative instances), posing significant challenges for Mambabased multi-instance learning (MIL) methods in capturing global representations. Furthermore, bag-level approaches struggle to extract critical features from all instances, while group-level methods fail to adequately account for tumor dispersion and intrinsic correlations across
groups, leading to suboptimal global representations. To
address these issues, we propose group masking Mamba
(GMMamba), a novel framework that combines two elaborate modules: (1) intra-group masking Mamba (IMM) for
selective instance exploration within groups, and (2) crossgroup super-feature sampling (CSS) to ameliorate longrange relation learning. Specifically, IMM adaptively predicts sparse masks to filter out features with low attention
scores (i.e., uninformative patterns) during bidirectional
Mamba modeling, facilitating the removal of instance redundancies for compact local representation. For improved
bag prediction, the CSS module further aggregates sparse
group representations into discriminative features, effectively grasping comprehensive dependencies among dispersed and sparse tumor regions inherent in large-scale
WSIs. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate
that GMMamba outperforms the state-of-the-art ACMIL
by 2.2% and 6.4% in accuracy on the TCGA-BRCA and
TCGA-ESCA datasets, respectively.

FLOPs (G)

GMMamba (Ours)

80G
DTFD

0.85

ABMIL

SSMMIL

MambaMIL

CLAM

0.80

TransMIL
0.75
0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90 0.95 1.00
Testing Time / s

1.05

1.10

1.15

1.20

Figure 1. Comparative results of FLOPs, testing time, and accuracy with representative MIL methods on the TCGA-ESCA
dataset. Our GMMamba achieves superior performance with
higher efficiency. The size of each circle represents the FLOPs.

advances in digital pathology have enabled the conversion
of physical slides into high-resolution whole slide images
(WSIs), creating new opportunities for deep learning-driven
tumor diagnosis. Despite this progress, the gigapixel resolution and diverse tumor patterns inherent in WSIs make
pixel-level manual annotation prohibitively laborious and
costly [26, 29, 38]. To alleviate these limitations, multiinstance learning (MIL) addresses this challenge by segmenting WSIs into patches (instances) and leveraging weak
bag-level labels for analysis [7, 16, 32, 48, 50]. In general,
previous efforts are rooted in exploring instance correlations
to construct a global representation for bag prediction.
A mass of studies improve bag-level representation, including Mean-Pooling, attention mechanisms [1, 17, 39,
51], recurrent and graph neural networks [3, 28], and
Transformer [29, 31]. Despite their considerable success,
these methods face a critical trade-off: computational efficiency versus discriminative bag representation, especially
in WSIs with numerous instances and complex tissue patterns. As shown in Figure 1, Transformer-based MIL methods (e.g., TransMIL [31]) suffer from high computational

9935

