This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RCTDistill: Cross-Modal Knowledge Distillation Framework for Radar-Camera
3D Object Detection with Temporal Fusion
Minjae Seong2 *
Geonho Bang1 *
3
Daye Oh
Junhyung Kim3
1

Seoul National University

2

Geunju Baek1
Jisong Kim2 *
3
Junho Koh
Jun Won Choi1†

Hanyang University

{ghbang, gjbaek}@spa.snu.ac.kr

3

Hyundai Motor Company

{mjseong, jskim}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr

{daye.oh, univjun, junhkoh}@hyundai.com

junwchoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Radar-camera fusion methods have emerged as a costeffective approach for 3D object detection but still lag behind
LiDAR-based methods in performance. Recent works have
focused on employing temporal fusion and Knowledge Distillation (KD) strategies to overcome these limitations. However, existing approaches have not sufficiently accounted for
uncertainties arising from object motion or sensor-specific
errors inherent in radar and camera modalities. In this work,
we propose RCTDistill, a novel cross-modal KD method
based on temporal fusion, comprising three key modules:
Range-Azimuth Knowledge Distillation (RAKD), Temporal Knowledge Distillation (TKD), and Region-Decoupled
Knowledge Distillation (RDKD). RAKD is designed to consider the inherent errors in the range and azimuth directions, enabling effective knowledge transfer from LiDAR
features to refine inaccurate BEV representations. TKD mitigates temporal misalignment caused by dynamic objects by
aligning historical radar-camera BEV features with current
LiDAR representations. RDKD enhances feature discrimination by distilling relational knowledge from the teacher
model, allowing the student to differentiate foreground and
background features. RCTDistill achieves state-of-the-art
radar–camera fusion performance on both the nuScenes and
View-of-Delft (VoD) datasets, with the fastest inference speed
of 26.2 FPS.

Figure 1. RCTDistill enhances the quality of BEV features for 3D
object detection by aligning spatial features in the range-azimuth
direction and temporal features in dynamic object trajectories.

1. Introduction

on Bird’s Eye View (BEV) domain [13, 15, 22]. Although
these methods effectively address the inherent limitations
of individual sensors, there remains a notable performance
gap when compared to LiDAR-based 3D detectors, as illustrated in Figure 1, where radar-camera fusion models show
spatially and temporally misaligned BEV representations.
In an effort to overcome these performance gaps, Knowledge Distillation (KD) [16, 40] and temporal fusion approaches [14, 15, 20] have recently emerged as promising
solutions in 3D object detection. KD-based approaches employ detectors based on low-fidelity sensors (e.g., cameras,
radar, or camera-radar fusion) as student models while lever-

Radar-camera-based 3D detection serves as a crucial component in autonomous driving systems. While various RadarCamera fusion approaches exist, recent methods predominantly focus on feature-level fusion, with particular emphasis
* Equal contributions
† Corresponding author

25315

