This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Group Inertial Poser: Multi-Person Pose and Global Translation
from Sparse Inertial Sensors and Ultra-Wideband Ranging
Ying Xue, Jiaxi Jiang, Rayan Armani, Dominik Hollidt, Yi-Chi Liao, and Christian Holz
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
https://siplab.org/projects/GroupInertialPoser

sparse IMU+UWB tracking

multi-person pose + global translation

6 trackers/person

SMPL parameters in a shared global space

between-person
distances
same-person
distances

Figure 1. Our method Group Inertial Poser estimates 3D full-body poses and global translation for multiple humans using inertial
measurements from a sparse set of wearable sensors, augmented by the distances between the sensors via ultra-wideband ranging. Our
approach overcomes the challenge of drift in previous inertial pose estimators to track translation, as we leverage information from body
motions across multiple people. Our IMU+UWB method stabilizes and improves individual pose estimates, relative translation estimates
between people, and global translation estimates, thereby preserving meaningful interaction dynamics.

Abstract
Tracking human full-body motion using sparse wearable
inertial measurement units (IMUs) overcomes the limitations of occlusion and instrumentation of the environment
inherent in vision-based approaches. However, purely IMUbased tracking compromises translation estimates and accurate relative positioning between individual people, as inertial cues are inherently self-referential and provide no direct spatial reference about others. In this paper, we present
a novel approach for robustly estimating body poses and
global translation for multiple individuals by leveraging the
distances between sparse wearable sensors—both on each
individual and across different people. Our method Group
Inertial Poser estimates these absolute distances between
pairs of sensors from ultra-wideband ranging (UWB) and
fuses them with inertial observations as input into structured state-space models to integrate temporal motion patterns for precise 3D pose estimation. Our novel two-step

optimization further leverages the estimated distances for
accurately tracking people’s global trajectories through the
world. We also introduce GIP-DB, the first IMU+UWB
dataset for two-person tracking, which comprises 200 minutes of motion recordings from 14 participants. In our evaluation, Group Inertial Poser outperforms previous stateof-the-art methods in accuracy and robustness across synthetic and real-world captures, showing the promise of
IMU+UWB-based multi-human motion capture in the wild.
[Code & Dataset]

1. Introduction

24910

Accurate motion tracking is a long-standing goal in computer vision. Single-person motion tracking has been extensively studied using camera-based approaches [10, 14,
23, 34, 39, 63, 76]. Expanding such tracking to multihuman motions introduces computational complexity and

