This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Debiasing Trace Guidance: Top-down Trace Distillation and Bottom-up Velocity
Alignment for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Xingjian Wang
Zhejiang University

Li Chai *
Zhejiang University

Jiming Chen
Zhejiang University

xingjianwang@zju.edu.cn

chaili@zju.edu.cn

cjm@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The leak of anomalous information from input condition
poses a great challenge to reconstruction-based anomaly
detection. Recent diffusion-based methods respond to this
issue by suppressing anomaly information for condition injection or in-sampling inversion. However, since they treat
conditions as a time-invariant prior, they fall into a trade-off
problem between anomaly suppression and normal pattern
consistency. To address this problem, we propose Debiasing
Trace Guidance (DTG) framework based on Flow Matching towards debiasing generation for more accurate unsupervised multi-class anomaly detection. Generally, DTG
distills a low-dimensional generation sub-trace robust to
anomalies by Top-down Trace Distillation, and then utilizes its time-varying velocity features to guide a debiasing generation by Bottom-up Velocity Alignment. The trace
distillation filters out high-frequency anomalies via learnable wavelet filters and reserving structural information
by keeping global consistency across samples using Skinhorn Distance. Subsequently, the velocity field of original trace is aligned with the one of sub-trace through KVInjection Attention mechanism. The model is forced to generate normal details from corresponding low-dimensional
contexts via Alignment Mask. Experimental results on several benchmarks and corresponding ablation studies have
demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed method.

ditional generation problem, prior diffusion-based methods
[9, 15, 22, 25, 33, 34, 39] assume they will generate normal counterparts confined to the learned normal distribution
when conditioned on the given samples by condition injection [9, 25, 39] and in-sampling inversion [22, 33, 34]. The
reconstruction errors of unknown test samples will provide
measurable cues for anomaly identification.
For conditional diffusion-based AD methods, there exists a major issue called ”identical shortcut” [15, 34, 35].
That is, abnormal information leaks from the conditioning
input and accumulate through iterative denoising process,
skewing generation results toward an anomalous data manifold. For condition injection, their condition modules are
trained on normal samples and encouraged to absorb all details, thus leading them to be vulnerable to potential anomalous patterns in test samples. As for in-sampling inversion,
subtle anomalies that cannot be fully masked by noise will
be inadvertently amplified across iterative steps.
Recently, several studies have responded to this issue. For condition injection, VPOT [15] aims to filter out
anomaly information in input conditional image, and learns
prototypes as vague condition via optimal transport. To optimize in-sampling inversion, LafitE [34] utilizes memory
bank and weighted integration to narrow the gap of initial
state between conditional input image and learned normal
distribution. However, the manner of prior methods to resolve this issue acts as double-edged sword, posing a tradeoff challenge. As stated in [19], excessive suppression of
anomaly information in conditional inputs will also erode
critical details, and thus hinder from preserving consistency
with normal regions. This limitation stems from that prior
methods impose conditions as a time-invariant prior at the
beginning or across the reverse progress.
The key to simultaneously address the ”identical shortcut” issue and the trade-off challenge, is to design a proper
time-variant condition mechanism. As observed by [13],
condition has time-variant impacts. Condition added in
early sampling have enormous influence on the generation
trajectory, and the one added in relatively later timesteps has
limited effect on overall direction.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised multi-class anomaly detection (AD) seek to
classify and locate unusual regions of multi-class objects
without relying on their labeled abnormal counterparts. It
has widespread applications in single-modality and multimodal applications such as industrial quality inspection
[1, 42], face anti-spoofing [18], etc. As emerging with great
generative capability, diffusion models [11, 27] have shown
remarkable potential in AD tasks. Treating AD tasks as con* Corresponding author.

22989

