This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

INTER: Mitigating Hallucination in Large Vision-Language Models by
Interaction Guidance Sampling
Xin Dong∗,1,2 , Shichao Dong∗,2 , Jin Wang∗,3 , Jing Huang†,1,4 , Li Zhou2 , Zenghui Sun2 ,
Lihua Jing1,4 , Jinsong Lan2 , Xiaoyong Zhu2 , Bo Zheng†,2
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{dongxin,huangjing,jinglihua}@iie.ac.cn, {dongshichao1996}@gmail.com,{wj0529}@connect.hku.hk,
{pengye.zl,zenghui.szh,jinsonglan.ljs}@taobao.com, {xiaoyong.z,bozheng}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

MM-Bench
84.6

Hallucinations in large vision-language models (LVLMs)
pose significant challenges for real-world applications, as
LVLMs may generate responses that appear plausible yet
remain inconsistent with the associated visual content. This
issue rarely occurs in human cognition. We argue that this
discrepancy arises from humans’ ability to effectively leverage multimodal interaction information in data samples.
Specifically, humans typically first gather multimodal information, analyze the interactions across modalities for understanding, and then express their understanding through
language. Motivated by this observation, we conduct extensive experiments on popular LVLMs and obtained insights that surprisingly reveal human-like, though less pronounced, cognitive behavior of LVLMs on multimodal samples. Building on these findings, we further propose INTER: Interaction Guidance Sampling, a novel trainingfree algorithm that mitigate hallucinations without requiring additional data. Specifically, INTER explicitly guides
LVLMs to effectively reapply their understanding of multimodal interaction information when generating responses,
thereby reducing potential hallucinations. On six benchmarks including VQA and image captioning tasks, INTER
achieves an average improvement of up to 3.4% on five
LVLMs compared to the state-of-the-art decoding strategy.
The codes are released on Github. 1

62.7

POPE (MSCOCO)

2279.6
2221.9
9.8

87.0
88.5

2316.4

81.0
61.0

89.3

MME

82.0

MMStar 63.9

24.0

11.6

LLaVA-Bench

12.5
21.6

Nucleus Sampling
VCD (Nucleus)
INTER (Nucleus)
Beam Search

19.7

CHAIR (

OPERA (Beam)

)

INTER (Beam)

Prompt: Can you explain this meme in detail?
This meme features a cooked spaghetti meal
The image features a baked chicken product,
presented on a pizza pan. The casserole is cut possibly patties or breaded chicken pieces,
up and laid out across the pan, showcasing its arranged to look like a globe or a map of the
various components. However, the dish catches world. There are multiple chicken pieces
the viewer's attention because it looks like the scattered across the globe, giving the
meal is dancing or moving to the left edge.
impression of a world map made of food.

Image

(a) Nucleus Sampling

(b) INTER (Nucleus)

Figure 1. Comparisons with existing decoding strategies on the
state-of-the-art LVLM InternVL2.5-MPO [10]. Our approach
INTER achieved optimal results across six benchmarks. Besides,
the detailed output of INTER in a case of complex inputs is presented. The hallucinated words are highlighted in red.

30, 37, 59]. These models blend visual and textual information, enhancing our ability to interpret and interact with
the world. However, LVLMs experience hallucinations that
hinder their applications, which means that responses are
not aligned with the given input [8, 11, 16, 25, 29, 49, 54].
Previous methods made attempts to address this issue
with additional training and fine-grained data [28, 35, 49,
60–62], but such approaches often demand substantial human effort and computational resources. In parallel, other
methods were proposed to explore efficient training-free

2

1. Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated remarkable versatility across a wide range of tasks,
from image captioning to complex reasoning [3, 10, 13,
1∗ Equal Contribution.
2† Corresponding authors.

2534

