This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AR-1-to-3: Single Image to Consistent 3D Object via Next-View Prediction
Xuying Zhang1* Yupeng Zhou1*
Shaohui Jiao4 Daquan Zhou4
1

VCIP, CS, Nankai University

2

Kai Wang1 Yikai Wang3 Zhen Li1
Qibin Hou1,2† Ming-Ming Cheng1,2

NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian

3

Tsinghua University

4

ByteDance Inc.

Homepage:https://github.com/HVision-NKU/AR123

Figure 1. Examples of high-quality 3D asset gallery generated by our AR-1-to-3 model. See Sec. 4.2 for more visualization results.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Synthesizing 3D objects from a single-view image has been
a fundamental and enduring research in both computer vision and graphics communities. This task is challenging,
as it not only involves reconstructing the visible regions of
a 3D object but also necessitates extrapolating the invisible
parts. To address these challenges, researchers have sought
to synthesize novel views [4, 29, 32, 40] with the powerful
priors of diffusion models, which have achieved remarkable
success in image generation [7, 25, 38, 43, 74].
Existing approaches can be broadly categorized into two
distinct paradigms. To be specific, the methods represented by Zero123 [30] fine-tune pre-trained diffusion models on <input view, camera pose, output view> triplets of
3D renders and generate multiple discrete views of a 3D
object based on a single-view image and a set of camera
poses. On another line, Zero123++ [45] and its followups [21, 28, 50, 65] consider the independence of new views
specified by different camera poses. They utilize diffusion
models to generate multiple views simultaneously by merging all target views with specified camera poses into a grid
image for joint distribution modeling. Despite their success
in many scenarios, these methods remain prone to synthe-

Novel view synthesis (NVS) is a cornerstone for imageto-3d creation. However, existing works still struggle to
maintain consistency between the generated views and the
input views, especially when there is a significant camera
pose difference, leading to poor-quality 3D geometries and
textures. We attribute this issue to their treatment of all target views with equal priority according to our empirical observation that the target views closer to the input views exhibit higher fidelity. With this inspiration, we propose AR1-to-3, a novel next-view prediction paradigm based on diffusion models that first generates views close to the input
views, which are then utilized as contextual information to
progressively synthesize farther views. To encode the generated view subsequences as local and global conditions for
the next-view prediction, we accordingly develop a stacked
local feature encoding strategy (Stacked-LE) and an LSTMbased global feature encoding strategy (LSTM-GE). Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly
improves the consistency between the generated views and
the input views, producing high-fidelity 3D assets.
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

26273

