This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Latent Diffusion Model for Complex Sewing Pattern Generation
Shengqi Liu1 , Yuhao Cheng1 ,* Zhuo Chen1 , Xingyu Ren1 , Wenhan Zhu2 ,
Lincheng Li3 , Mengxiao Bi3 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Yichao Yan1†
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Xueshen AI, 3 NetEase Fuxi AI Lab

Figure 1. SewingLDM can generate complex sewing pattern designs under the condition of texts, garment sketches, and body shapes,

demonstrating detailed control ability. The generated garments can be seamlessly integrated into the CG pipeline for simulation and
animation, achieving vivid and photo-realistic rendering results.

Abstract
Generating sewing patterns in garment design is receiving increasing attention due to its CG-friendly and flexibleediting nature. Previous sewing pattern generation methods
have been able to produce exquisite clothing, but struggle to
design complex garments with detailed control. To address
these issues, we propose SewingLDM, a multi-modal generative model that generates sewing patterns controlled by
text prompts, body shapes, and garment sketches. Initially,
we extend the original vector of sewing patterns into a more
comprehensive representation to cover more intricate details and then compress them into a compact latent space.
To learn the sewing pattern distribution in the latent space,
we design a two-step training strategy to inject the multimodal conditions, i.e., body shapes, text prompts, and garment sketches, into a diffusion model, ensuring the generated garments are body-suited and detail-controlled. Comprehensive qualitative and quantitative experiments show

the effectiveness of our proposed method, significantly surpassing previous approaches in terms of complex garment
design and various body adaptability. Our project page:
https://shengqiliu1.github.io/SewingLDM.

1. Introduction

17640

Clothes play a pivotal role in shaping human aesthetics
and physique, where appropriate clothes can beautify their
overall appearance and highlight human physical attributes.
Therefore, garment design has always been a crucial component that significantly impacts both digital character creation and real-life human visual presentation. In recent
years, many garment generation methods [3, 9, 20, 25–
27, 29, 33, 38, 43, 44, 54, 55, 64, 74] have emerged to generate desired garments for users under various conditions.
Typically, garment generation can be classified into 2D
∗ Project leader † Corresponding author

