This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CogCM: Cognition-Inspired Contextual Modeling
for Audio-Visual Speech Enhancement

1

Feixiang Wang1,2 , Shuang Yang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen 1,2
State Key Lab of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangfeixiang19@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {shuang.yang,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Audio-Visual Speech Enhancement (AVSE) leverages both
audio and visual information to improve speech quality.
Despite noisy real-world conditions, humans are generally
able to perceive and interpret corrupted speech segments
as clear. Researches in cognitive science have shown how
the brain merges auditory and visual inputs to achieve this,
which mainly manifests in four insights: (1) Humans utilize
high-level semantic context to reconstruct corrupted speech
signals, highlighting the importance of semantics. (2) Visual cues are shown to strongly correlate with semantic information, enabling visual cues to facilitate semantic context modeling. (3) Visual appearance and vocal information jointly benefit identification, implying that visual cues
strengthen low-level signal context modeling. (4) Highlevel semantic knowledge and low-level auditory processing operate concurrently, allowing the semantics to guide
signal-level context modeling. Motivated by these insights,
we propose CogCM, a cognition-inspired hierarchical contextual modeling framework. The CogCM framework includes three core modules: (1) A semantic context modeling module (SeCM) to capture high-level semantic context from both audio and visual modalities; (2) A signal
context modeling module ( SiCM) to model fine-grained
temporal-spectral structures under multi-modal semantic
context guidance; (3) A semantic-to-signal guidance module (SSGM) to leverage semantic context in guiding signal
context modeling across both temporal and frequency dimensions. Extensive experiments on 7 benchmarks demonstrate CogCM’s superiority, especially achieving 63.6%
SDR and 58.1% PESQ improvements at -15dB SNR – outperforming state-of-the-art methods across all metrics.

tional SE exclusively uses auditory signals and struggles in
scenarios with low SNR [9, 14, 63]. Inspired by insights
from cognitive psychology, such as the “Cocktail Party Effect” [11] and the “McGurk Effect” [50], the integration of
visual cues into speech enhancement has become increasingly prevalent. These phenomena have led to the flourishing development of Audio-Visual Speech Enhancement
(AVSE) [52, 69, 75, 76].
In real-world scenarios, widespread background noises
such as traffic, natural, and indoor noises are predominantly
non-stationary. Such variability leads to partial corruption of some parts in a noisy speech while leaving others relatively intact. Cognitive psychology has revealed
how humans perceive and process speech in such noisy
environments. First, the human auditory system leverages semantic contexts to reconstruct speech segments obscured by noise, a process known as phonemic restoration [59, 62]. This process indicates that semantic contexts provide high-level information about the overall content of speech, thereby supplying additional cues that enhance the reconstruction of disrupted acoustic details. Second, conflicting visual and auditory signals lead audiences
to a third, distinct perception, a phenomenon called McGurk
Effect [50]. This phenomenon reveals a strong coupling
between visual information and semantic context, indicating that visual cues modulate high-level semantic clues.
Third, humans integrate visual appearance (e.g., gender,
skin, body shape) and vocal information for processing
identity [8]. Recent methods [38] leveraging deep learning
have further demonstrated the correlation between visual
cues and vocal prosody (e.g., voice pitch). These prosodic
features appear as spectral shape variations along the frequency dimension in speech. Last, evidence from neuroscience shows that both high-level semantic centers and
lower-level auditory centers respond in parallel to incoming speech [30], enabling semantic information to guide the
modeling of signal-level details.
Based on these findings, we identify 3 key insights: (1)
Multimodal semantic context benefit the recovery of speech

1. Introduction
Speech Enhancement (SE) aims to improve the intelligibility and quality of speech by eliminating background
noise. Given the widespread presence of noise in realworld environments, SE is particularly important. Tradi-

21408

