This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tree Skeletonization from 3D Point Clouds by Denoising Diffusion
Elias Ariel Marks1,2
Rodrigo Marcuzzi1,2
1

Lucas Nunes1,2
Federico Magistri1,2
Lars Zimmermann2
Jens Behley1,2

Matteo Sodano1,2
Cyrill Stachniss1,2,3

Center for Robotics 2 University of Bonn 3 Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
{firstname.lastname}@igg.uni-bonn.de

Data Collection

Input Point Clouds

Output Skeletons

Figure 1. Our approach generates tree skeletons (right) of real orchard trees (left) from colorized point clouds (middle). We leverage a
denoising diffusion probabilistic model to predict the nodes and hierarchy of tree skeleton represented as a graph (red) of individual trees.

Abstract

1. Introduction
The world around us is filled with natural structures, such as
trees, that humans can interpret even when parts of them are
occluded; however, this remains a challenge for computer
vision systems. Reconstructing tree topologies from sensor
data is one application where this aspect matters. There are
many applications where inferring these topologies is fundamental, e.g., forest monitoring for understanding of these
complex natural systems [67], monitoring growth [16], predicting quality and quantity of harvested products [14], or
carbon storage estimation [9]. Another highly relevant application is orchard management, where automated pruning
and thinning processes require an accurate representation of
tree topology to define target points [71]. Automated harvesting robots can benefit from topological tree models by
including them in the end effector path planning to avoid
collisions with trunks and thick branches while ignoring foliage and small twigs [2]. There is an increasing interest
in tree topology estimation, which is commonly called tree
skeletonization [1, 7, 8, 26, 32, 34, 38]. Tree skeletonization consists of inferring from sensor data the graph representing the medial axes of the trunk, branches, and twigs,
collectively referred to as branches, for simplicity.
We address tree skeletonization using 3D point cloud
data, which is more descriptive for geometry than using
only 2D images. Traditionally, the task of tree skeletonization is approached as a regression problem [5, 6, 65], while
more recent approaches tackle the problem also with gen-

The natural world presents complex organic structures,
such as tree canopies, that humans can interpret even when
only partially visible. Understanding tree structures is
key for forest monitoring, orchard management, and automated harvesting applications. However, reconstructing
tree topologies from sensor data, called tree skeletonization, remains a challenge for computer vision approaches.
Traditional methods for tree skeletonization rely on handcrafted features, regression, or generative models, whereas
recent advances focus on deep learning approaches. Existing methods often struggle with occlusions caused by dense
foliage, limiting their applicability over the annual vegetation cycle. Furthermore, the lack of real-world data with
reference information limits the evaluation of these methods to synthetic datasets, which does not validate generalization to real environments. In this paper, we present
a novel approach for tree skeletonization that combines a
generative denoising diffusion probabilistic model for predicting node positions and branch directions with a classical minimum spanning tree algorithm to infer tree skeletons
from 3D point clouds, even with strong occlusions. Additionally, we provide a dataset of an apple orchard with 280
trees scanned 10 times during the growing season with corresponding reference skeletons, enabling quantitative evaluation. Experiments show the superior performance of our
approach on real-world data and competitive results compared to state-of-art approaches on synthetic benchmarks.

27607

