This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAM Encoder Breach by Adversarial Simplicial Complex Triggers Downstream
Model Failures
Yi Qin2,5∗ , Rui Wang1,3,4,6 *, Tao Huang2,5 , Tong Xiao2,5 , Liping Jing1,2,5†
State Key Laboratory of Advanced Rail Autonomous Operation, Beijing, China;
2
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Mining and Embodied Intelligence;
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Railway Traffic Safety, Beijing, China;
4
National Engineering Research Center of Rail Transportation Operation and Control
System, Beijing, China; 5 School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University,
Beijing, China; 6 School of Automation and Intelligence, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
1

{yeeqin,rui.wang,thuang,21271023,lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

0.017
Closer to Source Domain

L2-feature distance

While the Segment Anything Model (SAM) transforms
interactive segmentation with zero-shot abilities, its inherent vulnerabilities present a single-point risk, potentially
leading to the failure of numerous downstream applications. Proactively evaluating these transferable vulnerabilities is thus imperative. Prior adversarial attacks on
SAM often present limited transferability due to insufficient
exploration of common weakness across domains. To address this, we propose Vertex-Refining Simplicial Complex
Attack (VeSCA), a novel method that leverages only the encoder of SAM for generating transferable adversarial examples. Specifically, it achieves this by explicitly characterizing the shared vulnerable regions between SAM and
downstream models through a parametric simplicial complex. Our goal is to identify such complexes within adversarially potent regions by iterative vertex-wise refinement.
A lightweight domain re-adaptation strategy is introduced
to bridge domain divergence using minimal reference data
during the initialization of simplicial complex. Ultimately,
VeSCA generates consistently transferable adversarial examples through random simplicial complex sampling. Extensive experiments demonstrate that VeSCA achieves performance improved by 12.7% compared to state-of-the-art
methods across three downstream model categories across
five domain-specific datasets. Our findings further highlight
the downstream model risks posed by SAM’s vulnerabilities and emphasize the urgency of developing more robust
foundation models. The implementation code is available
at https://github.com/Seveone/SAM_VeSCA

0.016
0.015
0.014
0.013

-

0.012
Higher Transferability

0.011
SA-1B

0.083

0.166

0.250

Maximum Mean Discrepancy

ISTD

Figure 1. Performance comparison between VeSCA and baseline
methods on the shadow segmentation task (ISTD [42]). y-axis
indicates the mean ℓ2 distance between features of adversarial examples extracted by SAM encoder and downstream model. x-axis
shows Maximum Mean Discrepancy between adversarial examples and samples from SAM training data (SA-1B [23]). The point
at the lower-left corner indicate the ideal performance.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

The advent of foundation models has precipitated a
paradigm shift in artificial intelligence, endowing machines
with unprecedented generalization capabilities across diverse tasks. Models such as CLIP [34], DinoV2 [33],
GPT4 [1], DeepSeek-R1 [16], Segment Anything Model
(SAM) [23] exhibit near-human proficiency in zero-shot
perception and reasoning. Among these, SAM—a pioneering visual foundation model—has redefined interactive segmentation by dynamically generating masks in response to
arbitrary prompts, such as points, boxes, or text. SAM has
fostered applications in various domains, including shadow

10624

