This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HVPUNet: Hybrid-Voxel Point-cloud Upsampling Network
Juhyung Ha1
1

Vibhas Kumar Vats1

Soon-heung Jung2

Alimoor Reza3

David J. Crandall1

Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN USA
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
3
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Drake University, Des Moines, IA USA
juhha@iu.edu, vkvats@iu.edu, zeroone@etri.re.kr, md.reza@drake.edu, djcran@iu.edu

3

Input hybrid voxel (128 3 )

3

Output hybrid voxel (128 )

Output hybrid voxel (256 )

Shape Completion

Voxel

Point-cloud

Super Resolution

Marching Cube
Surface Reconstruction

Normal

Poisson Surface
Reconstruction

Figure 1. We propose an end-to-end technique, HVPUNet, for upsampling 3D point clouds. Unlike most existing techniques, it can
upsample points at precise positions with lower computational cost by using hybrid voxels. Our hybrid voxel representation encodes continuous point locations in a structured voxel grid, allowing both precise and efficient reconstruction. HVPUNet consists of two parts: shape
completion which imputes missing geometry in the sparse 3D input, and super-resolution which generates a more detailed reconstruction.
The estimated hybrid voxel output with normal vectors can be used to reconstruct 3D surfaces.

Abstract
Point-cloud upsampling aims to generate dense point sets
from sparse or incomplete 3D data. Most existing work uses
a point-to-point framework. While this method achieves
high geometric precision, it is slow because of irregular
memory accesses to process unstructured point data. Alternatively, voxel-based methods offer computational efficiency by using regular grids, but struggle to preserve precise point locations due to discretization. To resolve this
efficiency-precision trade-off, we introduce Hybrid Voxels,
a representation that combines both voxel occupancy and a
continuous point offset. We then present the Hybrid-Voxel
Point-cloud Upsampling Network (HVPUNet), an efficient
framework built upon this representation. HVPUNet integrates two key modules: (1) Shape Completion to restore

missing geometry by filling empty voxels, and (2) SuperResolution to enhance spatial resolution and capture finer
surface details. We also use progressive refinement, operational voxel expansion, and implicit geometric learning.
Experimental results demonstrate that HVPUNet can upsample point clouds at significantly lower computational
cost than the state-of-the-art, but with comparable model
accuracy.

1. Introduction

29153

Spatial enhancement in 3D is a crucial yet challenging problem for applications including computer graphics, CAD,
and virtual reality. Point-cloud upsampling aims to enhance
the details of 3D models by generating denser points from

