This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Loss Functions for Predictor-based Neural Architecture Search
Han Ji Yuqi Feng Jiahao Fan Yanan Sun*
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
jihan@stu.scu.edu.cn, feng770623@gmail.com, {fanjh,ysun}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

putational cost, prior research has introduced a wide range
of evaluation acceleration methods, such as weight sharing [27], early stopping strategy [7], zero-cost proxy [1],
and performance predictor [19].

Evaluation is a critical but costly procedure in neural architecture search (NAS). Performance predictors have been
widely adopted to reduce evaluation costs by directly estimating architecture performance. The effectiveness of predictors is heavily inﬂuenced by the choice of loss functions.
While traditional predictors employ regression loss functions to evaluate the absolute accuracy of architectures, recent approaches have explored various ranking-based loss
functions, such as pairwise and listwise ranking losses, to
focus on the ranking of architecture performance. Despite
their success in NAS, the effectiveness and characteristics
of these loss functions have not been thoroughly investigated. In this paper, we conduct the ﬁrst comprehensive
study on loss functions in performance predictors, categorizing them into three main types: regression, ranking, and
weighted loss functions. Speciﬁcally, we assess eight loss
functions using a range of NAS-relevant metrics on 13 tasks
across ﬁve search spaces. Our results reveal that speciﬁc
categories of loss functions can be effectively combined to
enhance predictor-based NAS. Furthermore, our ﬁndings
could provide practical guidance for selecting appropriate
loss functions for various tasks. We hope this work provides meaningful insights to guide the development of loss
functions for predictor-based methods in the NAS community. Codes are available at https://github.com/
jihan4431/PWLNAS.

Among these methods, performance predictors are one
of the most widely used because of their ability to provide accurate and stable predictions across various search
spaces. A performance predictor requires a small number of
trained architectures to learn the mapping from the encoding of an architecture to its corresponding performance. After that, it can directly estimate the performance of unseen
architectures, signiﬁcantly reducing the need for expensive
evaluations.
A crucial component of a performance predictor is the
loss function, which determines its optimization direction.
Previous studies [24, 40] have demonstrated that the choice
of loss function can dramatically affect the performance of
the predictor. This raises an important question: how to
design a proper loss function to empower the performance
predictor? A large number of works [22, 33, 34] opt for
Mean Square Error (MSE) loss to estimate the absolute accuracy of an architecture. Other works have explored ranking loss functions, such as hinge ranking (HR) loss [10, 24],
which predict rankings of architecture performance. Additionally, some works [30, 36] employ weighted loss functions, which focus more on architectures with higher accuracy. While several works [24, 40] have discussed the effect
of loss functions in predictors, they only consider MSE and
ranking loss. Additionally, existing evaluations of loss functions often lack generalizability due to limited search spaces
and assessment metrics. These limitations motivate us to investigate how different loss functions compare across various settings and how their respective strengths can be leveraged to enhance predictor-based NAS.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) aims to automate the design of specialized neural architectures for any given task
and has been widely applied in various domains [8, 17,
32]. NAS typically contains three key components: search
space, search strategy, and performance evaluation [6]. One
signiﬁcant bottleneck of early NAS was the expensive performance evaluation stage, which involves training each architecture from scratch [29, 45]. To mitigate the heavy com-

In this paper, we provide the ﬁrst comprehensive study
on loss functions in performance predictors. We identify
three signiﬁcant categories of loss functions. Regression
loss functions minimize the difference between the prediction score and the absolute accuracy of an architecture.
Ranking loss functions aim to rank architectures correctly.
They can be further classiﬁed into pairwise ones that re-

* Corresponding author.

1624

