This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Erasing More Than Intended? How Concept Erasure Degrades the Generation
of Non-Target Concepts
Ibtihel Amara1,2† , Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun1,3† , Ivana Kajic4 , Zarana Parekh4 , Natalie Harris1 , Sarah Young1 ,
Chirag Nagpal1 , Najoung Kim4 , Junfeng He1 , Cristina Nader Vasconcelos4 , Deepak Ramachandran4 ,
Golnoosh Farnadi1 , Katherine Heller1 , Mohammad Havaei1 , Negar Rostamzadeh1
1

Google Research, 2 McGill University, 3 Rice University, 4 Google Deepmind

Abstract
Concept erasure techniques have recently gained significant attention for their potential to remove unwanted concepts from text-to-image models. While these methods often
demonstrate promising results in controlled settings, their
robustness in real-world applications and suitability for deployment remain uncertain. In this work, we (1) identify
a critical gap in evaluating sanitized models, particularly
in assessing their performance across diverse concept dimensions, and (2) systematically analyze the failure modes
of text-to-image models post-erasure. We focus on the unintended consequences of concept removal on non-target concepts across different levels of interconnected relationships
including visually similar, binomial, and semantically related concepts. To address this, we introduce EraseBench,
a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating post-erasure
performance. EraseBench includes over 100 curated concepts, targeted evaluation prompts, and a robust set of metrics to assess both effectiveness and side effects of erasure. Our findings reveal a phenomenon of concept entanglement, where erasure leads to unintended suppression
of non-target concepts, causing spillover degradation that
manifests as distortions and a decline in generation quality.

Figure 1. The effects of concept erasure on non-target concepts. Pre-erasure outputs (left) vs. post-erasure results (right)
from Stable Diffusion (SD). Erasure negatively impacts the quality of unrelated concepts. EraseBench identifies such effects and
offers a framework to evaluate the reliability of erasure methods.

1. Introduction

triggering unwanted associations. However, the challenge
of effectively erasing a concept without unintentionally distorting related or visually similar concepts remains unresolved. For example, erasing “cat” from a model should
ideally remove all representations of a cat, yet leave semantically or visually related concepts like “lion” unaffected.
Figure 1 shows various failure modes observed in state-ofthe-art concept erasure techniques. These techniques exhibit instability after a concept is erased, often causing unintended consequences for closely related non-target concepts
such as over-erasure and image artifacts (i.e. distortions). In
this work, we argue that concept erasure techniques often
struggle under real-world conditions. Even state-of-the-art
methods fail when erasing concepts that are visually similar, binomially related, or semantically entangled. This lack
of robustness raises concerns about their deployment in sen-

As text-to-image (T2I) generative models [6, 20, 21, 38, 40,
45] have become increasingly popular and widely adopted,
the demand for techniques that allow for the targeted removal of specific concepts has grown in parallel. Concept
erasure methods [10, 11, 13, 18, 25, 26, 30, 32, 34, 44, 54]
promise to address important concerns such as ensuring
the safe deployment of models by removing undesirable or
harmful concepts [10, 15, 52]. Whether applied to mitigate bias [4, 34, 46], protect privacy [10, 15, 22, 52], or
filter out unwanted content, these techniques aim to create
“sanitized” models capable of generating content without

16420

