This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Quality-Guided Mixture of Score-Fusion Experts Framework
for Human Recognition
Jie Zhu, Yiyang Su, Minchul Kim, Anil Jain, and Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824
{zhujie4, suyiyan1, kimminc2, jain, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract

Non-math score distribution

Match score distribution

Whole-body biometrics integrates diverse recognition tasks
such as Face Recognition (FR) [10, 24], Gait Recognition
(GR) [63, 66], and Person Re-identiﬁcation (ReID) [15, 35]
to overcome unimodal limitations. Whole-body biometrics
beneﬁts from the combined strengths of multiple modalities. This multimodal synergy ensures robust performance
in non-ideal conditions (low-light, occlusion, and missing

Previous method

Limited

Images of the same subject

GR Model

Images of different subjects

ReID Model

…

1. Introduction

FR Model

…

Whole-body biometric recognition is a challenging multimodal task that integrates various biometric modalities, including face, gait, and body. This integration is essential for overcoming the limitations of unimodal systems.
Traditionally, whole-body recognition involves deploying
different models to process multiple modalities, achieving the ﬁnal outcome by score-fusion (e.g., weighted averaging of similarity matrices from each model). However, these conventional methods may overlook the variations in score distributions of individual modalities, making it challenging to improve ﬁnal performance. In this
work, we present Quality-guided Mixture of score-fusion
Experts (QME), a novel framework designed for improving whole-body biometric recognition performance through
a learnable score-fusion strategy using a Mixture of Experts
(MoE). We introduce a novel pseudo-quality loss for quality estimation with a modality-speciﬁc Quality Estimator
(QE), and a score triplet loss to improve the metric performance. Extensive experiments on multiple whole-body
biometric datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach, achieving state-of-the-art results across
various metrics compared to baseline methods. Our method
is effective for multimodal and multi-model, addressing key
challenges such as model misalignment in the similarity
score domain and variability in data quality. Code is available at the Project Link.

Uncertainty Distribution
importance misalignment

Quality
guided

Distribution
alignment

QME (Ours)

Enhanced

Figure 1. Illustration of score distribution alignment in multimodal human recognition. Different models and modalities (e.g.,
face, gait, and body) produce distinct similarity score distributions.
Conventional score-fusion methods struggle with optimal alignment and assigning importance weights to each modality, potentially degrading performance.

traits), making it indispensable for security-critical domains
like surveillance and law enforcement.
Effective fusion is pivotal to whole-body recognition.
Current approaches include decision-level fusion, featurelevel fusion, and score-level fusion [51]. In decision-level
fusion, each modality ﬁrst makes an identity decision based
on its extracted features. The individual decisions are
then combined based on either decision scores or ranks.
Feature-level fusion combines extracted features from different modalities to obtain a single representation [5, 27].
However, this approach is often hindered by inconsistencies
across modalities in biometrics, as different traits may not
necessarily complement each other effectively. Most importantly, feature-level fusion requires suitable paired multimodal datasets. Many available datasets such as WebFace42M [67] for face recognition do not contain wholebody data, while other datasets like PRCC [61], LTCC [43],
and CCPG [32] widely used in person ReID and gait recognition, are limited by dataset size, the masking of faces, or

13076

