This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DC-ControlNet: Decoupling Inter- and Intra-Element Conditions in
Image Generation with Diffusion Models
Hongji Yang†,

†

Wencheng Han , Yucheng Zhou, Jianbing Shen*
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau

yc47942@um.edu.mo, wencheng256@gmail.com, yucheng.zhou@connect.um.edu.mo

Text

Position

A Teddy Bear.

Normal

Segmentation

Text

Bounding Box

A living room.

Depth

Text

Background

Element Laryer Order

Normal

Accurate
Layer Order
Inter-Element Controller

HED

Intra-Element
Controller

A Camera.

Intra-Element
Controller

Layout Condition

Intra-Element
Controller

Content Conditions

Harmonious
Background
Relationship
Reasonable
Element
Interaction

Figure 1. Controllable generation using our DC-ControlNet under various conditions. In our pipeline, each element can be controlled by
decoupled conditions, while multiple elements can be naturally fused within a given order, enabling flexible customized generation.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce DC (Decouple)-ControlNet, a
highly flexible and precisely controllable framework for
multi-condition image generation. The core idea behind
DC-ControlNet is to decouple control conditions, transforming global control into a hierarchical system that integrates distinct elements, contents, and layouts. This enables users to mix these individual conditions with greater
flexibility, leading to more efficient and accurate image generation control. Previous ControlNet-based models rely
solely on global conditions, which affect the entire image and lack the ability of element- or region-specific control. This limitation reduces flexibility and can cause condition misunderstandings in multi-conditional image generation. To address these challenges, we propose both IntraElement and Inter-Element Controllers in DC-ControlNet.
The Intra-Element Controller handles different types of
control signals within individual elements, accurately de-

scribing the content and layout characteristics of the object. For interactions between elements, we introduce
the Inter-Element Controller, which accurately handles
multi-element interactions and occlusion based on userdefined relationships. Extensive evaluations show that DCControlNet significantly outperforms existing ControlNet
models and Layout-to-Image generative models in terms of
control flexibility and precision in multi-condition control.
Our project website: https://um-lab.github.io/
DC-ControlNet/.

1. Introduction

† These authors contributed equally to this work. This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology Development Fund of
Macau SAR (FDCT) under grants 0102/2023/RIA2 and 0154/2022/A3 and
001/2024/SKL, the MYRG-CRG2022-00013-IOTSC-ICI, the Jiangyin
Hi- tech Industrial Development Zone under the Taihu Innovation
Scheme (EF2025-00003-SKL-IOTSC), and the University of Macau
SRG2022-00023-IOTSC grant. *Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

Condition control plays a crucial role in image generation [1–6], requiring the output images to closely align with
the designer’s specifications, including style [7, 8], content [9, 10], layout [11–13] and other attributes. Most image
generation methods [14–17] rely on text prompts as the primary mechanism for condition control. Due to the expressive and versatile nature of natural language, text prompts
integrate multiple aspects of the conditions into a single input, allowing for holistic control over the generated image.
However, the layout-to-image generative model struggles
to control the specific shape of an element in an image, as
shown in Fig. 2 (a), the color and texture is not controlled.
To achieve precise detail control, Zhang et al. [9] intro-

19065

