This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COVTrack: Continuous Open-Vocabulary Tracking via
Adaptive Multi-Cue Fusion
Zekun Qian1,3 , Ruize Han2†, Zhixiang Wang1 , Junhui Hou3 , Wei Feng1
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
3
City University of Hong Kong
{clarkqian, zhixiang wang, wfeng}@tju.edu.cn, hanruize@suat-sz.edu.cn, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

https://github.com/zekunqian/COVTrack

Abstract
Open-Vocabulary Multi-Object Tracking (OVMOT) aims
to detect and track diverse object categories in videos, including both seen (base) and unseen (novel) categories.
Current methods rely on appearance features from generated image pairs or utilize the discontinuous annotations of the video dataset (TAO) for training, primarily
due to the lack of available continuous annotated video
datasets for OVMOT. This limitation affects their effectiveness, since continuous target trajectories are necessary for
robust tracker learning. In this work, we propose the CTAO dataset, which provides a continuous version of TAO,
thereby constructing the first continuous annotated training
dataset for OVMOT. This addresses the previous limitations
in training data availability. Additionally, we introduce
COVTrack, a unified framework that effectively integrates
motion and semantic features with appearance features, in
which the multi-cue feature aggregation strategy dynamically aggregates and balances these features, based on
the confidence estimation from both intra-frame and interframe contexts. Our proposed framework significantly improves OVMOT performance, establishing COVTrack as a
state-of-the-art solution on OVMOT benchmarks.

ing videos is demanding. First, the collected videos must
encompass a sufficiently large variety of object categories
and diverse motion patterns. Second, comprehensive annotations are required, including object bounding boxes,
as well as identities (for trajectory) and categories. However, existing large-scale datasets that provide a wide variety of object categories are predominantly image-based,
e.g., COCO [26], LVIS [14]. In contrast, video datasets
often suffer from limited category diversity, focusing primarily on a small number of classes, such as humans,
e.g., MOT20 [7], DanceTrack [39], vehicles [12]. Neither
of them can meet the requirements. To address this gap,
TAO [6] is a recent dataset proposed for the multi-category
object tracking problem, which contains 2,907 videos covering 833 categories. However, the annotation of TAO is
not continuous, with the annotation frame rate being only 1
fps, resulting in critical issues: not enough available frames
to train a robust open-vocabulary tracker and the lack of
continuous temporal information needed to train the tracker
effectively. As a result, existing methods for OVMOT, such
as OVTrack [22], rely on large image-based datasets, i.e.,
LVIS [14], to generate image pairs for training. This forces
them to rely solely on appearance features for tracking, resulting in suboptimal performance. Some later works, such
as SLAck [24], attempt to utilize the TAO dataset with
its discontinuous annotations by constructing pseudo-labels
for training. However, SLAck still fails to make full use
of the continuous video information. As shown in Fig. 2,
issues such as occlusions, viewpoint transitions, and appearance deformation lead to significant differences in annotated objects across large intervals (e.g., 30 frames). Consequently, the trained model may not perform very well, as
its features (e.g., appearance, motion) are not well-suited
for frame-by-frame inference during testing.

1. Introduction
Open-Vocabulary Multi-Object Tracking (OVMOT) is a
burgeoning problem in the computer vision area, which
aims to localize, classify and track various categories of objects in real-world videos [22]. This problem has significant practical applications, e.g., Internet video understanding, autonomous driving [15].
To develop an effective model for OVMOT, the quality
of training datasets is crucial. However, due to the multitask nature of this problem, collecting and annotating train† Corresponding author.

From the above observation, in this work, we aim to
newly build and fully leverage the continuous data for
OVMOT problem. To address the limitations of exist-

10054

