This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-Context State-Space Video World Models
Ryan Po1

Yotam Nitzan3 Richard Zhang3 Berlin Chen2 Tri Dao2
Eli Shechtman3 Gordon Wetzstein1 Xun Huang3
1
Stanford University 2 Princeton University 3 Adobe Research
Abstract

Video diffusion models have recently shown promise for
world modeling through autoregressive frame prediction
conditioned on actions. However, they struggle to maintain long-term memory due to the high computational cost
associated with processing extended sequences in attention
layers. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel architecture leveraging state-space models (SSMs) to extend
temporal memory without compromising computational efficiency. Unlike previous approaches that retrofit SSMs for
non-causal vision tasks, our method fully exploits the inherent advantages of SSMs in causal sequence modeling. Central to our design is a block-wise SSM scanning scheme,
which strategically trades off spatial consistency for extended temporal memory, combined with dense local attention to ensure coherence between consecutive frames. We
evaluate the long-term memory capabilities of our model
through spatial retrieval and reasoning tasks over extended
horizons. Experiments on Memory Maze and Minecraft
datasets demonstrate that our approach surpasses baselines
in preserving long-range memory, while maintaining practical inference speeds suitable for interactive applications.

1

Look Away

Look Back

2

3

Existing work
✘ Forgets

2

3

1

2

Context

3

Ours
Remembers

Figure 1. Failure case of existing video world models. Without long-term memory, previously observed regions may appear
altered or inconsistent upon revisiting.

of their attention mechanisms. This limitation hinders their
ability to simulate a persistent world with long-term consistency. For example, when using an existing video world
model to simulate a game, the entire environment might
completely change after a player simply looks right and
then left again (see Fig. 1). This is because the frames
that contain the original environment are no longer in the
model’s attention window. While one could theoretically
extend the memory by training the model on longer context windows, this approach faces two major limitations:
(1) the computational cost of training scales quadratically
with context length, making it prohibitively expensive, and
(2) the per-frame inference time grows linearly with context
length, resulting in increasingly slower generation speed
that would be impractical for applications that require realtime, infinite-length generation (such as gaming).
In this work, we propose a novel video world model architecture that leverages state-space models (SSMs) to enable long-term memory while maintaining efficient training
and fast autoregressive inference. Our key innovation is a
block-wise scan scheme of Mamba [20] that optimally balances temporal memory and spatial coherence, while preserving temporal causality. We complement this with dense
local attention between neighboring frames, maintaining
high-fidelity generation with minimal computational overhead. Unlike previous methods that retrofit SSMs for noncausal vision tasks, our approach fundamentally differs by

1. Introduction
World models [2, 23, 25, 31, 47, 70, 74, 92] are causal
generative models designed to predict how world states
evolve in response to actions, enabling interactive simulation of complex environments. Video diffusion models [7, 29, 37, 41, 45, 53, 85] have emerged as a promising approach for world modeling. While early models
were limited to generating fixed-length videos and therefore unsuitable for interactive applications, recent architectures have enabled infinite-length video generation through
autoregressive, sliding-window prediction [1, 9, 14, 16, 18,
26, 32, 36, 50, 60, 66, 73, 87, 88]. This paves the way for
a new paradigm in which video diffusion models can interactively simulate visual worlds by continuously generating
video frames conditioned on interactive control signals.
However, existing video world models have very limited temporal memory due to the restricted context length

8733

