This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Token Activation Map to Visually Explain Multimodal LLMs
Yi Li, Hualiang Wang, Xinpeng Ding, Haonan Wang, Xiaomeng Li*
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China.

{ylini,xmli}@ust.hk

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are broadly
empowering various fields. Despite their advancements, the
explainability of MLLMs remains less explored, hindering
deeper understanding, model credibility, and effective visualization. Unlike conventional vision models (e.g., CNNs,
ViTs, CLIP) that produce a single output, MLLMs generate
sequences of tokens progressively, where each generated token depends on the previous context. Therefore, earlier context tokens can introduce redundant activations that interfere with the explanation of later tokens beyond their original information. Existing studies often overlook this issue,
but our observations reveal that these redundant correlations can significantly hurt the reliability of explanations.
To address this, we propose an estimated causal inference
method to mitigate the interference of context to achieve
high-quality MLLM explanation, with a novel rank Gaussian filter to further reduce activation noises. We term this
method Token Activation Map (TAM) to highlight the consideration of interactions between tokens. TAM also indicates that it excels at explaining multiple tokens of MLLM,
which is different from the Class Activation Map (CAM) for
a single prediction. Our TAM method significantly outperforms existing SoTA methods, showcasing high-quality visualization results that can be utilized for various scenarios, such as object localization, failure case analysis, video
visualization, MLLMs visual comparison, and model understanding (e.g., color, shape, action, location, visual reasoning, multi-turn conversation, etc). The code is available at
github.com/xmed-lab/TAM.

CNN / ViT

Vision
endoder

A output
for classes

A ouput about
vocabularies (CLIP)

Text
endoder

K

Q

...

Vision-to-vision

-t
xt
Te

Tokenizer

Multimodal endoder

Multiple
generated tokens

xt
te
o-

Large language model

...

Text-to-vision

Text-to-text corelation

(a) Conventional models vs. MLLMs

(b)

①
②

②

(d)

(c) Correlated activations

Information flow of MLLM

①

①

③

L1 distance of text-to-vision (CAM) pairs

Context tokens ( ) can interfere
with the explained token ( ).

Abstract

③

Qualitative example of interference activations

②
③

(e) TAM (ours) for MLLM explanation

Figure 1. Illustration of Motivation. (a) MLLMs generate multiple
tokens beyond a single output. (b) The information flow indicates
that MLLM generates tokens progressively, where one generated
token (each row) is correlated with the context (prompt + earlier
answer tokens). (c) We randomly pair CAMs and count their L1
distance against text correlation. Higher text correlation corresponds to lower distance, indicating concurrent interferences. (d)
The example shows that the context token “plate” introduces interference activations (marked by white boxes) to the later explained
token “fork”. (e) Our TAM reveals the original information of the
explained token “fork”, eliminating context interferences and beyond CAM for a single output in (d). Results in (c, d, e) derive
from Qwen2-VL-2B on the COCO Caption dataset.

MLLMs [4, 16, 35, 47, 51], research on MLLM explainability remains less explored. It is crucial for user trust, model
understanding, case analysis, and visualization. However,
exploring the explainability of MLLMs is more challenging than conventional visual models (such as CNN [24],
ViT [23], CLIP [41]), where MLLMs progressively generate multiple tokens beyond a single output as Fig. 1a. Thus,
we aim to explain all tokens of MLLM, revealing the visual
cues via token-level activation maps (e.g., Fig. 1e).
Current MLLM explanation works [7, 48, 55] are generally borrowed from techniques [38, 45] for conventional
models. For example, LLaVA-CAM [55] uses Smooth

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs or Multimodal
LLMs) increasingly empower wide applications [17, 29,
30, 34], enabling multimodal inputs (e.g., images, videos,
text) and human-like conversations. Although extensive efforts have been devoted to enhancing the performance of
* Corresponding author.

48

