This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transformed Low-rank Adaptation via Tensor Decomposition and
Its Applications to Text-to-image Models
Zerui Tao1,†

Yuhta Takida2 Naoki Murata2 Qibin Zhao1 Yuki Mitsufuji2,3
1
RIKEN AIP 2 Sony AI 3 Sony Group Corporation

{zerui.tao,qibin.zhao}@riken.jp,

{yuta.takida,naoki.murata,yuhki.mitsufuji}@sony.com

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of the subject-driven generation results. Results are generated using ﬁne-tuned checkpoint by each
method. For each model, we randomly generate four images, all of which are shown here. The subcaptions are the given prompts, and the
subjects in italics represent training subjects.

Abstract
Parameter-Efﬁcient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) of text-to-image
models has become an increasingly popular technique with
many applications. Among the various PEFT methods,
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) and its variants have gained
signiﬁcant attention due to their effectiveness, enabling
users to ﬁne-tune models with limited computational resources. However, the approximation gap between the lowrank assumption and desired ﬁne-tuning weights prevents
the simultaneous acquisition of ultra-parameter-efﬁciency
and better performance. To reduce this gap and further improve the power of LoRA, we propose a new PEFT method
that combines two classes of adaptations, namely, transform and residual adaptations. In speciﬁc, we ﬁrst apply
† Work done during an internship at Sony AI

16333

a full-rank and dense transform to the pre-trained weight.
This learnable transform is expected to align the pre-trained
weight as closely as possible to the desired weight, thereby
reducing the rank of the residual weight. Then, the residual part can be effectively approximated by more compact
and parameter-efﬁcient structures, with a smaller approximation error. To achieve ultra-parameter-efﬁciency in practice, we design highly ﬂexible and effective tensor decompositions for both the transform and residual adaptations.
Additionally, popular PEFT methods such as DoRA can be
summarized under this transform plus residual adaptation
scheme. Experiments are conducted on ﬁne-tuning Stable
Diffusion models in subject-driven and controllable generation. The results manifest that our method can achieve
better performances and parameter efﬁciency compared to
LoRA and several baselines.

