This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Recipe for Generating 3D Worlds From a Single Image
Katja Schwarz Denis Rozumny

Samuel Rota Bulò

Lorenzo Porzi Peter Kontschieder

Meta Reality Labs Zurich, Switzerland

Figure 1. Overview: Given a single input image, our pipeline generates a 360 degree world. The scene is parameterized by Gaussian
Splats and can be explored on a VR headset within a cube with 2m side length. Project Page: https://katjaschwarz.github.io/worlds/

1. Introduction

Abstract
We introduce a recipe for generating immersive 3D worlds
from a single image by framing the task as an in-context
learning problem for 2D inpainting models. This approach
requires minimal training and uses existing generative models. Our process involves two steps: generating coherent
panoramas using a pre-trained diffusion model and lifting
these into 3D with a metric depth estimator. We then fill
unobserved regions by conditioning the inpainting model
on rendered point clouds, requiring minimal fine-tuning.
Tested on both synthetic and real images, our method produces high-quality 3D environments suitable for VR display.
By explicitly modeling the 3D structure of the generated environment from the start, our approach consistently outperforms state-of-the-art, video synthesis-based methods along
multiple quantitative image quality metrics.

Leveraging image-guided 3D scene synthesis has the potential to disrupt traditional 3D content creation workflows,
enabling the rapid generation of high-fidelity, plausible 3D
environments. With increasing consumer interest and an
ever-growing ecosystem of VR devices, there is a strong
need for simple and user-friendly approaches to the generation of 3D content, propelling new applications in gaming,
social experience apps, the way we marvel at art, etc.
Generating 3D environments for VR from a single input image is a highly ambiguous and complex task. The ill-posed
nature of this problem arises from the fact that multiple possible 3D scenes can be projected onto the same 2D image.
It is nontrivial to provide a solution that retains consistency
in the generated style and overall coherence of the result.
Also, the quality of the generated 3D geometry has a significant impact on the overall VR experience, as incorrect 3D

3520

