This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIGMAN: Scaling 3D Human Gaussian Generation with Millions of Assets
Yuhang Yang1,2,∗ , Fengqi Liu2,3∗ , Yixing Lu4 , Qin Zhao2 , Pingyu Wu1 , Wei Zhai1,† , Ran Yi3
Yang Cao1 , Lizhuang Ma3 , Zheng-Jun Zha1 , Junting Dong2,†
1
USTC 2 Shanghai AI Lab 3 SJTU 4 CMU
∗Equal Contribution †Corresponding Author
https://yyvhang.github.io/SIGMAN_3D/

HGS-1M Dataset
Unified & Large-scale

Complex Texture

Paradigm Shift

1.

HuMMan

High Quality
Generation Results

Large Generative Model

Optimization
2.
DNA-Rendering

Realistic
Face

Recon.

Gen.
Multi-View

3.

MVHumanNet

Network
3D
Gaussian

Ours.
Synthetic

VAE

...

(a)

Multi-View

3D Gaussian

Native
Gen

3D
Gaussian

Condition

(b)

Loose
Clothing

(c)

Figure 1. (a). In this work, we construct a large-scale, unified 3D Human Gaussian Dataset, called HGS-1M, to support (b) the large-scale
generation model for 3D human Gaussian generation. (c) This paradigm, with large-scale data, produces high-quality 3D human Gaussians
that exhibit complex textures, facial details, and realistic deformation of loose clothing.

Abstract

ation, we transform the ill-posed low-to-high-dimensional
mapping problem into a learnable distribution shift, which
also supports end-to-end inference. In addition, we employ
the multi-view optimization approach combined with synthetic data to construct the HGS-1M dataset, which contains 1 million 3D Gaussian assets to support the largescale training. Experimental results demonstrate that our
paradigm, powered by large-scale training, produces highquality 3D human Gaussians with intricate textures, facial
details, and loose clothing deformation.

3D human digitization has long been a highly pursued yet
challenging task. Existing methods aim to generate highquality 3D digital humans from single or multiple views,
but remain primarily constrained by current paradigms
and the scarcity of 3D human assets. Specifically, recent approaches fall into several paradigms: optimizationbased and feed-forward (both single-view regression and
multi-view generation with reconstruction). However, they
are limited by slow speed, low quality, cascade reasoning, and ambiguity in mapping low-dimensional planes to
high-dimensional space due to occlusion and invisibility,
respectively. Furthermore, existing 3D human assets remain small-scale, insufficient for large-scale training. To
address these challenges, we propose a latent space generation paradigm for 3D human digitization, which involves
compressing multi-view images into Gaussians via a UVstructured VAE, along with DiT-based conditional gener-

1. Introduction
Human digitization has always been a central topic in the
generation and reconstruction field, it supports various applications such as gaming, AR/VR, etc. For 3D human digitization, the task usually involves mapping the input (e.g.,
single image, multi images, text) to 3D human assets, which

5122

