This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Machine Unlearning for Quantized Neural Networks via Adaptive
Gradient Reweighting with Similar Labels

1

Yujia Tong1 , Yuze Wang1 , Jingling Yuan1 *, Chuang Hu2
Wuhan University of Technology, 2 University of Macau

Model quantization enables efficient deployment of deep
neural networks on edge devices through low-bit parameter representation, yet raises critical challenges for implementing machine unlearning (MU) under data privacy regulations. Existing MU methods designed for full-precision
models fail to address two fundamental limitations in quantized networks: 1) Noise amplification from label mismatch
during data processing, and 2) Gradient imbalance between forgotten and retained data during training. These
issues are exacerbated by quantized models’ constrained
parameter space and discrete optimization. We propose QMUL, the first dedicated unlearning framework for quantized models. Our method introduces two key innovations:
1) Similar Labels assignment replaces random labels with
semantically consistent alternatives to minimize noise injection, and 2) Adaptive Gradient Reweighting dynamically
aligns parameter update contributions from forgotten and
retained data. Through systematic analysis of quantized
model vulnerabilities, we establish theoretical foundations
for these mechanisms. Extensive evaluations on benchmark datasets demonstrate Q-MUL’s superiority over existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
success in fields such as computer vision [14] and natural
language processing [28], but their high demand for computation and memory limits their deployment on resourceconstrained edge devices. Model quantization [9, 22, 32]
reduces the storage requirements and computational complexity by lowering the bit-width of model weights and activations, making them more suitable for edge devices. To
enhance performance, user-provided data can be utilized for
periodic online fine-tuning of quantized models on edge devices. However, with the implementation of data privacy
* Corresponding author

The Ratio of Gradient Norms

Abstract

Quantized Model
FP Model

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2

4

6

8

Epoch

(a) Comparison of gradient.

10

Performance Gap with Retain

{tyjjjj, hbtmwyz, yjl}@whut.edu.cn, chuanghu@um.edu.mo

Quantized Model
FP Model

3

2

1

0

FA

RA

TA

MIA

AG

Metrics

(b) Comparison of performance.

Figure 1. We conduct Random Labels [11] on the full-precision
and quantized models. (a) The ratio of gradient norms between the
forgotten data and the retained data in the loss. (b) Performance
gaps of FA, RA, TA, and MIA with Retrain, AG is the average gap.
The observations are from ResNet18 on CIFAR-10.

regulations such as GDPR [15], users have the right to request the deletion of their uploaded data, which involves
not only removing data from databases but also ensuring
that specific samples no longer influence the trained models. This raises a new challenge: How to eliminate the influence of specific data samples on quantized models?
Machine unlearning (MU) provides a potential pathway
to implement the right to be forgotten through parametric
influence removal. Existing MU approaches fall into two
categories: 1) Exact unlearning [3] achieves ideal performance by retraining the model from scratch after removing the data to be forgotten, but it requires a high computational cost. 2) Approximate unlearning [5] achieves comparable unlearning performance by adjusting the parameters of a pre-trained model, requiring fewer computational
resources. We focus on approximate unlearning due to its
speed and efficiency making it particularly well-suited for
deployment on edge devices.
Existing MU methods face two main limitations when
applied to quantized models since they [8, 11] are primarily
designed for full-precision models and do not adequately
address the impact of quantization. Consequently, when
these methods (e.g., Random Labels [11] and SalUn [8])
are directly applied to quantized models, their effectiveness
is reduced, particularly in two key stages: data processing

20603

