This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physics Context Builders: A Modular Framework for Physical Reasoning in
Vision-Language Models
Vahid Balazadeh*
University of Toronto

Mohammadmehdi Ataei
Autodesk Research

Hyunmin Cheong
Autodesk Research

vahid@cs.toronto.edu

mehdi.ataei@autodesk.com

hyunmin.cheong@autodesk.com

Amir Hosein Khasahmadi
Autodesk Research

Rahul G. Krishnan
University of Toronto

amir.khasahmadi@autodesk.com

rahulgk@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

ical reasoning remains a significant challenge for artificial intelligence (AI) systems [10, 23, 35, 45], despite advances in computer vision and Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) [2, 25, 26, 32, 36, 39, 46].
VLMs are remarkably successful on many predictive
problems, spanning a broad range of tasks. This makes their
use central to real-world applications requiring expertise in a
variety of tasks, such as robotics and embodied AI [17, 28].
However, current VLMs consistently fail at physical reasoning tasks, struggling with basic spatial relationships (e.g.,
object positioning, counting) [33], object attributes [40], and
physical interactions (e.g., stability assessment, dynamics
prediction) [10, 14]. While humans leverage causal or physically guided knowledge for physical understanding of the
world [5], the mechanisms by which VLMs make predictions are not well understood. This leads to two important
questions: what factors contribute to the lack of physical
understanding in VLMs, and how can we improve it?
One potential explanation for such limitations lies in
VLMs’ training data. VLMs are created by fusing the representations of image and text encoders using datasets like
MSCOCO [27] and Conceptual Captions [34], which focus on general scene descriptions but lack annotations of
physical relationships. Our experiments with standard benchmarks like CLEVRER [45] confirm this hypothesis, demonstrating that fine-tuning on physics-focused data can enable
a relatively small VLM to approach state-of-the-art results
achieved by specialized architectures [11, 45]. However,
as the ecosystem of open and closed source models grows,
repeatedly fine-tuning each VLM for every regime of physical concepts it cannot reason about becomes impractical;
there is a need for practical, performant and modular tools
to augment VLM capabilities.
To this end, we introduce Physics Context Builders
(PCBs): specialized VLMs that are fine-tuned on simula-

Physical reasoning remains a significant challenge for
Vision-Language Models (VLMs). This limitation arises from
an inability to translate learned knowledge into predictions
about physical behavior. Although continual fine-tuning
can mitigate this issue, it is expensive for large models and
impractical to perform repeatedly for every task. This necessitates the creation of modular and scalable ways to teach
VLMs about physical reasoning. To that end, we introduce
Physics Context Builders (PCBs), a modular framework
where specialized smaller VLMs are fine-tuned to generate
detailed physical scene descriptions. These can be used as
physical contexts to enhance the reasoning capabilities of
larger VLMs. PCBs enable the separation of visual perception from reasoning, allowing us to analyze their relative
contributions to physical understanding. We perform experiments on CLEVRER and on Falling Tower, a stability
detection dataset with both simulated and real-world scenes,
to demonstrate that PCBs provide substantial performance
improvements, increasing average accuracy by up to 13.8%
on complex physical reasoning tasks. Notably, PCBs also
show strong Sim2Real transfer, successfully generalizing
from simulated training data to real-world scenes.

1. Introduction
Physical reasoning is a fundamental component of human
intelligence, enabling interpretation of complex interactions,
prediction of future events, and understanding of causal relationships in real-world environments [22]. For humans,
the ability to understand the physical world is developed
early and operates intuitively [3, 30, 38]. However, phys* This project was completed during an internship at Autodesk Research.

7318

