This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging with Learnable Physical Priors
Shida Sun
Yue Li
Yueyi Zhang
Zhiwei Xiong*
University of Science and Technology of China
{sdsun, yueli65}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging, recovering the hidden
volume from indirect reflections, has attracted increasing
attention due to its potential applications. Despite promising results, existing NLOS reconstruction approaches are
constrained by the reliance on empirical physical priors,
e.g., single fixed path compensation. Moreover, these approaches still possess limited generalization ability, particularly when dealing with scenes at a low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). To overcome the above problems, we introduce
a novel learning-based approach, comprising two key designs: Learnable Path Compensation (LPC) and Adaptive
Phasor Field (APF). The LPC applies tailored path compensation coefficients to adapt to different objects in the
scene, effectively reducing light wave attenuation, especially
in distant regions. Meanwhile, the APF learns the precise
Gaussian window of the illumination function for the phasor
field, dynamically selecting the relevant spectrum band of
the transient measurement. Experimental validations demonstrate that our proposed approach, only trained on synthetic
data, exhibits the capability to seamlessly generalize across
various real-world datasets captured by different imaging
systems and characterized by low SNRs. Code is available
at https://github.com/ssd1051/NLOS-LPP.

of light, and time-resolved detection sensors like Single Photon Avalanche Diode (SPAD) and Time-Correlated Single
Photon Counting, which precisely capture the flight of the
time that takes for photons to travel from the light source
to the hidden object and back to the SPAD. The captured
signals, known as transient measurement, undergo reconstruction using various algorithms, including traditional approaches [1, 18, 28] and learning-based approaches [4, 6, 13–
15, 22, 30, 31].
For the traditional approaches, the back projection algorithms [11, 28] and the light path transport algorithms [7, 23]
typically assume isotropically scattering, no inter-reflection,
and no occlusions within the hidden scenes. However, these
approaches always yield noisy results and lack details. Conversely, the wave propagation approaches [17, 19] require
no special assumptions and tend to produce better results
while being sensitive to scenes with large depth variations.
Learning-based approaches [4, 13, 22] leverage the powerful representation capabilities of neural networks, and push
NLOS reconstruction to a higher level.

1. Introduction

Despite promising results, current NLOS reconstruction
algorithms are constrained by the reliance on empirical physical priors and are still confronted with challenges. The
primary challenge is Radiometric Intensity Fall-off (RIF),
i.e., the intensity of the reflected photons attenuates and the
degree of attenuation is related to the surface material of
the hidden object. To address this phenomenon, quadratic
and quartic operations are commonly applied to the light
propagation path for retro-reflective and diffuse surfaces,
respectively [23], to compensate for intensity attenuation.
However, since various surface materials coexist within the
same scene, applying path compensation based on a single material type across the entire scene, as performed in
physical priors or previous work, may not effectively counteract the effects of attenuation. Additionally, the problem
is exacerbated by the low quantum efficiency of the imaging system, particularly over long distances. As shown in
Fig. 1(b), using a single coefficient to compensate for the
entire scene can enhance the reconstruction of objects with
corresponding material properties, but it will significantly
reduce the quality of other objects in the same scene. An-

Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging represents a groundbreaking advancement in visual perception, enabling the
visualization of hidden objects with significant implications in diverse fields, including autonomous navigation,
remote sensing, disaster recovery, and medical diagnostics [2, 12, 16, 20, 26, 29]. By harnessing sophisticated
time-of-flight (ToF) configuration, NLOS imaging systems
can effectively capture light signals bounced off hidden objects, even when direct line-of-sight visibility is obstructed,
as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The core components of such systems typically include pulse lasers, which emit short bursts
* Corresponding author.

25040

