This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flow Stochastic Segmentation Networks
Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro† Omar Todd Charles Jones Avinash Kori Raghav Mehta Ben Glocker†
Imperial College London

Abstract
We introduce the Flow Stochastic Segmentation Network
(Flow-SSN), a generative segmentation model family featuring discrete-time autoregressive and modern continuoustime flow variants. We prove fundamental limitations of the
low-rank parameterisation of previous methods and show
that Flow-SSNs can estimate arbitrarily high-rank pixel-wise
covariances without assuming the rank or storing the distributional parameters. Flow-SSNs are also more efficient
to sample from than standard diffusion-based segmentation
models, thanks to most of the model capacity being allocated
to learning the base distribution of the flow, constituting an
expressive prior. We apply Flow-SSNs to challenging medical imaging benchmarks and achieve state-of-the-art results.
Code available: https://github.com/biomedia-mira/flow-ssn.

boundaries, occlusion, poor image acquisition quality, and
the intrinsic variability of the underlying pathology. Therefore, to effectively model these ambiguities and reflect the
real-world variability of expert opinions, segmentation models ought to capture a rich distribution of plausible segmentation outcomes [14, 43]. Furthermore, providing uncertainty
estimates is useful for revealing whether a model has sufficient knowledge to provide a reliable assessment, which is
important in safety-critical real-world settings [7, 47, 63].

1. Introduction

There is a growing interest in using probabilistic methods
for estimating uncertainty in image segmentation. Most existing methods handle uncertainty by factorising the output
posterior into per-pixel marginal distributions, thereby ignoring any correlations between pixels. Therefore, pixel-wise
independent uncertainty estimates are incapable of fully capturing spatially structured uncertainty [46, 58]. To address
this, Monteiro et al. [55] proposed Stochastic Segmentation Networks (SSNs), which can explicitly model spatially
correlated aleatoric uncertainty without requiring variational
approximations or latent variable assumptions. Their method
involves placing a low-rank multivariate Gaussian distribution over the logit space (i.e. before the softmax), then using
Monte Carlo integration to marginalise out the logits and
compute pixel-wise joint likelihoods [36, 37]. Although
promising, the trouble with SSNs is three-fold: (i) The assumed rank of the low-rank approximation is typically kept
small due to computational constraints (e.g., ≃10), and it
is almost surely underspecified relative to the true rank of
high-dimensional, pixel-wise covariances; (ii) They often require an expensive mean pre-training stage to ensure proper
convergence, as jointly optimising poor initial estimates of
the mean and covariance can lead to getting trapped in suboptimal minima; (iii) They suffer from training instabilities,
partly due to a lack of guarantee that the low-rank covariance
matrix remains positive definite throughout training.

Semantic image segmentation consists of producing pixelwise predictions that reflect objects and their boundaries.
Traditional methods typically approach this as a deterministic pixel-wise classification task, while overlooking the inherent uncertainty of the spatial structures involved [11, 36, 98].
Uncertainty generally relates to unknown or imperfect information, often arising from a lack of knowledge, partial observations, and/or inherently stochastic events. Uncertainty
is commonly decomposed into two distinct parts [18, 36]:
(i) Epistemic uncertainty, which relates to a lack of knowledge, and it can be reduced in principle by observing more
data; (ii) Aleatoric uncertainty, which relates to inherent unknowns that differ each time we run the same experiment
(e.g. flipping a coin), and it cannot be reduced by observing
more data. Although conceptually attractive, the utility and
validity of this decomposition is actively contested [41, 79].
Inherent ambiguities are particularly prevalent in medical imaging, where medical opinions can vary significantly
across different experts [5, 9, 35, 43]. In this context, uncertainty can arise from several factors, including indistinct
† Email: {f.de-sousa-ribeiro, bglocker}@imperial.ac.uk

Contributions. We propose Flow Stochastic Segmentation
Networks (Flow-SSNs), a generative segmentation model
class featuring discrete-time autoregressive and modern
continuous-time flow parameterisations. Flow-SSNs can estimate arbitrarily high-rank pixel-wise covariances without
assuming the rank a priori, storing distributional parameters,
or assuming a lower-dimensional latent space as in VAEs.

14754

