This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking and Learning Multi-Dimensional Quality Evaluator
for Text-to-3D Generation
1∗

1∗

2

Yujie Zhang
Bingyang Cui
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

2

{yujie19981026, ccccby0813, yl.xu}@sjtu.edu.cn ,

Abstract

1. Introduction
Remarkable advances in text-to-3D generative methods
have been witnessed in recent years [33]. Given textual
descriptions (i.e., prompts), these methods have the capability to generate contextually relevant 3D representations, such as textured mesh [56], Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) [15, 21, 39], and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
[25, 48, 55, 71]. Unlike traditional distortions in 3D data
processing (e.g., noise, lossy compression), generated 3D
representations may suffer from some unique degradations,

2

{qiyang, lizhu}@umkc.edu

A red apple and a
ceramic plate

Text-to-3D generation has achieved remarkable progress in
recent years, yet evaluating these methods remains challenging for two reasons: i) Existing benchmarks lack finegrained evaluation on different prompt categories and evaluation dimensions. ii) Previous evaluation metrics only focus on a single aspect (e.g., text-3D alignment) and fail to
perform multi-dimensional quality assessment. To address
these problems, we first propose a comprehensive benchmark named MATE-3D. The benchmark contains eight
well-designed prompt categories that cover single and multiple object generation, resulting in 1,280 generated textured meshes. We have conducted a large-scale subjective
experiment from four different evaluation dimensions and
collected 107,520 annotations, followed by detailed analyses of the results. Based on MATE-3D, we propose a novel
quality evaluator named HyperScore. Utilizing hypernetwork to generate specified mapping functions for each evaluation dimension, our metric can effectively perform multidimensional quality assessment. HyperScore presents superior performance over existing metrics on MATE-3D, making it a promising metric for assessing and improving textto-3D generation. The project is available at https:
//mate-3d.github.io/.

* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

1†

Qi Yang
Zhu Li
Yiling Xu
2
University of Missouri-Kansas City

A red apple on a
ceramic plate

(a)

A rubber duck
next to
a wooden comb

v.s.

A canned Coke

4.76

Alignment

6.42

6.06

Geometry

2.74

5.90

Texture

3.39

5.63

Overall

3.86

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Diverse generation results from similar prompts. (b)
Quality evaluation from multiple perspectives.

such as misalignment with prompt semantics and multiview inconsistency (i.e., the Janus problem) [18, 44]. To
better guide the method design and support fair comparisons, it is important to explore subjective-aligned quality
evaluation for text-to-3D generation methods.
Previous works have conducted text-to-3D evaluation by
3
proposing new benchmarks. For example, T Bench [14]
constructs three prompt classes with increasing scene complexity, and Multiple objects, followed by collecting 630
texture meshes annotated from two dimensions, i.e., quality
and alignment. However, these benchmarks have two main
drawbacks. i) Lack of Prompt Diversity. Although these
benchmarks [14, 22, 61] have classified prompts based on
textual complexity or object quantity, their categorization
generally lacks an adequate degree of distinction. In fact,

18563

