This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Schema Proximity Network for Composed Image Retrieval
Jiangming Shi1, 2 , Xiangbo Yin1 , Yeyun Chen1, 2 , Yachao Zhang1 , Zhizhong Zhang3 ,
∗
Yuan Xie2, 3 , Yanyun Qu1*
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University,
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute, 3 East China Normal University
jiangming.shi@outlook.com, S yinxb@163.com, yeyunchen2022@stu.xmu.edu.cn
{yxie, zzzhang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, {yachaozhang, yyqu}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

Multi-Schema Interaction

Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) aims to retrieve a target image using a query that combines a reference image and a textual description, benefiting users to express
their intent more effectively. Despite significant advances
in CIR methods, two unresolved problems remain: 1) existing methods overlook multi-schema interaction due to the
lack of fine-grained explicit visual supervision, which hinders the capture of complex correspondences, and 2) existing methods overlook noisy negative pairs formed by potential corresponding query-target pairs, which increases
confusion. To address these problems, we propose a MultischemA Proximity Network (MAPNet) for CIR, consisting
of two key components: Multi-Schema Interaction (MSI)
and Relaxed Proximity Loss (RPLoss). Specifically, MSI
leverages textual descriptions as an implicit guide to establish correspondences between multiple objects and attributes in the reference and target images, enabling multischema interactions. Then, RPLoss further aligns the query
and target features while avoiding the poison of noisy negative pairs by denoising and reweighting strategy. Comprehensive experiments conducted on CIRR, FashionIQ, and
LaSCo demonstrate that MAPNet achieves competitive results against state-of-the-art CIR methods.

hands

umpire

knees

The umpire's hands should be
at their knees.

hands at
knees

(a) An example of the multi-schema interaction between the composed
query and the target image.
Relative caption: bigger dog and no background

Relative caption: change the angle of the panda and add one panda cuddling the other

Relative caption: has a more simple graphic on the front and is grey and one large circle as logo

Relative caption: has a colorful print and is more whimsical

1. Introduction

(b) The top five retrieval results (from left to right) are shown on CIRR [1]
(top two rows) and FashionIQ [2] (bottom two rows). The query (reference image and text) is shown in the left column. The ground truth target
is framed in green. Arguably, additional images that could be marked acceptable (referred to as noisy negative samples) are framed in red.

Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) is a crucial task in multimodality information retrieval and computer vision, aiming
to retrieve target images based on a query that integrates
both visual and textual information [3–5]. The bi-modality
query is more flexible and accurate for users to express their
search intent, as certain features are better conveyed through
language, while others are more effectively represented vi-

Figure 1. Our insight focuses on multi-schema interaction and mitigating noisy negative pairs to improve the effectiveness of composed image retrieval.

* Corresponding author.

sually. As shown in Fig. 1(a), we aim to find an image
where the umpire’s hands should be at their knees. The umpire’s appearance is easy to convey visually but difficult to

19999

