This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging 2D Priors and SDF Guidance for Dynamic Urban Scene Rendering
Siddharth Tourani2,3
Jayaram Reddy1
Akash Kumbar1
Satyajit Tourani1
Nishant Goyal5
Madhava Krishna1
N Dinesh Reddy4
Muhammad Haris Khan2
1

IIIT Hyderabad, 2 MBZUAI, 3 University of Heidelberg, 4 VLM Run, 5 IIT Kharagpur
https://dynamic-ugsdf.github.io/

Abstract
Dynamic scene rendering and reconstruction play a crucial role in computer vision and augmented reality. Recent
methods based on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), have enabled accurate modeling of dynamic urban scenes, but for
urban scenes they require both camera and LiDAR data,
ground-truth 3D segmentations and motion data in the form
of tracklets or pre-defined object templates such as SMPL.
In this work, we explore whether a combination of 2D object agnostic priors in the form of depth and point tracking coupled with a signed distance function (SDF) representation for dynamic objects can be used to relax some of
these requirements. We present a novel approach that integrates Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) with 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) to create a more robust object representation by harnessing the strengths of both methods.
Our unified optimization framework enhances the geometric accuracy of 3D Gaussian splatting and improves deformation modeling within the SDF, resulting in a more adaptable and precise representation. We demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance in rendering
metrics even without LiDAR data on urban scenes. When
incorporating LiDAR, our approach improved further in
reconstructing and generating novel views across diverse
object categories, without ground-truth 3D motion annotation. Additionally, our method enables various scene editing tasks, including scene decomposition, and scene composition.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We propose Urban Gaussians via Signed Distance
Functions (UGSDF) for dynamic object modeling and rendering
in urban scenes. UGSDF maintains a Signed Distance Function (SDF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) representation to
model and render a dynamic object. It can be used for object removal, scene decomposition, scene composition (inserted object
indicated with green arrow) and other tasks related to simulation
in urban scenes.

Representing and modeling large-scale dynamic scenes
serves as the foundation of 3D scene understanding, playing a critical role in various autonomous driving tasks such
as 3D object detection [6, 11], motion planning [69] and
simulation of safety-critical scenarios [15, 81]. As long as
driving simulators like CARLA [15] and MARS [90] work
with synthetic data, there remains a big domain gap to realworld driving scenarios, which can lead to adverse results

29051

when deployed in self-driving cars [65].
To mitigate the domain gap, real-world data integration
is essential. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [50] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [33] excel in scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis with high visual fidelity but
may compromise geometric accuracy. In contrast, Signed
Distance Fields (SDFs) offer precise surface modeling but
require dense representations to achieve comparable visual
fidelity.
Separate from real-world verisimilitude, reconstructing
dynamic driving scenes is challenging due to diverse actors, sensor noise, complex motions, occlusions, and so
on. Early methods to tackle these challenges focused on
static scenes [26, 49, 64, 68]. Recent methods handle
dynamic scenes by either (i) decomposing the scene into
static and dynamic components via NeRFs [68, 78, 96] and
3DGS [12, 29, 105] or (ii) constructing a scene graph [13,
17, 39, 55, 70, 90, 97] in which dynamic actors and static
background are represented as nodes with edges encoding
relative transformations that represent each actor’s motion

