This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R ES Q: A Novel Framework to Implement Residual Neural
Networks on Analog Rydberg Atom Quantum Computers
Nicholas S. DiBrita, Jason Han, and Tirthak Patel
Rice University

1. Introduction
The recent advancements in quantum hardware have driven
the experimental demonstration of many theoretical applications in quantum computing, especially within quantum machine learning (QML) [7, 8, 17, 18].
This
progress has spurred significant interest in implementing
machine learning (ML) models like convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [32, 35], generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [12, 34], reinforcement learning [13, 24], and quantum reservoir computing [22, 28], largely through digital,
gate-based quantum computing paradigms. Digital quantum gates allow for straightforward parameterization: certain gates depend on scalar parameters (an example being
rotation gates, which are parameterized by an angle), which
can be trained analogously to the weights in a neural network, enabling neural-like quantum circuits.
However, this paradigm presents limitations when extending QML to residual neural networks (ResNets).
ResNets consist of layers with skip connections so that the
output of a given residual block F (x) + x is the sum of
the input x and the hidden layer output F (x) (Figure 1).
These residual blocks can help circumvent issues that arise
in training via gradient-based methods [16]. Most near-term
QML architectures do not have the ability to perform this
skip operation, as quantum gates only allow for unitary linear transformations of the model’s state.

Input

Output

x

F(x) + x

Q0
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

Analog
Hamiltonian
Evolution
H(t)

Measurements

Research in quantum machine learning has recently proliferated due to the potential of quantum computing to accelerate machine learning. An area of machine learning
that has not yet been explored is neural ordinary differential equation (neural ODE) based residual neural networks
(ResNets), which aim to improve the effectiveness of neural networks using the principles of ordinary differential
equations. In this work, we present our insights about why
analog Rydberg atom quantum computers are especially
well-suited for ResNets. We also introduce R ES Q, a novel
framework to optimize the dynamics of Rydberg atom quantum computers to solve classification problems in machine
learning using analog quantum neural ODEs.

Our Quantum Realization
Qubits

Classical Residual Neutral Network
Hidden Layers F(x)

Abstract

Q5
Residual Connection

Time (t)

Figure 1. High-level representation of R ES Q’s analog quantum
implementation of the classical residual neural network (ResNet).

To overcome this, we base our approach on techniques
that use ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to implement residual connections [9]. Referred to as neural ODEs,
these models are parameterized to capture long-term dependencies in data. Neural ODEs involve a more complex
interaction of parameters that are inherently dynamic and
continuously evolving [9], posing challenges for the standard gate-based approach [20, 21]. This opens an avenue
for exploring analog quantum systems, specifically Rydberg
atom-based quantum computers, as a promising alternative
for implementing ResNets due to their unique capacity to
natively model dynamical systems (Figure 1).
With this insight, in this work, we introduce R ES Q,
the first work to leverage Rydberg-atom quantum computers to implement ResNets for classification tasks to
leverage the advantages of quantum computing. Neural ODEs enable a constant-execution-time formulation of
ResNets regardless of problem size, which aligns naturally
with analog quantum computers, unlike digital quantum
and classical architectures. Rydberg atom systems support
continuous-time Hamiltonian evolution and local/global
control, making them uniquely suitable for this goal.
R ES Q parameterizes the system’s Hamiltonian dynamics to encode input features and training parameters, offering a scalable and flexible platform for QML. By harnessing
the globally addressed Hamiltonian in the Rydberg system,
as well as the locally addressable detuning Hamiltonian,
R ES Q enables precise control over atom states and interactions, allowing us to fine-tune the system to encode complex data inputs and train ResNet models effectively. This
approach enhances the strengths of analog Rydberg systems

20085

