This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GauUpdate: New Object Insertion in 3D Gaussian Fields with Consistent
Global Illumination
Chengwei Ren1, 6 Fan Zhang2 Liangchao Xu3 Liang Pan2 Ziwei Liu4
Wenping Wang5 Xiao-Ping Zhang1 ! Yuan Liu6 !
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Nanjing University, 4 Nanyang Technological University,
5

Texas A&M University, 6 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Ours

Updating
Composite baseline

Target scene

Source scene

Target scene

Source scene

Composite baseline

Ours

Updating

Figure 1. We present GauUpdate, a novel framework capable of updating newly inserted Gaussians from the source Gaussian field to the
target, achieving seamless blending even in the presence of significant appearance differences between the two fields.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) is a prevailing technique to
reconstruct large-scale 3D scenes from multiview images
for novel view synthesis, like a room, a block, and even a
city. Such large-scale scenes are not static with changes
constantly happening in these scenes, like a new building
being built or a new decoration being set up. To keep the
reconstructed 3D Gaussian fields up-to-date, a naive way
is to reconstruct the whole scene after changing, which is
extremely costly and inefficient. In this paper, we propose a
new method called GauUpdate that allows partially updating an old 3D Gaussian field with new objects from a new

3D Gaussian field. However, simply inserting the new objects leads to inconsistent appearances because the old and
new Gaussian fields may have different lighting environments from each other. GauUpdate addresses this problem
by applying inverse rendering techniques in the 3DGS to
recover both the materials and environmental lights. Based
on the materials and lighting, we relight the new objects in
the old 3D Gaussian field for consistent global illumination.
For an accurate estimation of the materials and lighting,
we put additional constraints on the materials and lighting
conditions, that these two fields share the same materials
but different environment lights, to improve their qualities.
We conduct experiments on both synthetic scenes and realworld scenes to evaluate GauUpdate, which demonstrate
that GauUpdate achieves realistic object insertion in 3D
Gaussian fields with consistent appearances.

! Corresponding authors. Xiao-Ping Zhang is with the Shenzhen Key
Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University (e-mail: xpzhang@ieee.org). Yuan Liu is
with HKUST (e-mail: yuanly@ust.hk).

28653

