This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACE-G: Improving Generalization of Scene Coordinate Regression
Through Query Pre-Training
Leonard Bruns2,* Axel Barroso-Laguna1 Tommaso Cavallari1 Áron Monszpart4
Sowmya Munukutla1 Victor Adrian Prisacariu1,3 Eric Brachmann1
1
Niantic Spatial 2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology 3 University of Oxford 4 Third Dimension AI
https://nianticspatial.github.io/ace-g/

Abstract

Mapping Images

Scene coordinate regression (SCR) has established itself as
a promising learning-based approach to visual relocalization. After mere minutes of scene-specific training, SCR
models estimate camera poses of query images with high
accuracy. Still, SCR methods fall short of the generalization
capabilities of more classical feature-matching approaches.
When imaging conditions of query images, such as lighting
or viewpoint, are too different from the training views, SCR
models fail. Failing to generalize is an inherent limitation
of previous SCR frameworks, since their training objective
is to encode the training views in the weights of the coordinate regressor itself. The regressor essentially overfits to the
training views, by design. We propose to separate the coordinate regressor and the map representation into a generic
transformer and a scene-specific map code. This separation allows us to pre-train the transformer on tens of thousands of scenes. More importantly, it allows us to train the
transformer to generalize from mapping images to unseen
query images during pre-training. We demonstrate on multiple challenging relocalization datasets that our method,
ACE-G, leads to significantly increased robustness while
keeping the computational footprint attractive.

Query Image

ACE

ACE-G

1. Introduction

Figure 1. ACE-G is trained with separate mapping and query splits
explicitly optimizing scene coordinate regression for unseen views
including changing conditions. The estimated scene coordinates
for the query image and the estimated and ground-truth camera
poses are shown. ACE-G estimates less noisy coordinates resulting in a more accurate pose estimate compared to ACE, which
degrades for larger viewpoint or scene condition changes.

The limits of our training data mean the limits of our world.
This statement, freely adapted from Wittgenstein, has been
the guiding principle of machine learning and computer vision in recent years. Scaling architectures and training data
has led to astonishing successes in language models [1],
image and video synthesis [16], and more recently 3D vision [63]. Yet, there are particular tasks that are seemingly

bound to small-scale learning problems. One such task is
scene coordinate regression (SCR) [53].
SCR has been proposed for the task of visual relocalization. Given a set of RGB mapping images with known
camera poses, one builds a visual map of an environment.
After the mapping stage, the system is presented with new
query images from the same environment and asked to estimate their camera poses relative to the map. SCR models
solve this problem by training a scene-specific coordinate
regressor on the mapping images. The model learns to as-

* Work done during an internship at Niantic.

26751

