This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stochastic Gradient Estimation for Higher-order Differentiable Rendering
Zican Wang
University College London

Michael Fischer
Adobe Research

Tobias Ritschel
University College London

robert.wang.19@ucl.ac.uk

mifischer@adobe.com

t.ritschel@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We derive methods to compute higher-order differentials
(Hessians and Hessian-vector products) of the rendering
operator. Our approach is based on importance sampling of
a convolution that represents the differentials of rendering
parameters and shows to be applicable to both rasterization
and path tracing. We further suggest an aggregate sampling strategy to importance-sample multiple dimensions
of one convolution kernel simultaneously. We demonstrate
that this information improves convergence when used in
higher-order optimizers such as Newton or Conjugate Gradient relative to a gradient descent baseline in several inverse rendering tasks.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering is concerned with optimizing the parameters of a scene to minimize a loss. This can be a useful tool
when the true parameters of the scene are unknown or nontrivial to set for a human expert, and therefore need to be
inferred from observations or measurements. Examples for
such scenarios are multi-view reconstruction [18] or the recovery of illumination and reflectance properties [38]. Differentiable rendering has recently become a popular tool for
this optimization, as automatic differentiation (AD) frameworks have become more widespread.
However, differentiating the rendering process is far
from trivial, as the rendering function [12] has zero and/or
undefined gradients and step edges. Moreover, as many rendering operations rely on integration, discontinuities in the
rendering pipeline cause problems for AD-engines, as we
can no longer naı̈vely exchange the integral- and derivativecomputations. Recent research therefore has designed a
plethora of differentiable renderers [16], which compute
gradients in various ways, typically incurring more [15, 20]
or less [5, 7, 8] implementation and compute effort.
A surprising insight is that, while these special renderers allow deriving gradients w.r.t. the scene parameters by
differentiating (and back-propagating through) the rendering operator, virtually all of them are limited to first-order

Gradients (Previous)

Hessians (Ours)

Figure 1. Our approach allows sampling the Hessian for inverse
rendering, here for the task of rotating the cup around its horizontal
(x0 ) and vertical axes (x1 ). The estimated positive and negative
gradients are shown in blue and red, respectively.

derivatives, and hence to expressing the gradient solely locally at a point in the parameter space. At the time of
writing, no attempts to derive the Hessians required for
higher-order inverse rendering methods have been published. However, decades of optimization research have
shown the potential of higher-order methods in convergence
and robustness [22].
In this paper, we argue that these benefits are also applicable to inverse rendering scenarios and show that they
translate to net-gains in optimization time and performance
in differentiable rendering. We tackle the Achilles’ heel
of higher-order optimizers – their increased per-iteration
cost and computational / storage requirements – by developing efficient Monte Carlo (MC) estimators of the
required higher-order quantities that can be importancesampled with established techniques [23].
Our method leads to speedups of 2.71× over previous
methods, and net-gains in optimization time, speed and robustness while only assuming the rendering operator to be
a black box that can be point-sampled.

2. Previous Work
Gradient-based Optimization, the main workhorse of
modern neural network training and inverse rendering, uses
the gradient of the objective function to take iterative steps
in the parameter space towards an improved solution until a
(local) minimum is found. The exact nature of these steps
varies with the optimizer that is being used [27].

28198

