This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIGI-Holmes: Towards Explainable and Generalizable AI-Generated Image
Detection via Multimodal Large Language Models
Ziyin Zhou1∗# Yunpeng Luo2∗ Yuanchen Wu2 Ke Sun1 Jiayi Ji1
Ke Yan2† Shouhong Ding2 Xiaoshuai Sun1† Yunsheng Wu2 Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
{ziyinzhou,skjack}@stu.xmu.edu.cn

{xssun,rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

jjyxmu@gmail.com {petterluo,kerwinyan}@tencent.com

https://github.com/wyczzy/AIGI-Holmes

Abstract
The rapid development of AI-generated content (AIGC) technology has led to the misuse of highly realistic AI-generated
images (AIGI) in spreading misinformation, posing a threat
to public information security. Although existing AIGI detection techniques are generally effective, they face two issues:
1) a lack of human-verifiable explanations, and 2) a lack
of generalization in the latest generation technology. To
address these issues, we introduce a large-scale and comprehensive dataset, Holmes-Set, which includes the HolmesSFTSet, an instruction-tuning dataset with explanations on
whether images are AI-generated, and the Holmes-DPOSet,
a human-aligned preference dataset. Our work introduces
an efficient data annotation method called the Multi-Expert
Jury, enhancing data generation through structured MLLM
explanations and quality control via cross-model evaluation,
expert defect filtering, and human preference modification.
In addition, we propose Holmes Pipeline, a meticulously
designed three-stage training framework comprising visual
expert pre-training, supervised fine-tuning, and direct preference optimization. Holmes Pipeline adapts multimodal large
language models (MLLMs) for AIGI detection while generating human-verifiable and human-aligned explanations,
ultimately yielding our model AIGI-Holmes. During the inference stage, we introduce a collaborative decoding strategy
that integrates the model perception of the visual expert with
the semantic reasoning of MLLMs, further enhancing the
generalization capabilities. Extensive experiments on three
benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our AIGI-Holmes.

1. Introduction

highly realistic. While beneficial for digital art and film,
these technologies also pose risks such as misinformation,
privacy breaches, and deepfakes. Recent advancements in
diffusion models (e.g., FLUX [4], SD3, SD3.5 [22]) and
autoregressive techniques (e.g., VAR [87]) have further complicated detection, highlighting the urgent need for effective
AI-generated image detection methods.
Recent studies [46, 63, 85, 91, 93, 100] have demonstrated remarkable advancements in AI-generated image
detection. While these improvements are noteworthy, two
critical issues limit their application and generalization in
real-world scenarios: 1. Lack of explanation: Current
detection models are black boxes (Fig. 1(a) , making their
detection results difficult for humans to verify. The lack of
human-verifiable explanations leads to unreliable detection
results. 2. Lack of generalization: The rapidly evolving AIGC technologies (Fig. 1(c)) persistently challenge
their generalization capabilities. Therefore, developing explainable and generalizable AI-generated image detection
algorithms is becoming increasingly urgent.
Recent breakthroughs in Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) [13, 33, 34, 54, 69, 83, 99, 101, 106] offer
a promising pathway: their exceptional capabilities in commonsense understanding and natural language generation
enable semantic-level analysis of visual content. This makes
MLLMs a strong candidate for explainable and generalizable
AI-generated image detection algorithms. There have been
preliminary explorations of using MLLMs for AI-generated
images [5, 44]. However, merely employing MLLMs for
binary classification predictions does not fully leverage their
potential. We aspire for Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) to emulate the capabilities of the renowned de-

The rapid evolution of AI technologies like GANs [28, 43]
and Diffusion models [21, 73] has made generated images

18746

# This work was done during an internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

