This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fuse Before Transfer: Knowledge Fusion for Heterogeneous Distillation
Guopeng Li1* Qiang Wang3 Ke Yan3 Shouhong Ding3 Yuan Gao2† Gui-Song Xia2†
1

School of Computer Science, 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
3
Tencent YouTu Lab
{guopengli, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, ethan.y.gao@gmail.com
{albertqwang, kerwinyan, ericshding}@tencent.com
Abstract
Most knowledge distillation (KD) methods focus on
teacher-student pairs with similar architectures, such as
both being CNN models. The potential and flexibility of
KD can be greatly improved by expanding it to CrossArchitecture KD (CAKD), where the knowledge of homogeneous and heterogeneous teachers can be distilled selectively. However, substantial feature gaps between heterogeneous models (e.g., ViT teacher v.s. CNN student)
make CAKD extremely challenging, caused by the distinction of inherent inductive biases and module functions. To
this end, we fuse heterogeneous knowledge before transferring it from teacher to student. This fusion combines
the advantages of both cross-architecture inductive biases
and module functions by merging different combinations of
convolution, attention, and MLP modules derived directly
from student and teacher module functions. Furthermore,
heterogeneous features exhibit diverse spatial distributions,
hindering the effectiveness of conventional pixel-wise MSE
loss. Therefore, we replace it with a spatial-agnostic InfoNCE loss. Our method is evaluated across various homogeneous models and arbitrary heterogeneous combinations
of CNNs, ViTs, and MLPs, yielding promising performance
for distilled models with a maximum gain of 11.47% on
CIFAR-100 and 3.67% on ImageNet-1K. Code is available
at https://github.com/liguopeng0923/FBT.

Figure 1. Significant feature gaps among heterogeneous models. For example, (a) CNN-based models [8] and (c) ViT-based
models [6] have different features in different stages caused by
different inductive biases and module functions.

1. Introduction

of the teacher model. Therefore, it is intuitive to understand
different teachers have different knowledge (logits or features) determined by their unique architectures [18].
Most existing KD methods focus on similar-architecture
distillation [17, 29, 33] (called SAKD), i.e., optional teachers are restricted to a limited scope with structures similar to the student model. This presents two principal limitations: (1) Limited Potential: Compared to the broader
range of arbitrary teachers (including homogeneous and
heterogeneous ones), the restricted scope of teachers in

Knowledge Distillation (KD) [11, 29] has been demonstrated as a powerful method to transfer knowledge from
a cumbersome teacher to a compact student. Compared to
the model trained from scratch, the performance of distilled
students usually improves significantly. Generally, knowledge transferred is derived from output logits (logits-based
KD [32]) or intermediate features (feature-based KD [29])
∗ Work done during internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
† indicates the corresponding authors.

3445

