This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mobile Video Diffusion
Haitam Ben Yahia*†
Denis Korzhenkov*‡
Ioannis Lelekas‡
Amir Ghodrati†
Amirhossein Habibian‡
‡

Qualcomm AI Research

{dkorzhen, ilelekas, ahabibia}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Video diffusion models have achieved impressive realism
and controllability but are limited by high computational
demands, restricting their use on mobile devices. This paper introduces the first mobile-optimized image-to-video
diffusion model. Starting from a spatio-temporal UNet
from Stable Video Diffusion (SVD), we reduce the computational cost by reducing the frame resolution, incorporating multi-scale temporal representations, and introducing
two novel pruning schemas to reduce the number of channels and temporal blocks. Furthermore, we employ adversarial finetuning to reduce the denoising to a single step.
Our model, coined as MobileVD, can generate latents for
a 14 × 512 × 256 px clip in 1.7 seconds on a Xiaomi-14
Pro, with negligible quality loss. Our results are available at
https://qualcomm-ai-research.github.io/
mobile-video-diffusion

1. Introduction
Video diffusion models are making significant progress in
terms of realism, controllability, resolution, and duration of
the generated videos. Starting from zero-shot video models [11, 26, 30, 36], which deploy pretrained image diffusion models to generate consistent frames, e.g., through
cross-frame attention, modern video diffusion models rely
on spatio-temporal denoising architectures, i.e., 3D UNets [2, 3, 16] or 3D DiTs [33, 68, 74]. This involves inflating image denoising models by adding temporal transformers and convolutions to denoise multiple frames simultaneously. Despite their impressive generation qualities, spatiotemporal denoising architectures demand high memory and
computational power, which limits their usage to clouds with
high-end GPUs. This hinders the wide adoption of video
* Equal contribution
† Work done while at Qualcomm AI Research
‡ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
Snapdragon and Qualcomm branded products are products of Qualcomm
Technologies, Inc. and/or its subsidiaries.

generation technology for many applications that require
generating content locally on mobile devices.
Prior work on accelerating video diffusion models
has mostly focused on reducing the number of sampling
steps [62, 72]. By extending the consistency models [58]
and adversarial distillation [54] to video diffusion models,
they managed to reduce the number of denoising steps from
25 to only 4 [62] and 1 step [72], which tremendously accelerates video generation. However, step distillation alone
does not reduce the memory usage of the model, which is the
key setback in deploying video diffusion models on mobile
devices.
This paper is the first attempt to build image-to-video
diffusion models for mobile. Starting from model of Stable
Video Diffusion (SVD) [2, 3], as a representative for video
diffusion models, we conduct a series of optimizations on
its spatio-temporal UNet to build a mobile-friendly UNet:
driven by the lower resolution needs for user-generated content on phones, we first opt for using a smaller latent resolution for generating 512 × 256 px frames. Additionally,
instead of preserving the number of frames throughout the
denoising UNet, we introduce additional temporal down- and
up-sampling operations to extend the multi-scale representation both in space and time, which reduces the memory and
computational cost with minimal loss in quality. Moreover,
we discuss how naive visual conditioning through crossattention leads to significant computational overhead that
can be avoided without damaging visual quality.
We further accelerate the mobile-friendly UNet by reducing its parameters using a novel channel compression
schema, coined channel funneling, and a novel technique
to prune the temporal transformers and temporal residual
blocks from the UNet. Finally, following Zhang et al. [72],
we reduce the number of denoising steps to a single step
using adversarial finetuning. This results in the first mobile
video diffusion model called MobileVD, which is able to
generate 14 latent frames of resolution 512 × 256 in 1.7
seconds on a Xiaomi 14-Pro smartphone at a slightly worse
quality in terms of FVD, 149 vs. 171.

19450

