This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intervening in Black Box: Concept Bottleneck Model for Enhancing Human
Neural Network Mutual Understanding
Nuoye Xiong1 , Anqi Dong2 *, Ning Wang1 , Cong Hua1 , Guangming Zhu1 ,
Lin Mei3 , Peiyi Shen1 , Liang Zhang1†
1
Xidian University, China
2
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
3
Donghai Laboratory, China
{nyx, ningwang, chua}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
{gmzhu, pyshen, liangzhang}@xidian.edu.cn
{meilin}@donghailab.com
{anqid}@kth.se

Abstract

liability. Neural networks for image classification can be
broadly categorized into three types by their interpretability: (i) Black-box models, where decision-making is opaque
and difficult to trace; (ii) Gray-box models, which offer partial transparency, allowing some explanation of decisions;
and (iii) White-box models, which are fully transparent
with completely traceable decision processes [1, 14]. While
black-box models often achieve superior performance, their
lack of interpretability poses significant challenges.
Many studies aim to achieve white-box-like interpretability while maintaining black-box models’ performance. Methods such as Grad-CAM [31], Saliency Maps
[33], and Feature Attack [8] use feature attribution, helping
to explain its focus and reasoning in making predictions.
Alternatively, methods include ACE [12], MOCE [19], IBD
[46], and CRAFT [10] focus on visual concept explanations, linking model decisions to human-understandable
patterns or attributes in data. These approaches provide
more structured interpretation by associating model reasoning with recognizable concepts instead of abstract features.
However, most existing methods focus on passive explanations rather than allowing active intervention to modify
black-box behavior. This limitation weakens their ability to
systematically refine model decision-making.
The Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) [20] introduced
an intervenable framework for concept-based reasoning, expanding the scope of interpretability methods. However, its
reliance on concept bottleneck representations often leads to
lower classification accuracy, compared to black-box models with the same backbone. Post-hoc CBM [45] was later
introduced to mitigate this limitation by integrating blackbox residual connections. Yet, this modification weakens
overall interpretability and, even with interventions, Post-

Recent advances in deep learning have led to increasingly
complex models with deeper layers and more parameters,
reducing interpretability and making their decisions harder
to understand. While many methods explain black-box reasoning, most lack effective interventions or only operate at
sample-level without modifying the model itself. To address this, we propose the Concept Bottleneck Model for
Enhancing Human-Neural Network Mutual Understanding
(CBM-HNMU). CBM-HNMU leverages the Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) as an interpretable framework to approximate black-box reasoning and communicate conceptual understanding. Detrimental concepts are automatically identified and refined (removed/replaced) based on
global gradient contributions. The modified CBM then distills corrected knowledge back into the black-box model,
enhancing both interpretability and accuracy. We evaluate CBM-HNMU on various CNN and transformer-based
models across Flower-102, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, FGVCAircraft, and CUB-200, achieving a maximum accuracy
improvement of 2.64% and a maximum increase in average accuracy across 1.03%. Source code is available at:
https://github.com/XiGuaBo/CBM-HNMU.

1. Introduction
Interpretable machine learning has become a crucial research direction, particularly in image classification, where
understanding model decisions is essential for trust and re* Co-first contributing author.
† Corresponding author.

2836

