This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangled World Models: Learning to Transfer Semantic
Knowledge from Distracting Videos for Reinforcement Learning
Qi Wang1,2,3 * Zhipeng Zhang4,5 * Baao Xie2,3 * Xin Jin2,3† Yunbo Wang1
Shiyu Wang5,6 Liaomo Zheng5,6 Xiaokang Yang1 Wenjun Zeng2,3
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
Ningbo Key Laboratory of Spatial Intelligence and Digital Derivative, Ningbo, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Shenyang Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Shenyang CASNC Technology Co., Ltd
https://qiwang067.github.io/diswm
Pretraining

Abstract
Training visual reinforcement learning (RL) in practical
scenarios presents a significant challenge, i.e., RL agents
suffer from low sample efficiency in environments with variations. While various approaches have attempted to alleviate this issue by disentangled representation learning,
these methods usually start learning from scratch without
prior knowledge of the world. This paper, in contrast, tries
to learn and understand underlying semantic variations
from distracting videos via offline-to-online latent distillation and flexible disentanglement constraints. To enable effective cross-domain semantic knowledge transfer, we introduce an interpretable model-based RL framework, dubbed
Disentangled World Models (DisWM). Specifically, we pretrain the action-free video prediction model offline with disentanglement regularization to extract semantic knowledge
from distracting videos. The disentanglement capability of
the pretrained model is then transferred to the world model
through latent distillation. For finetuning in the online environment, we exploit the knowledge from the pretrained
model and introduce a disentanglement constraint to the
world model. During the adaptation phase, the incorporation of actions and rewards from online environment interactions enriches the diversity of the data, which in turn
strengthens the disentangled representation learning. Experimental results validate the superiority of our approach
on various benchmarks.

Finetuing
Latent distillation

Disentangled video
prediciton model
Offline distracting videos
from different domains

Disentangled
world model
Online
environment

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed framework. The key idea
is to leverage distracting videos for semantic knowledge transfer,
enabling the downstream agent to improve sample efficiency on
unseen tasks.

1. Introduction
Visual reinforcement learning (VRL) presents a promising approach for training agents within complex environments [11, 18, 20, 28, 45]. However, VRL frequently suffers from performance degradation in practical scenarios
due to the complexity, volatility, and visual distractions in
environments. Even minor environmental variations can result in significant pixel-level shifts, making the trained VRL
policies ineffective or suboptimal [6, 7]. For instance, a
slight change in lighting conditions can affect an object’s
appearance (e.g., color, shadow, or other visual attributes).
Therefore, it is crucial to enhance models with interpretability, enabling them to perceive, learn, and understand the semantic environmental variations.
Disentangled representation learning (DRL) presents a
promising approach to addressing the interpretability challenges inherent in the “black-box” nature of deep learning algorithms. Fundamentally, DRL approaches mimic the
cognitive processes of biological intelligence, where under-

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Xin Jin <jinxin@eitech.edu.cn>.

2599

