This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HUST: High-Fidelity Unbiased Skin Tone Estimation via Texture Quantization
Zimin Ran1 Xingyu Ren2 Xiang An3 Kaicheng Yang3 Ziyong Feng3 Jing Yang4
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias5 Linchao Zhu6 Jiankang Deng5
1

University of Technology Sydney 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 DeepGlint
4
University of Cambridge 5 Imperial College London 6 Zhejiang University

zimin.ran@student.uts.edu.au

Input

Texture

Overlay

Albedo

rxy sjtu@sjtu.edu.cn

Relighting

j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk

Input

Texture

Overlay

Albedo

Relighting

Figure 1. We introduce HUST, a high-fidelity unbiased skin tone estimation method. HUST learns a high-fidelity texture codebook from
large-scale RGB faces, generates textures from the color images, and enables unsupervised adaptation from texture to albedo domain.
HUST does not rely on captured data and generates high-fidelity unbiased diffuse albedo maps that can be used for realistic rendering.

Abstract
Recent 3D facial reconstruction methods have made significant progress in shape estimation, but high-fidelity unbiased facial albedo estimation remains challenging. Existing
methods rely on expensive light-stage captured data, and
although they have made progress in either high-fidelity reconstruction or unbiased skin tone estimation, no work has
yet achieved optimal results in both aspects simultaneously.
In this paper, we present a novel high-fidelity unbiased facial diffuse albedo reconstruction method, HUST, which recovers the diffuse albedo map directly from a single image
without the need for captured data. Our key insight is that

the albedo map is the illumination-invariant texture map,
which enables us to use inexpensive texture data for diffuse
albedo estimation by eliminating illumination. To achieve
this, we collect large-scale high-resolution facial images
and train a VQGAN model in the image space. To adapt the
pre-trained VQGAN model for UV texture generation, we
fine-tune the encoder by using limited UV textures and our
high-resolution faces under adversarial supervision in both
image and latent space. Finally, we train a cross-attention
module and utilize group identity loss to adapt the domain
from texture to albedo. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that HUST can predict high-fidelity facial albedos for inthe-wild images. On the FAIR benchmark, HUST achieves

13523

