This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interpretable point cloud classification using multiple instance learning
Matt De Vries1,2,3 , Reed Naidoo1,2 , Olga Fourkioti2 , Lucas G Dent4 , Nathan Curry3 ,
Chris Dunsby4 , Chris Bakal1,2
1
2
Sentinal4D
Institute of Cancer Research 3 Imperial College London
4
University College London
matt.devries@sentinal4d.com, {reed.naidoo, olga.fourkioti, chris.bakal}@icr.ac.uk,
l.dent@ucl.ac.uk, {nathan.curry08, christopher.dunsby}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Understanding 3D cell shape is crucial in biomedical research, where morphology serves as a key indicator of disease, cellular state, and drug response. However, many
existing 3D point cloud classification models lack interpretability, limiting their utility for extracting biologically
meaningful insights. In this work, we unify standard point
cloud backbones and feature aggregation strategies within a
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) framework to enable inherently interpretable classification. Our approach, P OINTMIL, improves classification performance while providing fine-grained point-level explanations without relying on
post hoc analysis. We demonstrate state-of-the-art mACC
(97.3%) and F1 (97.5%) in the IntrA biomedical dataset
and evaluate the interpretability using quantitative and
qualitative metrics. Additionally, we introduce ATLAS-1, a
novel dataset of drug-treated 3D cancer cells, and use it to
show how P OINT MIL captures fine-grained morphological
effects of chemical treatments. Beyond biomedical applications, P OINT MIL generalises to standard benchmarks such
as ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN, offering interpretable
3D object recognition across domains1 .

Figure 1. Current point cloud classifiers usually only provide predictive probabilities. We propose P OINT MIL to incorporate interpretability and improve predictive performance into point-based
architectures inherently.

1. Introduction

diagnostics [46], biological functions, and drug discovery
[10, 12, 22, 26, 32, 52].
Recent advances in point cloud classification have focused mainly on improving model accuracy [21], with limited emphasis on interpretability. However, for scientific applications such as classifying diseased cells and morphological profiling for drug discovery, interpretability is crucial.
The morphology of drug-treated cells often reflects cellular
responses to treatment. It can encode valuable information
related to drug effects and mechanisms of action [56], but
existing models do not highlight where these morphological
differences are most informative. Without interpretability,
such models function as black boxes, limiting their utility
to biomedical researchers who seek to understand how and
why a model classifies specific cell shapes under different
perturbations.
To address this, we demonstrate that common point processing backbones and feature aggregation strategies can be
unified within a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) framework, which we refer to as P OINT MIL. This design enables built-in point-level interpretability without requiring
post hoc analysis. By coupling widely used point cloud

Three-dimensional (3D) imaging data is crucial in various
scientific and industrial applications, including autonomous
driving, augmented reality, robotics, and biomedical research. In biomedical imaging, understanding the 3D morphology of cells is increasingly recognised as a powerful
approach for characterising cellular states, disease phenotypes, and responses to perturbations such as drug treatments [52]. The ability to systematically classify and interpret changes in 3D cell shape has implications for disease
1 Project and dataset page: https://Sentinal4D.github.io/
PointMIL.

22209

