This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Background Invariance Testing According to Semantic Proximity
Zukang Liao
University of Oxford

Min Chen
University of Oxford

zukang.liao@eng.ox.ac.uk

min.chen@oerc.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In many applications, machine-learned (ML) models are
required to hold some invariance qualities, such as rotation, size, and intensity invariance. Among these, testing for
background invariance presents a significant challenge due
to the vast and complex data space it encompasses. To evaluate invariance qualities, we first use a visualization-based
testing framework which allows human analysts to assess
and make informed decisions about the invariance properties of ML models. We show that such informative testing
framework is preferred as ML models with the same global
statistics (e.g., accuracy scores) can behave differently and
have different visualized testing patterns. However, such
human analysts might not lead to consistent decisions without a systematic sampling approach to select representative
testing suites. In this work, we present a technical solution
for selecting background scenes according to their semantic proximity to a target image that contains a foreground
object being tested. We construct an ontology for storing
knowledge about relationships among different objects using association analysis. This ontology enables an efficient
and meaningful search for background scenes of different
semantic distances to a target image, enabling the selection
of a test suite that is both diverse and reasonable. Compared with other testing techniques, e.g., random sampling,
nearest neighbors, or other sampled test suites by visuallanguage models (VLMs), our method achieved a superior
balance between diversity and consistency of human annotations, thereby enhancing the reliability and comprehensiveness of background invariance testing.

Figure 1. The four sets of points, i.e., the Anscombe’s quartet [36],
have exactly the same statistical measures, e.g., mean, standard deviation, correlation, etc. However, they are differently distributed.
Visualization-based approaches are often more informative than
statistical scores for illustrating data distributions.

Figure 2. Random sampling leads to inconsistent visual representations across different testing runs, making visualization-based
testing frameworks or human-centric testing methods inconsistent.
We show the proposed testing framework leads to more consistent
testing patterns in Appendix B4.

[39] and to anticipate whether the model can be deployed
in other application domains [38]. This work is concerned
with background invariance testing – a relatively challenging type of testing.
When considering invariance qualities of an ML model,
most existing works reported a single averaged worst-case
accuracy, e.g., [15, 40]. However, as shown in Figure 1, typical statistical measures, e.g., mean, cannot informatively
characterize how the data are distributed. In machine learning (ML), while averaged accuracy scores can provide an
overall statistical indication of the invariance quality, they
do not support more detailed analysis such as whether the
level of robustness or biases is acceptable in an application by taking into account the probabilities of the variants,
for example different background scenes. To transform the
problem of invariance testing from simply reporting an accuracy score into a more informative multi-factor decisionmaking process, recent work [12, 25] conducted testing for

1. Introduction
There are a variety of invariance qualities associated with
machine-learned models. Testing these invariance qualities
enables us to evaluate the robustness of a model in its realworld application, where the model may encounter variations that do not feature sufficiently in the training and testing data. Testing also allows us to observe possible biases or
spurious correlations that may have been learned by a model

8056

