This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PHD: Personalized 3D Human Body Fitting with Point Diffusion

Po-Chen Wu3

Hsuan-I Ho1,3
Chen Guo1,3
Ivan Shugurov3
Chengcheng Tang3
Abhay Mittal3
2
Manuel Kaufmann†
Linguang Zhang†3
1

Sizhe An3

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
ETH AI Center, ETH Zürich
3
Reality Labs, Meta

GT Meshes
Ours Fitting
ScoreHMR Fitting

Figure 1. We present PHD, a novel body fitting paradigm for obtaining accurate 3D body poses from single videos. PHD handles complex
poses well and avoids common problems of existing methods, like bending knees, that are due to inaccurate shape estimates.

Abstract

via a Point Distillation Sampling loss. This learned 3D
pose prior effectively mitigates errors arising from an overreliance on 2D constraints. Consequently, our approach
improves not only pelvis-aligned pose accuracy but also
absolute pose accuracy – an important metric often overlooked by prior work. Furthermore, our method is highly
data-efficient, requiring only synthetic data for training,
and serves as a versatile plug-and-play module that can be
seamlessly integrated with existing 3D pose estimators to
enhance their performance. Code and models are available
at https://PHD-Pose.github.io.

We introduce PHD, a novel approach for personalized 3D
human mesh recovery (HMR) and body fitting that leverages user-specific shape information to improve pose estimation accuracy from videos. Traditional HMR methods
are designed to be user-agnostic and optimized for generalization. While these methods often refine poses using
constraints derived from the 2D image to improve alignment, this process compromises 3D accuracy by failing to
jointly account for person-specific body shapes and 3D pose
plausibility. In contrast, our pipeline decouples this process by first calibrating the user’s body shape and then
employing a personalized pose fitting process conditioned
on that shape. To achieve this, we develop a body shapeconditioned 3D pose prior, implemented as a Point Diffusion Transformer, which iteratively guides the pose fitting

1. Introduction
Perceiving accurate 3D human pose and shape is fundamental for future AI systems, such as realistic human avatars
for AR/VR telepresence, personalized service robots, and
human behavior understanding. Impressive strides have recently been made in 3D human pose and shape estima-

† Equal advisory

7526

