This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CountSE: Soft Exemplar Open-set Object Counting
Shuai Liu, Peng Zhang, Shiwei Zhang, Wei Ke*
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{wei.ke, sh_liu}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {pppzhang, zhangshiwei96}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

23 Text-guided methods

Open-set counting is garnering increasing attention due
to its capability to enumerate objects of arbitrary category. It can be generally categorized into two methodologies: text-guided zero-shot counting methods and exemplarguided few-shot counting methods. Previous text-guided
zero-shot methods only provide limited object information through text, resulting in poor performance. Besides,
though exemplar-guided few-shot approaches gain better
results, they rely heavily on manually annotated visual exemplars, resulting in low efficiency and high labor intensity. Therefore, we propose CountSE, which simultaneously
achieves high efficiency and high performance. CountSE is
a new text-guided zero-shot object counting algorithm that
generates multiple precise soft exemplars at different scales
to enhance counting models driven solely by semantics.
Specifically, to obtain richer object information and address
the diversity in object scales, we introduce Semantic-guided
Exemplar Selection, a module that generates candidate soft
exemplars at various scales and selects those with high similarity scores. Then, to ensure accuracy and representativeness, Clustering-based Exemplar Filtering is introduced
to refine the candidate exemplars by effectively eliminating inaccurate exemplars through clustering analysis. In
the text-guided zero-shot setting, CountSE outperforms all
state-of-the-art methods on the FSC-147 benchmark by at
least 15%. Additionally, experiments on two other widely
used datasets demonstrate that CountSE significantly outperforms all previous text-guided zero-shot counting methods and is competitive with the most advanced exemplarguided few-shot methods. Codes will be available. Code
is available at https://github.com/pppppz22/
CountSE.

MAE (Mean Absolute Error)

21
19
17

BMNet+
CounTR
LOCA
CACViT
DAVE
Ours

ZSC
CLIP-Count
VLCounter
CounTX
GroundingDINO
GroundingREC

Exemplar-guided methods

15
13
11

9
7
1

4

7

10

13

Annotation time (s)

15

17

Figure 1. Our method achieves few-shot level performance with
zero-shot annotation cost. We measure annotation time as either
class name input (e.g., "tomato") or three exemplar box annotations per image, averaged over 100 images. While text-only zeroshot methods have minimal annotation cost but poor performance,
and exemplar-based few-shot methods perform better but require
costly annotations, our method bridges this gap effectively.

1. Introduction

34]. Its application is extended from traditional counting of
a specific category to methods that support open-set counting. Closed-set [9, 17, 21, 23, 31, 36, 39, 40, 46, 47] object counting methods are limited to predefined categories
present in the train set. In contrast, open-set [1, 2, 5, 16,
19, 28, 32, 35, 37, 42, 44, 48, 54] counting methods overcome this restriction by enabling the counting of objects
from any category during inference without the need for additional training. Specifically, open-set counting allows the
model to identify the target category via visual exemplars
(e.g., bounding boxes of target objects in an image) or text
prompts, thereby facilitating the counting of objects from
any category in an image.

The object counting task has experienced substantial advancements with the development of deep learning [7, 14,

Some open-set counting methods (e.g., [CounTX [1],

* Corresponding author

21536

