This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trokens: Semantic-Aware Relational Trajectory Tokens
for Few-Shot Action Recognition
Pulkit Kumar1 * Shuaiyi Huang1∗
Matthew Walmer1 Sai Saketh Rambhatla1,2 Abhinav Shrivastava1
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

GenAI, Meta

{pulkit,huangshy,mwalmer,abhinav}@cs.umd.edu rssaketh@meta.com

Abstract
Video understanding requires effective modeling of both
motion and appearance information, particularly for fewshot action recognition. While recent advances in point
tracking have been shown to improve few-shot action recognition, two fundamental challenges persist: selecting informative points to track and effectively modeling their
motion patterns. We present Trokens, a novel approach
that transforms trajectory points into semantic-aware relational tokens for action recognition. First, we introduce a
semantic-aware sampling strategy to adaptively distribute
tracking points based on object scale and semantic relevance. Second, we develop a motion modeling framework that captures both intra-trajectory dynamics through
the Histogram of Oriented Displacements (HoD) and intertrajectory relationships to model complex action patterns.
Our approach effectively combines these trajectory tokens
with semantic features to enhance appearance features with
motion information, achieving state-of-the-art performance
across six diverse few-shot action recognition benchmarks:
Something-Something-V2 (both full and small splits), Kinetics, UCF101, HMDB51, and FineGym. Our project page is
available here.

Figure 1. Our motivation. (a) Our semantic-aware points adapt
better to object scale and semantic relevance while existing methods with grid sampling miss small objects with important motion
(e.g., knife). (b) We explicitly model relational motions within a
trajectory and across trajectories.

1. Introduction

great strides, the challenge of capturing crucial motion
patterns remains complex. Traditional optical flow techniques [41, 50, 56] have been a primary approach, but
they are fundamentally limited to analyzing adjacent frames
and deteriorate under occlusions, resulting in incomplete
motion representations. In parallel to optical flow methods, trajectory-based approaches emerged as an alternative paradigm. Early trajectory works [62, 63, 66] made
progress by capturing longer-term patterns, and recent work
[39] has further advanced this direction through point tracking. Unlike optical flow, point tracking [10, 23, 35, 97]
explicitly maintains temporal correspondence across long
sequences and handles occlusions naturally, making it particularly effective for capturing complex motion patterns in
real-world actions. In this work, we aim to advance fewshot action recognition by building upon these advantages
of point tracking approaches.
To advance point tracking for action recognition, we
must address two fundamental challenges: (1) sampling informative query points to track through time, and (2) effec-

At the core of video understanding lies the fundamental synergy between motion and appearance cues. Motion patterns
reveal the dynamic flow of actions through time. At the
same time, appearance information captures the rich context, the interplay of objects, environments, and their relationships within each frame. In action recognition tasks,
particularly in few-shot settings, explicitly modeling this
complementary relationship becomes crucial, as both aspects provide distinct yet essential signals.
While appearance understanding in models has made
* Equal Contribution

13544

