This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Point Cloud Completion: Are We Ready For The Real-World?
Stuti Pathak†1 Prashant Kumar†2 Dheeraj Baiju3
Nicholus Mboga4 Gunther Steenackers1 Rudi Penne1
1
UAntwerp, Belgium 2 IIT Delhi, India 3 BITS Pilani, India 4 GIM, Belgium
{stuti.pathak,gunther.steenackers,rudi.penne}@uantwerpen.be
f20212232@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in

prashantk.nan@gmail.com

nckodhiambo@gmail.com

PCN
Ground
truth

Partial

Ground
truth

Partial

Nonuniformly
sparse

Uniformly
sparse

RealPC

Ground
truth

Partial
(a)

RealPC

PCN
(b)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of current existing and RealPC object point clouds. (a) We show a complete absence of non-uniformity
and noise for the PCN dataset [63], in contrast to multiple levels of non-uniformity (as shown by the magnified regions) along with
noise (bottom two magnifications) in the case of our RealPC dataset. (b) Comparison of Persistence Diagrams of a point cloud each
from RealPC and PCN dataset. Points further away from the diagonal indicate strong topological features. Unlike PCN, RealPC has
numerous significant 0- and 1-dimensional (H0 , H1 ) topological features.

Abstract
Point clouds acquired in constrained, challenging, uncontrolled, and multi-sensor real-world settings are noisy,
incomplete, and non-uniformly sparse. This presents acute
challenges for the vital task of point cloud completion. Using tools from Algebraic Topology and Persistent Homology
(PH), we demonstrate that current benchmark object point
clouds lack rich topological features that are integral part of
point clouds captured in realistic environments. To facilitate
research in this direction, we contribute the first real-world

industrial dataset for point cloud completion, RealPC - a
diverse, rich and varied set of point clouds. It consists of
∼ 40,000 pairs across 21 categories of industrial structures
in railway establishments. Benchmark results on several
strong baselines reveal that existing methods fail in realworld scenarios. We discover a striking observation - unlike current datasets, RealPC consists of multiple 0- and
1-dimensional PH-based topological features. We prove
that integrating these topological priors into existing works
helps improve completion. We present how 0-dimensional
PH priors extract the global topology of a complete shape
in the form of a 3D skeleton and assist a model in generating
topologically consistent complete shapes. Since comput-

† Equal contribution.

25388

