This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Vision Semantic Density with Anatomy Normality Modeling for
Medical Vision-language Pre-training
Weiwei Cao1,2,4 Jianpeng Zhang1,2,4 * Zhongyi Shui2 Sinuo Wang2 Zeli Chen2
Xi Li1 Le Lu2 Xianghua Ye3 Tingbo Liang3 Qi Zhang3 Ling Zhang2
1

3

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
The First Affiliated Hospital of College of Medicine, Zhejiang University

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China

4

jianpeng.zhang0@gmail.com

Abstract

Vision
encoder

Image w/ low SNR

CLS

Alignment

Text
A high-density
encoder shadow on the

posterior wall of
bladder;
bladder stone.

Report w/ high SNR

(c) VLP with vision semantic density boosting

(b) Vanilla VLP

CLS

Semantic
density gap

Text tokens w/
high semantic density

Vision-language pre-training (VLP) has great potential
for developing multifunctional and general medical diagnostic capabilities. However, aligning medical images with
a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) to reports with a high SNR
presents a semantic density gap, leading to visual alignment
bias. In this paper, we propose boosting vision semantic
density to improve alignment effectiveness. On one hand,
we enhance visual semantics through disease-level vision
contrastive learning, which strengthens the model’s ability
to differentiate between normal and abnormal samples for
each anatomical structure. On the other hand, we introduce
an anatomical normality modeling method to model the distribution of normal samples for each anatomy, leveraging
VQ-VAE for reconstructing normal vision embeddings in
the latent space. This process amplifies abnormal signals by
leveraging distribution shifts in abnormal samples, enhancing the model’s perception and discrimination of abnormal attributes. The enhanced visual representation effectively captures the diagnostic-relevant semantics, facilitating more efficient and accurate alignment with the diagnostic report. We conduct extensive experiments on two chest
CT datasets, CT-RATE and Rad-ChestCT, and an abdominal CT dataset, MedVL-CT69K, and comprehensively evaluate the diagnosis performance across multiple tasks in the
chest and abdominal CT scenarios, achieving state-of-theart zero-shot performance. Notably, our method achieved
an average AUC of 84.9% across 54 diseases in 15 organs,
significantly surpassing existing methods. Additionally, we
demonstrate the superior transfer learning capabilities of
our pre-trained model. Code is available at https://

Vision tokens w/
low semantic density

(a) Semantic density gap between visual and linguistic modalities

Visual activation map

Boosting vision
semantic density

Alignment

Visual activation map

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of semantic density gap between vision
and linguistic modalities in the medical scenario. We present an
abdomen CT scan, accompanied by the diagnostic report indicating the presence of a bladder stone. SNR: signal-to-noise ratio.
(b) In the vanilla VLP, the visual activation map fails to highlight
regions of interest for bladder stone diagnosis, resulting in visual
alignment bias. (c) Our method is proposed to enhance attention
to disease-related regions by boosting vision semantic density.

github.com/alibaba-damo-academy/ViSD-Boost

that necessitate pixel-level, region-level, or image-level annotations [1, 4, 19]. This process is both time-intensive
and labor-intensive, thereby complicating the creation of
adaptable and versatile generalist models. Vision-language
pre-training (VLP), driven by natural language, eliminates
the need for excessive manual annotation and has achieved
significant success in natural image scenarios [20, 26, 34].
This approach has the potential to disrupt the traditional
supervised learning pipeline, enabling the development of
more versatile diagnostic capabilities at a lower cost.
However, recent attempts in medical scenarios have
yielded only modest success, with diagnostic performance
falling short of clinical requirements [43]. The core challenge lies in extracting diagnostic-related semantics from
vision embedding space. Medical images encompass a
broad range of anatomical content, yet the content of inter-

1. Introduction
The advancement of computer-aided diagnosis has conventionally depended on supervised learning methodologies
* Correspondence to Jianpeng Zhang.

23041

