This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hydra-NeXt: Robust Closed-Loop Driving with Open-Loop Training
Zhenxin Li1,2*

Shihao Wang3* Shiyi Lan4 Zhiding Yu4 Zuxuan Wu1,2† Jose M. Alvarez4
1
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied AI, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 4 NVIDIA

Abstract
End-to-end autonomous driving research currently faces a
critical challenge in bridging the gap between open-loop
training and closed-loop deployment. Current approaches
are trained to predict trajectories in an open-loop environment, which struggle with quick reactions to other agents
in closed-loop environments and risk generating kinematically infeasible plans due to the gap between open-loop
training and closed-loop driving. In this paper, we introduce Hydra-NeXt, a novel multi-branch planning framework
that unifies trajectory prediction, control prediction, and
a trajectory refinement network in one model. Unlike current open-loop trajectory prediction models that only handle
general-case planning, Hydra-NeXt further utilizes a control decoder to focus on short-term actions, which enables
faster responses to dynamic situations and reactive agents.
Moreover, we propose the Trajectory Refinement module to
augment and refine the planning decisions by effectively adhering to kinematic constraints in closed-loop environments.
This unified approach bridges the gap between open-loop
training and closed-loop driving, demonstrating superior
performance of 65.89 Driving Score (DS) and 48.20% Success Rate (SR) on the Bench2Drive dataset without relying
on external experts for data collection. Hydra-NeXt surpasses the previous state-of-the-art by 22.98 DS and 17.49
SR, marking a significant advancement in autonomous driving. Code will be available at https://github.com/
woxihuanjiangguo/Hydra-NeXt.

1. Introduction
End-to-end autonomous driving (E2E AD) [7, 9, 20, 22, 23,
27, 31, 41, 44, 45, 47] has emerged as a trending alternative to traditional perception-planning pipelines. Current research in E2E AD is divided into open-loop and closed-loop
environment-oriented approaches.
An open-loop environment [3, 4, 12, 22] refers to an
autonomous system’s performance being assessed without
∗ Work done during internship at NVIDIA.
† Corresponding author.

Privileged Input

Control
Prediction

Closed-loop
Control

Driving

(a) Closed-loop RL-based Experts

Sensor

Trajectory
Prediction

Closed-loop
Trajectory

Driving

(b) Open-loop Trajectory Prediction

Sensor

Trajectory
Prediction

Trajectory

Control
Prediction

Control

Trajectory Closed-loop
Refinement
Driving

(c) Open-loop Motion Predictions + Trajectory Refinement (Ours)

Figure 1. Different Paradigms of Autonomous Driving. Closedloop RL-based experts learn from environment interactions, ensuring responsiveness to agents and kinematic feasibility by predicting control signals. End-to-end methods use open-loop trajectory
prediction, often neglecting ego-agent interaction and kinematic
constraints. Our approach integrates trajectory prediction, control
prediction, and a trajectory refinement module to bridge the gap
between open-loop training and closed-loop driving.

environmental feedback. The main advantage of this approach is its simplicity and efficiency, as it avoids the complexity of real-time feedback, making it cost-effective and
suitable for large-scale training and testing. Benchmarks
like NAVSIM [12] provide controlled environments where
agents follow predefined trajectories, allowing for precise
evaluation of metrics like collision rates, progress, and trafficrule following. However, the lack of reactive behaviors and
dynamic interactions with other agents or changing conditions makes it difficult to deploy models trained in open-loop
environments in real-world driving.
A closed-loop environment in autonomous driving involves real-time feedback between the agent’s actions and
the environment, typically via a simulator [1, 4, 14]. The
primary advantage of closed-loop methods is their ability
to simulate dynamic, interactive environments, allowing for
more realistic testing of driving policies. However, they face
significant challenges: These systems often rely on synthetic

27305

