This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperGCT: A Dynamic Hyper-GNN-Learned Geometric Constraint
for 3D Registration
Xiyu Zhang1 , Jiayi Ma2 , Jianwei Guo3 , Wei Hu4 , Zhaoshuai Qi1 , Fei Hui5 , Jiaqi Yang1 *, Yanning Zhang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Wuhan University 3 Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Peking University 5 Chang’an University
{2426988253}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; {ynzhang, jqyang}@nwpu.edu.cn

inlier

Abstract
Geometric constraints between feature matches are critical in 3D point cloud registration problems. Existing approaches typically model unordered matches as a consistency graph and sample consistent matches to generate
hypotheses. However, explicit graph construction introduces noise, posing great challenges for handcrafted geometric constraints to render consistency. To overcome this,
we propose HyperGCT, a flexible dynamic Hyper-GNNlearned geometric ConstrainT that leverages high-order
consistency among 3D correspondences. To our knowledge, HyperGCT is the first method that mines robust geometric constraints from dynamic hypergraphs for 3D registration. By dynamically optimizing the hypergraph through
vertex and edge feature aggregation, HyperGCT effectively
captures the correlations among correspondences, leading
to accurate hypothesis generation. Extensive experiments
on 3DMatch, 3DLoMatch, KITTI-LC, and ETH show that
HyperGCT achieves state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, HyperGCT is robust to graph noise, demonstrating a
significant advantage in terms of generalization.

(a) Random

(b) Triplet

v1

outlier

(c) Maximal Clique

Graph Update

(d) Ours

v1

Figure 1. Key aspects of HyperGCT. It mines high-order consistency among inliers, offering greater flexibility than random sampling, triplet, or clique constraints. The implicit graph construction
continuously refines the neighbor connections around the central
node, effectively learning the high-order correlations.

1. Introduction

lution to PCR and can be categorized into deep-learned and
traditional approaches. Deep-learned methods [2, 9, 19, 20,
25, 37, 38, 47] classify inliers and outliers by learning the
consistency between correspondences and generating inlier
probabilities for outlier removal. Most traditional methods [6, 21, 28, 33, 39–41, 43, 44, 46] follow the hypothesis generation-verification paradigm, leveraging geometric
constraints to select consistent matches. Thus, designing
a good geometric constraint is critical for both methods.
Deep-learned methods integrate pairwise compatibility into
networks, for example, PointDSC [2] using spatial consistency and 3DPCP-Net [37] incorporating deep geometric
coherence. Traditional methods employ random sampling,
triplet, or clique constraints. RANSAC [16] and its variants [3, 4, 10, 24] use random sampling to remove outliers,
but their performance degrades with a high outlier ratio.
Recently, researchers [21, 28, 33, 39–41, 43, 44, 46] have
applied graph theory to identify geometrically consistent
matches. These approaches typically check the geometric

Point cloud registration (PCR) is essential in numerous
3D computer vision tasks including reconstruction [7], simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [14], and
robotics [27]. It aims to align 3D fragments from different views. The standard approach involves establishing correspondences using local features, sampling consistent matches that meet geometric constraints, and estimating six-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF) pose transformations.
However, PCR becomes challenging when faced with noise,
such as low-quality point clouds or incorrect matches.
Correspondence-based methods are the mainstream so* Corresponding Author.
Code link: https://github.com/zhangxy0517/HyperGCT.

24750

