This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Deep Multi-view Clustering via Causal Learning with Partially
Aligned Cross-view Correspondence
Xihong Yang1,3 , Siwei Wang2 , Jiaqi Jin1 , Fangdi Wang1 , Tianrui Liu1 ,
, Yueming Jin3 , Xinwang Liu1, *, En Zhu1,∗ , Kunlun He4
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha,
China 2 Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore 4 Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China
{yangxihong, xinwangliu, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view clustering (MVC) aims to explore the common clustering structure across multiple views. Many existing MVC methods heavily rely on the assumption of
view consistency, where alignments for corresponding samples across different views are ordered in advance. However, real-world scenarios often present a challenge as
only partial data is consistently aligned across different
views, restricting the overall clustering performance. In
this work, we consider the model performance decreasing
phenomenon caused by data order shift (i.e., from fully
to partially aligned) as a generalized multi-view clustering problem. To tackle this problem, we design a causal
multi-view clustering network, termed CauMVC. We adopt
a causal modeling approach to understand multi-view clustering procedure. To be specific, we formulate the partially
aligned data as an intervention and multi-view clustering
with partially aligned data as an post-intervention inference. However, obtaining invariant features directly can be
challenging. Thus, we design a Variational Auto-Encoder
for causal learning by incorporating an encoder from existing information to estimate the invariant features. Moreover, a decoder is designed to perform the post-intervention
inference. Lastly, we design a contrastive regularizer to
capture sample correlations. To the best of our knowledge,
this paper is the first work to deal generalized multi-view
clustering via causal learning. Empirical experiments on
both fully and partially aligned data illustrate the strong
generalization and effectiveness of CauMVC.

Figure 1. An illustrative example of the motivation is presented
through a raw video and its corresponding description. In this example, the issue of partial alignment between the video and the description becomes evident. In this scenario, we consider the video
as one view and the description as another. There is a noticeable
mismatch between the description and the visual content. For instance, when the description mentions “Oriole,” the video content
actually shows “feeding catbirds” at the timestamp “01:24”.

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) [2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 14, 19, 23–25,
30, 35, 39, 41–44] is a critical task for uncovering semantic
information and partitioning data into distinct groups in an
unsupervised manner, gaining significant attention in recent
years.
Although existing MVC algorithms demonstrate promising clustering performance, they heavily rely on the assumption that the mapping of all corresponding samples
between views is ordered. This reliance facilitates learning a common representation and makes clustering feasible. However, in real application, the multi-view data is always partially aligned. To be concrete, taking a multi-view
dataset {X1 , X2 } as an example, the data x1i and x2i with
the same index in two views may represent different con-

* Corresponding author

1990

