This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NAPPure: Adversarial Purification for Robust Image Classification under
Non-Additive Perturbations
Junjie Nan1,2 , Jianing Li1* , Wei Chen1,2 , Mingkun Zhang1,2 , Xueqi Cheng1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 101408, China
{nanjunjie32s, lijianing, chenwei2022, zhangmingkun20z, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

100 km Zone

Adversarial purification has achieved great success in combating adversarial image perturbations, which are usually
assumed to be additive. However, non-additive adversarial perturbations such as blur, occlusion, and distortion are
also common in the real world. Under such perturbations,
existing adversarial purification methods are much less effective since they are designed to fit the additive nature. In
this paper, we propose an extended adversarial purification
framework named NAPPure, which can further handle nonadditive perturbations. Specifically, we first establish the
generation process of an adversarial image, and then disentangle the underlying clean image and perturbation parameters through likelihood maximization. Experiments on
GTSRB and CIFAR-10 datasets show that NAPPure significantly boosts the robustness of image classification models
against non-additive perturbations.

120 km Zone

80 km Zone

50 km Zone

Clean

Blur

Occlusion

Distortion

50 km Zone

120km
kmZone
Zone
80

80 km Zone

100 km Zone

Adv

DiffPure

LM

NAPPure (ours)

Figure 1. Upper: typical adversarial attacks with non-additive perturbations. Lower: adversarial image (Adv) and corresponding
purification results. White texts are classified labels.

can be implemented by attaching optical films, and occlusion by attaching printed patches. Recent researches have
shown that, non-additive perturbations are also effective for
adversarial attacks, leading to significantly decreased performance of image classification systems [12, 28, 46].
Adversarial purification has been proved to be an effective approach against additive adversarial attacks [4, 27,
45]. The idea is to remove or reduce the adversarial perturbations by preprocessing the input data before feeding it
to the classifier, thereby enhancing its robustness. Our observations, as shown in Fig. 1, indicate that existing adversarial purification methods (DiffPure [27] and LM [4]) are
significantly less effective when dealing with non-additive
perturbations. The reason may be that, non-additively perturbed images cannot be easily modeled by additive perturbations under restricted scales. Though any transformations can be viewed as an additive one by treating the difference as the additive perturbation, the scale (such as l2
norm) of perturbation may be large enough to accommodate multiple feasible solutions from different classes. In
other words, if additive adversarial purification method is
forcibly applied to handle non-additive perturbations, adverse outcomes such as semantic drift may be inevitable,
leading to incorrect classification result.
In this paper, we aim to extend the application scope of

1. Introduction
Neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks: in
image classification, an imperceptible perturbation added to
the input image can lead to misclassification with high confidence [34] . This phenomenon has raised concerns about
the reliability of deep learning models in risk-sensitive applications such as autonomous driving, intelligent security system, and smart healthcare. Adversarial perturbations are usually assumed to be additive and imperceptible,
which is implemented by directly adding a scale-limited
and carefully-crafted noise image to the original image
[11, 22]. However, non-additive perturbations such as blur,
occlusion, and distortion are common in real applications,
and may even be physically easier to exploit by attackers
[2, 9, 17, 24, 37, 38]. For example, blur and distortion
* Corresponding author: lijianing@ict.ac.cn

2260

