This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DLF: Extreme Image Compression with Dual-generative Latent Fusion
Naifu Xue1∗ Zhaoyang Jia2 * Jiahao Li 3 Bin Li3 Yuan Zhang 1 Yan Lu3
1
Communication University of China 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{aaronxuenf, yzhang}@cuc.edu.cn, {jzy ustc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{li.jiahao, libin, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Dataset-level semantics

Cluster center
Detail
Compensation
Refined latent

Codebook:

0.0234 bpp

Codebook:

0.0118 bpp

Codebook:
Detail:

0.0059 bpp
0.0039 bpp

Codebook Size

(a) Generative tokenizer

Latent clustering

Small

(b) DLF

Individual-level details

Large

Recent studies in extreme image compression have achieved
remarkable performance by compressing the tokens from
generative tokenizers. However, these methods often prioritize clustering common semantics within the dataset, while
overlooking the diverse details of individual objects. Consequently, this results in suboptimal reconstruction fidelity,
especially at low bitrates. To address this issue, we introduce a Dual-generative Latent Fusion (DLF) paradigm.
DLF decomposes the latent into semantic and detail elements, compressing them through two distinct branches.
The semantic branch clusters high-level information into
compact tokens, while the detail branch encodes perceptually critical details to enhance overall fidelity. Additionally, we propose a cross-branch interactive design to reduce
redundancy between the two branches, thereby minimizing
the overall bit cost. Experimental results demonstrate the
impressive reconstruction quality of DLF even below 0.01
bits per pixel (bpp). On the CLIC2020 test set, our method
achieves bitrate savings of up to 27.93% on LPIPS and
53.55% on DISTS compared to MS-ILLM. Furthermore,
DLF surpasses recent diffusion-based codecs in visual fidelity while maintaining a comparable level of generative
realism. Project: https://dlfcodec.github.io/

Ground truth

Abstract

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Visualization of reconstruction and clustered latents.
(a) Generative tokenizer [12] clusters dataset-level semantics to
encode common contents. But with reduced codebook size, the
details in individual objects become significantly distorted. (b)
Our DLF encodes the additional detail information to compensate
for the small codebook, significantly improving overall fidelity yet
with lower total bitrate.

As image data continues to grow, achieving efficient compression while maintaining human perceptual quality has
become crucial. At low bitrates, both traditional codecs
[6, 10] and learning-based codecs [9, 17, 27] (optimized
for PSNR) often produce blurry reconstructions due to substantial information degradation [5]. In this context, generative codecs [3, 32, 34], which enhance subjective quality
by adding high-frequency details to reconstructed images,
have attracted considerable attention. To achieve effective
* Naifu Xue and Zhaoyang Jia are interns of Microsoft Research Asia.

generative coding at extremely low bitrates, recent studies
[16, 31, 36, 46] have employed generative visual tokenizers [12, 41] as foundational components. These tokenizers
cluster common semantic content across the entire dataset
into a compact codebook while simultaneously learning a
powerful pixel generator based on the clustered information. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), if you do not look closely,
many common semantic content within the dataset can be
reconstructed with acceptable quality using a small code-

19227

