This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayerD: Decomposing Raster Graphic Designs into Layers
Tomoyuki Suzuki1

Input

Kang-Jun Liu2 Naoto Inoue1 Kota Yamaguchi1
1
CyberAgent 2 Tohoku University
Application

Output: Layers
Recolor

Change layout

LayerD

Replace
object

Add
effect

Figure 1. LayerD effectively decomposes raster graphic design images into layers, where the input design contains various elements such
as typographic entities, embellishments, vector shapes, or even image materials. Once decomposed, one can apply image editing operations
such as color conversion or translation at the layer level, or further apply other post-processing such as OCR to vectorize each raster layer.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the creative workflow, designers create and edit graphic
designs at the layer level, which is a basic unit of visual objects, such as text or images, and is commonly seen in design authoring tools like Adobe Photoshop or PowerPoint.
Once the workflow is complete, authoring tools composite
these layers into a final image and deliver it to a display device or print media, such as social media posts, flyers, and
posters. Composite raster images do not retain layer information, making it difficult for designers to edit or retouch a
raster graphic design. Precise decomposition of raster artwork into layers, i.e., the inverse problem of composition,
addresses this situation and enables a workflow that uses
existing raster artwork assets to create new artwork.

Designers craft and edit graphic designs in a layer representation, but layer-based editing becomes impossible once
composited into a raster image. In this work, we propose
LayerD, a method to decompose raster graphic designs into
layers for re-editable creative workflow. LayerD addresses
the decomposition task by iteratively extracting unoccluded
foreground layers. We propose a simple yet effective refinement approach taking advantage of the assumption that layers often exhibit uniform appearance in graphic designs. As
decomposition is ill-posed and the ground-truth layer structure may not be reliable, we develop a quality metric that
addresses the difficulty. In experiments, we show that LayerD successfully achieves high-quality decomposition and
outperforms baselines. We also demonstrate the use of LayerD with state-of-the-art image generators and layer-based
editing. Code and models are publicly available 1 .

1 https://github.com/CyberAgentAILab/LayerD

In this work, we investigate graphic layer decomposition, aiming to automatically decompose a raster graphic
design into a composable sequence of raster layers. Since
designers create graphic designs in a layered format, we can
view this task as restoring the original layered representation. Layer decomposition involves several computer vi-

17783

