This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On Large Multimodal Models as Open-World Image Classifiers
Alessandro Conti1, * Massimiliano Mancini1 Enrico Fini2,†
Yiming Wang3 Paolo Rota1 Elisa Ricci1,3
1

University of Trento

2

Independent researcher

3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Abstract
Traditional image classification requires a predefined list of
semantic categories. In contrast, Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) can sidestep this requirement by classifying images directly using natural language (e.g., answering the
prompt “What is the main object in the image?”). Despite this remarkable capability, most existing studies on
LMM classification performance are surprisingly limited in
scope, often assuming a closed-world setting with a predefined set of categories. In this work, we address this gap
by thoroughly evaluating LMM classification performance
in a truly open-world setting. We first formalize the task
and introduce an evaluation protocol, defining various metrics to assess the alignment between predicted and ground
truth classes. We then evaluate 13 models across 10 benchmarks, encompassing prototypical, non-prototypical, finegrained, and very fine-grained classes, demonstrating the
challenges LMMs face in this task. Further analyses based
on the proposed metrics reveal the types of errors LMMs
make, highlighting challenges related to granularity and
fine-grained capabilities, showing how tailored prompting
and reasoning can alleviate them. Code is available at
https://github.com/altndrr/lmms-owc.

Figure 1. We extensively test 13 Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs) for Open-World (OW) classification on 10 datasets using four evaluation metrics. We show that LMMs outperform contrastive-based approaches in OW (CaSED [17], and
CLIP [49] with image-to-text retrieval) but still lag behind closedworld models with fixed categories (CLIP [49], dashed line).

1. Introduction

processing images and text, this constraint is no longer necessary. Instead of choosing from a fixed list, LMMs can
answer open-ended prompts such as “What is the object in
the image?”, recognizing virtually any semantic concept.
From this perspective, closed-world classification is an artificial limitation that restricts a model’s expressive capabilities rather than reflecting its true potential.

Image classification aims to assign a label to an image.
This widely studied task relies on a key assumption: the categories are fixed and known in advance, a setting known as
the closed world. However, the latter is often restrictive in
real-world applications where new categories can emerge,
requiring to expand the label set [5], recognize unseen concepts [24], or both [6]. Despite its limitations, this assumption has historically been useful, enabling supervised training and straightforward evaluation on labeled datasets. With
the rise of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [3, 38, 41]
* Correspondence to: alessandro.conti-1@unitn.it.
† Enrico Fini is currently at Apple

While some studies have explored classification with
LMMs, they have either focused on the closed-world setting [42] or relied on limited metrics to assess performance:
checking whether the ground truth label appears in the
model’s prediction [69]. However, this metric provides a
limited view of classification performance. It fails to account for alternative correct answers (e.g., sofa instead of
couch), while also overlooking real mistakes (e.g., confusing can with trash can). Evaluating models in the open
world presents additional challenges, as predictions may
differ in granularity (e.g., dog vs. pug), or conflict with an-

16388

