This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLSeg: Enhancing Privacy and Robustness in Federated Learning under
Heterogeneous Data via Model Segmentation

1

Zichun Su1† Zhi Lu1† Yutong Wu1 Renfei Shen1 Songfeng Lu1,2*
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Shenzhen Huazhong University of Science and Technology Research Institute
suzc25@m.fudan.edu.cn, {luzhi,wyt,shenrenfei,lusongfeng}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

these challenges, corresponding techniques have been developed. For privacy protection, methods like Homomorphic Encryption (HE) [29], Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMPC) [5], and Differential Privacy (DP) [35, 39]
aim to safeguard training data by ensuring that only encrypted or obfuscated information is shared. For robustness
against Byzantine attacks, various Robust Aggregation Rule
(RAR), such as Krum [4], DnC [33], and RFA [32], help
identify and exclude malicious updates, thereby protecting
the global model from adversarial influence.
However, achieving both robustness and privacy simultaneously presents a significant challenge, as privacypreserving methods can unintentionally protect malicious
updates from detection [27]. To address this issue, a series
of Privacy-preserving and Robust FL (PRFL) frameworks
have been proposed. These methods explore various architectures and protocols or select encryption schemes that are
compatible with specific RAR [2, 25, 28, 29, 38].
Despite these methods balancing robustness and privacy,
they still have notable limitations: (1) Privacy-preserving
techniques such as HE and SMPC introduce significant
computational overhead [27]. (2) These methods impose
restrictions on the use of RAR, supporting only simple, single RAR, which are vulnerable to adaptive attacks such as
Min-Max [33] and IPM [40]. (3) Gradient heterogeneity
caused by data heterogeneity significantly degrades both
model performance and the accuracy of RAR [22]. However, existing PRFL methods largely overlook this issue.
Therefore, we aim to address the following question:
”How can we efficiently preserve privacy while avoiding restrictions on RAR implementation and mitigating the impact
of data heterogeneity on robustness and performance?” To
this end, we draw inspiration from existing theoretical insights: reducing data dimensionality can alleviate the curse
of dimensionality and gradient heterogeneity, thereby enhancing robustness [26, 33]. Based on this principle, we
propose FLSeg, a model segmentation-based framework.
We design a Segment Exchange privacy protocol to achieve
privacy preservation without incurring excessive computa-

Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative training of
a global model without data sharing, yet it faces critical challenges from privacy leakage and Byzantine attacks.
Existing privacy-preserving robust FL frameworks suffer
from three key limitations: high computational costs, restricted application of Robust Aggregation Rules (RAR),
and inadequate handling of data heterogeneity. To address these limitations, we propose the FLSeg framework,
which leverages Segment Exchange and Segment Aggregation to avoid excessive encryption computations while enabling unrestricted use of any RAR. Additionally, a regularization term in local training balances personalization
with global model performance, effectively adapting to heterogeneous data. Our theoretical and experimental analyses demonstrate FLSeg’s semi-honest security and computational efficiency: it achieves client and server time complexities of O(ℓ) and O(nℓ), with empirical results showing
significantly reduced computational times. Extensive experiments further confirm FLSeg’s robustness across diverse
heterogeneous and adversarial scenarios.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) allows organizations to collaboratively train models without sharing sensitive data. By exchanging model updates instead of raw data, FL enhances
privacy and efficiency, making it ideal for fields like finance
[18], healthcare [16], and smart cities [31]. However, FL
is currently threatened by two major issues: privacy leakage and Byzantine attacks. Privacy leakage occurs when
the server can infer clients’ sensitive training data by analyzing the model updates [13, 43]. Byzantine attacks, on
the other hand, involve malicious clients submitting incorrect or manipulated updates, which can disrupt or compromise the global model’s performance [23, 34]. To address
* Corresponding author, † Equal contribution

3916

