This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wasserstein Style Distribution Analysis and Transform for
Stylized Image Generation
Xi Yu
Xiang Gu∗
Zhihao Shi
Jian Sun∗
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, 710049, China
ericayu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, xianggu@xjtu.edu.cn, szhxjtu777@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Style Image

A dragon

A dog

An elephant

A bear

A bus

A cabin

A church

Style Image

A letter “S"

A letter “D"

A letter “T"

A tank

A bed

A pickup truck

A train

A temple

A skyscraper

A mountain

A bridge

(a) WSDT built on SDXL base model

(b) WSDT built on SD3 base model

Figure 1. Visualization of stylized images generated by our WSDT method through Wasserstein style distribution transform. Subfigures
(a) and (b) show the results of WSDT built on SDXL [25] and SD3 [9] base models, respectively.

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models have achieved
remarkable success in image generation, thereby driving
the development of stylized image generation technologies.
Recent studies introduce style information by empirically
replacing specific features in attention blocks with style features. However, the relationship between features and style
remains unclear. In this paper, we systematically analyze
the relationship between features in attention blocks and
style. By quantifying the distribution discrepancy induced
by style variations using the Wasserstein distance, we find
that features in self-attention blocks exhibit high sensitivity to style compared to features in cross-attention blocks.
Our analysis provides valuable insights into the contribu-

tion of different features to style. Based on our findings, we
propose a novel Wasserstein Style Distribution Transform
(WSDT) method, which generates stylized images by transforming the distribution of style-sensitive features to align
with that of style features. WSDT applies channel adaptive
distribution transform to ensure that information not related
to the style is not introduced. Our approach is simple yet efficient, optimization-free, and can be seamlessly integrated
into attention-based text-to-image diffusion models. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in stylized image generation tasks.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding authors.

Text-to-image diffusion models [2, 23, 25, 29, 30, 34] have
made significant progress in the field of image generation,
giving rise to numerous applications, such as stylized image

17496

