This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Few-Shot Temporal Action Segmentation
Zijia Lu
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

lu.zij@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Procedural videos are critical for learning new tasks.
Temporal action segmentation (TAS), which classifies the
action in every video frame, has become essential for understanding procedural videos. Existing TAS models, however, learn a fixed-set of tasks at training and unable to
adapt to novel tasks at test time. Thus, we introduce
the new problem of Multi-Modal Few-shot Temporal Action Segmentation (MMF-TAS) to learn open-set models
that can generalize to novel procedural tasks with minimal visual/textual examples. We propose the first MMFTAS framework, by designing a Prototype Graph Network
(PGNet). In PGNet, a Prototype Building Block summarizes action information from support videos of the novel
tasks via an Action Relation Graph, and encodes this information into action prototypes via a Dynamic Graph Transformer. Next, a Matching Block compares action prototypes
with query videos to infer framewise action labels. To exploit the advantages of both visual and textual modalities,
we compute separate action prototypes for each modality
and combine the two modalities through prediction fusion
to avoid overfitting on one modality. By extensive experiments on procedural datasets, we show our method successfully adapts to novel tasks during inference and significantly outperforms baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ZijiaLewisLu/ICCV2025-MMF-TAS.

visual PGNet

textual PGNet

action labels

action labels

Matching Block

Matching Block

Multi-Stage Refinement

Multi-Stage Refinement

Prediction Fusion

Prediction Fusion

action prototypes

action prototypes

Prototype Building Block

Prototype Building Block

Dynamic Graph Transformer

Dynamic Graph Transformer

Action Relation Graph

Action Relation Graph

Video Encoder

Text Encoder
add butter,
pour coffee,
…

support videos

query video

action names

Figure 1. Our MMF-TAS framework. We propose a Prototype Graph
Network (PGNet) that segments query videos of novel tasks by summarizing action information from support videos and matching it with query
videos. We learn separate visual and textual PGNets. In each PGNet, Prototype Building Block computes action prototypes from the corresponding
modality to summarize action information. Matching Block compares action prototypes with query videos to predict action labels and combine
modalities via prediction fusion.

1. Introduction

number of procedural tasks and the high cost of annotating
long videos, we need an open-set approach that can adapt to
novel tasks using a few annotated videos.

Procedural videos have become increasingly important for
learning new skills (e.g., parsing instructional videos) and
understanding users’ goal-oriented activities (e.g., inferring
executed steps of a task). As a result, temporal action segmentation (TAS), which segments long procedural videos
into non-overlapping action/step segments, has gained increasing attention [3, 36, 40, 53, 54, 58], with various applications, such as content retrieval and AI task assistants
[4, 26, 27, 53, 73, 76].
Current TAS methods for procedural videos face a critical limitation: models are learned for a closed set of procedural tasks with hundreds of training videos, and cannot adapt to novel tasks without retraining. Given the vast

Multi-Modal Few-shot Temporal Action Segmentation
(MMF-TAS). Inspired by humans’ ability to learn new
tasks from a few examples, we study the new problem of
MMF-TAS. In this setting, models receive a few support
videos of novel tasks at test time and leverage the information of both visual (action demonstration) and textual
(action names) modalities to segment query videos. Standard few-shot setting assumes having both support videos
and their framewise labels, which can be limiting given the
long durations of procedural videos. On the other hand, the
Multi-Modal Few-shot setting, which we study in the paper,
allows handling more general and realistic settings, such as
when only action classes are known but support videos are

14106

