This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ImageGem: In-the-wild Generative Image Interaction Dataset for Generative
Model Personalization
Yuanhe Guo1→ , Linxi Xie1→ , Zhuoran Chen1 , Kangrui Yu1 ,
Ryan Po2 , Guandao Yang2 , Gordon Wetztein2 , Hongyi Wen1†
1
NYU 2 Stanford
https://maps-research.github.io/imagegem-iccv2025/

Figure 1. Our proposed ImageGem dataset and its applications. The left side illustrates image and generative model retrieval. On the right,
we demonstrate a novel task of generative model personalization through LoRA weights-to-weights (W2W) space construction.

Abstract

1. Introduction
A thousand Hamlets in a thousand people’s eyes

We introduce ImageGem, a dataset for studying generative
models that understand fine-grained individual preferences.
We posit that a key challenge hindering the development of
such a generative model is the lack of in-the-wild and finegrained user preference annotations. Our dataset features
real-world interaction data from 57K users, who collectively have built 242K customized LoRAs, written 3M text
prompts, and created 5M generated images. With user preference annotations from our dataset, we were able to train
better preference alignment models. In addition, leveraging
individual user preference, we investigated the performance
of retrieval models and a vision-language model on personalized image retrieval and generative model recommendation. Finally, we propose an end-to-end framework for editing customized diffusion models in a latent weight space to
align with individual user preferences. Our results demonstrate that the ImageGem dataset enables, for the first time,
a new paradigm for generative model personalization.

*

Equal contribution.

†

Recent advances in text-to-image models [28] have empowered users to generate a portrait of Hamlet, Shakespeare’s famous character, from merely a short and underspecified description like “A portrait of Hamlet”. However,
each user has their imagination about the portrait of Prince
Hamlet. Can generative models capture and produce the
version that aligns with individual preference?

Correspondence.

Current progress toward building personalized textconditioned generative models is mainly driven by data
availability. For example, with the presence of datasets that
contain different person or object identities, prior works are
able to customize diffusion model to generate these userspecified concepts. [26, 29, 30, 36]. These works, however,
do not address under-specified inputs that require reasoning
about individual preference, such as generating an image
of “my favorite dog.” Similarly, enabled by datasets with
user preference annotations [19, 21, 34, 37], many works
are able to create text-to-images models that align with hu-

19577

