This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning on the Go: A Meta-learning Object Navigation Model
Xiaorong Qin1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 , Sixian Zhang1,2 , Xinyao Yu1,2 , Xinmiao Zhang2 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2,3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing, 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
3

Institute of Intelligent Computing Technology, Suzhou, CAS

{xiaorong.qin, xinhang.song, sixian.zhang, xinyao.yu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

flexibility and adaptability when faced with this challenge,
as their navigation models tend to specialize in training
environments and remain fixed at the test stage, resulting
in a lack of degrees of freedom that can be relearned to
adapt to changes under uncertainty [4, 24]. The limitation
of poor adaptability is evident in both mainstream modular approaches [7, 27, 42, 62, 68, 73] and end-to-end techniques [12, 14, 22, 31, 38, 43, 44, 54, 65, 74] for navigation.
Unlike these methods, human learners exhibit the ability to
flexibly adapt to dynamic environments—a capability that
is crucial for developing visually intelligent agents [31, 54].
Currently, several zero-shot approaches [6, 30, 64, 70, 71]
based on the generalization capability of large language
models (LLMs). However, these methods highly depend
on pre-trained knowledge bases, have complex input conditions, and lack the flexibility of human adaptability. To better simulate humans’ dynamic adaptability, some research
in visual recognition and detection tasks has been investigated from the perspective of meta-learning [15, 20, 21].
However, there is still a lack of systematic research on navigation, which is a more complex and real-time task.

Object navigation tasks require an agent to locate a
target object using visual observations in unseen environments, where unfamiliar layouts and novel object appearances can hinder navigation. Most existing methods
lack the adaptability needed to handle these uncertainties, as their navigation models remain fixed during testing. In this paper, we address this challenge by examining
object-conditioned trajectory distribution shifts in navigation caused by changes in environmental dynamics. We propose learning a central conditional distribution as a prior
that approximates the specific distributions of diverse environments. To retain environment-specific information during navigation, we allow each environment-specific distribution to approximate this central distribution rather than
relying on it directly. To implement this, we introduce a
meta-learning mechanism that integrates with traditional
navigation methods, offering tailored solutions for various
types of navigation approaches. Our approach, Learning
on the Go (LOG), enables agents to learn on the go, allowing for flexible, adaptive, real-time learning during navigation. Our theoretical analysis highlights the benefits of
learning a central distribution for effective generalization
across environments, and empirical results confirm the proposed method’s effectiveness, demonstrating superior performance compared to existing approaches.

Towards better dynamic adaptability, we propose a pluggable meta-learning mechanism that enhances the generalization capabilities of traditional navigation models by
enabling efficient ”learning on the go.” Our approach focuses on analyzing object-conditioned trajectory distribution shifts caused by environmental changes, which is illustrated in Fig. 1. As the environments vary, the trajectories
for locating the sink also appear different. To achieve effective generalization in new environments, a model must go
beyond simply replicating training distributions and instead
be capable of generalizing to related but distinct distributions. Ideally, prior learning provides a strong foundation
for rapid adaptation, ensuring effective transfer to new environments. However, successful transfer of prior knowledge to unknown distributions requires certain assumptions
to hold true [2, 3, 39]. In our scenario, the observation trajectories of agents across different environments may appear significantly distinct, yet they exhibit common patterns

1. Introduction
The object navigation problem [11, 12, 61, 65] requires
an agent to navigate towards an instance of an object category (e.g., a sink) using first-person visual observations.
A fundamental challenge in navigation lies in the ability
to generalize to unseen environments, which often introduce system uncertainties such as unfamiliar layouts and
objects with novel appearances. These uncertainties make
it difficult to navigate effectively to the target during test.
However, most current navigation methods exhibit limited

8939

