This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Neural Scene Representation from iToF Imaging
Wenjie Chang1 , Hanzhi Chang1 , Yueyi Zhang3 , Wenfei Yang1,2,† , Tianzhu Zhang1,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratoray of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
3
Miromind
changwj@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Indirect Time-of-Flight (iToF) cameras are popular for 3D
perception because they are cost-effective and easy to deploy. They emit modulated infrared signals to illuminate
the scene and process the received signals to generate amplitude and phase images. The depth is calculated from the
phase using the modulation frequency. However, the obtained depth often suffers from noise caused by multi-path
interference, low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and depth
wrapping. Building on recent advancements in neural scene
representations, which have shown great potential in 3D
modeling from multi-view RGB images, we propose leveraging this approach to reconstruct 3D representations from
noisy iToF data. Our method utilizes the multi-view consistency of amplitude and phase maps, fusing information
from all input views to generate an accurate scene representation. Considering the impact of infrared illumination,
we propose a new rendering scheme for amplitude maps
based on signed distance function (SDF) and introduce a
neural lighting function to model the appearance variations
caused by active illumination. We also incorporate a phaseguided sampling strategy and a wrapping-aware phase-todepth loss to utilize raw phase information and mitigate
depth wrapping. Additionally, we add a noise-weight loss
to prevent excessive smoothing information across noisy
multi-view measurements. Experiments conducted on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art techniques.

Amplitude

Ours

Phase

TőRF

(c) Noisy iToF Data

(d) Rendered Depth

(a) MPI Effects
!"
#. !"
Estimated Phase Shift: 1. "#

(b) Wrapped Estimation

Ours

TőRF

(e) Surface Reconstruction

Figure 1. iToF cameras are affected by various interferences (a)(b), resulting in noisy amplitude and phase information (c). We
aim to utilize neural scene representation techniques to obtain accurate depth information (d) from multi-view iToF imaging data
and achieve promising surface reconstruction (e).

1. Introduction

time delay between emitted and received signals. ToF imaging can be broadly classified into direct-ToF (dToF) and
indirect-ToF (iToF) systems. While dToF systems offer precise depth measurements using components like single photon avalanche diodes (SPADs), they are often constrained
by high hardware costs and low spatial resolution [37]. In
contrast, iToF imaging emits amplitude-modulated infrared
signals and calculates the phase and amplitude information,
as shown in Fig. 1(c). The phase information denotes the
phase difference between the emitted signals and returned
signals [16], which is then transformed into depth measurements. This approach offers a more cost-effective solution
and provides higher spatial resolution, making it particularly attractive for consumer applications [4].
Despite these advantages, iToF imaging faces significant
challenges, such as multi-path interference, low signal-tonoise ratio (SNR), and depth wrapping [27]. As shown in

Time-of-Flight (ToF) imaging has emerged as a foundational technology in depth sensing, widely adopted across
diverse fields such as autonomous driving [2, 28, 35], augmented reality [12, 25], and robotics [19, 36], owing to its
capability to capture depth information by measuring the
† Corresponding Author

27937

