This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperEvent: Cross-Modal Learning of Event-based Keypoint Detection for SLAM
Yannick Burkhardt1,2,3

Simon Schaefer1,2,3

Stefan Leutenegger1,2,3

Abstract
Event-based keypoint detection and matching holds significant potential, enabling the integration of event sensors
into highly optimized Visual SLAM systems developed for
frame cameras over decades of research. Unfortunately, existing approaches struggle with the motion-dependent appearance of keypoints and the complex noise prevalent in
event streams, resulting in severely limited feature matching
capabilities and poor performance on downstream tasks.
To mitigate this problem, we propose SuperEvent, a datadriven approach to predict stable keypoints with expressive descriptors. Due to the absence of event datasets with
ground truth keypoint labels, we leverage existing framebased keypoint detectors on readily available event-aligned
and synchronized gray-scale frames for self-supervision:
we generate temporally sparse keypoint pseudo-labels considering that events are a product of both scene appearance
and camera motion. Combined with our novel, informationrich event representation, we enable SuperEvent to effectively learn robust keypoint detection and description in
event streams. Finally, we demonstrate the usefulness of
SuperEvent by its integration into a modern sparse keypoint
and descriptor-based SLAM framework originally developed for traditional cameras, surpassing the state-of-theart in event-based SLAM by a wide margin. Source code is
available at ethz-mrl.github.io/SuperEvent.

Figure 1. Detections on the sequence rec1499023756 of the
DDD20 [31] dataset (not used for training). Top: Pseudolabels from SuperPoint [15] and SuperGlue [59] on the gray-scale
frames. Bottom: Matched keypoints from SuperEvent in the event
stream at the corresponding time stamps.

in most hardware and software being highly optimized
for frame processing. A common approach for tasks like
Structure-from-Motion, Visual Odometry (VO), Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), or Place Recognition is to detect and match keypoints across frames to gain a
geometric scene understanding [7, 40]. Consequently, a robust keypoint detector and descriptor working on the event
stream would unlock the potential of integrating event cameras into extensive and highly-developed algorithms developed initially for frame-based vision.
While several authors already proposed event-based approaches to detect keypoints [9, 10, 19, 32, 33, 47], their
matching abilities still show limitations. Most employ
nearest-neighbor matching in pixel space, which restricts
their usability to visually simple scenes. In an attempt to
overcome this issue, more recent approaches learn descriptors in a data-driven fashion. To generate ground truth labels – inspired by frame-based methods [15] – they warp
their event representations with a random homography and
penalize non-consistent model predictions. This approach
forces the models to learn descriptors to match visually similar keypoints. However, it fundamentally ignores the true

1. Introduction
Event cameras offer exciting advantages over their framebased counterparts, such as an increased temporal resolution, little motion blur, and a high dynamic range. These
properties promise to enhance robustness for robot estimation and perception tasks under fast motion and uncontrollable lighting conditions. However, processing the sparse
and asynchronous output of event cameras requires fundamentally different algorithms than traditional frames. The
decades-long research edge in frame-based vision resulted
1 Technical University of Munich,

{yannick.burkhardt, simon.k.schaefer }@tum.de
2 ETH Zürich, lestefan@ethz.ch
3 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

8918

