This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Image Restoration Transformer via
Adaptive Translation Equivariance

1

JiaKui Hu1,2,3 , Zhengjian Yao1,2,3 , Lujia Jin4 , Hangzhou He1,2,3 , Yanye Lu1,2,3 *
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center, Peking University
2
Biomedical Engineering Department, College of Future Technology, Peking University
3
National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
4
China Mobile Research Institute
jkhu29@stu.pku.edu.cn, yanye.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

TEA(T (x))

≠

≠

=

error

WA(T (x))

w TE
w/o TE

e
in

SA(T (x))

a
Tr

Translation equivariance is a fundamental inductive bias
in image restoration, ensuring that translated inputs produce translated outputs. Attention mechanisms in modern
restoration transformers undermine this property, adversely
impacting both training convergence and generalization. To
alleviate this issue, we propose two key strategies for incorporating translation equivariance: slide indexing and
component stacking. Slide indexing maintains operator responses at fixed positions, with sliding window attention
being a notable example, while component stacking enables the arrangement of translation-equivariant operators
in parallel or sequentially, thereby building complex architectures while preserving translation equivariance. However, these strategies still create a dilemma in model design
between the high computational cost of self-attention and
the fixed receptive field associated with sliding window attention. To address this, we develop an adaptive sliding
indexing mechanism to efficiently select key-value pairs for
each query, which are then concatenated in parallel with
globally aggregated key-value pairs. The designed network,
called the Translation Equivariance Adaptive Transformer
(TEAFormer), is assessed across a variety of image restoration tasks. The results highlight its superiority in terms of
effectiveness, training convergence, and generalization.

mations of the input. This fidelity property is termed translation equivariance, which is one of the inherent inductive
biases in image restoration.

error

r

rro
(1) Convergence
Tes
t

T (TEA(x))

e rr

or

T (SA(x))

T (WA(x))

Attentions

TE

Performance
PSNR↑ / SSIM↑

NTK [25]
Condition ↓

SRGA [33]
Value ↓

SA
WA

✘
✘

28.21 / 0.8435
27.45 / 0.8254

11140.44
1746.49

4.075
3.655

TEA (Ours)

✔

28.67 / 0.8489

236.78

3.275

(2) Generalization

Figure 1. T (·) means the translation function. ”SA” and ”WA” are
commonly used for self-attention and window attention, respectively, but disrupt translation equivariance (TE) due to position encoding and feature shifting. ”TEA” is our proposed translation
equivariance adaptive attention, which satisfies TE. TE promotes
faster convergence and better generalization.
Complexity
O(N 2 )
O(N )
O(N )

1. Introduction

Table 1. In 4× image super-resolution, we study performance,
NTK [8] convergence speed, SRGA [33] generalization, and computation complexities. We replace WA in SwinIR with SA and
TEA for testing. TEA shows fast convergence, better generalization, and linear complexity. The results are tested on Urban100.

In restoration networks [32, 62, 68, 71] based on convolution neural networks (CNNs), the paradigm of sliding information extraction inherent to convolutions [18] imparted
a natural translation equivariance (TE) 1 property in restoration networks. However, as shown in Figure 1 and Table 1,

Image restoration aims to reconstruct high-quality (HQ) images from their low-quality (LQ) counterparts, which are
often affected by degradations resulting from the imaging
system or environment. As a constituent of the imaging
system, image restoration methods should satisfy the following fidelity property: the restoration results for the target
region should remain equivariant under geometric transfor* Corresponding author.

16047

1 Translation equivariance and translation invariance are concepts that

are frequently misconstrued. Our paper is dedicated to the analysis of
equivariance. We have provided a clear delimitation and discussion concerning these concepts in the supplementary material.

