This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GEOPARD: Geometric Pretraining for Articulation Prediction in 3D Shapes
Pradyumn Goyal1 Dmitry Petrov1 Sheldon Andrews2 Yizhak Ben-Shabat3
Hsueh-Ti Derek Liu3 Evangelos Kalogerakis1,4
1

UMass Amherst

Self-supervised pretraining

2

École de technologie supérieure

Finetuning

Inference
Part

3

Roblox

4

TU Crete

Generalization across diverse geometries
motion type

“revolute”
GEOPARD

Shape

articulation
parameters

Figure 1. GEOPARD allows to predict articulation parameters for diverse object categories and complex kinematic hierarchies. Our
method uses geometrically valid articulations as a form of self-supervision to pretrain our model, followed by fine-tuning on articulated
shape datasets with ground truth annotations, resulting in precise articulation inference.

Abstract

tions, such as motion types, motion axes, centers of rotation for revolute motions, and so on. For example, the most
popular benchmark, PartNet-Mobility [41], includes only
a few thousand shapes annotated with articulation parameters. This restricts the generalizability of existing methods
to novel object categories and kinematic hierarchies. Another challenge in articulation understanding is to develop
architectures able to accommodate diverse kinematic hierarchies and object categories.

We present GEOPARD1 , a transformer-based architecture
for predicting articulation from a single static snapshot of a
3D shape. The key idea of our method is a pretraining strategy that allows our transformer to learn plausible candidate
articulations for 3D shapes based on a geometric-driven
search without manual articulation annotation. The search
automatically discovers physically valid part motions that
do not cause detachments or collisions with other shape
parts. Our experiments indicate that this geometric pretraining strategy, along with carefully designed choices in
our transformer architecture, yields state-of-the-art results
in articulation inference in the PartNet-Mobility dataset.

We present GEOPARD, a transformer architecture that
is able to predict articulation parameters for input shape
parts in a diverse set of object categories and complex kinematic hierarchies. Our architecture incorporates the idea
of learnable queries, inspired by set transformers [15] and
modern object detection architectures [2] to learn compact,
articulation-aware representations for parts.

1. Introduction

In addition, a key idea of our method is to incorporate
a pre-training strategy without manual articulation supervision for label-efficient training of our model. Our pretraining strategy computes a set of candidate articulations based
on geometric criteria leading to physically valid articulations without causing collision or detachment of parts from
the rest of the shape. Using this geometric form of selfsupervision, we pretrain our model, followed by fine-tuning
on articulated shape dataset with ground truth annotations
to enable precise articulation inference. Such pretraining is
not applicable to several existing architectures (e.g. NAP

Articulated objects are pervasive in the physical
world—from pieces of furniture and mechanical assemblies
to tools and robotic systems. Understanding articulation
is critical for building interactive virtual environments
and “digital twins” of real-world objects. As a result,
substantial research has been stimulated in articulation
understanding and generation for 3D objects [23].
However, a major bottleneck hindering progress is the
scarcity of training data with detailed articulation annota1 Project page: https://prady1272.github.io/GEOPARD/

9332

