This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReferDINO: Referring Video Object Segmentation with Visual Grounding
Foundations
Tianming Liang1 Kun-Yu Lin1 Chaolei Tan1 Jianguo Zhang2 Wei-Shi Zheng1 Jian-Fang Hu1 *
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Southern University of Science and Technology
liangtm@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Project page: https://isee-laboratory.github.io/ReferDINO
“The lamb with horns in white and brown.”

ReferDINO

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) aims to segment target objects throughout a video based on a text description. This is challenging as it involves deep visionlanguage understanding, pixel-level dense prediction and
spatiotemporal reasoning. Despite notable progress in recent years, existing methods still exhibit a noticeable gap
when considering all these aspects. In this work, we
propose ReferDINO, a strong RVOS model that inherits
region-level vision-language alignment from foundational
visual grounding models, and is further endowed with pixellevel dense perception and cross-modal spatiotemporal reasoning. In detail, ReferDINO integrates two key components: 1) a grounding-guided deformable mask decoder
that utilizes location prediction to progressively guide mask
prediction through differentiable deformation mechanisms;
2) an object-consistent temporal enhancer that injects pretrained time-varying text features into inter-frame interaction to capture object-aware dynamic changes. Moreover, a
confidence-aware query pruning strategy is designed to accelerate object decoding without compromising model performance. Extensive experimental results on five benchmarks demonstrate that our ReferDINO significantly outperforms previous methods (e.g., +3.9% \protect \mathcal  {J}\&\mathcal {F} on RefYouTube-VOS) with real-time inference speed (51 FPS).

SOTA

Abstract

(a) SOTA vs. ReferDINO

Time

ReferDINO

G-DINO

“The Cat swinging its tail.”

(b) GroundingDINO vs. ReferDINO

Time

Figure 1. (a) The SOTA method [23] in RVOS struggles to distinguish similar objects properly based on compositional attribute
descriptions (e.g., shapes + colors), while our ReferDINO overcomes this limitation. (b) GroundingDINO [22] fails to identify
the target cat based on the motion reference “swinging its tail”,
while our ReferDINO corrects the prediction through cross-modal
spatiotemporal reasoning and generates precise object masks.

1. Introduction

a strong vision-language capability to understand complicated descriptions and associate visual objects with text.
Despite significant progress in recent years, existing
RVOS models [3, 9, 23, 25, 40, 45] still suffer from many
common problems. For example, they often struggle to handle the queries involving complex appearance, relative locations and attributes, as shown in Figure 1 (a). These problems are mainly caused by the insufficient vision-language
capabilities of current models, which, in turn, result from
the limited scale and diversity of available RVOS data, as
densely annotating video-text data is extremely expensive.
The recent progress in visual grounding field [5, 19,
22] offers unique potential to address this data limita-

Referring Video Object Segmentation (RVOS) [3, 40] aims
to segment the target object in a video, referred by a given
text description. This emerging task is potentially benefitial for many interactive video applications, and has therefore attracted great attention in the computer vision community. Compared to the unimodal video segmentation
tasks [26, 41], RVOS is more challenging since it requires
* Corresponding author.

20009

