This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Back on Track: Bundle Adjustment for Dynamic Scene Reconstruction
Weirong Chen1,2 Ganlin Zhang1,2 Felix Wimbauer1,2 Rui Wang4 Nikita Araslanov1,2
Andrea Vedaldi3
Daniel Cremers1,2
1

TU Munich

2

Munich Center for Machine Learning

3

University of Oxford

4

Microsoft

Abstract
Traditional SLAM systems, which rely on bundle adjustment,
struggle with the highly dynamic scenes commonly found in
casual videos. Such videos entangle the motion of dynamic
elements, undermining the assumption of static environments
required by traditional systems. Existing techniques either
filter out dynamic elements or model their motion independently. However, the former often results in incomplete reconstructions, while the latter can lead to inconsistent motion
estimates. Taking a novel approach, this work leverages a
3D point tracker to separate camera-induced motion from
the observed motion of dynamic objects. By considering
only the camera-induced component, bundle adjustment can
operate reliably on all scene elements. We further ensure
depth consistency across video frames with lightweight postprocessing based on scale maps. Our framework combines
the core of traditional SLAM—bundle adjustment—with a
robust learning-based 3D tracker. Integrating motion decomposition, bundle adjustment, and depth refinement, our
unified framework, BA-Track, accurately tracks camera motion and produces temporally coherent and scale-consistent
dense reconstructions, accommodating both static and dynamic elements. Our experiments on challenging datasets
reveal significant improvements in camera pose estimation
and 3D reconstruction accuracy.

BA-Track
Motion Decoupling

Bundle Adjustment

Global Refinement

Figure 1. Framework preview. Given a casual input video, BATrack uses a 3D tracker to separate camera-induced motion from
the total observed motion, enabling bundle adjustment to process
both static and dynamic points. Using the aligned sparse point
tracks from bundle adjustment, we refine the dense depth maps,
producing a globally consistent dynamic scene reconstruction.

solving these ambiguities by analytical constraints or statistical outlier filtering alone is infeasible due to the complexity
and diversity of real-world object motion. This challenge motivates a hybrid approach that combines traditional optimization with deep priors. Existing hybrid methods often address
dynamic elements by detecting and removing them from
optimization, leading to incomplete reconstructions or missing details associated with moving objects [2, 55]. Another
approach is to rely on geometric cues, such as monocular
depth models for per-frame reconstruction, but this requires
additional optimization to achieve a globally aligned 3D reconstruction [23]. This proves challenging in practice due to
the inconsistency between estimated camera pose and depth
priors across different frames, which can result in misaligned

1. Introduction
With the increasing prevalence of casual videos, reconstructing scenes containing moving objects has become essential
for applications like augmented reality and robotics. Traditional methods for structure-from-motion (SfM) [1] and
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [11] excel
at recovering camera poses and scene geometry. However,
they leverage the epipolar constraint and thus apply only to
static environments. Dynamic scenes with moving objects
introduce ambiguities that violate the epipolar constraint. ReProject page: wrchen530.github.io/projects/batrack

4951

