This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLaVA-3D: A Simple yet Effective Pathway to Empowering
LMMs with 3D Capabilities
Chenming Zhu1,2

Tai Wang2,†

Wenwei Zhang2

1

Jiangmiao Pang2

Xihui Liu1,†

2

The University of Hong Kong
Shanghai AI Laboratory
https://zcmax.github.io/projects/LLaVA-3D
†
corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of LLaVA-3D. The left block (b) shows that our LLaVA-3D achieves state-of-the-art performance across various 3D
scene understanding benchmarks. Notably, LLaVA-3D maintains the comparable performance on 2D multimodal benchmarks compared
to LLaVA-Video [50]. The middle block (c) demonstrates that LLaVA-3D leverages 3D patches to endow the 2D LMMs with 3D spatial
awareness, enabling it to perform various 3D vision-and-language tasks in the physical world. The right block (d) and (e) highlight the
significantly faster convergence and inference speeds of LLaVA-3D compared to existing 3D LMMs.

Abstract

Leveraging the strong 2D visual understanding priors from
LLaVA, our LLaVA-3D efficiently adapts LLaVA for 3D scene
understanding without compromising 2D understanding capabilities. To achieve this, we utilize the 3D position embeddings to enhance the 2D CLIP Patches with 3D spatial context information and construct 3D patches. By integrating
the 3D position embeddings into 2D LMMs and employing
joint 2D and 3D vision-language instruction tuning, we establish a unified architecture for both 2D visual understanding and 3D scene understanding. In contrast to previous 3D

Recent advancements in Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs) have greatly enhanced their proficiency in 2D visual
understanding tasks, enabling them to effectively process
and understand images and videos. However, the development of LMMs with 3D scene understanding capabilities has
been hindered by the lack of large-scale 3D vision-language
datasets and powerful 3D encoders. In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective framework called LLaVA-3D.

4295

