This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video2BEV: Transforming Drone Videos to BEVs
for Video-based Geo-localization
Hao Ju1
1

Shaofei Huang1

Si Liu2

Zhedong Zheng1†

Faculty of Science and Technology and Institute of Collaborative Innovation, University of Macau
2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University

{yc47429,zhedongzheng}@um.edu.mo, shaofeihuang.ai@gmail.com, liusi@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Matched
Missed

Existing approaches to drone visual geo-localization predominantly adopt the image-based setting, where a single
drone-view snapshot is matched with images from other
platforms. Such task formulation, however, underutilizes
the inherent video output of the drone and is sensitive
to occlusions and viewpoint disparity. To address these
limitations, we formulate a new video-based drone geolocalization task and propose the Video2BEV paradigm.
This paradigm transforms the video into a Bird’s Eye View
(BEV), simplifying the subsequent inter-platform matching process. In particular, we employ Gaussian Splatting to reconstruct a 3D scene and obtain the BEV projection. Different from the existing transform methods,
e.g., polar transform, our BEVs preserve more fine-grained
details without significant distortion. To facilitate the
discriminative intra-platform representation learning, our
Video2BEV paradigm also incorporates a diffusion-based
module for generating hard negative samples. To validate our approach, we introduce UniV, a new videobased geo-localization dataset that extends the image-based
University-1652 dataset. UniV features flight paths at 30◦
and 45◦ elevation angles with increased frame rates of
up to 10 frames per second (FPS). Extensive experiments
on the UniV dataset show that our Video2BEV paradigm
achieves competitive recall rates and outperforms conventional video-based methods. Compared to other competitive methods, our proposed approach exhibits robustness at
lower elevations with more occlusions. The code is available at: https://github.com/HaoDot/Video2BEV-Open.

(occluded)

Image query

Missed

Gallery

…

Matched i-m th (unoccluded)

…

i th (occluded)

Video query

i+m th (unoccluded)

Matched
Missed

Missed
(occluded)

Image query

Gallery

…

Matched i-m th (unoccluded)

…

i th (occluded)

Video query

i+m th (unoccluded)

Figure 1. Typical failure cases for image-based drone geolocalization. For image queries (left), the core areas in groundtruth are occluded by another building, largely compromising the
spatial matching. In contrast, video queries (right) usually contain unoccluded frames in a circling flight, and thus could reflect a
more comprehensive view of the target location.

1. Introduction

is typically supported by off-line GNSS metadata [74], enabling drones to self-localize even in GNSS-denied environments, such as urban canyons or rural areas. The prevailing
approach follows an image-based matching paradigm [6,
8, 31, 58, 59, 74], where a single drone-captured snapshot
serves as the query to retrieve the corresponding location
from the satellite-viewed candidate pool. However, despite
the advancements in image-based paradigms, two critical
limitations persist. Both are due to drone flight height regulations [2, 19, 52]. (1) Drones typically operate at lower
altitudes in cluttered environments, resulting in significant
occlusions in the captured images from buildings, trees,
and other foreground objects. Such occlusion can lead to
a substantial loss or degradation of visual information in
the drone image captured from a single viewpoint, making
it difficult to establish accurate correspondences with satellite imagery. As shown in Fig. 1 (left), the core areas in
the query are entirely obstructed by surrounding buildings.
(2) Similarly, due to height limitation, drones typically capture images at oblique angles, while satellite images are predominantly acquired from a top-down perspective. The significant viewpoint disparity between the drone and satellite
perspectives further increases the difficulty of matching.

Drone visual geo-localization aims to retrieve images of the
same location from another platform, such as satellite, using visual information captured by the drone. This process
† Corresponding author.

27073

