This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Voyaging into Perpetual Dynamic Scenes from a Single View
Fengrui Tian

Tianjiao Ding Jinqi Luo Hancheng Min
University of Pennsylvania

René Vidal

{tianfr,tjding,jinqiluo,hanchmin,vidalr}@upenn.edu

Voyaging into Dynamic Scenes with Fly-through Camera Trajectories
Input Image

…

…

Rotate Left

Move Back

Move Back

Move Back

Time Start

End

Move Back

Rotate Left

Move Back

Rotate Left

Rotate Right

Time Start

End

Input Video

+

Controllable Dynamic Scene Generation with Scene Prompts

Video + Scene Prompt
A happy man
is walking
along a road
with [].

[Pink clouds]

[River]

[Village]

[Sea]

[flowers]

[cliff]

Figure 1. DynamicVoyager generates 4D point clouds of perpetual dynamic scenes by our dynamic scene outpainting process. Given a
fixed viewpoint video (or an image with a motion prompt) with dynamic scene prompts and fly-through camera trajectories, DynamicVoyager can generate dynamic scenes along the trajectories (Top) and control scene generation contents (Bottom).

Abstract

More specifically, we first map the single-view video input to
a dynamic point cloud using the estimated video depths. We
then render a partial video of the point cloud from a novel
view and outpaint the missing regions using ray information
(e.g., the distance from a ray to the point cloud) to generate
3D consistent motions. Next, we use the outpainted video
to update the point cloud, which is used for outpainting the
scene from future novel views. Moreover, we can control
the generated content with the input text prompt. Experiments show that our model can generate perpetual scenes
with consistent motions along fly-through cameras. Project
page: https:// tianfr.github.io/ DynamicVoyager.

The problem of generating a perpetual dynamic scene from
a single view is an important problem with widespread applications in augmented and virtual reality, and robotics.
However, since dynamic scenes regularly change over time,
a key challenge is to ensure that different generated views
be consistent with the underlying 3D motions. Prior work
learns such consistency by training on multiple views, but
the generated scene regions often interpolate between training views and fail to generate perpetual views. To address
this issue, we propose DynamicVoyager, which reformulates
dynamic scene generation as a scene outpainting problem with new dynamic content. As 2D outpainting models
struggle at generating 3D consistent motions from a single
2D view, we enrich 2D pixels with information from their
3D rays that facilitates learning of 3D motion consistency.

1. Introduction
Perpetual scene generation [27, 30, 58] aims to create a
virtual 3D scene as the camera moves along arbitrary tra-

7698

