This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConsNoTrainLoRA: Data-driven Weight Initialization of Low-rank Adapters
using Constraints
Debasmit Das * Hyoungwoo Park * Munawar Hayat Seokeon Choi
Qualcomm AI Research †

Sungrack Yun

Fatih Porikli

Abstract
Foundation models are pre-trained on large-scale
datasets and subsequently fine-tuned on small-scale
datasets using parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) techniques like low-rank adapters (LoRA). In most previous
works, LoRA weight matrices are randomly initialized with
a fixed rank across all attachment points. In this paper, we
improve convergence and final performance of LoRA finetuning, using our proposed data-driven weight initialization method, ConsNoTrainLoRA (CNTLoRA). We express
LoRA initialization as a domain shift problem where we
use multiple constraints relating the pre-training and finetuning activations. By reformulating these constraints, we
obtain a closed-form estimate of LoRA weights that depends on pre-training weights and fine-tuning activation
vectors and hence requires no training during initialization. This weight estimate is decomposed to initialize the
up and down matrices with proposed flexibility of variable
ranks. With the proposed initialization method, we finetune on downstream tasks such as image generation, image classification and image understanding. Both quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that CNTLoRA
outperforms standard and data-driven weight initialization
methods. Extensive analyses and ablations further elucidate the design choices of our framework, providing an optimal recipe for faster convergence and enhanced performance.

Figure 1. The DINO score plot of different initialization methods
with increasing steps of training on the Dreambooth [36] dataset.

require much more computational complexity and memory.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods provide
a promising solution e.g. Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
[18] only adds a trainable adapter with fewer parameters
while keeping the pre-trained model frozen. To expedite the
convergence of PEFT models, recent works [9, 28, 32, 45]
explore adapter initialization from model weights or data
to encapsulate pre-trained knowledge or task information.
Among the adapter initialization methods, PiSSA [28] and
OLoRA [9] are the most popular. PiSSA uses SVD decomposition of pre-trained matrices to initialize LoRA weights,
while OLoRA [9] uses QR decomposition. Neither method
uses fine-tuning data for initialization. EVA [32] addresses
this by minimizing the reconstruction error of LoRA layer
input activations and initializing down matrices from SVD
of input activations. However, up matrices are initialized with zeros, making it difficult to balance pre-training
knowledge with fine-tuning data. To encapsulate both previous and novel knowledge, CORDA [45] uses low-rank
SVD on the interaction between LoRA weight matrices and
the covariance of input activations to initialize up and down
matrices. While effective for language tasks, its application
to visual tasks remains untested, and the selection of interaction is rather unclear. This paper presents a systematic,
constraint-based framework for LoRA weight initialization,
which promotes faster convergence, improves performance,

1. Introduction
Foundation models (FMs) [6] generally undergo an initial phase of large-scale pre-training, followed by taskspecific fine-tuning to address domain shift [27] between
pre-training and task-specific data. This two-step approach
has led to advances across multiple applications in natural
language processing [1, 39, 40], computer vision [11, 31]
and others [7, 8]. However, as the size scales up vastly (or
significantly), fine-tuning all parameters of the FM would
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

498

