This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViT-Split: Unleashing the Power of Vision Foundation Models via
Efficient Splitting Heads
Yifan Li1 *, Xin Li2 , Tianqin Li2,3 , Wenbin He2 , Yu Kong1 , Liu Ren2
1

2

Michigan State University
Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
3
Carnegie Mellon University

{liyifa11, yukong}@msu.edu, {xin.li9, tianqin.li2, Wenbin.He2, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract

Prior
Head
Seg

Vision foundation models (VFMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide range of downstream
tasks. While several VFM adapters have shown promising results by leveraging the prior knowledge of VFMs, we
identify two inefficiencies in these approaches. First, the
interaction between convolutional neural network (CNN)
and VFM backbone triggers early layer gradient backpropagation. Second, existing methods require tuning all components, adding complexity. Besides, these adapters alter VFM features, underutilizing the prior knowledge. To
tackle these challenges, we propose a new approach called
ViT-Split, based on a key observation: the layers of several
VFMs, like DINOv2, can be divided into two components:
an extractor for learning low-level features and an adapter
for learning task-specific features. Leveraging this insight,
we eliminate the CNN branch and introduce two heads, task
head and prior head, to the frozen VFM. The task head is
designed to learn task-specific features, mitigating the early
gradient propagation issue. The prior head is used to leverage the multi-scale prior features from the frozen VFM,
reducing tuning parameters and overfitting. Extensive experiments on various tasks (e.g., segmentation, detection,
depth estimation, and visual question answering) validate
the effectiveness and efficiency of ViT-Split. Specifically,
ViT-Split reduces training time up to 4× while achieving
comparable or even better results on ADE20K, compared
to other VFM adapters. Codes are available: https:
//jackyfl.github.io/vitsplit.github.io/.

Seg

VFM

CNN

Adapter

Det

Det

VFM
VQA

VQA

Initialize

MDE

Task
Head

(a) Previous VFM adapters.

MDE

(b) Ours (ViT-Split).

Figure 1. Comparison between previous VFM adapters and ours.
Previous VFM adapters integrate low-level features learned by
a CNN branch into a learnable VFM through an adapter. Our
method exploits VFM prior knowledge with two heads: a prior
head for multi-scale prior feature learning from a frozen VFM,
and a task head for task-specific feature learning, initialized by the
last few layers of the VFM.

in downstream tasks. For vision tasks, vision foundation models (VFMs) acquire prior knowledge from largescale datasets through self-supervised learning [26], utilizing techniques such as masked image modeling (MIM)
[4, 31, 79], contrastive learning [6, 11, 25, 30], or hybrid
approaches (MIM + contrastive) [1, 57]. They also leverage vision-language alignment [23, 59] and dense prediction tasks [39, 68], among others. VFMs exhibit remarkable
zero-shot and transfer learning capabilities across a variety
of downstream tasks, e.g., classification, detection, segmentation, monocular depth estimation (MDE), and visual question answering (VQA), etc.
To leverage prior knowledge from VFMs, previous VFM
adapters such as ViT-Adapter [12] or ViT-CoMer [65] primarily adopt a two-branch architecture (see Fig. 1a). Such
a design enables the adapter to integrate low-level features
from a convolutional neural network (CNN) with global
features from a vision transformer (ViT)-based VFM. While
this architecture has demonstrated promising results across
various downstream tasks, certain design aspects may affect
training efficiency. From Fig. 1a, we identify two main is-

1. Introduction
Recent studies reveal that the foundation models have
the remarkable ability to acquire prior knowledge from
large-scale datasets [78], which enhances the performance
* Work done during intern at Bosch

1979

