This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmbodiedOcc: Embodied 3D Occupancy Prediction
for Vision-based Online Scene Understanding
Yuqi Wu

Wenzhao ZhengB Sicheng Zuo Yuanhui Huang Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China

Jiwen Lu

wuyq24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; wenzhao.zheng@outlook.com

Progressive Exploration

Only RGB as Observations

Access and Update Global 3D Gaussians

Gaussian-to-Voxel Splatting

Unknown Environments

T=1

T=5

T=9

T=18

T=25

Figure 1. Given streaming monocular RGB inputs, our EmbodiedOcc conducts embodied occupancy prediction in an online manner
for indoor scenes. Different from existing methods which focus on offline perception from monocular images, we focus on the scenelevel occupancy prediction from embodied observations. We initialize the scene to be explored with uniform 3D semantic Gaussians and
progressively update them based on new observations, similar to how humans explore unknown scenes.

Abstract
3D occupancy prediction provides a comprehensive description of the surrounding scenes and has become an essential task for 3D perception. Most existing methods focus on offline perception from one or a few views and cannot be applied to embodied agents that demand to gradually perceive the scene through progressive embodied exploration. In this paper, we formulate an embodied 3D occupancy prediction task to target this practical scenario and
propose a Gaussian-based EmbodiedOcc framework to accomplish it. We initialize the global scene with uniform 3D
semantic Gaussians and progressively update local regions
observed by the embodied agent. For each update, we extract semantic and structural features from the observed image and efficiently incorporate them via deformable crossattention to refine the regional Gaussians. Finally, we employ Gaussian-to-voxel splatting to obtain the global 3D

occupancy from the updated 3D Gaussians. Our EmbodiedOcc assumes an unknown (i.e., uniformly distributed)
environment and maintains an explicit global memory of it
with 3D Gaussians. It gradually gains knowledge through
the local refinement of regional Gaussians, which is consistent with how humans understand new scenes through
embodied exploration. We reorganize an EmbodiedOccScanNet benchmark based on local annotations to facilitate the evaluation of the embodied 3D occupancy prediction task. Our EmbodiedOcc outperforms existing methods
by a large margin and accomplishes the embodied occupancy prediction with high accuracy and efficiency. Code:
https://github.com/YkiWu/EmbodiedOcc.

1. Introduction

B Corresponding author.

With the rapid development of embodied intelligence and
active agents [14, 17, 32], 3D scene perception [30, 34, 41,
42] has become a crucial task in computer vision. Intelligent agents first perceive their surrounding environments
and then make decisions based on the perception results.

26360

