This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flow-MIL: Constructing Highly-expressive Latent Feature Space For Whole
Slide Image Classiﬁcation Using Normalizing Flow
Yingfan Ma3,1,2 , Bohan An1,2 , Ao Shen1,2 , Mingzhi Yuan4 , Minghong Duan1,2 , Manning Wang1,2,
1
2

*

Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Imaging Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Shanghai 200032, China
3
4

Ant Group

Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Medical Image Computing (iMIC), NUIST, Nanjing 210044, China

Abstract

1. Introduction
The application of deep learning to Whole Slide Image
(WSI) in computational pathology can signiﬁcantly advance the automation of pathological image diagnosis and
* Corresponding author.



   

Whole Slide Image (WSI) classiﬁcation has been widely
used in pathological diagnosis and prognosis prediction,
and it is commonly formulated as a weakly-supervised Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) problem because of the large
size of WSIs and the difﬁculty of obtaining ﬁne-grained annotations. In the MIL formulation, a WSI is treated as a
bag and the patches cut from it are treated as its instances,
and most existing methods ﬁrst extract instance features
and then aggregate them into bag feature using attentionbased mechanism for bag-level prediction. These models
are trained using only bag-level labels, so they often lack
instance-level insights and lose detailed semantic information, which limits their bag-level classiﬁcation performance
and damages their ability to explore high-expressive information. In this paper, we propose Flow-MIL, which leverages normalizing ﬂow-based Latent Semantic Embedding
Space (LSES) to enhance feature representation. By mapping patches into the simple and highly-expressive latent
space LSES, Flow-MIL achieves effective slide-level aggregation while preserving critical semantic information. We
also introduce Gaussian Mixture Model-based Latent Semantic Prototypes (LSP) within the LSES to capture classspeciﬁc pathological distribution for each class and reﬁne
pseudo instance labels. Extensive experiments on three
public WSI datasets show that Flow-MIL outperforms recent SOTA methods in both bag-level and instance-level
classiﬁcation and offers improved interpretability.

  
  






    

     

 

 

 



    

    
      

   

   
 

   

Figure 1. Motivation of our method. (a) Conventional Methods
rely on a complex feature space, which often leads to information
loss during the aggregation process, making it difﬁcult to effectively distinguish and classify instances within the bags. (b) Our
method uses normalizing ﬂow to map patch features into a highexpressive LSES, decoupling complex features. Latent Semantic Prototypes are designed for capturing key pathological features
and morphological differences.

analysis [10, 35, 36, 38]. Unlike natural images, WSIs often
have gigapixel resolution, making it infeasible to directly
apply conventional deep learning models due to the limited memory and processing constraints. To tackle these
challenges, it is common to divide WSIs into thousands of
non-overlapping patches [26, 29, 32]. However, obtaining
precise annotations for these patches is both labor-intensive
and costly, which makes fully supervised learning methods
impractical. Therefore, weakly supervised methods based

23561

