This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IQA-Adapter: Exploring Knowledge Transfer from Image Quality Assessment
to Diffusion-based Generative Models
Khaled Abud1,2 Sergey Lavrushkin1 Alexey Kirillov2,3 Dmitriy Vatolin1,2
1
MSU Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russian Federation
2
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation
3
Yandex
{khaled.abud, sergey.lavrushkin, alexey.kirillov, dmitriy}@graphics.cs.msu.ru

Abstract
Diffusion-based models have recently revolutionized image generation, achieving unprecedented levels of fidelity.
However, consistent generation of high-quality images remains challenging partly due to the lack of conditioning
mechanisms for perceptual quality. In this work, we propose methods to integrate image quality assessment (IQA)
models into diffusion-based generators, enabling qualityaware image generation. We show that diffusion models
can learn complex qualitative relationships from both IQA
models’ outputs and internal activations. First, we experiment with gradient-based guidance to optimize image quality directly and show this method has limited generalizability. To address this, we introduce IQA-Adapter, a novel
framework that conditions generation on target quality levels by learning the implicit relationship between images
and quality scores. When conditioned on high target quality, IQA-Adapter can shift the distribution of generated images towards a higher-quality subdomain, and, inversely, it
can be used as a degradation model, generating progressively more distorted images when provided with a lowerquality signal. Under high-quality condition, IQA-Adapter
achieves up to a 10% improvement across multiple objective metrics, as confirmed by a user preference study, while
preserving generative diversity and content. Furthermore,
we extend IQA-Adapter to a reference-based conditioning
scenario, utilizing the rich activation space of IQA models
to transfer highly specific, content-agnostic qualitative features between images.

over, recent extensions leverage diverse guidance sources
such as depth, pose [6], or reference images [7], enhancing control and flexibility. Unified frameworks integrating
multiple conditioning types, such as OmniGen [8], have recently emerged to further extend generation capabilities.
Despite these improvements, conditioning generative
models explicitly on image quality or aesthetics from Image Quality and Aesthetic Assessment (IQA/IAA) systems
remains largely unexplored. IQA methods evaluate images
according to human-perceived quality, while IAA focuses
on more subjective, content-dependent aspects. Integration
of IQA/IAA models directly into the generative architectures is a logical next step towards aligning generated images with human preferences, moving beyond traditional
text-image alignment metrics. Although recent works [9–
11] began exploring aesthetic alignment, explicit incorporation of IQA/IAA knowledge into generative models has
not yet been systematically addressed.
Motivated by recent successful transfers of generative
priors to IQA [12–15], we propose the opposite direction: incorporating IQA expertise into generative diffusion
models via conditioning. Specifically, we present IQAAdapter, a novel conditioning architecture leveraging IQA
scores, enabling generation of images with controlled levels
of image quality and aesthetics.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• Qualitative adaptation method. We introduce IQAAdapter, a novel conditioning tool for diffusion models that enables quality-aware generation guided by
IQA/IAA scores. To our knowledge, this work is the first
systematic attempt to directly introduce IQA knowledge
in a generative setting via conditioning: we show that diffusion models can implicitly learn complex relationships
from both IQA models’ outputs and internal activations.
• Diverse IQA/IAA model integration. We experiment
with a range of IQA and IAA models with diverse architectures and training datasets, demonstrating the adapt-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in diffusion-based models have greatly improved text-to-image generation, producing highly realistic
visuals from textual prompts. Models like DALL-E 3 [3],
FLUX [4], and SDXL [5] exemplify this progress. More-

15469

