This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoCo-Sim: Enhancing Roadside Collaborative Perception through
Foreground Simulation
Yuwen Du1,2 * Anning Hu1 * Zichen Chao3 Yifan Lu1 Junhao Ge1
Weitao Wu3 Lanjun Wang2 Siheng Chen1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

3

Tianjin University

Genjia Liu1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology

{huanning, yifan lu, cancaries, LGJ1zed, sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn
{duyuwen,wanglanjun}@tju.edu.cn, {zichen.chao, weitaowwtw}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Roadside Collaborative Perception refers to a system
where multiple roadside units collaborate to pool their perceptual data, assisting vehicles in enhancing their environmental awareness. Existing roadside perception methods concentrate on model design but overlook data issues
like calibration errors, sparse information, and multi-view
consistency, leading to poor performance on recent published datasets. To significantly enhance roadside collaborative perception and address critical data issues, we
present the first simulation framework RoCo-Sim for roadside collaborative perception. RoCo-Sim is capable of
generating diverse, multi-view consistent simulated roadside data through dynamic foreground editing and fullscene style transfer of a single image. RoCo-Sim consists of four components: (1) Camera Extrinsic Optimizer
ensures accurate 3D to 2D projection for roadside cameras; (2) A novel Multi-View Occlusion-Aware Sampler
(MOAS) determines the placement of diverse digital assets within 3D space; (3) DepthSAM innovatively models foreground-background relationships from single-frame
fixed-view images, ensuring multi-view consistency of foreground; and (4) Scalable Post-Processing Toolkit generates
more realistic and enriched scenes through style transfer
and other enhancements. RoCo-Sim significantly improves
roadside 3D object detection, outperforming SOTA methods by 83.74% on Rcooper-Intersection and 83.12% on
TUMTraf-V2X for AP70. RoCo-Sim fills a critical gap in
roadside perception simulation. Code can be accessed at:
https://github.com/duyuwen-duen/RoCo-Sim

Figure 1.
Performance on RCooper-Intersection[8], 117
and 136. With RoCo-Sim, camera-only 3D detection model
BEVHeight [40] achieves significantly better performance.

1. Introduction

multiple roadside units to help vehicles improve their understanding of the surrounding environment. This system
serves as an effective supplement to autonomous driving,
enhancing vehicle safety by addressing blind spots and providing a more comprehensive view of the road conditions.
In Roadside Collaborative Perception, camera-based systems play a pivotal role by capturing rich visual information
that can be leveraged to infer detailed 3D environmental
characteristics. However, current methods utilizing cameraonly systems for 3D detection in roadside collaborative perception have not yet achieved optimal results.
Existing roadside perception methods [16, 23, 25, 29],
primarily focus on designing model architectures that aim to
capture more information from the available data. However,
these methods often overlook data issues. Firstly, the extrinsics of fixed-view cameras are difficult to calibrate initially
and tend to drift over time due to environmental factors like
mounting shifts or external interference, requiring frequent
recalibration. Secondly, during data collection, long periods
with few or no vehicles in the field of view result in sparse
information density. Thirdly, ensuring multi-view consistency in annotations is highly challenging, leading to lowquality labeled data and high data collection costs. These

Roadside Collaborative Perception [23, 25, 29, 40] is
a cooperative system that integrates perceptual data from
* Equal contribution.

26977

