This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision-Language Neural Graph Featurization for Extracting Retinal Lesions
Taimur Hassan1 , Anabia Sohail2 , Muzammal Naseer2 , Naoufel Werghi2
1

2

Abu Dhabi University, UAE

Khalifa University, UAE

Abstract
Retinopathy comprises a group of retinal disorders that can
lead to severe visual impairments or blindness. The heterogeneous morphology of lesions poses a significant challenge in developing robust diagnostic systems. Supervised
approaches rely on large labeled datasets and often struggle
with generalization. To address these limitations, we propose an unsupervised vision-language neural graph featurization method. This method first segments fundus images
into a set of superpixels via Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC). The superpixels are then decomposed into an
undirected graph where each superpixel serves as a node,
and spatially adjacent nodes are connected by edges. A
Hamiltonian path systematically traverses the graph and
iteratively updates and propagates node and edge latent
space embeddings throughout the graph until convergence
is achieved. Then, a normalized cut separates the converged embeddings into two clusters within a latent space
that represent the lesion and healthy superpixels of the input scans. The lesion superpixels are further classified into
lesion categories using a prompt-based zero-shot visionlanguage model. The proposed method is rigorously tested
on four public datasets, dubbed ODIR, FIVES, BIOMISA,
and IDRiD, achieving F1-scores of 0.89, 0.92, 0.93, and
0.92, respectively, with significant performance gains over
state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed framework with DMSF
[10], the state-of-the-art method. (A) Fundus image, (B) Ground
truth, (C) Lesion classification using the proposed framework, and
(D) Lesion classification using the state-of-the-art method. Notice
particularly the extracted lesions within the pink bounding boxes
in (C) compared to the ground truth (B). The proposed framework
is able to extract the smallest lesion pathologies accurately, contrary to the state-of-the-art method [10] (D).

1. Introduction

learning [18] has been extensively explored toward extracting retinal lesions from the fundus scans, these methods suffer three significant limitations that hinder their deployment
in real-world clinical settings to extract retinal lesions effectively. The first limitation is related to their requirement
of being trained on a large-scale and well-annotated dataset
in order to extract retinal lesions with decent performance.
The second limitation is their requirement to be fine-tuned
explicitly on the multi-vendor scans to effectively extract
retinal lesions from the scans acquired from different machinery at the inference stage. The third limitation is related to their inability to accurately recognize the formation
of small lesions, especially microaneurysms (see Figure 1).
Due to these limitations, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models proposed for screening retinal diseases are not scalable
to be deployed in the clinical setting [5].
To overcome these limitations, we propose an unsupervised
neural graph featurization method that extracts retinal lesions from the fundus scans irrespective of the scan specifications, the dataset variations, or the vendor artifacts. Moreover, the proposed method eliminates the need for extensive
training, fine-tuning, or ground truth labels to segment retinal lesions from fundus scans. Additionally, it inherently
demonstrates robustness to scanner variations by employing Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC) [1] to generate small superpixels from the scans. These superpixels

Retinopathy represents a group of retinal diseases that can
cause severe visual impairments and even blindness if left
untreated. The common types of retinal diseases are diabetic retinopathy, diabetic macular edema, and age-related
macular degeneration [30, 38, 39]. These retinal diseases
represent escalating global health concerns and can be diagnosed by analyzing the presence of retinal lesions. Fundus imaging examination [9] is pivotal for detecting retinal
lesions, yet their precise segmentation and recognition remain a challenging task due to significant pathological variations contained within the fundus scans. While supervised

23700

