This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Category-Level Object Detection
and Pose Estimation from RGB Images using 3D Prototypes

1

Tom Fischer*1,2 Xiaojie Zhang*1,2 Eddy Ilg2
Saarland University 2 University of Technology Nuremberg
Existing Two-Stage Solution

Abstract

Single-Object
Pose Estimator

Recognizing objects in images is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. Although detecting objects in 2D
images is common, many applications require determining their pose in 3D space. Traditional category-level
methods rely on RGB-D inputs, which may not always be
available, or employ two-stage approaches that use separate models and representations for detection and pose
estimation. For the first time, we introduce a unified
model that integrates detection and pose estimation into
a single framework for RGB images by leveraging neural mesh models with learned features and multi-model
RANSAC. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art results
for RGB category-level pose estimation on REAL275, improving on the current state-of-the-art by 22.9% averaged
across all scale-agnostic metrics. Finally, we demonstrate
that our unified method exhibits greater robustness compared to single-stage baselines. Our code and models
are available at github.com/Fischer-Tom/unified-detectionand-pose-estimation.

Object
Detector

Single-Object
Pose Estimator

Our Single-Stage Solution

Multi-Object
Pose Estimator

Figure 1. The top shows existing pipelines that are made up of
separate stages for object detection and and single-object pose estimation. In the bottom, we show our pipeline that uses a single
representation and model for detection and pose estimation.

use to devices and working conditions where depth can be
captured. Pose estimation from RGB images alone [15, 30,
36, 52, 59] is less explored and a much harder task.
Methods can be further classified according to the used
detection approach. Although there are some RGB-D methods that utilize a shared representation with individual detection and pose heads [24, 51], most methods completely
decouple the problem and use separate models and representations. All current RGB methods fall into this category of two-stage methods and use separate models per
task, where as shown in Figure 1, objects are first detected,
cropped, and then passed into a single-object pose estimator. This naturally places strong emphasis on the accuracy
of the detection model, as failures cannot be recovered later,
and comes with the downside of having to maintain two separate models.
For the first time, we show that a single unified model
can be established for both tasks in the case of RGB images,
and that this approach leads to improved accuracy and robustness. Our model leverages neural mesh models [2, 38]
as a 3D representation of object categories, where a 2D
feature extractor for images and the neural features on the

1. Introduction
Finding out whether an object is present in an image, where
it is located, and how it is oriented in space, are fundamental problems of scene understanding. They are commonly
referred to as object detection and pose estimation, and are
critically relevant for applications in robotics [27, 53, 54],
autonomous driving [28, 43] and augmented reality [39].
In object pose estimation, one distinguishes between methods that work only on known instances [19, 29, 32, 44, 60],
and methods that are able to generalize within object categories [12, 15, 33, 35, 51, 52, 58, 59].
Category-level pose estimation has made significant
progress in recent years [12, 15, 33, 35, 51, 52, 58, 59].
However, most current work still relies on accurate depth
information to recover precise poses [12, 58], restricting the
* Equal contribution.
Corresponding email:
xiaojie.zhang}@utn.de.

Single-Object
Pose Estimator

{tom.fischer,

9790

