This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LDPose: Towards Inclusive Human Pose Estimation for
Limb-Deﬁcient Individuals in the Wild
Jiaying Ying∗1
Heming Du∗1
Kaihao Zhang2
Lincheng Li1
1
2
The University of Queensland Australian National University
∗
Equal contributors † Corresponding author

Xin Yu†1

uqjying@uq.edu.au

LDPose GT

RTMPose

LDPose GT

ViTPose

RTMPose

ViTPose

Figure 1. Demonstration of Limb-Deﬁcient Pose (LDPose) Dataset. LDPose contributes to ﬁll the current pose estimation limitation
on individuals with limb deﬁciency. The ﬁrst individual has upper limb deﬁciencies, while the second has lower limb deﬁciencies using
prosthetics. Errors are highlighted using red circles and lines, while residual and intact limb keypoints are annotated in blue and green,
respectively. Inference results of RTMPose and ViTPose show incorrect predictions on residual limbs with a conﬁdence threshold of 0.3.

Abstract

verse limb deﬁciency types and ethnic backgrounds. The
annotation process is guided by internationally accredited
para-athletics classiﬁers to ensure high precision. In addition, we propose a Limb-Deﬁcient Loss (LDLoss) to better
distinguish residual limb keypoints by contrasting residual
limb keypoints and intact limb keypoints. Furthermore, we
design Limb-Deﬁcient Metrics (LD Metrics) to quantitatively measure the keypoint predictions of both residual and
intact limbs and benchmark our dataset using state-of-theart human pose estimation methods. Experiment results indicate that LDPose is a challenging dataset, and we believe
that it will foster further research and ultimately support
individuals with limb deﬁciencies worldwide.  LDPose

Human pose estimation aims to predict the location of body
keypoints and enable various practical applications. However, existing research focuses solely on individuals with full
physical bodies and overlooks those with limb deﬁciencies.
As a result, current pose estimation methods cannot be generalized to individuals with limb deﬁciencies. In this paper, we introduce the Limb-Deﬁcient Pose Estimation task,
which not only predicts the locations of standard human
body keypoints, but also estimates the endpoints of missing
limbs. To support this task, we present Limb-Deﬁcient Pose
(LDPose), the ﬁrst-ever human pose estimation dataset for
individuals with limb deﬁciencies. LDPose comprises over
28k images for approximately 73k individuals across di-

9865

