This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FPEM: Face Prior Enhanced Facial Attractiveness Prediction
for Live Videos with Face Retouching
Hui Li1† , Xiaoyu Ren1,2† , Hongjiu Yu1 , Ying Chen1 *, Kai Li1 ,
L Wang1 , Xiongkuo Min2 , Huiyu Duan2 , Guangtao Zhai2 , Xu Liu1
1

Alibaba Group 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{lh401704,naomi.rxy,yuhongjiu.yhj,YingChen,kaishi.lk,zhuangshu.wlb,steven.liu}@taobao.com
{minxiongkuo,huiyuduan,zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Ours

Facial attractiveness prediction (FAP) has long been an important computer vision task, which could be widely applied
in live videos with facial retouching. However, previous
FAP datasets are either small or closed-source. Moreover,
the corresponding FAP models exhibit limited generalization and adaptation ability. To overcome these limitations,
we introduce the first large-scale FAP dataset LiveBeauty
specifically designed for live video scenarios wherein face
images may be real-time processed for aesthetics purposes.
10,000 face images are collected directly from a live streaming platform, with 200,000 corresponding attractiveness
annotations obtained from a well-devised subjective experiment, making LiveBeauty the largest open-access FAP
dataset. Based on the built dataset, a novel FAP method
named Facial Prior Enhanced Multi-modal model (FPEM)
is proposed to measure the attractiveness of facial images. Extensive experiments conducted on both LiveBeauty
and other open-source FAP datasets demonstrate that our
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance.
The dataset will be released at https://github.com/EstellaLH/FPEM.

ResNeXt-50

Ours

CNN-ER
REX-INCEP
REX-INCEP

Inception-V3

CNN-ER

2D-FAP
Inception-V3

Figure 1. SROCC vs PLCC comparison on LiveBeauty and SCUTFBP5500 [27]. FPEM, denoted by red triangular, outperforms
other methods (CNN-ER [2], 2D-FAP [32], REX-INCEP [2],
Inception-V3 [49], ResNeXt-50 [56]) on both datasets.

1. Introduction

the visual appeal changes or improvements of individual
streaming channels. The clarity-related assessment tasks
of facial quality could be categorized into Biometric Face
Image Quality Assessment (BFIQA) and Generic Face Image Quality Assessment (GFIQA). BFIQA focuses on the
identity information of faces for down-stream tasks such as
face recognition [1, 37, 40], while GFIQA emphasizes the
visual perceptual quality of faces [6, 47, 52]. The aestheticsrelated assessment of facial quality is often referred to as Facial Attractiveness Prediction (FAP) [12, 27, 28]. The goal
of FAP is to quantify the attractiveness of facial images,
which is vital for assessing the effectiveness of facial retouching settings and offers valuable insights for algorithm
development.
As shown in Tab. 1, numerous FAP datasets have been
proposed in recent years, many of which encompass a rich
diversity in age, gender, face expression and pose [9, 17,
24, 27, 53, 61, 63, 64]. However, most of these datasets
are either small or unavailable due to privacy and ethical
concerns. In video streaming, especially live video, it is
common practice to use facial retouching algorithms to improve the facial aesthetics of content presented to audiences.

With the rapid development of live streaming, short-form
video, and advanced face retouching within such applications, the perceptual quality of faces becomes an important
factor for the overall visual experience of users, which is
particularly essential for video platforms, as it can significantly affect the average viewer watch time and even GMV
(Gross Merchandise Volume). A robust metric system for
evaluating facial clarity and aesthetics is essential to monitor both the overall service quality of the platform and
* Corresponding author.
† Equal contributions.

11458

