This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Early Timestep Zero-Shot Candidate Selection for Instruction-Guided Image
Editing
Joowon Kim1 * Ziseok Lee2 * Donghyeon Cho1 Sanghyun Jo3
Yeonsung Jung1 Kyungsu Kim1,2† Eunho Yang1†
1

KAIST

2

Seoul National University

3

OGQ

kjwispro@kaist.ac.kr, ziseoklee@snu.ac.kr, hyeon9698@kaist.ac.kr, shjo.april@gmail.com
ys.jung@kaist.ac.kr, kyskim@snu.ac.kr, eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr

(less background artifact)

Source Image

Background Inconsistency Score (BIS)

(more background artifact)

Instruction

Model

“Change
the pendant
to a purse”

InstructPix2Pix

“Change the
animal in the
image from
rabbit to cat”

MGIE

“Change the
color of the
heart from
red to pink"

InstructDiffusion

“Add a hat
to cat"

UltraEdit

Best Seed

Figure 1. Instruction-guided image editing models are highly influenced by the noise seed. To address this issue, we propose a unique
candidate selection method (ELECT), which is successfully selects the best seed for background consistency while maintaining the editability
of the base model. We propose Background Inconsistency Score (S BIS ) that quantifies the degree of unintended background changes in an
edited image, measuring relatively how well the background is preserved compared to other candidates in a self-supervised manner. Samples
with low S BIS (blue) have a consistent background while samples with high S BIS (red) display multiple artifacts and distortion.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in diffusion models, achieving reliable image generation and editing results remains challenging due to the inherent diversity induced by stochastic noise
in the sampling process. Particularly, instruction-guided image editing with diffusion models offers user-friendly editing
capabilities, yet editing failures, such as background distortion, frequently occur across different attempts. Users
often resort to trial and error, adjusting seeds or prompts to
achieve satisfactory results, which is inefficient. While seed
selection methods exist for Text-to-Image (T2I) generation,
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

they depend on external verifiers, limiting their applicability,
and evaluating multiple seeds increases computational complexity, reducing practicality. To address this, we first establish a new multiple-seed-based image editing baseline using
background consistency scores, achieving Best-of-N performance without supervision. Building on this, we introduce
ELECT (Early-timestep Latent Evaluation for Candidate
selecTion), a zero-shot framework that selects reliable seeds
by estimating background mismatches at early diffusion
timesteps, identfying the seed that retains the background
while modifying only the foreground. ELECT ranks seed
candidates by a background inconsistency score, filtering
unsuitable samples early based on background consistency
while fully preserving editability. Beyond standalone seed
selection, ELECT integrates into instruction-guided editing

18844

