This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RI3D: Few-Shot Gaussian Splatting With Repair and Inpainting Diffusion Priors
Xilong Zhou1,3
Wei Ye2
Jinhui Xiong2
Rakesh Ranjan2
Nima Khademi Kalantari1
1
2
3
Texas A&M University
Meta Reality Labs
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Inputs

Avinash Paliwal1

DNGaussian

CoR-GS

FSGS

Stage 1 (Repair)

Stage 2 (Repair + Inpaint) - Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1. We introduce a novel sparse view synthesis method that employs two diffusion models, “repair” and “inpainting”, which are
responsible for aiding in the reconstruction of visible regions and hallucinating missing regions, respectively. Our approach involves a
two-stage optimization process. In the first stage, we use the repair model to constrain the 3DGS optimization and reconstruct the regions
covered by the input images. As shown, the output of the first stage properly reconstructs the visible areas, but contains missing regions,
which are marked in white. In the second stage, we utilize the inpainting model to fill in these missing areas and continue optimization
using the repair model to seamlessly integrate the hallucinated regions with the rest of the scene. Here, we compare our method (“Stage
2”) against several state-of-the-art techniques on a 360° scene using only three input images.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose RI3D, a novel 3DGS-based approach that harnesses the power of diffusion models to reconstruct high-quality novel views given a sparse set of input images. Our key contribution is separating the view
synthesis process into two tasks of reconstructing visible regions and hallucinating missing regions, and introducing
two personalized diffusion models, each tailored to one of
these tasks. Specifically, one model (’repair’) takes a rendered image as input and predicts the corresponding highquality image, which in turn is used as a pseudo ground
truth image to constrain the optimization. The other model
(’inpainting’) primarily focuses on hallucinating details in
unobserved areas. To integrate these models effectively, we
introduce a two-stage optimization strategy: the first stage
reconstructs visible areas using the repair model, and the
second stage reconstructs missing regions with the inpainting model while ensuring coherence through further optimization. Moreover, we augment the optimization with a
novel Gaussian initialization method that obtains per-image

depth by combining 3D-consistent and smooth depth with
highly detailed relative depth. We demonstrate that by separating the process into two tasks and addressing them with
the repair and inpainting models, we produce results with
detailed textures in both visible and missing regions that
outperform state-of-the-art approaches on a diverse set of
scenes with extremely sparse inputs.

1. Introduction

25094

The introduction of novel 3D representations, such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) [18] and 3D Gaussian splatting
(3DGS) [14], has revolutionized the field of novel view synthesis. While these techniques excel at reconstructing 3D
scenes from a large number of images, view synthesis from
a sparse set of images remains a challenging problem.
Most state-of-the-art sparse novel view synthesis approaches [16, 32, 48] introduce a series of regularizations
to constrain the optimization process and avoid overfitting
to the input images. While these approaches produce re-

