This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Multi-View Learning via Representation Fusion of Sample-Level Attention
and Alignment of Simulated Perturbation
Jie Xu1,3 , Na Zhao3,∗ , Gang Niu4 , Masashi Sugiyama5 , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2,∗
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China; 2 Hainan University, Haikou, China; 3 Singapore University
of Technology and Design, Singapore; 4 Southeast University, Nanjing, China; 5 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Recently, multi-view learning (MVL) has garnered significant attention due to its ability to fuse discriminative information from multiple views. However, real-world multi-view
datasets are often heterogeneous and imperfect, which usually causes MVL methods designed for specific combinations
of views to lack application potential and limits their effectiveness. To address this issue, we propose a novel robust
MVL method (namely RML) with simultaneous representation fusion and alignment. Specifically, we introduce a simple yet effective multi-view transformer fusion network where
we transform heterogeneous multi-view data into homogeneous word embeddings, and then integrate multiple views
by the sample-level attention mechanism to obtain a fused
representation. Furthermore, we propose a simulated perturbation based multi-view contrastive learning framework that
dynamically generates the noise and unusable perturbations
for simulating imperfect data conditions. The simulated
noisy and unusable data obtain two distinct fused representations, and we utilize contrastive learning to align them
for learning discriminative and robust representations. Our
RML is self-supervised and can also be applied for downstream tasks as a regularization. In experiments, we employ
it in multi-view unsupervised clustering, noise-label classification, and as a plug-and-play module for cross-modal hashing retrieval. Extensive comparison experiments and ablation studies validate RML’s effectiveness. Code is available
at https://github.com/SubmissionsIn/RML .

P −1
Figure 1. Our motivation. Left: we utilize ∆ = Vm=1
|Dm −
Dm+1 | to measure the dimension difference across views, where
Dm indicates the data dimension of the m-th view (from Table 2).
Real-world multi-view datasets exhibit significant differences in
data modalities, dimensions, sparsity, and scales, which urges us
to build view-universal and robust MVL methods. Right: we evaluate the performance of representation learning using an unsupervised clustering task. For example, both the methods MCN [5]
and MFLVC [50] significantly outperform the baseline method
K-Means [27] on the BDGP [4] dataset. However, they do not
make improvements on the Prokaryotic [3] and YoutubeVideo [28]
datasets, and even underperform K-means on the VOC [8] dataset.
Our method consistently achieves good performance.

machine learning models has given rise to a continuously intriguing research topic, i.e., multi-view learning (MVL). The
key to MVL lies in leveraging the explicit correspondences
among multiple views for achieving their mutual alignment
and information fusion during learning representations, and
thus to enhance the performance of downstream tasks like
clustering [10, 30], classification [35], and retrieval [12].
As achieving effective information interaction across multiple views is not trivial, many existing MVL methods have
been proposed by researchers and yield important progress
in the past decade. In the literature, the mainstream methodologies in MVL can be summarized into: 1) representation
fusion and 2) representation alignment. Specifically, to integrate multi-view discriminative information, representation
fusion methods often merge multiple views into a unified

1. Introduction
In real-world applications, algorithms usually need to handle
data with multiple views or modalities in different forms,
such as multi-view data from different sensors [24, 32, 53],
image-text and video-audio pairs in multimedia [10, 33, 57],
and multi-omics features in biomedical data analysis [20, 21].
Compared to a single view, multiple views contain richer
information and utilizing them to train more comprehensive
∗ Corresponding Authors.

4232

