This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Material-Agnostic System Identiﬁcation from Videos
Yizhou Zhao1 Haoyu Chen1 Chunjiang Liu1 Zhenyang Li2 Charles Herrmann3
Junhwa Hur3 Yinxiao Li3 Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4 Bhiksha Raj1 Min Xu1 *
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Alabama at Birmingham 3 Google 4 UC Merced
https://github.com/Skaldak/MASIV
Material Types
Elastic

Expert-designed Elasticity Models

Expert-designed Plasticity Models

‫ = ۾‬2ߤ ۴ െ ‫ ܀‬+ ߣ‫ ܬ ܬ‬െ 1 ۴ ିୃ

௘
۴ ௘ = ۴୲୰୧ୟ୪
Identity Plasticity

Fixed Corotated Elasticity

Plastic

Granular

‫ ߤ = ۾‬۴ ௘ െ ۴ ௘ ିୃ ) + ߣ log ‫ ܬ‬۴ ௘ ିୃ

۴ ௘ = ‫ ࣴ܃‬઱ ‫ୃି ܄‬

Neo-Hookean Elasticity

Drucker-Prager Plasticity

‫ ܃ = ۾‬2ߤ઱ ିଵ log ઱ + ߣtr log ઱ ઱ିଵ ‫ୃ ܄‬

۴ ௘ = ‫ܬ‬ଵ/ଷ ۷

StVK Elasticity

Fluid Plasticity

…

…

Viscoelastic
Fluid

(a) Prior Work: System Identification with Known Material Types

Learnable
Elasticity Model

Observations

Learnable
Plasticity Model

(b) Ours: Material-Agnostic System Identification from Videos (MASIV)

Predictions

Figure 1. System identiﬁcation from video observations seeks to understand the intrinsic dynamics of a given scene. (a) Existing methods
rely on scene-speciﬁc material priors. (b) Our MASIV removes this requirement, grounding object motion in a material-agnostic manner.

Abstract

ries, providing temporally rich motion constraints beyond
sparse visual cues. Comprehensive experiments show that
MASIV achieves state-of-the-art performance in geometric
accuracy, rendering quality, and generalization ability.

System identiﬁcation from videos aims to recover object geometry and governing physical laws. Existing methods integrate differentiable rendering with simulation but rely on
predeﬁned material priors, limiting their ability to handle
unknown ones. We introduce MASIV, the ﬁrst vision-based
framework for material-agnostic system identiﬁcation. Unlike existing approaches that depend on hand-crafted constitutive laws, MASIV employs learnable neural constitutive models, inferring object dynamics without assuming
a scene-speciﬁc material prior. However, the absence of
full particle state information imposes unique challenges,
leading to unstable optimization and physically implausible behaviors. To address this, we introduce dense geometric guidance by reconstructing continuum particle trajecto-

1. Introduction
From the ﬂow of water down a stream to the deformation of
a rubber ball upon impact, the physical world operates with
a set of underlying principles that govern motion and interaction. Humans intuitively grasp these principles through
observation, allowing us to see a scene and instinctively
predict its outcome or re-imagine it with different initial dynamics. Material identiﬁcation forms the basis of this ability, requiring us to determine an object’s composition and
understand how that inﬂuences its response to forces. This
capability is fundamental to world modeling, the process of
constructing internal representations that help us understand

* Corresponding author

5944

