This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FairGen: Enhancing Fairness in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models via
Self-Discovering Latent Directions
Yilei Jiang1
1

Wei-Hong Li1,2 * Yiyuan Zhang1 Minghong Cai1 Xiangyu Yue1,3 *
MMLab, CUHK 2 University of Bristol 3 SHIAE, CUHK

Abstract
While Diffusion Models (DM) exhibit remarkable performance across various image generative tasks, they nonetheless reflect the inherent bias presented in the training set.
As DMs are now widely used in real-world applications,
these biases could perpetuate a distorted worldview and
hinder opportunities for minority groups. Existing methods
on debiasing DMs usually requires model retraining with
a human-crafted reference dataset or additional classifiers,
which suffer from two major limitations: (1) collecting reference datasets causes expensive annotation cost; (2) the
debiasing performance is heavily constrained by the quality of the reference dataset or the additional classifier. To
address the above limitations, we propose FairGen, a plugand-play method that learns attribute latent directions in
a self-discovering manner, thus eliminating the reliance on
such reference dataset. Specifically, FairGen consists of two
parts: a set of attribute adapters and a distribution indicator. Each adapter in the set aims to learn an attribute latent
direction, and is optimized via noise composition through
a self-discovering process. Then, the distribution indicator is multiplied by the set of adapters to guide the generation process towards the prescribed distribution. Our
method enables debiasing multiple attributes in DMs simultaneously, while remaining lightweight and easily integrable with other DMs, eliminating the need for retraining. Extensive experiments on debiasing gender, racial, and
their intersectional biases show that our method outperforms previous SOTA by a large margin.

Original
DM
Gender
Debias
(Ours)
(a) Prompt: ‘A photo of a CEO’
Original
DM
Gender
Debias
(Ours)
(b) Prompt: ‘A photo of nurse’

Figure 1. Illustration of gender bias associated with different occupations in Stable Diffusion v2.1 and the debiased results for gender
by our method. The leadership roles such as CEOs are biased towards male figures, whereas supportive roles such as nurses are
biased towards female figures. Our method can generate debiased
results regarding the gender bias.

1. Introduction

purposes. For instance, Stable Diffusion v1.5 has been
downloaded over 8 million times on Huggingface, and Midjourney is used by over a million users [5]. However, existing DMs have been found to generate biased content across
various demographic factors, such as gender and race [13],
which could have harmful effects on society when these
models are implemented in real-world applications.
In Figure 1, we randomly generate several images of two
occupations using Stable Diffusion v2.1. Given the prompt
of “A photo of a CEO”, the generated images predominantly
depict male figures, reinforcing the stereotype that leadership roles, such as CEOs and doctors, are male-dominated.
On the contrary, when the prompt is “A photo of a nurse”,
the majority of generated images depict female figures, reflecting the bias that supportive roles are traditionally associated with women. Regarding racial bias, we randomly
generate 1000 images using Stable Diffusion v2.1 with the
prompt “A photo of a worker”. The statistic of 1000 images depicted in Figure 2 shows a strong bias in racial representation, with White individuals making up 71% of the

State-of-the-art Text-to-Image Diffusion Models (DMs)
such as Stable Diffusion [26], DALL-E 3 [20] and Imagen [27] have demonstrated remarkable performance in
generating high-quality images. With the rapid development of DMs, an increasing number of individuals and corporations are choosing to utilize them to serve their own
* Corresponding author.

18411

