This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDM: Efficient Deep Feature Matching
Xi Li

Tong Rao
Realsee

Cihui Pan

{lixi042, raotong001, pancihui001}@realsee.com

Abstract

29

Recent feature matching methods have achieved remarkable
performance but lack efficiency consideration. In this paper,
we revisit the mainstream detector-free matching pipeline
and improve all its stages considering both accuracy and
efficiency. We propose an Efficient Deep feature Matching
network, EDM. We first adopt a deeper CNN with fewer dimensions to extract multi-level features. Then we present
a Correlation Injection Module that conducts feature transformation on high-level deep features, and progressively injects feature correlations from global to local for efficient
multi-scale feature aggregation, improving both speed and
performance. In the refinement stage, a novel lightweight
bidirectional axis-based regression head is designed to directly predict subpixel-level correspondences from latent
features, avoiding the significant computational cost of explicitly locating keypoints on high-resolution local feature
heatmaps. Moreover, effective selection strategies are introduced to enhance matching accuracy. Extensive experiments show that our EDM achieves competitive matching
accuracy on various benchmarks and exhibits excellent efficiency, offering valuable best practices for real-world applications. The code is available at https://github.
com/chicleee/EDM .

20

1. Introduction
Image feature matching is a crucial task in the field of computer vision with a broad range of important applications,
including structure from motion (SfM)[1, 21, 52], simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [6, 36], visual
tracking [53, 66], and visual localization [48, 50], etc. Traditional feature matching methods generally consist of several stages, including keypoint detection, feature description and matching[4, 5, 33, 47].
Benefiting from the powerful feature description capability of deep neural networks, many recent studies [3, 11,
42, 67] have adopted convolutional neural networks to extract local features, which significantly outperform the conventional handcrafted features. Besides, feature matching

AUC@5°

19

RoMa
Ours
~ 2.3 × Faster

ASpanFormer
QuadTree

EfficientLoFTR

18

TopicFM

17

LoFTR

MatchFormer

16
15

SP + LG
20

40

60

80

100

Latency (ms)

120

140 300

320

Figure 1. Comparison of Matching Accuracy and Latency. Our
method achieves competitive accuracy with lower latency. Models
are evaluated on the ScanNet dataset to get AUC@5◦ accuracy,
while the latency for an image pair with 640×480 resolution is
measured on a single NVIDIA 3090 GPU.

methods [32, 49] based on deep learning have also emerged
and achieved remarkable results. Although these methods
are generally effective, they still encounter difficulties due
to various challenging factors, including illumination variations, scale changes, poor textures, and repetitive patterns.
To address these limitations, end-to-end detector-free local feature matching methods are coming into existence.
Early methods [17, 28, 43, 44, 68] typically used the cost
volume and neighborhood consensus to generate matches.
Given the powerful capability of modelling long-range
global context information, some studies [8, 57, 63] have
started using Transformer [61] to establish precise correspondences. To reduce computational complexity, most
of these methods usually adopt a coarse-to-fine scheme.
Specifically, coarse matches at the patch level are first obtained using the nearest neighbor criterion, then refined to
the sub-pixel level for increased accuracy. More recently,
some studies [15, 16] have explored methods for generating dense, pixel-wise matching, achieving impressive performance on mainstream datasets.

26198

