This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One Polyp Identiﬁes All: One-Shot Polyp Segmentation with SAM via Cascaded
Priors and Iterative Prompt Evolution
Xinyu Mao1

Xiaohan Xing†,2 Fei Meng3 Jianbang Liu1 Fan Bai1 Qiang Nie4
1
Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Stanford University
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology(Guangzhou)
5
Southern University of Science and Technology

Max Meng†,5

xhxing@stanford.edu, max.meng@ieee.org

Abstract
Polyp segmentation is vital for early colorectal cancer detection, yet traditional fully supervised methods struggle
with morphological variability and domain shifts, requiring frequent retraining. Additionally, reliance on largescale annotations is a major bottleneck due to the timeconsuming and error-prone nature of polyp boundary labeling. Recently, vision foundation models like Segment
Anything Model (SAM) have demonstrated strong generalizability and ﬁne-grained boundary detection with sparse
prompts, effectively addressing key polyp segmentation
challenges. However, SAM’s prompt-dependent nature limits automation in medical applications, since manually inputting prompts for each image is labor-intensive and timeconsuming. We propose OP-SAM, a One-shot Polyp segmentation framework based on SAM that automatically
generates prompts from a single annotated image, ensuring accurate and generalizable segmentation without
additional annotation burdens. Our method introduces
Correlation-based Prior Generation (CPG) for semantic
label transfer and Scale-cascaded Prior Fusion (SPF) to
adapt to polyp size variations as well as ﬁlter out noisy
transfers. Instead of dumping all prompts at once, we devise Euclidean Prompt Evolution (EPE) for iterative prompt
reﬁnement, progressively enhancing segmentation quality.
Extensive evaluations across ﬁve datasets validate OPSAM’s effectiveness. Notably, on Kvasir, it achieves 76.93%
IoU, surpassing the state-of-the-art by 11.44%∗ .

1. Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC), ranking as the third most prevalent cancer globally [6], begins when small, benign cell
† Corresponding author.

∗ Project page: https://github.com/Hectormxy/OP-SAM

Figure 1. Challenges in SAM-based polyp segmentation and
methods comparison. (a) The size variations of polyps and interference like bubbles and reﬂections complicate polyp perception.
(b) Previous methods pour all the prompts simultaneously, while
our method introduces evaluation to add prompts interactively.

clusters called polyps form on the colon’s interior lining.
Early polyp detection via colonoscopy can prevent CRC,
yet polyp segmentation, especially with fully supervised
methods, faces two key limitations. First, polyp segmentation is inherently challenging due to signiﬁcant variations
in size, color, and texture, requiring extensive expert annotations to enhance the segmentation capability [25]. However, ambiguous boundaries make precise and large-scale
annotations time-consuming and prone to errors, which can
inversely degrade model performance. Second, clinical
deployment of polyp segmentation models requires strong
generalizability across datasets. However, domain shifts

24182

