This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Monocular Facial Appearance Capture in the Wild
Yingyan Xu1,2
Kate Gadola1
Prashanth Chandran2
Sebastian Weiss2
Markus Gross1,2
Gaspard Zoss2
Derek Bradley2
1
2
ETH Zürich
DisneyResearch|Studios
kgadola@student.ethz.ch

{yingyan.xu,grossm}@inf.ethz.ch

{prashanth.chandran,sebastian.weiss,gaspard.zoss,derek.bradley}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
We present a new method for reconstructing the appearance properties of human faces from a lightweight capture
procedure in an unconstrained environment. Our method
recovers the surface geometry, diffuse albedo, specular intensity and specular roughness from a monocular video
containing a simple head rotation in-the-wild. Notably, we
make no simplifying assumptions on the environment lighting, and we explicitly take visibility and occlusions into account. As a result, our method can produce facial appearance maps that approach the fidelity of studio-based multiview captures, but with a far easier and cheaper procedure.

Like facial geometry reconstruction, the field of skin appearance estimation is also well-studied in controlled studio environments, where accurate appearance maps can be
reconstructed from large setups that obtain multi-view or
multi-shot images under calibrated lighting [55]. Following the geometry trend, current research aims to allow facial appearance capture in less constrained settings, for example outdoors using the sun as a single point light [62].
Unfortunately, these methods often make simplifying assumptions, and thus there still exists a large gap in reconstruction quality between current in-the-wild methods and
production-ready studio-based capture.
In this work we present a new method for facial appearance capture in the wild, surpassing the level of fidelity of
existing lightweight methods. Our approach requires only
a short video sequence of a simple head rotation, captured
from a single camera in any environment, including indoors
or outdoors, on a sunny day or in shadow. Our approach is
built on traditional inverse rendering optimization, where a
fast differentiable renderer is used to solve for the geometry
and appearance parameters together with the environment
lighting simultaneously. Different from previous methods,
we do not make any assumptions on the lighting condition
(e.g. we do not require a sun in the sky), and as our main
contribution we explicitly take visibility into account, effectively removing baked-in shading by correctly modeling
self-occlusion in our appearance solver. The result is a detailed geometry mesh with textures for diffuse albedo, specular intensity and roughness. As we will show, our approach
leads to more faithful recovery of the appearance properties
than existing techniques in the wild. As a particular application, our approach allows fast capture of actors on a film
set, with resulting assets that can be used directly in traditional VFX pipelines. In summary, we make the following
key contributions:
• A new state-of-the-art method for in-the-wild facial appearance capture that makes no assumption on the scene
lighting condition.
• A novel shading model that explicitly handles visibility

1. Introduction
3D facial scanning is a fundamental tool for the creation of
realistic digital humans in several industries like film and
video game entertainment, communication and telepresence, medical applications, and the new trend of AI-driven
digital characters. For decades, practitioners have relied on
high-quality 3D face scans in order to bring people into virtual worlds. Much of the technology evolution has focused
on reconstructing the surface geometry, where initial scanners could create detailed triangle meshes in controlled studio settings with many cameras and lights, and then more
recent efforts focused on fast and lightweight face reconstruction from monocular inputs in less-constrained, socalled “in-the-wild” settings. While the facial geometry is
extremely important, the shape alone is not enough to rerender the subject in novel environments with photorealistic quality. For this task, we must additionally recover the
appearance properties of the face, which dictate how light
interacts with the skin surface. As such, in today’s high-end
facial scanning pipelines the desired result includes a highresolution facial surface mesh with corresponding appearance textures for properties like the diffuse albedo, specular intensity and specular roughness, which are compatible
with modern skin shaders.

12078

