This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From One to More: Contextual Part Latents for 3D Generation
Shaocong Dong1 ,* Lihe Ding2 ,* Xiao Chen2 , Yaokun Li2 , Yuxin Wang1 ,
Yucheng Wang1 , Qi Wang1 , Jaehyeok Kim1 , Chenjian Gao2 , Zhanpeng Huang3 ,
Zibin Wang3 , Tianfan Xue2,4†, Dan Xu1†
1
2
3
4
HKUST
CUHK
SenseTime Research
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{sdongae, danxu}@cse.ust.hk, {dl023, tfxue}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

TRELLIS

Rodin

App. 1: Articulated object generation

Ours

App. 2: Mini-scene generation

3D box input and our part generation result

App. 3: Part editing

Figure 1. CoPart achieves high-quality part-based 3D generation and supports various applications.

Abstract

contextual part latents and simultaneously generates coherent 3D parts. This part-based framework has several advantages, including: i) reduces the encoding burden of intricate objects by decomposing them into simpler parts, ii) facilitates part learning and part relationship modeling, and
iii) naturally supports part-level control. Furthermore, to
ensure the coherence of part latents and to harness the powerful priors from foundation models, we propose a novel
mutual guidance strategy to fine-tune pre-trained diffusion
models for joint part latent denoising. Benefiting from the
part-based representation, we demonstrate that CoPart can
support various applications including part-editing, articulated object generation, and mini-scene generation. Moreover, we collect a new large-scale 3D part dataset named
Partverse from Objaverse through automatic mesh segmentation and subsequent human post-annotations. By training on the proposed dataset, CoPart achieves promising
part-based 3D generation with high controllability. Project
page: https://copart3d.github.io.

To generate 3D objects, early research focused on multiview-driven approaches relying solely on 2D renderings.
Recently, the 3D native latent diffusion paradigm has
demonstrated superior performance in 3D generation, because it fully leverages the geometric information provided
in ground truth 3D data. Despite its fast development, 3D
diffusion still faces three challenges. First, the majority of
these methods represent a 3D object by one single latent, regardless of its complexity. This may lead to detail loss when
generating 3D objects with multiple complicated parts. Second, most 3D assets are designed parts by parts, yet the
current holistic latent representation overlooks the independence of these parts and their interrelationships, limiting
the model’s generative ability. Third, current methods rely
on global conditions (e.g., text, image, point cloud) to control the generation process, lacking detailed controllability. Therefore, motivated by how 3D designers create a 3D
object, we present a new part-based 3D generation framework, CoPart, which represents a 3D object with multiple

8230

