This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMARTIES: Spectrum-Aware Multi-Sensor Auto-Encoder
for Remote Sensing Images
Gencer Sumbul
Chang Xu
Emanuele Dalsasso
Devis Tuia
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland

Abstract
From optical sensors to microwave radars, leveraging the
complementary strengths of remote sensing (RS) sensors
is crucial for achieving dense spatio-temporal monitoring
of our planet. In contrast, recent deep learning models,
whether task-specific or foundational, are often specific to
single sensors or to fixed combinations: adapting such models to different sensory inputs requires both architectural
changes and re-training, limiting scalability and generalization across multiple RS sensors. On the contrary, a single
model able to modulate its feature representations to accept
diverse sensors as input would pave the way to agile and
flexible multi-sensor RS data processing. To address this,
we introduce SMARTIES, a generic and versatile foundation model lifting sensor-specific/dependent efforts and enabling scalability and generalization to diverse RS sensors:
SMARTIES projects data from heterogeneous sensors into a
shared spectrum-aware space, enabling the use of arbitrary
combinations of bands both for training and inference. To
obtain sensor-agnostic representations, we train a single,
unified transformer model reconstructing masked multisensor data with cross-sensor token mixup. On both singleand multi-modal tasks across diverse sensors, SMARTIES
outperforms previous models that rely on sensor-specific
pretraining. Our code and pretrained models are available
at https://gsumbul.github.io/SMARTIES.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) An example of RGB, multispectral, and SAR images
representative of the different spectral and spatial properties of RS
sensors. (b) The spectral bands’ histograms for each sensor are
shown as probability density function estimations, aligned with the
corresponding wavelength range in the electromagnetic spectrum
(shown in log scale). SMARTIES leverages different projection
layers {f1 , f2 , . . . , f17 } for different spectral ranges that allow a
single, unified model independent from sensors specificities.

sensors that can acquire images day and night and independently of weather conditions; thermal sensors measure
the energy emitted directly by objects at the surface and can
be used to estimate surface temperature. The complementary strengths of these sensors hold the potential for continuous, all-day, and all-weather Earth observation, supporting
a wide range of applications in various fields, e.g., agriculture, climate, hydrology, urban planning [14, 42]. Despite
the wealth of RS sensors, a significant barrier remains: the
lack of unified image representations for multi-modal processing of RS data. A significant obstacle to achieve this
goal originates from the highly heterogeneous characteristics of RS sensors, in terms of spectral range, radiometric resolution, and spatial resolution: such diversity forced
previous attempts to design restrictive sensor-specific models [9, 12, 19, 23, 32]. To mitigate this issue, several foundation models (FMs) have been proposed by designing sensorspecific backbones, leading to an increase in computational
complexity [12, 15, 46]. Adding new sensors at pretrain-

1. Introduction
Every day, a vast number of airborne and spaceborne sensors generate tens of terabytes of remote sensing (RS) data,
empowering Earth observation [7] (Fig. 1a). Unlike RGB
natural images, RS data spans a wide spectrum of wavelengths captured by diverse sensors from RGB visible light,
through infrared frequencies and all the way to Microwaves
(Fig. 1b). RS sensors capture electromagnetic radiation at
different frequencies: optical sensors capture (very) highresolution images mostly in the visible and infrared spectrum, offering rich semantic details, but limited by clouds
and daylight; synthetic aperture radars (SAR) are active

5569

