This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Prompt Learning via Gaussian Outlier Synthesis for
Out-of-distribution Detection

1

Yongkang Zhang1,2 Dongyu She2
Zhong Zhou1,2, *
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{zyk, zz}@buaa.edu.cn, shedy@zgclab.edu.cn

95.0

Abstract

37.6% 37.0%

92.5

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to distinguish
whether detected objects belong to known categories or
not. Existing methods extract OOD samples from Indistribution (ID) data to regularize the model’s decision
boundaries. However, the decision boundaries are not adequately regularized because the model does not have sufficient knowledge about the distribution of OOD data. To
address the above issue, we propose an Adaptive Prompt
Learning framework via Gaussian Outlier Synthesis (APLGOS) for OOD detection. Specifically, we leverage the
Vision-Language Model (VLM) to initialize learnable ID
prompts by sampling standardized results from pre-defined
Q&A pairs. Region-level prompts are synthesised in lowlikelihood regions of class-conditional gaussian distributions. These prompts are then utilized to initialize learnable OOD prompts and optimized with adaptive prompt
learning. Also, OOD pseudo-samples are synthesised via
gaussian outlier synthesis. The aforementioned methodology regularizes the model to learn more compact decision
boundaries for ID and OOD categories. Extensive experiments show that APLGOS achieves state-of-the-art performance with less ID data on four mainstream datasets.

AUROC(%)

90.0

APLGOS

Dynamic Prototypes

VOS
31.5%

87.5

30.6%

CSI

85.0

Generalized ODIN
31.2%

31.8%

Mahalanobis

GAN-synthesis

82.5

Energy score
31.4%

80.0

31.2%

77.5

ODIN
20

30

40

50

31.2%
60

FPR95(%)

Figure 1. Quantitative comparisons with state-of-the-art OOD detection methods in terms of FPR95, AUROC and mAP metrics.
Note that larger points denote higher mAP, and the numerical values are also given next to each point. Our APLGOS provides remarkable performance boost on all the metrics.

practical applications and struggles to learn compact decision boundaries that effectively distinguish between known
and unknown categories. During the testing phase, unknown categories are likely to result in erroneous predictions accompanied by a high confidence score. This leads
to severe safety risks in critical safety domains such as autonomous driving.
OOD detection [5, 21, 24, 33] is a research hotspot in
recent years, which aims to enable the detectors to accurately distinguish not only seen categories, but also unseen
categories during training. The detectors need to learn compact decision boundaries during training, ensuring low uncertainty for ID categories while maintaining high uncertainty away from them. To achieve this, existing OOD detection methods [12, 13, 34–36] provide sufficient supervision of OOD data for model training by extracting OOD
pseudo-samples from ID data, helping the model better distinguish between known and unknown categories. However, due to the unpredictable quality of OOD pseudo-

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made significant progress in recent years.
It encompasses a multitude of research domains, including
object detection [22, 40, 52], autonomous driving [41, 51]
and image generation [20, 42]. Various existing deep learning methods rely on large-scale datasets to regularize the
model, enabling it to learn sufficient data distribution and
supervision signals of the training data. In real-world scenarios, where the number of unknown categories is significantly greater than that in the training dataset, the model
lacks knowledge about the distribution of unknown data in
* Corresponding author

3235

