This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Compression for 3D Geometry Sets
Siyu Ren1 Junhui Hou1 * Weiyao Lin2 Wenping Wang3
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Texas A&M University
siyuren2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn, wenping@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
We present NeCGS, the first neural compression paradigm,
which can compress a geometry set encompassing thousands
of detailed and diverse 3D mesh models by up to 900 times
with high accuracy and preservation of detailed geometric structures. Specifically, we first propose TSDF-Def, a
new implicit representation that is capable of accurately
representing irregular 3D mesh models with various structures into regular 4D tensors of uniform and compact size,
where 3D surfaces can be extracted through the deformable
marching cubes. Then we construct a quantization-aware
auto-decoder network architecture to regress these 4D tensors to explore the local geometric similarity within each
shape and across different shapes for redundancy removal,
resulting in more compact representations, including an embedded feature of a smaller size associated with each 3D
model and a network parameter shared by all models. We
finally encode the resulting features and network parameters into bitstreams through entropy coding. Besides, our
NeCGS can handle the dynamic scenario well, where new 3D
models are constantly added to a compressed set. Extensive
experiments and ablation studies demonstrate the significant
advantages of our NeCGS over state-of-the-art methods both
quantitatively and qualitatively. The source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/rsy6318/NeCGS.

1. Introduction
3D mesh models find widespread applications across computer graphics, virtual reality, robotics, and autonomous driving. As geometric data becomes increasingly complex and
voluminous, effective compression techniques have become
critical for efficient storage and transmission.
In contrast to 2D images and videos typically structured
as regular 2D or 3D tensors, 3D mesh models are commonly
represented as irregular polygons, posing challenges for
compression. Thus, a natural idea is to re-structure mesh
* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by NSFC under
Grant 62422118 and in part by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council
under Grants 11219324 and 11219422.

models and then leverage image or video compression techniques to compress them. A common practice involves converting mesh models into voxelized point clouds, with the
ability to reconstruct the original mesh models using surface
reconstruction methods [21, 24]. Based on this, MPEG has
recently developed two types of 3D point cloud compression
(PCC) standards [28, 47]: geometry-based PCC (GPCC) for
static models and video-based PCC (VPCC) for sequential
models. Additionally, the field has seen the emergence of
various learning-based PCC techniques [14, 19, 41, 54, 55]
driven by advances in deep learning, improving overall compression efficiency. However, voxelized point clouds demand
high resolutions (typically 210 or more) to accurately represent geometric shapes, introducing redundancy and limiting
compression efficiency. Moreover, these methods primarily focus on individual 3D models or temporally linked 3D
model sequences, and they face challenges when dealing
with diverse, unrelated 3D shape datasets.
An alternative regular representation method involves employing implicit fields of 3D mesh models, such as signed
distance fields (SDFs) and truncated SDFs (TSDFs). This
kind of approach entails computing the implicit field value
at each uniformly distributed grid point, thereby forming
a regular tensor. Mesh models can be reconstructed from
these tensors using techniques like Marching Cubes [32] or
its variants [15, 45]. In comparison to point clouds, implicit
tensorss offer a way to represent mesh models at a relatively
lower resolution. However, to capture intricate and detailed
geometric structures, larger SDF/TSDF tensors are often necessary when dealing with more complex 3D models. Consequently, when working with geometry sets that encompass
a variety of categories, the need for SDF/TSDF tensors of
varying sizes arises, sometimes requiring very large tensors
to ensure accuracy. This diversity poses significant challenges during the subsequent compression phase. Recently,
neural implicit representation methods, such as DeepSDF
[36], utilize multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to regress the
SDFs of any given query points. While this representation
achieves high accuracy for single or similar models (e.g.,
chairs, tables), the limited receptive field of MLPs makes it
challenging to represent large numbers of models in different

25294

