This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UKBOB: One Billion MRI Labeled Masks for Generalizable 3D Medical Image
Segmentation
Emmanuelle Bourigault

Amir Jamaludin

Abdullah Hamdi

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
emmanuelle@robots.ox.ac.uk

Diversity (Number of Classes)

100

BRATS
BTCV
MIMIC-CXR
Abdomen Atlas
CheXpert
MedMNIST
TCIA
UKBOB (ours)

80
60
40
20
0
102

103

104

105

106

107

108

Dataset Size (Number of 2D Samples, Log Scale)

Figure 1. UKBOB Size and Diversity. Our proposed UK Biobank Organs and Bones (UKBOB) is the largest labeled medical imaging
dataset for segmentation, comprising body organs of 51,761 MRI 3D samples (17.9 M 2D images) and a total of more than 1.37 billion 2D
masks of 72 organs. Left: we show label examples from UKBOB from axial, coronal, and sagittal views. Right: We show a plot of the
size (number of 2D images) and diversity (number of classes) of our UKBOB compared to other medical images datasets. The size of the
bubbles indicates 2D image resolution. This new scale in dataset size and diversity should unlock a new wave of applications and methods in
the computer vision and medical imaging communities.

Abstract
In medical imaging, the primary challenge is collecting
large-scale labeled data due to privacy concerns, logistics,
and high labeling costs. In this work, we present the UK
Biobank Organs and Bones (UKBOB), the largest labeled
dataset of body organs of 51,761 MRI 3D samples (17.9 M
2D images) and a total of more than 1.37 billion 2D segmentation masks of 72 organs based on the UK Biobank
MRI dataset. We utilize automatic labeling, introduce an
automated label cleaning pipeline with organ-specific filters,
and manually annotate a subset of 300 MRIs with 11 abdominal classes to validate the quality (UKBOB-manual). This
approach allows for scaling up the dataset collection while
maintaining confidence in the labels. We further confirm
the validity of the labels by the zero-shot generalization of

trained models on the filtered UKBOB to other small labeled
datasets from a similar domain ( e.g. abdominal MRI). To
further elevate the effect of the noisy labels, we propose
a novel Entropy Test-time Adaptation (ETTA) to refine the
segmentation output. We use UKBOB to train a foundation model (Swin-BOB) for 3D medical image segmentation based on Swin-UNetr, achieving state-of-the-art results
in several benchmarks in 3D medical imaging, including
BRATS brain MRI tumour challenge (+0.4% improvement),
and BTCV abdominal CT scan benchmark (+1.3% improvement). The pre-trained models and the code are available at
https://emmanuelleb985.github.io/ukbob,
while filtered labels will be made available with the UK
Biobank.

21600

