This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differential-informed Sample Selection Accelerates Multimodal Contrastive
Learning
Zihua Zhao1 *, Feng Hong1 *, Mengxi Chen1 , Pengyi Chen1 , Benyuan Liu1 , Jiangchao Yao1,3 B ,
Ya Zhang2,3 B , Yanfeng Wang2,3
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{sjtuszzh, feng.hong, mxchen mc, chenmuqiu, lby0912, Sunarker, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The remarkable success of contrastive-learning-based
multimodal models has been greatly driven by training on
ever-larger datasets with expensive compute consumption.
Sample selection as an alternative efficient paradigm plays
an important direction to accelerate the training process.
However, recent advances on sample selection either mostly
rely on an oracle model to offline select a high-quality
coreset, which is limited in the cold-start scenarios, or focus on online selection based on real-time model predictions, which has not sufficiently or efficiently considered the
noisy correspondence. To address this dilemma, we propose a novel Differential-Informed Sample Selection (DISSect) method, which accurately and efficiently discriminates
the noisy correspondence for training acceleration. Specifically, we rethink the impact of noisy correspondence on
contrastive learning and propose that the differential between the predicted correlation of the current model and
that of a historical model is more informative to characterize sample quality. Based on this, we construct a robust differential-based sample selection and analyze its theoretical insights. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets and various downstream tasks demonstrate
the consistent superiority of DISSect over current state-ofthe-art methods. Source code is available at: https:
//github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/DISSect.

Figure 1. Learning from samples with noisy correspondence (e.g.
wrongly relate a “Bellington” to a sheep) undermines multimodal
contrastive learning. Both clean and noisy samples are memorized
in an overlapping region. DISSect effectively discriminates noisy
correspondence with distinct moving differential δ between hitorical and current sample learning states.

the burden, sample selection [44, 46] draws the increasing
attention recently, as identifying informative and diverse
samples is widely recognized as essential for accelerating
the model convergence and enhancing the performance.
Existing sample selection for acceleration can generally
be categorized into two main lines: coreset sample selection [39, 62] and online sample selection [14, 36]. Coreset selection methods aim to build a coreset from the original data for reproducing training, with inherently an oracle model available as the auxiliary to filter out samples [15, 53]. The success of such methods highlights the
importance of accurately eliminating noisy correspondence
samples, however obtaining such an oracle model is not
always feasible in some cold-start scenarios. In contrast,
online selection [42, 55] focuses on selecting data along
with the training dynamics. However, most of these online

1. Introduction
Multimodal models [7, 19, 23, 27] have widely adopted the
contrastive learning paradigm [38, 64] to capture the mutual
information across modalities. While achieving remarkable success over the past years, much of this progress has
been driven by training on ever-expanding datasets [21, 47],
which often comes at a substantial compute cost. To reduce
* The first two authors contribute equally.

2930

