This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IMG: Calibrating Diffusion Models via Implicit Multimodal Guidance
Jiayi Guo1,2 * Chuanhao Yan1,2 * Xingqian Xu1 Yulin Wang2 Kai Wang1
Gao Huang2† Humphrey Shi1†
1

2

SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech

Tsinghua University

https://github.com/SHI-Labs/IMG-Multimodal-Diffusion-Alignment

(a) Concept Comprehension
One morning I chased an elephant in my pajamas.

(b) Aesthetic Quality
The clock on the side of the metal building is gold and black.

(c) Object Addition
A woman on the top of a butterfly.

(d) Object Correction
A rubber ball and a metallic car.

FLUX

FLUX + IMG (Ours)

FLUX

FLUX + IMG (Ours)

Figure 1. The multimodal misalignment issue. Even the latest state-of-the-art diffusion model, FLUX.1 [dev] (FLUX) [35], may
overlook or misinterpret concepts in prompts. Assisted with our proposed Implicit Multimodal Guidance (IMG) framework, the promptimage misalignment issues are significantly mitigated in various aspects such as concept comprehension, aesthetic quality, object addition,
and correction. In each case, both images are generated with the same random seed for fair comparison.

Abstract
Ensuring precise multimodal alignment between diffusiongenerated images and input prompts has been a longstanding challenge. Earlier works finetune diffusion weight
using high-quality preference data, which tends to be limited and difficult to scale up. Recent editing-based methods further refine local regions of generated images but
may compromise overall image quality. In this work, we
propose Implicit Multimodal Guidance (IMG), a novel re-

generation-based multimodal alignment framework that requires no extra data or editing operations. Specifically,
given a generated image and its prompt, IMG a) utilizes a
multimodal large language model (MLLM) to identify misalignments; b) introduces an Implicit Aligner that manipulates diffusion conditioning features to reduce misalignments and enable re-generation; and c) formulates the realignment goal into a trainable objective, namely Iteratively
Updated Preference Objective. Extensive qualitative and
quantitative evaluations on SDXL, SDXL-DPO, and FLUX
show that IMG outperforms existing alignment methods.

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

16079

