This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MS3D: High-Quality 3D Generation via Multi-Scale Representation Modeling
Guan Luo1,2 Jianfeng Zhang2
1
Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance Seed

Single-Scale Feature

Cross

Multi-Scale Feature

Cross

Reshape

Single-Scale Reconstruction (Prior Works)

Cross

Aggregate

Multi-Scale Reconstruction (Our method)

Figure 1. Previous methods rely on single-scale reconstruction, requiring the model to capture both global structure and local details
simultaneously, often leading to suboptimal results. In contrast, our method decomposes the reconstruction process into progressive
refinement, enabling more precise geometric and texture generation.

Abstract
High-quality textured mesh reconstruction from sparseview images remains a fundamental challenge in computer
graphics and computer vision. Traditional large reconstruction models operate in a single-scale manner, forcing the models to simultaneously capture global structure
and local details, often resulting in compromised reconstructed shapes. In this work, we propose MS3D, a novel
multi-scale 3D reconstruction framework. At its core, our
method introduces a hierarchical structured latent repre-

sentation for multi-scale modeling, coupled with a multiscale feature extraction and integration mechanism. This
enables progressive reconstruction, effectively decomposing the complex task of detailed geometry reconstruction
into a sequence of easier steps. This coarse-to-fine approach effectively captures multi-frequency details, learns
complex geometric patterns, and generalizes well across diverse objects while preserving fine-grained details. Extensive experiments demonstrate MS3D outperforms state-ofthe-art methods and is broadly applicable to both imageand text-to-3D generation. The entire pipeline reconstructs

26336

