This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaScope: Optics-Driven Neural Network for Ultra-Micro Metalens Endoscopy
Wentao Pan1,∗
Xiaoyuan Liu2,3,∗
Zhendong Luo2
Chenxin Li1
Wuyang Li1,3, *
Hengyu Liu1
Din Ping Tsai2,†
Mu Ku Chen2,†
Yixuan Yuan1,†
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, City University of Hong Kong, 3 EPFL
Project Page: https://cuhk-aim-group.github.io/MetaScope/

Abstract
Miniaturized endoscopy has advanced accurate visual perception within the human body. Prevailing research remains limited to conventional cameras employing convex
lenses, where the physical constraints with millimetre-scale
thickness impose serious impediments on the micro-level
clinical. Recently, with the emergence of meta-optics, ultramicro imaging based on metalenses (micron-scale) has garnered great attention, serving as a promising solution.
However, due to the physical difference of metalens, there
is a large gap in data acquisition and algorithm research.
In light of this, we aim to bridge this unexplored gap, advancing the novel metalens endoscopy. First, we establish
datasets for metalens endoscopy and conduct preliminary
optical simulation, identifying two derived optical issues
that physically adhere to strong optical priors. Second, we
propose MetaScope, a novel optics-driven neural network
tailored for metalens endoscopy driven by physical optics.
MetaScope comprises two novel designs: Optics-informed
Intensity Adjustment (OIA), rectifying intensity decay by
learning optical embeddings, and Optics-informed Chromatic Correction (OCC), mitigating chromatic aberration
by learning spatial deformations informed by learned Point
Spread Function (PSF) distributions. To enhance joint
learning, we further deploy a gradient-guided distillation
to transfer knowledge from the foundational model adaptively. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MetaScope
not only outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both metalens segmentation and restoration but also achieves impressive generalized ability in real biomedical scenes.

Figure 1. (a) Miniaturized endoscopy; (b) Comparing convex-lens
and our meta-lens about physical nature and imaging quality.

1. Introduction

testinal tract. This is vital for the early detection of serious
diseases, aiding medical professionals in surgical decisions.
To facilitate endoscopic diagnosis and surgery [57, 67,
72, 73], lots of efforts have been made to develop more robust, accurate, and efficient solutions for disease recognition and segmentation. Some works [1, 9, 32, 41, 50, 56]
focus on data engineering by enhancing diversity, quality,
and scale. Some other works [2, 23, 39, 55, 92, 95] develop more advanced deep-learning models by addressing
numerous algorithmic challenges, including domain generalization [2, 46, 47], privacy preservation [17, 35, 58], and
label-efficient learning [48, 60, 88], among others.
Despite significant algorithmic advancements, existing
studies are limited to conventional cameras that utilize convex lenses [44, 52], whose physical constraints pose substantial barriers to micro-level clinical applications. The
inherent curvature limitations of convex lenses (Fig. 1b
left) hinder the development of ultra-lightweight profiles,
restricting them to millimetre-scale thickness. This impairs navigation through narrow or curved anatomical structures and negatively impacts device size, power consumption, and operational efficiency, hindering progress toward
micro-miniaturized clinical applications.
Recently, with the emergence of meta-optics [13, 36,
69, 70, 82], ultra-micro imaging based on metalenses has
garnered significant attention in micro-robotics, showing a

Miniaturized endoscopy provides reliable internal visual
perception within the human body (Fig. 1a). Recent advancements in computer vision have significantly enhanced
real-time clinical support, such as segmenting the gastroin* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Authors.

25938

