This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MCAM: Multimodal Causal Analysis Model for Ego-Vehicle-Level
Driving Video Understanding
Tongtong Cheng*,1 , Rongzhen Li†,2 , Yixin Xiong∗,1 , Tao Zhang1 , Jing Wang3 , and Kai Liu†,1
1
Department of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
2
National Elite Institute of Engineering, Chongqing University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Deffense Technology, China

Abstract

haviors from visual data into high-level textual narratives.
However, these methods [1, 13, 39] primarily focus on simple behaviors, neglecting the causal relationships between
driving actions and their environmental context. Furthermore, the learning process is often hindered by spurious
correlations, which could severely degrade the accuracy
of causal analysis. Thus, developing a robust model with
causality that mitigates spurious correlations is essential for
advancing autonomous driving technologies.
Current approaches to driving behavior understanding
can be categorized into two main streams: caption generation [34, 47] and retrieval-based matching [26, 27, 30,
41, 42]. For instance, Jin et al. [17] proposed ADAPT,
a Video Swin Transformer-based architecture [23], which
pairs driving behavior descriptions with comprehensive predictions. Similarly, Fan et al. [13] introduced MLLMSUL, a framework combining multi-scale feature extraction
with large language models (LLMs) like LLaMA for crossmodal video understanding. As illustrated in Figure 1, such
methods establish causal links between actions (e.g., stopping) and environmental changes (e.g., traffic lights turning from yellow to red). While these approaches provide
insights into driving behaviors, their causal reasoning is
often limited to probabilistic correlations rather than detailed causal inference. On the other hand, retrieval-based
methods, such as RAG-driver [46] and RAC3 [39], leverage retrieval mechanisms to enhance scene understanding
by searching for similar scenarios. However, these methods
heavily depend on large-scale datasets and fail to effectively
mitigate the problem of spurious correlations inherent.
To reduce the detrimental impact of spurious causal relationships—stemming from spatial-temporal correlations
in driving video understanding—and to establish authentic
causal relationships, researchers have focused on a sophisticated realm of causal learning that emphasizes attention
mechanisms [25] and causal reasoning [37, 38, 48], with
particular emphasis on exploring and understanding spatiotemporal causal relationships. For example, Cong et al. [10]
introduced spatio-temporal attention to capture intra-frame

Accurate driving behavior recognition and reasoning are
critical for autonomous driving video understanding. However, existing methods often tend to dig out the shallow
causal, fail to address spurious correlations across modalities, and ignore the ego-vehicle level causality modeling.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel Multimodal Causal Analysis Model (MCAM) that constructs latent causal structures between visual and language modalities. Firstly, we design a multi-level feature extractor to
capture long-range dependencies. Secondly, we design a
causal analysis module that dynamically models driving
scenarios using a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of driving
states. Thirdly, we utilize a vision-language transformer to
align critical visual features with their corresponding linguistic expressions. Extensive experiments on the BDDX, and CoVLA datasets demonstrate that MCAM achieves
SOTA performance in visual-language causal relationship
learning. Furthermore, the model exhibits superior capability in capturing causal characteristics within video sequences, showcasing its effectiveness for autonomous driving applications. The code is available at https://
github.com/SixCorePeach/MCAM

1. Introduction
With the advancement of autonomous driving technologies,
understanding driving videos has become a critical research
area [17, 24, 29, 46]. This is due to the cost-effective acquisition of videos, which provide richer feature information than images [9, 19]. Moreover, understanding driving videos is crucial for comprehending autonomous driving behavior, supporting the wider adoption of intelligent
vehicles. Recent studies have explored vision-to-language
methods [6, 12, 15, 16, 43], which translate driving be* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

5479

