This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OV-SCAN: Semantically Consistent Alignment for Novel Object Discovery in
Open-Vocabulary 3D Object Detection
Adrian Chow

Evelien Riddell

Yimu Wang Sean Sedwards
University of Waterloo

Krzysztof Czarnecki

{ahtchow,evelien.riddell,yimu.wang,sean.sedwards,krzysztof.czarnecki}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Open-vocabulary 3D object detection for autonomous driving aims to detect novel objects beyond the predefined training label sets in point cloud scenes. Existing approaches
achieve this by connecting traditional 3D object detectors
with vision-language models (VLMs) to regress 3D bounding boxes for novel objects and perform open-vocabulary
classification through cross-modal alignment between 3D
and 2D features. However, achieving robust cross-modal
alignment remains a challenge due to semantic inconsistencies when generating corresponding 3D and 2D feature
pairs. To overcome this challenge, we present OV-SCAN,
an Open-Vocabulary 3D framework that enforces Semantically Consistent Alignment for Novel object discovery. OVSCAN employs two core strategies: discovering precise
3D annotations and filtering out low-quality or corrupted
alignment pairs (arising from 3D annotation, occlusioninduced, or resolution-induced noise). Extensive experiments on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate that OV-SCAN
achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/ahtchow/OV-SCAN.

Figure 1. Cross-modal Alignment Performance. The red CDF
shows the distance distribution between 3D embeddings from
a baseline OV-3D detector and 2D CLIP embeddings on the
nuScenes validation set. The green CDF, using OV-SCAN instead of the baseline, shifts left, indicating improved 3D-2D alignment enabled by our higher-quality proposal pairings and alignment head.

pabilities rely on large-scale datasets of image-text pairs,
which are often unavailable for 3D data [8, 20, 21, 28, 43].
Without similar large-scale 3D-text datasets, methods must
find alternative ways to provide accurate 3D annotations for
novel objects and achieve alignment between 3D and text.
OV-3D object detection faces two main challenges: (1)
novel object discovery (NOD), which involves generating
3D labels for novel objects in order to train an off-the-shelf
LiDAR-based detector, and (2) semantic alignment between
3D features and textual embeddings. Existing NOD approaches generally fall into two categories: online and offline methods. The former starts with a set of base objects
and progressively expands the training labels to include
novel objects during training [4, 5]. The latter generates
pseudo-labels for novel objects ahead of time [10, 25, 49].
Online methods often struggle to balance training with discovery, leading to biases in object shape and scale that result
in overfitting to base categories. Due to the aforementioned
challenges with online methods, recent work has increasingly shifted toward offline approaches. In these offline
pipelines, OV-2D detectors such as Grounding DINO [21]
and OWL-ViT [27] first generate 2D proposals from multiview images, which are typically paired with a point cloud.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in autonomous driving have intensified research in 3D object detection, with most methods operating in a closed-set setting, classifying objects into a small
set of predefined categories (e.g. vehicle, cyclist, pedestrian). However, such high-level object identification is inadequate for navigating complex real-world environments.
Autonomous systems need to recognize objects at a deeper
semantic level. For instance, distinguishing between a fire
truck and a school bus, rather than simply labeling them
as trucks or buses, is critical for safe and context-aware
decision-making.
To address the need for deeper semantic understanding
in 3D vision systems, open-vocabulary (OV)-3D object detection has emerged. In OV-2D object detection, OV ca-

7990

