This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TaxaDiffusion: Progressively Trained Diffusion Model
for Fine-Grained Species Generation
Amin Karimi Monsefi 1
1

Mridul Khurana 2 Rajiv Ramnath 1
Wei-Lun Chao 1 Cheng Zhang 3

The Ohio State University

2

Virginia Tech

Abstract
We propose TaxaDiffusion, a taxonomy-informed training
framework for diffusion models to generate fine-grained animal images with high morphological and identity accuracy.
Unlike standard approaches that treat each species as an
independent category, TaxaDiffusion incorporates domain
knowledge that many species exhibit strong visual similarities, with distinctions often residing in subtle variations
of shape, pattern, and color. To exploit these relationships, TaxaDiffusion progressively trains conditioned diffusion models across different taxonomic levels — starting
from broad classifications such as Class and Order, refining through Family and Genus, and ultimately distinguishing at the Species level. This hierarchical learning strategy first captures coarse-grained morphological
traits shared by species with common ancestors, facilitating knowledge transfer, before refining fine-grained differences for species-level distinction. As a result, TaxaDiffusion enables accurate generation even with limited training samples per species. Extensive experiments on three
fine-grained animal datasets demonstrate that TaxaDiffusion outperforms existing approaches, achieving superior
fidelity in fine-grained animal image generation. Project
page: https://amink8.github.io/TaxaDiffusion/

3

Anuj Karpatne 2

Texas A&M University

Phylum

Chordata

Class

Actinopterygii

Order

Perciformes

Family

Pomacentridae

Genus

Abudefduf

Species

Abudefduf
abdominalis

Real Image TaxaDiffusion

LoRA

Zero-Shot

Figure 1. Taxonomy encodes a rich hierarchical structure for categorizing life. We propose TaxaDiffusion to leverage such knowledge to enable fine-grained, controllable image generation. Compared to Zero-Shot generation with vanilla Stable Diffusion [37]
and LoRA fine-tuning [14], TaxaDiffusion achieves higher accuracy and captures fine details that align closely with real images.

els often fail to generate morphologically accurate images
or images that precisely reflect the identity of species.
Two key domain characteristics contribute to this issue.
First, animals are highly dynamic objects with considerable
degrees of freedom. They exhibit various poses and movements, resulting in significant intra-class variation. Second, with millions of animal species on Earth, collecting
sufficient samples to capture both intra-class variations and
inter-class distinctions is a daunting task. These challenges
paint a grim picture for accurate animal generation. We ask:

1. Introduction

How can we learn high-quality generative models for
animals without a large amount of data per species?

Diffusion models have revolutionized the field of image
generation [4, 12, 33]. By progressively denoising sampled
noise, these models can generate diverse, high-quality images with fine details. Further enhanced by vision-language
models [34] and various control mechanisms [1, 26, 55, 58],
diffusion models can produce complex compositions of
common concepts (e.g., objects and attributes) while faithfully aligning with user inputs.
However, when it comes to generating fine-grained concepts, specifically animal species, diffusion models still face
significant challenges. Given a species name, existing mod-

Our key insight is that, despite the vast number of animal species, they are not independent categories. Instead,
it took half a billion years for the Animalia Kingdom to
evolve from a few species to millions, and species that diverged more recently often share similar visual traits. While
CLIP [25, 34], commonly used for prompting in diffusion models, may have learned species relationships from
image-text pairs, it primarily relies on correlations. These
correlations are only reliable when sufficient data is available — often not the case for fine-grained animal species.

8579

