This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDF: Iterative Dynamic Filtering Networks for Generalizable Image Denoising
Muhammad Kashif Ali2
Tae Hyun Kim1†
Jaekyun Ko1 *
1
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University
2
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University

Dongjin Kim1 *

{dongjinkim, rhworbs1124, taehyunkim}@hanyang.ac.kr
Project page:

OOD Denoising Performance

Abstract

Synthetic / Real-World / Monte Carlo

Image denoising is a fundamental challenge in computer vision, with applications in photography and medical imaging.
While deep learning–based methods have shown remarkable
success, their reliance on specific noise distributions limits
generalization to unseen noise types and levels. Existing
approaches attempt to address this with extensive training
data and high computational resources but they still suffer
from overfitting. To address these issues, we conduct image
denoising by utilizing dynamically generated kernels via efficient operations. This approach helps prevent overfitting
and improves resilience to unseen noise. Specifically, our
method leverages a Feature Extraction Module for robust
noise-invariant features, Global Statistics and Local Correlation Modules to capture comprehensive noise characteristics
and structural correlations. The Kernel Prediction Module then employs these cues to produce pixel-wise varying
kernels adapted to local structures, which are then applied
iteratively for denoising. This ensures both efficiency and
superior restoration quality. Despite being trained on singlelevel Gaussian noise, our compact model (∼ 0.04 M) excels
across diverse noise types and levels, demonstrating the
promise of iterative dynamic filtering for practical image
denoising.

1. Introduction
Image denoising remains a fundamental, yet challenging,
problem in computer vision, with applications spanning
photography and medical imaging. Recently, deep learning–based approaches [9, 10, 44, 68, 78, 79, 82–85, 88] have
demonstrated remarkable performance by learning an end-toend mapping from noisy inputs to clean outputs. However,
many of these methods are specifically tailored to the noise
distributions present in their training datasets, limiting their
generalization capabilities when faced with unseen noise
types or levels [8, 11, 52, 82, 85].
*

Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

kashifali@swjtu.edu.cn

https://github.com/dongjinkim9/IDF

Gaussian
Spatial
Gaussian

(25.73dB)

Model Size

Ours
MaskedDenoising
CODE
Restormer

Real-World
(SIDD)
(32.08dB)

(27.87dB)

Speckle

Monte Carlo
[64-SPP]
(28.09dB)

(29.18dB)

Ours (0.04M)

Light

DnCNN (0.67M)

MaskedDenoising(0.88M)

CODE(12.23M)

Mixture
[Level-4]
(28.11dB)

Poisson
(27.47dB)
Salt&Pepper
(33.38dB)

Restormer (26.10M)

Large

Figure 1. A comparison of denoising performance (PSNR) across
various noise types and model sizes (number of parameters) between our method and comparable approaches [8, 79, 82, 88].

To address these challenges, several strategies have been
proposed to improve robustness to out-of-distribution (OOD)
noise. Self-supervised denoising networks [5, 26, 37, 39, 41,
42, 56, 69, 81], for instance, adapt neural networks to the
unknown noise distribution without accessing clean images.
However, these methods are vulnerable to noise types that
are not included in the training data and often require a
time-consuming test-time adaptation [30, 45, 53]. In contrast, various methods [2, 27, 31, 33, 35, 75, 77] seek to
mitigate overfitting issues by creating synthetic training data
sets via noise modeling techniques. However, the resilience
to OOD noise is still limited because the noise models are
restricted to the training distribution. While, prior-based
methods [11, 13, 40, 46] leverage priors from pretrained
models trained on large training datasets to extract distortioninvariant features for robust denoising. Nonetheless, these
approaches are also limited in scenarios where extensive pretraining is not feasible. Recently, based on masked training
strategies, the MaskedDenoising [8] has been proposed to
regularize networks to learn intrinsic image structures rather
than overfitting to specific noise patterns. However, because

12180

