This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SA-Occ: Satellite-Assisted 3D Occupancy Prediction in Real World
Chen Chen1,2* , Zhirui Wang1 *, Taowei Sheng1,2 , Yi Jiang1,2 , Yundu Li1,2 , Peirui Cheng1 ,
Luning Zhang1 , Kaiqiang Chen1†, Yanfeng Hu1 , Xue Yang3 , Xian Sun1
1

Key Laboratory of Target Cognition and Application Technology,
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
chenchen235@mails.ucas.ac.cn, chenkq@aircas.ac.cn
https://github.com/chenchen235/SA-Occ

Figure 1. Street views provide real-time observations but are significantly affected by occlusions from both static (blue regions occluded
by the wall and door) and dynamic objects (yellow regions occluded by the vehicles). Additionally, perspective projections lead to
sparse observations in distant regions. Integrating satellite imagery enhances perception, particularly in occluded areas and distant regions
(orange boxes). However, a key challenge in fusing satellite and street views is the inconsistency of dynamic objects due to the temporal
gap between observations (red boxes: absence of the dynamic vehicle in satellite view).

Abstract
Existing vision-based 3D occupancy prediction methods are
inherently limited in accuracy due to their exclusive reliance on street-view imagery, neglecting the potential benefits of incorporating satellite views. We propose SA-Occ,
the first Satellite-Assisted 3D occupancy prediction model,
which leverages GPS & IMU to integrate historical yet
readily available satellite imagery into real-time applications, effectively mitigating limitations of ego-vehicle perceptions, involving occlusions and degraded performance
in distant regions. To address the core challenges of crossview perception, we propose: 1) Dynamic-Decoupling Fusion, which resolves inconsistencies in dynamic regions
caused by the temporal asynchrony between satellite and
street views; 2) 3D-Proj Guidance, a module that enhances
3D feature extraction from inherently 2D satellite imagery;
and 3) Uniform Sampling Alignment, which aligns the
sampling density between street and satellite views. Evaluated on Occ3D-nuScenes, SA-Occ achieves state-of-the-art

performance, especially among single-frame methods, with
a 39.05% mIoU (a 6.97% improvement), while incurring
only 6.93 ms of additional latency per frame.

1. Introduction

* Co-first authors.
† Corresponding author.

Vision-based 3D occupancy prediction is widely favored in
autonomous driving for its cost-effectiveness [41], yet it often struggles with accuracy limitations [20, 25]. Existing
methods either improve accuracy through increasingly complex models [12, 18, 32, 40], or seek a balance between
accuracy and speed using sparse and lightweight methods
[9, 17, 24, 29, 39]. Despite these advances, all these methods rely exclusively on street views and ignore the benefits
of integrating satellite views, thereby susceptible to performance degradation caused by occlusions and sparse sampling in distance regions, as shown in Figure 1.
Satellite-street cross-view perception has evolved from
coarse-grained retrieval [10] to fine-grained localization
[5, 17, 24, 29, 37], and has further expanded to other tasks
such as fine-grained building attribute segmentation [36]
and cross-view synthesis [14, 21, 27, 35]. These advance-

27021

