This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple yet Mighty Hartley Diffusion Versatilist for
Generalizable Dense Vision Tasks
Qi Bi1,3∗ , Jingjun Yi2∗ , Huimin Huang2 , Hao Zheng2 , Haolan Zhan4 ,
Wei Ji5 , Yawen Huang2 , Yuexiang Li6 , Yefeng Zheng1
1
Westlake University, China 2 Tencent Jarvis Lab, China
3
University of Amsterdam, Netherland 4 Monash University, Australia
5
Yale University, United States 6 Macau University, Macau
∗: equal contribution

huiminhuang@tencent.com, yuexiang.li@ieee.org, zhengyefeng@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

Source Domain

Diffusion models have demonstrated powerful capability as a
versatilist for dense vision tasks, yet the generalization ability to unseen domains remains rarely explored. This paper
presents HarDiff, an efﬁcient frequency learning scheme,
so as to advance generalizable paradigms for diffusion based
dense prediction. It draws inspiration from a ﬁne-grained
analysis of Discrete Hartley Transform, where some lowfrequency features activate the broader content of an image,
while some high-frequency features maintain sufﬁcient details for dense pixels. Consequently, HarDiff consists of
two key components. The low-frequency training process extracts structural priors from the source domain, to enhance
understanding of task-related content. The high-frequency
sampling process utilizes detail-oriented guidance from the
unseen target domain, to infer precise dense predictions with
target-related details. Extensive empirical evidence shows
that HarDiff can be easily plugged into various dense
vision tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation, depth estimation
and haze removal, yielding improvements over the state-ofthe-art methods in twelve public benchmarks.

Semantic Segmentation

Train

Test

Target Domains

Image Encoder

Haze Removal

Training

Noisy Low Freq
(ߟ)
(Content)
n

High Freq
(Detail)

Noisy
(ߟǯ )

Sampling

Depth Estimation

Semantic Segmentation

Map Decoder

Depth Estimation

Haze Removal

Pred
Semantic Segmentation

Depth Estimation

Haze Removal

Multiple Dense Vision Tasks

Figure 1. HarDiff is a domain-generalized diffusion versatilist
for dense vision tasks. It is designed to (1) train on a speciﬁc source
domain in a generative manner, facilitating effective test across
diverse domains within the same dense vision task; and (2) exhibit
robust adaptability that encompasses multiple dense vision tasks.

a versatilist model has to encounter various images from
unseen domains within each dense vision task.
The emergence of diffusion model [30, 60, 62], an advanced deep generative approach, has revolutionized the
dense vision tasks through the following two key processes:
• Training Process: It learns the conversion between noise
(η) and ground truth, conditioned on the image feature.
• Sampling Process: During inference, it iteratively reﬁne
the randomly-sampled noise (η  ) into desired prediction.
The forward diffusion of training process can be regarded
as a form of low-pass ﬁltering that captures semantic information [42, 70, 96], promoting the learning of the joint
probability distribution between image and ground truth. It
also pioneers a novel approach for domain generalization, by
mapping the source data with domain-speciﬁc style into the
noise distribution with domain-agnostic content. However,
designing a versatile domain-generalized diffusion model for
various dense vision tasks imposes higher demands on the
generative procedure, necessitating a training process that

1. Introduction
Dense vision tasks play a fundamental role in computer vision, which predict a certain attribute for each pixel in an
image (e.g., semantic category [19, 32, 41, 99], depth value
[4, 5, 90]). Efforts have been made in the past decade to advance this ﬁeld, but most models are specialized for a certain
dense pixel task [17, 78, 88]. Recently, devising a versatilist
model to advance the feasibility for multiple dense vision
tasks has drawn increasing attention [23, 33, 79]. However,
the underlying assumption of these work is that, the training
and inference images for each dense vision task follow the
identical and independent distribution (i.i.d.). Practically,

6748

