This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SemGes: Semantics-aware Co-Speech Gesture Generation using Semantic
Coherence and Relevance Learning
Lanmiao Liu1,2,3 Esam Ghaleb1,2 Aslı Özyürek1,2 and Zerrin Yumak3
1

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 2 Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Behaviour 3 Utrecht University
{lanmiao.liu, esam.ghaleb, asli.ozyurek}@mpi.nl

Abstract

z.yumak@uu.nl

Speaker ID

Creating a virtual avatar with semantically coherent
gestures that are aligned with speech is a challenging
task. Existing gesture generation research mainly focused on generating rhythmic beat gestures, neglecting
the semantic context of the gestures. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach for semantic grounding in cospeech gesture generation that integrates semantic information at both fine-grained and global levels. Our
approach starts with learning the motion prior through
a vector-quantized variational autoencoder. Built on
this model, a second-stage module is applied to automatically generate gestures from speech, text-based semantics and speaker identity that ensures consistency
between the semantic relevance of generated gestures
and co-occurring speech semantics through semantic
coherence and relevance modules. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach enhances the realism and coherence of semantic gestures. Extensive experiments and user studies show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches across two benchmarks in co-speech gesture generation in both objective and subjective metrics. The qualitative results of
our model, code, dataset and pre-trained models can be
viewed at https://semgesture.github.io/.

Crossmodal Integration

SemGes
Multimodal Consistency
Codebook

... in my free time ....
Semantic Embeddings

Motion
Priors
Semantic Coherence

Generated
Gesture

Ground Truth

Semantics-Aware
Generated Gesture

Iconic Gesture

Semantic Relevance

1. Introduction

Figure 1. SemGes integrates audio, text-based semantics,
and speaker identity to produce both contextually relevant
(discourse-level) and fine-grained (local) gestures. A semantic coherence module aligns text and motion embeddings. The
multimodal consistency loss synchronizes the quantized multimodal representations to match the quantized learned motion
features for final speech-driven semantics-aware gesture generation. The semantic relevance loss selectively emphasizes
gestures with semantic annotations.

Human language is inherently multimodal, with gestures and speech complementing each other to convey pragmatic and semantic information [21, 35]. Cospeech gestures are non-verbal cues that are uniquely
related to co-occurring speech, pragmatically, semantically, and temporally. For example, representational
iconic gestures that visually express the semantic content of speech and interact with spoken language [13,
14, 19, 21, 41]. A long-standing goal in Computer Vision is to create digital humans that use non-verbal cues
in sync with speech. Gesture generation—synthesizing

13963

movements from co-occurring speech, masked motion,
or speaker identity—has advanced to enhance AI agents’
expressiveness and realism [29]. However, much of the
focus has gone into generating rhythmic beat gestures
with limited semantic information, leaving representational gestures that convey semantic messages (e.g.,
iconic) less explored [29, 40].
Generating spontaneous and semantically rich gestures from speech comes with multiple challenges. First,
it requires capturing global discourse-level information
and local fine-grained details (e.g., salient words) to
generate speech-driven gestures that reflect the intended
meaning and align with speech temporally and semantically. Second, existing methods often generate repetitive and short sequences that do not span the full range
of expressive motions required for natural communication. To leverage semantics when generating gestures,
researchers have attempted to align motion with speech
representations at a global level, e.g., by leveraging pre-

