This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Stabilized and Efﬁcient Diffusion Transformers through
Long-Skip-Connections with Spectral Constraints
Guanjie Chen1,2 * Xinyu Zhao3 * Yucheng Zhou4 Xiaoye Qu 2,5 Tianlong Chen 3† Yu Cheng6†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 4 SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau
5
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 6 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
chenguanjie@sjtu.edu.cn, xinyu@cs.unc.edu
3

Noise Output

...

FFN
Cross-attention
Temporal
self-attention

Block

Block 2

Block

Block 1

Block

Cross-attention
Norm

Spatial
self-attention

Linear

Condition

FFN

Block 3

Noise Latent

(a) Feature similarity across timesteps

(b) Adding long-skip-connections to DiT

(c) Improving efficiency without performance drop

Figure 1. (a) Feature similarities between standard and cache-accelerated outputs in vanilla DiT (caching with FORA [30] and FasterDiff [13]) and our proposed Skip-DiT. Skip-DiT presents consistently higher feature similarity, demonstrating superior stability after
caching. (b) Illustration of Skip-DiT that modiﬁes vanilla DiT models using long-skip-connection to connect shallow and deep DiT blocks.
Dashed arrows indicate paths where computation can be skipped in cached inference. (c) Comparison of video generation quality (PNSR)
and inference speedup of different DiT caching methods. Skip-DiT maintains higher generation quality even at greater speedup factors.

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiT) have emerged as a powerful architecture for image and video generation, offering
superior quality and scalability. However, their practical
application suffers from inherent dynamic feature instability, leading to error ampliﬁcation during cached inference.
Through systematic analysis, we identify the absence of longrange feature preservation mechanisms as the root cause of
unstable feature propagation and perturbation sensitivity. To
this end, we propose Skip-DiT, an image and video generative DiT variant enhanced with Long-Skip-Connections
(LSCs) - the key efﬁciency component in U-Nets. Theoretical
spectral norm and visualization analysis demonstrate how
LSCs stabilize feature dynamics. Skip-DiT architecture
and its stabilized dynamic feature enable an efﬁcient statical caching mechanism that reuses deep features across
timesteps while updating shallow components. Extensive
experiments across the image and video generation tasks
demonstrate that Skip-DiT achieves: (1) 4.4× training

acceleration and faster convergence, (2) 1.5 − 2× inference
acceleration with negligible quality loss and high ﬁdelity
to the original output , outperforming existing DiT caching
methods across various quantitative metrics. Our ﬁndings
establish Long-Skip-Connections as critical architectural
components for stable and efﬁcient diffusion transformers.
Codes are provided in the URL1 .

17708

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [3, 8, 24, 51] have emerged as the de-facto
solution for visual generation, owing to their high ﬁdelity outputs and ability to incorporate various conditioning signals,
particularly natural language. Classical diffusion models
typically adopt U-Net [27] as their denoising backbone. Recently, Diffusion Transformers (DiT) [4, 23] introduce an
alternative architecture to replace traditional convolutional
1 https://github.com/OpenSparseLLMs/Skip-DiT
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Authors.

