This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRACE: Learning 3D Gaussian Physical Dynamics from Multi-view Videos
Jinxi Li, Ziyang Song, Bo Yang*
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{jinxi.li, ziyang.song}@connect.polyu.hk, bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk
Ground Truth Extrapolation at 𝒕 = 𝟏. 𝟎

TRACE (Ours) Extrapolation at 𝒕 = 𝟏. 𝟎

Deform-3DGS Extrapolation at 𝒕 = 𝟏. 𝟎

PSNR: 36.437

PSNR: 25.631

PSNR: 28.885

PSNR: 24.847

Figure 1. Given video frames of a real-world dynamic scene, our TRACE can learn the underlying physics and accurately predict the future
motion of a rode passing through a hyperbolic slot and a track keep going forward, while the existing method cannot.

Abstract

further predicting their future states are crucial for emerging applications in robotics, mixed reality, and embodied
AI. With the advancement of recent 3D representations
such as NeRF [35] and 3DGS [19], a plethora of works
[40, 52, 55] have been proposed to model various dynamic
3D scenes, achieving excellent performance in interpolating
novel views within the observed time. However, they often
fail to extrapolate future frames, essentially because they do
not learn the underlying physics priors of 3D scenes.
To learn physics priors, existing methods mainly consist of two categories: 1) physics-informed neural network
(PINN) based methods [43] which integrate the governing
partial differential equations (PDEs) into loss functions to
drive neural networks to learn physically plausible dynamic
3D scenes such as floating smoke [42] and simple moving objects [24]. While demonstrating promising results in
modeling 3D geometry and physics such as velocity and
viscosity, these methods usually need boundary constraints
such as accurate object/foreground masks which may not
always be available in practice. In addition, adding PINN
losses is not a free lunch, but significantly sacrifices the efficiency in training and accuracy at boundary regions. 2)
Physics model based methods [18, 51, 61] which encode
various physics systems into neural networks to model elastic objects, fluids, etc.. Thanks to the explicit physics priors
added, these methods obtain impressive results in physical
properties learning and simulation. Nevertheless, they are
often limited to specific types of objects, materials, or motions due to the lack of generality of encoded physics priors,
thus being unable to predict future motions of complex dynamic 3D objects and scenes.

In this paper, we aim to model 3D scene geometry, appearance, and physical information just from dynamic multiview videos in the absence of any human labels. By leveraging physics-informed losses as soft constraints or integrating simple physics models into neural nets, existing works
often fail to learn complex motion physics, or doing so requires additional labels such as object types or masks. We
propose a new framework named TRACE to model the motion physics of complex dynamic 3D scenes. The key novelty of our method is that, by formulating each 3D point as
a rigid particle with size and orientation in space, we directly learn a translation rotation dynamics system for each
particle, explicitly estimating a complete set of physical parameters to govern the particle’s motion over time. Extensive experiments on three existing dynamic datasets and
one newly created challenging synthetic datasets demonstrate the extraordinary performance of our method over
baselines in the task of future frame extrapolation. A nice
property of our framework is that multiple objects or parts
can be easily segmented just by clustering the learned physical parameters. Our datasets and code are available at
https://github.com/vLAR-group/TRACE .

1. Introduction
Regarding our daily dynamic 3D scenes such as falling
balls, rotating fans, and folding chairs, precisely modeling their geometry, appearance, and physical properties, and
* Corresponding Author

8820

