This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GM-MoE: Low-Light Enhancement with Gated-Mechanism
Mixture-of-Experts
*

Minwen Liao1

Haobo Dong2

*

Xinyi Wang3

*

†

†

†

Kurban Ubul1

Yihua Shao4 Ziyang Yan5
1
Xinjiang University 2 Harbin University of Commerce
3
Changchun University of Science and Technology
4
University of Science and Technology Beijing 5 University of Trento

Abstract
Input

Low-light enhancement has wide applications in autonomous driving, 3D reconstruction, remote sensing,
surveillance, and so on, which can significantly improve
information utilization. However, most existing methods
lack generalization and are limited to specific tasks such
as image recovery. To address these issues, we propose Gated-Mechanism Mixture-of-Experts (GM-MoE),
the first framework to introduce a mixture-of-experts network for low-light image enhancement. GM-MoE comprises a dynamic gated weight conditioning network and
three sub-expert networks, each specializing in a distinct
enhancement task. Combining a self-designed gated mechanism that dynamically adjusts the weights of the subexpert networks for different data domains. Additionally,
we integrate local and global feature fusion within subexpert networks to enhance image quality by capturing
multi-scale features. Experimental results demonstrate that
the GM-MoE achieves superior generalization compared
to over 20 existing approaches, reaching state-of-the-art
performance on PSNR on 5 benchmarks and SSIM on 4
benchmarks, respectively. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/Sameenok/gm- moe- lowlightenhancement.git

MOST EXISTING
LLIE METHODS

GM-MoE

Imbalanced
Global Information

+ Mixture-of-Experts

Card background:
colors are greener than GT
and distorted

Card background:
colors are closer and
more natural

Ground Truth

Input

✓

Excessive Focus
On Global Information

+ Gated-Mechanism

Stapler: poor color
recovery and high noise

Stapler: vivid colors,
high clarity

Ground Truth

✓

Figure 1. Given a low-light image, our GE-MoE achieves better performance (for both object and whole scene) compared with
LightenDiffusion [18]

.
fine details, enabling more reliable scene understanding in
challenging lighting conditions. Although recent advancements [22, 25] have improved LLIE performance, most
existing methods focus on addressing specific challenges,
such as noise suppression or detail restoration, rather than
providing a comprehensive solution for diverse low-light
scenarios. First, many existing algorithms have the problem
of unbalanced global information due to local enhancement.
Traditional algorithms such as histogram equalization enhance the image through a single strategy, which often overenhances local areas, resulting in loss of image details or

1. Introduction
Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) is a crucial
research area with diverse applications, including autonomous driving [54], low-light scene reconstruction [35,
55], remote sensing [35, 42, 59], and image/video analysis [39–41], since it enhances visibility and preserves
* These three authors contributed equally to this work and are considered co-first authors.
† Corresponding authors.

8766

