This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Weather-aware Aggregation and Adaptation for
Semantic Segmentation under Adverse Conditions
Yuwen Pan1 Rui Sun1 Wangkai Li 1 Tianzhu Zhang1,2 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
{panyw, issunrui, lwklwk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Semantic segmentation under adverse conditions is critical for reliable visual perception in challenging weather
environments. These extreme scenarios introduce distortions, such as low contrast and reduced visibility, making
traditional segmentation models struggle. The scarcity of
labeled data in such conditions makes it difficult to train
models directly for these environments. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been proposed as a solution to
transfer knowledge from labeled source domains (normal
weather) to unlabeled target domains (adverse weather).
However, existing methods face significant challenges, particularly due to weather unawareness and feature heterogeneity. Many models fail to account for the unique characteristics of different weather conditions, and the significant feature discrepancies between normal and adverse
weather images hinder effective adaptation. In this paper,
we propose a novel weather-aware aggregation and adaptation network that leverages characteristic knowledge to
achieve weather homogenization and enhance scene perception. Specifically, we introduce amplitude prompt aggregation to capture essential characteristics from the Fourier
frequency domain that are indicative of different weather
conditions. Additionally, we employ weather heterogeneity adaptation to mitigate the inter-domain heterogeneity,
thereby achieving feature homogenization across diverse
environments. Extensive experimental results on multiple challenging benchmarks demonstrate that our method
achieves consistent improvements for semantic segmentation under adverse conditions.

Source
Domain

normal

Target
Domain

snow

Vision
Embedding

Feature Extraction

Weather-unawareness

Abstract

TeacherStudent
Network

Severe
heterogeneity
(a) Traditional Cross-weather Paradigm

rain
Characteristic
Aggregation

snow

Heterogeneity
Adaptation

normal

Weather-aware
Prompts

Weather
homogenization

TeacherStudent
Network

rain
(b) Weather-aware Aggregation and Adaptation (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of the traditional cross-weather paradigm
and our weather-aware aggregation and adaptation. To mitigate the
existing issues (unawareness of weather characteristics and severe
cross-weather heterogeneity), we aim to aggregate weather-aware
attribute knowledge and homogenize domain discrepancies.

1. Introduction

tonomous driving [34, 37, 59] and surveillance [13, 32, 60].
However, the performance of segmentation models often
degrades significantly when faced with adverse weather
conditions [22, 45], including night, fog, rain, and snow.
The deterioration in visibility and scene appearance poses
a substantial challenge for traditional segmentation algorithms, which are typically trained on datasets collected under normal weather conditions. Therefore, exploring an
effective way for semantic parsing under extreme weather
conditions is highly anticipated.
Extensive research efforts have been devoted to semantic segmentation in adverse weather conditions [7, 26, 41–

Semantic segmentation involves assigning a class label to
each pixel in an image [30, 35, 36, 38, 47], which plays a
crucial role in various real-world applications such as au* Corresponding author.

13952

