This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EA-KD: Entropy-based Adaptive Knowledge Distillation
Chi-Ping Su1,* , Ching-Hsun Tseng2,* , Bin Pu3,† , Lei Zhao4 , Jiewen Yang3 , Zhuangzhuang Chen3 ,
Shin-Jye Lee1,†
1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, 2 The University of Manchester,
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 4 Hunan University
Abstract

Knowledge distillation (KD) enables a smaller “student”
model to mimic a larger “teacher” model by transferring
knowledge from the teacher’s output or features. However,
most KD methods treat all samples uniformly, overlooking the varying learning value of each sample and thereby
limiting effectiveness. In this paper, we propose Entropybased Adaptive Knowledge Distillation (EA-KD), a simple yet effective plug-and-play KD method that prioritizes
learning from valuable samples. EA-KD quantifies each
sample’s learning value by strategically combining the entropy of the teacher and student output, then dynamically
reweights the distillation loss to place greater emphasis
on high-entropy samples. Extensive experiments across diverse KD frameworks and tasks–including image classification, object detection, and large language model (LLM)
distillation–demonstrate that EA-KD consistently enhances
performance, achieving state-of-the-art results with negligible computational cost. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/cpsu00/EA-KD.

Figure 1. Training Time per Batch (ms) vs. Accuracy (%) of
EA-Methods and Baselines on CIFAR-100.

such as Instance-T [20], have shown that assigning unique
temperatures to each sample outperforms the uniform temperature method Global-T. This highlighted the benefits of
adapting to each sample’s distinct characteristics. Building on this, we hypothesize that emphasizing samples rich
in valuable knowledge1 can further optimize the distillation process. This mirrors how human students learn better
when key points are highlighted by teachers. Such a strategy enables the student model to focus on more informative samples, leading to improved performance. However,
as we will show, the uniform distillation scheme in most
KD methods often overlooks these critical samples, thereby
limiting the efficiency of knowledge transfer.
The question then arises: How can we identify the most
valuable samples for learning? Entropy, the core concept
in information theory that quantifies the uncertainty or information of a random variable [36], may be well-suited
for this role. Prior methods have incorporated entropy in
KD to adjust weighting [17] or refine logit predictions [49];
however, these approaches are typically restricted to specific scenarios (e.g., multi-teacher or logit-based KD) and
primarily rely on teacher entropy, leaving the broader potential of entropy in KD underexplored. Therefore, we propose
leveraging entropy to quantify the learning value of each

1. Introduction
The growing size of state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep learning models poses challenges for deployment in resourceconstrained settings. Knowledge Distillation (KD) [11] offers a solution by training a smaller “student” model to
mimic a larger “teacher” model, using both ground-truth
and the teacher’s “knowledge” (e.g. logits or feature representations) to achieve similar performance in a compact
form. KD has been widely applied across domains, including computer vision (CV) [1, 31, 40], large language models
(LLMs) [9, 13, 15, 35], and medical imaging [8, 21–23].
Advanced KD methods have explored diverse knowledge forms and structural modifications to refine knowledge
transfer [2, 11, 14, 26, 30, 33, 47]. However, most methods
distill uniformly across all samples, operating under the assumption that each sample has equal importance and overlooking their varying learning value. Recent advancements,
* Equal contribution.
† Bin Pu and Shin-Jye Lee are corresponding authors (eebinpu@ust.hk,

1 Throughout this paper, we consider samples with high entropy as containing valuable knowledge.

camhero@gmail.com).

731

