This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention to the Burstiness in Visual Prompt Tuning!

1

Yuzhu Wang1 Manni Duan1 Shu Kong2,3,B
Zhejiang Lab 2 University of Macau 3 Institute of Collaborative Innovation
project webpage

Figure 1. Attention to the burstiness in Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT)! VPT [30] learns a small number of parameters (so-called prompts)
P in the input space with a Transformer [10]: P is multiplied by image patch embeddings X, the query Wq and key Wk projectors in
the attention module (a). We uncover burstiness [28] in them: a small portion of entries in Wq WkT XT have very large absolute values
(b). Further, we uncover non-Gaussian distributions: values of Wq WkT follow a hyper-Laplacian distribution [37] (c), and values of
patch embedding X follow a Laplacian distribution (d). Intuitively, such non-Gaussian distributions pose challenges in learning prompt
P. To facilitate learning, we propose whitening [11, 56] Wq WkT XT , transforming it to be more Gaussian before learning prompt P. We
derive the whitening matrix W and fix it to learn prompt P (dubbed BPT-fWhiten), resulting into the effective prompt as P̃ = PWT .
Surprisingly, BPT-fWhiten significantly accelerates learning and boosts accuracy (i), e.g., from 42.15% by VPT to 77.48% on the CUB-200
benchmark [63]! We compare its value distribution with that of P learned by VPT in (e) and (f). Interestingly, different from non-bursty
prompts learned by VPT [30], BPT-fWhiten exhibits burstiness: a small number of entries in P̃ have large values (>200). The reason is
that its final prompt P̃ = PWT is a bilinear operation, which is known to produce burstiness [34, 46]. Significant gains achieved by
BPT-fWhiten suggest that learning bursty prompts helps in prompt tuning. As the Transformer is differentiable w.r.t the whitening matrix W,
we finetune it too when learning prompt P (dubbed BPT-tWhiten), which also produces bursty prompt (g). With the bilinear operation, we
finally present low-rank bilinear prompt tuning (dubbed BPT-bilinear), which learns two compact matrices A and B and use their product as
the final prompt, i.e., P̃ = ABT . BPT-bilinear produces bursty prompts (h) and significantly accelerates learning and boosts performance,
as shown in (i) and (j). Refer to Fig. 2 for a conceptual demonstration of our BPT methods.

Abstract

prompts. We derive the whitening matrix over random image
patch embeddings and ViT’s key and query projectors, and
multiply it with the prompt to be learned in a bilinear manner.
Surprisingly, this method significantly accelerates prompt
tuning and boosts accuracy, e.g., >25 accuracy points on
the CUB dataset; interestingly, it learns “bursty prompts”.
Extending the bilinear model which is known to introduce
burstiness, we present a compact, low-rank version by learning two smaller matrices whose multiplication yields the final
prompts. We call the proposed methods Bilinear Prompt Tuning (BPT). Extensive experiments across multiple benchmark
datasets demonstrate that BPT methods not only outperform
various VPT methods but also reduce parameter count and
computation overhead.

Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) is a parameter-efficient funetuning technique that adapts a pre-trained vision Transformer (ViT) by learning a small set of parameters in the
input space, known as prompts. In VPT, we uncover “burstiness” in the values arising from the interaction of image
patch embeddings, and the key and query projectors within
Transformer’s self-attention module. Furthermore, the values of patch embeddings and the key and query projectors
exhibit Laplacian and hyper-Laplacian distribution, respectively. Intuitively, these non-Gaussian distributions pose
challenges for learning prompts. To address this, we propose whitening these data, de-correlating them and equalizing their variance towards more Gaussian before learning

4253

