This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AerialVG: A Challenging Benchmark for Aerial Visual Grounding by
Exploring Positional Relations
Junli Liu*1,2
1

Qizhi Chen∗2,3 Zhigang Wang∗2 Yiwen Tang1,2 Yiting Zhang2
Chi Yan2 Dong Wang2 Xuelong Li4 Bin Zhao†1,2

Northwestern Polytechnical University

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

3

Zhejiang University

4

TeleAI

Figure 1. Overview of AerialVG. This work introduces aerial visual grounding (AerialVG), a new task for intelligent drones. We provide
the first dataset for this task, consisting of 50K annotations and 103K objects. Additionally, an AerialVG model is proposed to explore the
positional relations among objects and achieve superior context-aware visual grounding in drone applications.

Abstract

real-world aerial images, 50K manually annotated descriptions, and 103K objects. Particularly, each annotation in
AerialVG dataset contains multiple target objects annotated with relative spatial relations, requiring models to
perform comprehensive spatial reasoning. Furthermore, we
propose an innovative model especially for the AerialVG
task, where a Hierarchical Cross-Attention is devised to
focus on target regions, and a Relation-Aware Grounding
module is designed to infer positional relations. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our dataset and
method, highlighting the importance of spatial reasoning
in aerial visual grounding. The code will be released at
https://github.com/Ideal-ljl/AerialVG.

Visual grounding (VG) aims to localize target objects in
an image based on natural language descriptions. In this
paper, we propose AerialVG, a new task focusing on visual
grounding from aerial views. Compared to traditional VG,
AerialVG poses new challenges, e.g., appearance-based
grounding is insufficient to distinguish among multiple visually similar objects, and positional relations should be
emphasized. Besides, existing VG models struggle when
applied to aerial imagery, where high-resolution images
cause significant difficulties. To address these challenges,
we introduce the first AerialVG dataset, consisting of 5K
* Authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author

5177

