This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIC: Similarity-Based Interpretable Image Classification with Neural Networks
Tom Nuno Wolf
Emre Kavak
Fabian Bongratz
Christian Wachinger
Lab for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Germany
tn.wolf@tum.de

Abstract
The deployment of deep learning models in critical domains
necessitates a balance between high accuracy and interpretability. We introduce SIC, an inherently interpretable
neural network that provides local and global explanations
of its decision-making process. Leveraging the concept
of case-based reasoning, SIC extracts class-representative
support vectors from training images, ensuring they capture
relevant features while suppressing irrelevant ones. Classification decisions are made by calculating and aggregating similarity scores between these support vectors and the
input’s latent feature vector. We employ B-Cos transformations, which align model weights with inputs, to yield
coherent pixel-level explanations in addition to global explanations of case-based reasoning. We evaluate SIC on
three tasks: fine-grained classification on Stanford Dogs
and FunnyBirds, multi-label classification on Pascal VOC,
and pathology detection on the RSNA dataset. Results
indicate that SIC not only achieves competitive accuracy
compared to state-of-the-art black-box and inherently interpretable models but also offers insightful explanations verified through practical evaluation on the FunnyBirds benchmark. Our theoretical analysis proves that these explanations fulfill established axioms for explanations. Our findings underscore SIC’s potential for applications where understanding model decisions is as critical as the decisions
themselves.

tion [3, 19, 23, 24, 28, 30]. While these methods can accurately compute feature contributions for low-dimensional
inputs [19], they introduce approximation errors for highdimensional inputs such as images [1].
As an alternative, inherently interpretable models provide explanations by design. For instance, logistic regression can be considered an inherently interpretable model
since evaluating its coefficients directly explains the effect of each input feature towards the prediction. Translating these properties to complex functions implemented
by neural networks was further fueled by the argument that
if a technique is able to summarize the decision-making
of a black-box without any error, the black-box could be
replaced by an inherently interpretable model in the first
place [26]. As a result, a growing research community
is dedicated to developing inherently interpretable models,
e.g., for decision-critical tasks like medicine [4, 16, 33].
The explanations provided by these models can be categorized into local and global explanations, and evaluated
in terms of axioms to verify if they are faithful [30] 1 . Local explanations focus on individual predictions, revealing
how the model arrived at a specific outcome for a particular instance. In contrast, global explanations provide insight into the model’s overall behavior. In logistic regression, global explanations are derived from the model’s coefficients, which describe how each feature influences the
prediction across all instances. To produce local explanations, a sample’s specific feature values are multiplied by
their corresponding coefficients, illustrating how each feature contributed to the particular prediction.

1. Introduction
Related Work As outlined in Tab. 1, locally interpretable
deep learning models include the work by Wang and
Sabuncu [31], who trained a non-parametric classification
head with metric learning to classify an image by summing
the softmax-normalized similarity scores between training

Deep learning is increasingly becoming part of everyday
life, e.g., targeted advertisements, gaming, and high-stakes
areas like banking and medicine. In the latter, identifying errors in the model’s decision-making process is crucial to detect failure cases, which can be addressed by
adding transparency to model predictions using explainable
AI (XAI). Explanations are typically produced post-hoc for
black-box models using approximation methods, which estimate the contribution of each input feature to the predic-

24276

1 Throughout this manuscript, we define faithful explanations as expla-

nations that satisfy all of the axioms proposed by Sundararajan et al. [30]:
Completeness, Sensitivity, Implementation Invariance, Dummy, Linearity,
and Symmetry-Preserving.

