This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bitrate-Controlled Diffusion for Disentangling Motion and Content in Video
Xiao Li1† Qi Chen1,2,3† Xiulian Peng1 Kai Yu2 Xie Chen2,3B Yan Lu1B
1
Microsoft Research Asia 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Shanghai Innovation Institute
{cq1073554383, kai.yu, chenxie95}@sjtu.edu.cn

{xili11, xipe, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract

the interpretation, the synthesis and the manipulation of the
visual world in its first principles.

We propose a novel and general framework to disentangle
video data into its dynamic motion and static content components. Our proposed method is a self-supervised pipeline
with less assumptions and inductive biases than previous
works: it utilizes a transformer-based architecture to jointly
generate flexible implicit features for frame-wise motion
and clip-wise content, and incorporates a low-bitrate vector
quantization as an information bottleneck to promote disentanglement and form a meaningful discrete motion space.
The bitrate-controlled latent motion and content are used
as conditional inputs to a denoising diffusion model to facilitate self-supervised representation learning. We validate
our disentangled representation learning framework on real
world talking head videos with motion transfer and autoregressive motion generation tasks. Furthermore, we also
show that our method can generalize to other type of video
data, such as pixel sprites of 2D cartoon characters. Our
work presents a new perspective on self-supervised learning of disentangled video representations, contributing to
the broader field of video analysis and generation.

Despite the clear advantages of the disentangled representation of video data, the disentanglement learning task
itself remains challenging. The decomposition task is intrinsically an under-determined problem, not to mention the
extremely high-dimensional nature of video signals which
exacerbates the computational demands as well as introduces complexities in the construction of meaningful disentanglement. Existing works either introduce additional
assumptions [5, 7, 40, 42, 43, 52] or impose task-specific
prior constraints [17, 23, 38, 51, 56, 62]. These additional
assumptions are often overly idealistic and limit the expressiveness of disentanglement features in real scenarios, while
the introduced priors constrain the target framework to specific tasks, restricting its applicability to a narrow domain.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose a general and practical framework for disentangling motion and content representations
in real-world video data, minimizing assumptions and taskspecific inductive biases. The form of our disentangled representation is uniquely flexible - a purely implicit framewise motion feature and clip-wise global content latent features for a given video input sequence. Compared with
other explicit or hybrid representations, implicit features
have less inductive bias, significantly increasing the expressiveness of our representation. To make our disentanglement assumptions more general, we resort to the first principle and introduce an information bottleneck to regulate
the information flow of implicit features during training.
Inspired by recent neural codec methods [34], we achieve
this by leveraging a low-bitrate codebook. Our key insight
is that low-bitrate constraint acts as a general prior to enforce meaningful disentanglement, as video reconstruction
under an information bottleneck shares the same goal as
disentangled representations: providing a compact yet informative representation of the data [53]. We facilitate the
self-supervised video reconstruction under low-bitrate with
a latent denoising diffusion model. The usage of the latent
diffusion model as a generative decoder for representation
learning enhances the fidelity of the learned representation
under information bottlenecks [31].

Video data contains rich temporal information and intricate
patterns of movement and change, offering a deeper understanding of real-world environments. Following the intrinsic information structure, a compact and robust representation of video sequences is the disentangled representation in
terms of the static part (i.e. content) and the dynamic part
(i.e. motion). The content part is highly semantic, encapsulating the unchanging aspects of the scene. The motion
component captures the time-varying essentials of the input data, embodying the essence of change and movement
within the video. Hence, the disentangled representation
offers a structured space for accurately modeling, processing, and understanding the motion and the content, enabling
† Joint first authors. The major part of the work was done when Qi
Chen was an intern at MSRA.
B Corresponding authors.

12904

