This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Omnimodal Expressions and Reasoning in
Referring Audio-Visual Segmentation
Kaining Ying

Henghui Ding
Guangquan Jie Yu-Gang Jiang
Fudan University, China
https://henghuiding.com/OmniAVS/

(a)

or

Which object mimics another?

or

The one speak the same language as <sound: Korean>.

or

The one similar to <image:

or

The instrument is played by someone of the same gender in <image:
and makes a similar sound in <sound: 🎶Sound of Pipa.>.

Output: It is [SEG]. The girl is imitating the barking of the dog on the right.

(b)

Output: It is [SEG]. They both speak Korean.

(c)

> serves as lead.

Output: It is [SEG]. The guitar on the right serves as lead.

(d)

>

Output: It is [SEG]. The pipa
held by the man on the right.

Figure 1. Examples of the proposed benchmark Omnimodal Referring Audio-Visual Segmentation (OmniAVS) to show its nature and
flexibility. OmniAVS introduces 3 key features: 1) It supports diverse multimodal referring expressions that flexibly combine text , speech ,
sound , and image for referring audio-visual segmentation; 2) It emphasizes understanding the content of audio rather than merely hearing
them; 3) It incorporates complex reasoning and world knowledge in expressions, prompting models to provide explanations for their
segmentation decisions. These characteristics make OmniAVS practical for real-world use and well-suited for developing omnimodal
models with fine-grained perception.

Abstract
Referring audio-visual segmentation (RAVS) has recently
seen significant advancements, yet challenges remain in integrating multimodal information and deeply understand-

ing and reasoning about audiovisual content. To extend
the boundaries of RAVS and facilitate future research
in this field, we propose Omnimodal Referring AudioVisual Segmentation (OmniAVS), a new dataset containing 2,104 videos and 61,095 multimodal referring expressions. OmniAVS stands out with three key innovations:
(1) 8 types of multimodal expressions that flexibly combine text, speech, sound, and visual cues; (2) an emphasis

Henghui Ding (henghui.ding@gmail.com) is the corresponding author with the Institute of Big Data, College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

22575

