This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimMLM: A Simple Framework for Multi-modal Learning with Missing
Modality
Sijie Li Chen Chen † Jungong Han*†
School of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
{sli256, chen.chen2, jungong.han}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose SimMLM, a simple yet powerful framework for multimodal learning with missing modalities. Unlike existing approaches that rely on sophisticated
network architectures or complex data imputation techniques, SimMLM provides a generic and effective solution
that can adapt to various missing modality scenarios with
improved accuracy and robustness. Specifically, SimMLM
consists of a generic Dynamic Mixture of Modality Experts
(DMoME) architecture, featuring a dynamic, learnable gating mechanism that automatically adjusts each modality’s
contribution in both full and partial modality settings. A
key innovation of SimMLM is the proposed More vs. Fewer
(MoFe) ranking loss, which ensures that task accuracy improves or remains stable as more modalities are made available. This aligns the model with an intuitive principle: removing one or more modalities should not increase accuracy. We validate SimMLM on multimodal medical image
segmentation (BraTS 2018) and multimodal classification
(UPMC Food-101, avMNIST) tasks, where it consistently
surpasses competitive methods, demonstrating superior accuracy, interpretability, robustness, and reliability across
both complete and missing modality scenarios at test time.
Code is available at https://github.com/LezJ/SimMLM.

in data collection, budget, and resources. Addressing this
test-time missing modality problem is crucial for building
robust multimodal models.
One mainstream to address the missing modality problem is data imputation, which focuses on synthesizing the
missing modalities from available ones [18, 44] or approximating intermediate missing features [10, 35, 36, 40].
However, ensuring the factuality and fidelity of synthetic
data remains a major challenge, as issues such as poor
data quality [16, 27], data hallucination [30], and vulnerability to adversarial corruption [6, 29] have been reported.
Moreover, the computational overhead of generative imputation limits its practicality. In parallel, sophisticated frameworks have been developed, which aim to tackle the missing
modality by leveraging advanced, complex network architectures [1, 35, 41], and harmonize or align early or late features from different modalities into a unified, shared space.
However, such approaches often introduce substantial resource demands. While some are not adaptable to other
tasks at all, others constrain the choice of network architectures or require additional modules, such as projection
layers, to accommodate diverse or heterogeneous modalities.
In this paper, we introduce SimMLM, a simple yet effective framework for multi-modal learning with missing
modalities, without relying on specific neural network architectures or complex data imputation. First, to effectively
handle varying modality availability, we propose a Dynamic
Mixture of Modality Experts (DMoME) architecture, where
modality-specific expert networks process available modalities, and a learnable gating network dynamically adjusts
their contributions. This design ensures that the model remains effective in both full and partial modality settings
while being adaptable to different neural architectures and
task domains.
To further improve the model’s robustness and reliability against missing modalities, we introduce a novel loss
function, which is designed to optimize the loss landscape
around the region of missing data. Inspired by an intuitive principle that the model should not degrade in per-

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning aims to build models that can process and integrate information from multiple, complementary modalities such as visual, textual and auditory information, which has been found useful for various tasks such as
image-text food classification [4, 15], multimodal medical
image segmentation [5, 24] with improved model accuracy.
However, in real-world scenarios, it is common for one or
more modalities to be missing during deployment due to
hardware failures, environmental conditions, or constraints
* Corresponding author
†† These authors contributed equally as senior authors.

24068

