This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

monoVLN: Bridging the Observation Gap between Monocular and Panoramic
Vision and Language Navigation
Renjie Lu1∗ , Yu Zhou1 *, Hao Cheng2 , Jingke Meng1†, Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Hunan University,
3
Pengcheng Lab, 4 Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{lurj3, zhouy635}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, haocheng@hnu.edu.cn, mengjke@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract

observed
rendered

Panoramic views captured by cameras

…

Vision and Language Navigation(VLN) requires agents to
navigate 3D environments by following natural language
instructions. While existing methods predominantly assume
access to panoramic observations, many practical robotics
are equipped with monocular RGBD cameras, creating a
significant configuration disparity. In this work, we address
this critical gap by developing a novel 3DGS-based framework for monocular VLN agents, focusing on the intrinsic
information incompleteness challenge. Our approach incorporates two key innovations: (1) implicit partial completion module for inferring representations of missing regions in incompletely rendered panoramic feature maps,
and (2) an uncertainty-aware active perception strategy
that enables the agent to actively acquire visual observation when uncertain about its decision. Extensive experiments on R2R-CE and RxR-CE datasets demonstrate that
our monoVLN outperforms all existing monocular methods, significantly improve 8% success rate on R2R-CE compared to previous monocular methods. We also validate our
monoVLN in real-world environments, providing a practical solution for real-world VLN.

Panoramic

Rendered incomplete panoramic views

…
Monocular

front

Figure 1. An example of panoramic views captured by cameras
and rendered panoramic views. The rendered views are incomplete due to unobserved areas during navigation, resulting in certain regions being rendered with black.

cessible. These methods achieves notable performance but
facing significant limitations in real-world robotic deployment. The primary constraint stems from the prevalent use
of monocular RGBD cameras in practical robotic applications, which restrict the observable area to a limited field
of view around the agent at a step. Consequently, the development of models compatible with monocular camera is
imperative for enhancing practicality and compatibility in
real-world scenarios. Recent methods [46, 50] address this
challenge by reconstructing 3D feature fields that integrate
previously observed information and rendering panoramic
views, enabling the direct transfer of panoramic VLN models to monocular settings and achieving impressive results.
However, they ignore a fundamental challenge inherent to
monocular VLN: the intrinsic information incompleteness
resulting from the limited field of view. As illustrated in
Figure 1, the rendered views by works[46, 50] are often
incomplete, which prevents visual encoders from extracting comprehensive features and leads to suboptimal performance. In this work, we present the first attempt to solve
this problem.
An intuitive solution is to perform a 360-degree rotation
at each step to mimic panoramic observations. While this
method is conceptually simple, it introduces significant inefficiencies, leading to an increase of over 200% in the num-

1. Introduction
Vision and Language Navigation (VLN) [5, 27] involves
guiding an agent to navigate to a specified destination by interpreting natural language instructions. This process typically requires the agent to execute fine-grained actions (e.g.,
rotating 15 degrees left/right or advancing 0.25 meters)
within navigable areas. VLN has attracted significant research interests[3, 10, 11, 13, 17, 20, 21, 34, 43, 46, 50, 52].
Current researches in VLN predominantly focus on navigation utilizing panoramic observations, which assumes
that the 360-degree area surrounding the agent is fully ac* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† denotes the corresponding authors.

9477

