This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIH-CLIP: Unleashing the Diversity of Multi-Head Self-Attention for
Training-Free Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Songsong Duan, Xi Yang*, Nannan Wang
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University
duanss@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yangx@xidian.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent Training-Free Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation (TF-OVSS) leverages a pre-training vision-language
model to segment images from open-set visual concepts
without training and fine-tuning. The key of TF-OVSS
is to improve the local spatial representation of CLIP by
leveraging self-correlation maps, thus preserving its zerosample capability and achieving open understanding. However, most TF-OVSS methods utilize the Multi-Head SelfAttention (MHSA) mechanism to generate self-correlation
maps, neglecting the diversity among multiple heads. In
this paper, we explore the diversity of MHSA, revealing that
the contributions of single-head attention to the final results are varied and redundant. To address this issue, we
introduce DIH-CLIP, a training-free CLIP model for openvocabulary semantic segmentation. Specifically, we propose a Selective Head Attention (SHA) to replace the traditional MHSA in CLIP, which contains two key designs: (1)
evaluating the diversity of multi-head attention via calculating information entropy scores of per head attention map
and removing the redundant attention head with threshold;
(2) transferring the local representation of single-head attention to the global CLIP feature to enhance the local spatial representation capability of CLIP. Furthermore, we embed SHA into the middle layers of CLIP to extract the plentiful details. Experiments on six benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of DIH-CLIP. Our code is available
at https://github.com/duan-song/DiH-CLIP.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to segment images according
to pre-defined visual concepts. In the last decade, benefiting from the advance of deep learning and neural networks,
researchers have proposed various models for semantic segmentation, including the well-known CNN-based DeepLab
* Corresponding author

Image

Head 1

Head 4

Head 8

Head 12

(a) Attention visualization of different heads
60.1
59.1 on VOC21
34.2 on Context59
34.8

Index of head
(b) mIoU scores of different heads

Figure 1. Diversity of multi-head self-attention. (a) the attention
maps of different heads have redundancy via attention visualization, e.g., Head 4 of the top line and Head 8 of the bottom line. (b)
performance of SCLIP [41] with single-head attention and MHSA.
Solid and dotted lines are the mIoU scores of single-head attention
and MHSA.

series [9], Transformer-based MaskFormer/Mask2Former
[10, 11], and recently Mamba-based VMamba [29] and
SigMa [40]. Although these methods have achieved satisfactory performance on existing closed datasets, they are
unable to handle dynamic real-world scenarios (unknown
visual concept), which is one of the greatest challenges that
semantic segmentation needs to face in practical applications. Fortunately, vision-language models, such as CLIP

22794

