This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recovering Parametric Scenes from Very Few Time-of-Flight Pixels
Carter Sifferman†, Yiquan Li†, Yiming Li, Fangzhou Mu, Michael Gleicher, Mohit Gupta, Yin Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Diﬀuse Single-Pixel ToF
light intensity

Traditional Depth Sensor: Point Cloud

Distance estimate
per pixel

Experimental Results for 6D Pose Recovery
Simulated Data

time
Real Data

Narrow FoV per pixel

Wide FoV per pixel

Many pixels needed
for good coverage

Few pixels needed
for good coverage

Figure 1. We introduce a method for recovering the geometry of parametric 3D scenes, such as the 6D pose of a known object, from a
distributed set of very few (e.g., 15), diffuse (i.e., wide field-of-view) single-pixel ToF Sensors. Methods based on traditional depth
sensors suffer poor performance under a low-pixel-count regime due to their sparse coverage. Our method outperforms a point cloud-based
baseline by utilizing the entirety of data recovered by a diffuse ToF sensor. See Sec. 4.4 for details of the experiment.

Abstract
We aim to recover the geometry of 3D parametric scenes
using very few depth measurements from low-cost, commercially available time-of-flight sensors. These sensors offer
very low spatial resolution (i.e., a single pixel), but image
a wide field-of-view per pixel and capture detailed timeof-flight data in the form of time-resolved photon counts.
This time-of-flight data encodes rich scene information and
thus enables recovery of simple scenes from sparse measurements. We investigate the feasibility of using a distributed set of few measurements (e.g., as few as 15 pixels) to recover the geometry of simple parametric scenes
with a strong prior, such as estimating the 6D pose of a
known object. To achieve this, we design a method that
utilizes both feed-forward prediction to infer scene parameters, and differentiable rendering within an analysis-bysynthesis framework to refine the scene parameter estimate. We develop hardware prototypes and demonstrate
that our method effectively recovers object pose given an
untextured 3D model in both simulations and controlled
real-world captures, and show promising initial results
for other parametric scenes. We additionally conduct experiments to explore the limits and capabilities of our
imaging solution. Our project webpage is available at
cpsiff.github.io/recovering parametric scenes

1. Introduction
Time-of-flight (ToF) cameras such as LiDARs are a key
technology for modern 3D vision, enabling tasks like pose
† Co-first author

estimation, shape reconstruction, and object recognition,
with applications spanning fields such as robotics, augmented reality, and autonomous driving. Most current
methods for inference from ToF imagery depend on dense
3D data, usually represented as a point cloud captured by
high-resolution camera(s). It is generally accepted that a
dense collection of depth measurements (e.g., ToF pixels as
points) is vital for precise 3D vision. While certain applications do require high-resolution geometry, can some vision
tasks be accomplished with only sparse 3D measurements?
This question is particularly relevant given the recent
emergence of low-cost (< $3 USD per unit), miniature (< 5
mm across) ToF sensors [1, 30]. These sensors, already deployed in mobile [41] and wearable applications [9], are
often implemented with a single photon avalanche diode
(SPAD) array [31, 33], featuring very limited pixel counts
(even a single pixel) yet a wide field-of-view (FoV) per
pixel (e.g., 30°). They capture raw ToF data with a transient histogram—a 1D waveform that encodes the intensity of light returning from the scene at pico-to-nanosecond
timescales, integrated over a pixel’s entire FoV. Traditionally, these histograms are processed into a point cloud by
detecting and converting their peaks into depth estimates.
However, this processing reduces the high-dimensional histogram to a single number, eliminating potentially useful
information. Our key hypothesis, inspired by recent studies [3, 15, 24, 32], is that while these sensors cannot recover high-resolution point clouds, even a few transient histograms encode rich scene information sufficient for various downstream 3D vision tasks. An example is recovering
scenes with low geometric complexity or scenarios where a
strong geometric prior (e.g., a low-dimensional parametric
shape model) is available. Our question is, under these con-

27989

