This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GCRayDiffusion: Pose-Free Surface Reconstruction via
Geometric Consistent Ray Diffusion
Li-Heng Chen1,2

Zi-Xin Zou2

Chang Liu1

Tianjiao Jing1

Hongbo Fu3
1
4

Beijing Normal University

2

3

VAST

Yan-Pei Cao2

Shi-Sheng Huang1,4 †

Hua Huang1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Virtual Reality Application Engineering Research Center of the Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University

Input: Images

Output: Camera and Mesh

GCRayDiffusion timestep

…

…

t=T

t=10

t=0

Marching
Cubes

t=0

Marching
Cubes

Triplane-based SDF

…

…

t=T

t=10

Triplane-based SDF

Figure 1. We achieve accurate pose-free neural surface learning with the aid of a novel geometric consistent ray diffusion, i.e., GCRayDiffusion, even from sparse view images (left). Our GCRayDiffusion model formulates the images’ camera poses as neural ray bundles
and provides explicit sampling points generated during the denoiser processing (middle) to regularize the triplane-based SDF learning,
achieving accurate surface reconstruction and camera pose estimation simultaneously (right).

Abstract
Accurate surface reconstruction from unposed images is
crucial for efficient 3D object or scene creation . However,
it remains challenging particularly for the joint camera
pose estimation. Previous approaches have achieved impressive pose-free surface reconstruction results in denseview settings, but could easily fail for sparse-view scenarios
without sufficient visual overlap. In this paper, we propose a
new technique for pose-free surface reconstruction, which
follows triplane-based signed distance field (SDF) learning but regularizes the learning by explicit points sampled
from ray-based diffusion of camera pose estimation. Our
key contribution is a novel Geometric Consistent Ray Diffusion model (GCRayDiffusion), where we represent camera poses as neural bundle rays and regress the distri-

bution of noisy rays via a diffusion model. More importantly, we further condition the denoising process of
RGRayDiffusion using the triplane-based SDF of the entire scene, which provides effective 3D consistent regularization to get multi-view consistent camera pose estimation. Finally, we incorporate RGRayDiffusion to the
triplane-based SDF learning by introducing on-surface geometric regularization from the sampling points of the neural bundle rays, which leads to highly accurate pose-free
surface reconstruction results even for sparse view inputs.
Extensive evaluations on public datasets show that our
GCRayDiffusion achieves more accurate camera pose estimation than previous approaches, with geometrically
more consistent surface reconstruction results, especially
given sparse view inputs. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/CountNemoChan/GCRayDiffusion

† Corresponding authors. Supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2024YFB2808804).

25335

