This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCAN: Bootstrapping Contrastive Pre-training for Data Efficiency
Yangyang Guo, Mohan Kankanhalli
National University of Singapore, Singapore
guoyang.eric@gmail.com, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg
76

While contrastive pre-training is widely employed, its data
efficiency problem has remained relatively under-explored
thus far. Existing methods often rely on static coreset selection algorithms to pre-identify important data for training. However, this static nature renders them unable to
dynamically track the data utility throughout pre-training,
leading to subpar pre-trained models. To address this challenge, our paper introduces a novel dynamic bootstrapping
dataset pruning method. It involves pruning data preparation followed by dataset mutation operations, both of
which undergo iterative and dynamic updates. We apply
this method to two prevalent contrastive pre-training frameworks: CLIP and MoCo, representing vision-language and
vision-centric domains, respectively. In particular, we individually pre-train seven CLIP models on two large-scale
image-text pair datasets, and two MoCo models on the ImageNet dataset, resulting in a total of 16 pre-trained models.
With a data pruning rate of 30-35% across all 16 models,
our method exhibits only marginal performance degradation
(less than 1% on average) compared to corresponding models trained on the full dataset counterparts across various
downstream datasets, and also surpasses several baselines
with a large performance margin. Additionally, the byproduct from our method, i.e., coresets derived from the original
datasets after pre-training, also demonstrates significant superiority in terms of downstream performance over other
static coreset selection approaches. Code is available at
https://github.com/guoyang9/SCAN.

74

ImageNet Accuracy (%)

Abstract

Model: RN101
Model: ViT-B/16

72
70
68

CLIP
SCAN
Info-Batch
SemDeDup

66
2.9

4.1
7.1
10.1
Averaged Data Size Per Epoch (M)

Figure 1. Interplay between averaged training data size per epoch
and the downstream performance of CLIP, our method SCAN, and
two SoTA baselines. All models are trained for the same number
of epochs. Two CLIP models are pre-trained separately on two
datasets containing 4.1M and 10.1M samples, respectively. The
three data-efficient methods, including SCAN, utilize 30% less data,
reducing the average data size to 2.9M and 7.1M, respectively.

This paper delves into the data efficiency problem for
contrastive pre-training. Despite the pervasiveness of contrastive pre-training across both vision-centric [10, 11] and
vision-language [29, 51] domains, nevertheless, the data efficiency issue has received scant attention in the existing
literature. We attribute the reason for this fact to two challenges. I- Absence of reliable labels for self-supervised
learning objectives. Unlike in supervised learning, where explicit labels aid in class prediction, self-supervised learning
in contrastive pre-training operates without such guidance,
making it unable to estimate the class probability of data
samples such as EL2N [49]. II- Extensive data scale due
to easy accessibility, e.g., the interleaved image-text data
from the web [51]. Current datasets usually comprise millions [7, 56] or even billions of samples [54]. It is thus
computationally very intensive for methods employing gradients [49] or second derivative (Influence Functions) [31]
to evaluate individual data utility. Recent approaches in

1. Introduction
Large models are heavily data-driven, particularly in the
realm of pre-training [10, 11, 51]. This paradigm has been
widely underpinned by the scaling law [22, 27, 30], which
suggests that more data often leads to reduced generalization
errors. However, using large quantities of data frequently
results in a notable increase in the carbon footprint. Addressing this pressing issue requires substantial efforts to optimize
the data training efficiency.

3662

