This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoST: Efficient Collaborative Perception From Unified Spatiotemporal
Perspective
Yi Liu2 Yifan Sun2 Yulu Gao1,2 Jinyu Chen2 Runsheng Xu3 * Si Liu2†
Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 3 University of California, Los Angeles

Zongheng Tang1,2

1

{tzhhhh123,18373214,gyl97,chenjinyu,liusi}@buaa.edu.cn
sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn, rxx3386@g.ucla.edu

Abstract

laborative perception addresses these challenges by enabling agents to share complementary sensor data, fostering a holistic environmental understanding. In autonomous
driving, collaborative perception facilitates information exchange between vehicles and infrastructure [28, 32, 37],
thereby overcoming single-agent constraints and enhancing
perception accuracy and robustness.
A critical challenge in this domain is the integration of
temporal information. Temporal data enriches the perception process by capturing past and future object states, correcting pose errors, and mitigating communication delays.
Recent studies have underscored the importance of temporal modeling in this field. For instance, previous methods [12, 35, 38] utilize historical data to enhance overall perception capabilities. While these works have made
progress, they separate multi-agent and temporal fusion into
sequential steps, processing either spatial or temporal data
first. This separation prevents the full modeling of the interactions between spatial and temporal information, thereby
limiting the overall capability of the perception system.
This paper proposes Collaborative Perception with
Spatio-temporal Transformer (CoST), which utilizes a
novel perspective to unify collaboration across space and
time into a single spatio-temporal space. Concretely, we
view historical agents as duplicates of current agents (with
some time delay), and they are directly comparable to each
other. Therefore, given the current agents and historical
agents, we can gather all their observations on objects into
a shared spatio-temporal space for collaborative perception.
This perspective no longer separates temporal modeling and
multi-agent collaboration and is thus fundamentally different from previous temporal-modeling methods.
Our spatio-temporal perspective brings two important
advantages, i.e., efficient feature transmission and superior
feature fusion. The reasons are as follows:
• Efficient feature transmission. In the spatio-temporal
space, repeatedly transmitting static object features is re-

Collaborative perception shares information among different agents and helps solving problems that individual
agents may face, e.g., occlusions and small sensing range.
Prior methods usually separate the multi-agent fusion and
multi-time fusion into two consecutive steps. In contrast, this paper proposes an efficient collaborative perception that aggregates the observations from different agents
(space) and different times into a unified spatio-temporal
space simultaneously. The unified spatio-temporal space
brings two benefits, i.e., efficient feature transmission and
superior feature fusion. 1) Efficient feature transmission:
each static object yields a single observation in the spatial
temporal space, and thus only requires transmission only
once (whereas prior methods re-transmit all the object features multiple times). 2) superior feature fusion: merging
the multi-agent and multi-time fusion into a unified spatialtemporal aggregation enables a more holistic perspective,
thereby enhancing perception performance in challenging
scenarios. Consequently, our Collaborative perception with
Spatio-temporal Transformer (CoST) gains improvement in
both efficiency and accuracy. Notably, CoST is not tied to
any specific method and is compatible with a majority of
previous methods, enhancing their accuracy while reducing the transmission bandwidth. Code will be available at
https://github.com/tzhhhh123/CoST.

1. Introduction
Accurate 3D object detection is critical for autonomous
driving to ensure road safety and traffic efficiency. Traditional single-agent systems, relying solely on onboard sensors, face limitations such as occlusions and restricted detection range, which pose safety risks. Multi-agent col* Work done during Ph.D.
† Corresponding author.

1120

