This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TinyViM: Frequency Decoupling for Tiny Hybrid Vision Mamba
Xiaowen Ma ∗ Zhenliang Ni * Xinghao Chen†
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
xwma@zju.edu.cn, {nizhenliang2, xinghao.chen}@huawei.com

Abstract
Mamba has shown great potential for computer vision due
to its linear complexity in modeling the global context with
respect to the input length. However, existing lightweight
Mamba-based backbones cannot demonstrate performance
that matches Convolution or Transformer-based methods.
By observing, we find that simply modifying the scanning
path in the image domain is not conducive to fully exploiting the potential of vision Mamba. In this paper,
we first perform comprehensive spectral and quantitative
analyses, and verify that the Mamba block mainly models low-frequency information under Convolution-Mamba
hybrid architecture. Based on the analyses, we introduce
a novel Laplace mixer to decouple the features in terms
of frequency and input only the low-frequency components
into the Mamba block. In addition, considering the redundancy of the features and the different requirements for
high-frequency details and low-frequency global information at different stages, we introduce a frequency ramp inception, i.e., gradually reduce the input dimensions of the
high-frequency branches, so as to efficiently trade-off the
high-frequency and low-frequency components at different
layers. By integrating mobile-friendly convolution and efficient Laplace mixer, we build a series of tiny hybrid vision
Mamba called TinyViM. The proposed TinyViM achieves
impressive performance on several downstream tasks including image classification, semantic segmentation, object
detection and instance segmentation. In particular, TinyViM
outperforms Convolution, Transformer and Mamba-based
models with similar scales, and the throughput is about 2-3
times higher than that of other Mamba-based models. Code
is available at https://github.com/xwmaxwma/TinyViM.

Figure 1. Comparision of GFLOPs, Throughput and accuracy
between TinyViM and others. The top-1 accuracy is tested on
ImageNet-1K and the throughput is measured on Nvidia V100
GPU with maximum power-of-two batch size that fits in memory. Compared to recent Mamba-based models such as EfficientVMamba, QuadMamba, and VMamba, TinyViM has higher top-1
accuracy with 2× higher throughput and fewer GFLOPs.

1. Introduction

tured state-space model that can overcome the limitations
of local perception in Convolution neural networks [19]
and the quadratic computational complexity of Transformers [3], thereby demonstrating strong capabilities in handling long-sequence data. Due to its advanced context extraction capabilities, Mamba has been widely applied in image classification tasks and has achieved advanced performance, such as Vim [56], VMamba [31], etc.
Vim [56] is one of the earliest works to apply Mamba
to visual tasks, by introducing a bidirectional state-space
model to process 2D image data. By introducing the
Cross-Scan Module (CSM) and 2D Selective Scanning
(SS2D) modules, VMamba [31] reduces the computational
complexity from quadratic to linear while maintaining the
global acceptance domain. MSVMamba [44] uses a multiscale 2D scanning method to apply Mamba to both original
and down-sampled feature maps. This not only helps to
learn long-distance dependencies, but also reduces compu-

In recent years, Mamba has gained widespread attention
and application in the field of vision due to its advantages
in long-sequence modeling [8]. Mamba is a selective struc* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

23519

