This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backdooring Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning by Noisy Alignment
Tuo Chen1,3 , Jie Gui1,2‡ , Minjing Dong4 , Ju Jia1 , Lanting Fang5 , Jian Liu3‡
1

Southeast University 2 Purple Mountain Laboratories 3 Ant Group
4
City University of Hong Kong 5 Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract

Such datasets typically scraped from internet sources (e.g.,
Google, YouTube) [25, 26], often lack manual review before
being fed into the model. Recent studies indicate that contrastive learning is susceptible to data poisoning backdoor
attacks [3, 5, 19, 27, 37]. In extreme cases, it is feasible
to manipulate a contrastive learning model to misclassify a
backdoored test input by corrupting as little as one millionth
of the pre-training dataset [5].
DPCL exploits the co-occurrence from random augmentations of backdoor triggers and target object patterns in
images [5, 37]. Given an image, CL randomly generates augmented views and enforces similarity (dissimilarity) between
features of positive (negative) views. By poisoning pretraining data with malicious images containing dog patterns
and backdoor triggers, victim CL models learn to associate
triggers with dogs (the attack target). Consequently, downstream classifiers inherit this bias and misclassify triggered
images as "dog". Existing DPCL methods [3, 5, 19, 27, 37]
universally leverage this principle. For instance, Saha et
al. [27] physically superimpose triggers onto targets, while
Zhang et al. [37] optimize co-occurrence probabilities. This
paper focuses on image-modal CL, with Section 7 extending
our approach to image-text CL.
Current DPCLs exhibit limited attack effectiveness. To
bridge this gap, we draw inspiration from a theoretical upper bound backdoor attack to CL (called oracle attack) that
controls model training [16, 31, 33, 34]. Oracle attack essentially maximizes the feature similarity between reference
images (collected target-class images guiding the attack) and
noisy backdoored images. By decomposing the oracle attack
objective, i.e., noisy alignment, into representation-space reference alignment components that capture the co-occurrence
of backdoor and target object patterns and noise compression
components that capture the degradation of original noisy
patterns, we demonstrate that the noise compression term
inherently compresses the subspace orthogonal to reference
features. As illustrated in Figure 1, backdoored panda images may fail due to domination by non-trigger features. Enhancing attack performance requires suppressing the neural
network’s extraction of undesirable elements (e.g., pandas or
trees) beyond the backdoor trigger. Formal analysis appears

Self-supervised contrastive learning (CL) effectively learns
transferable representations from unlabeled data containing
images or image-text pairs but suffers vulnerability to data
poisoning backdoor attacks (DPCLs). An adversary can
inject poisoned images into pretraining datasets, causing
compromised CL encoders to exhibit targeted misbehavior
in downstream tasks. Existing DPCLs, however, achieve
limited efficacy due to their dependence on fragile implicit
co-occurrence between backdoor and target object and inadequate suppression of discriminative features in backdoored images. We propose Noisy Alignment (NA), a DPCL
method that explicitly suppresses noise components in poisoned images. Inspired by powerful training-controllable CL
attacks, we identify and extract the critical objective of noisy
alignment, adapting it effectively into data-poisoning scenarios. Our method implements noisy alignment by strategically manipulating contrastive learning’s random cropping mechanism, formulating this process as an image layout optimization problem with theoretically derived optimal
parameters. The resulting method is simple yet effective,
achieving state-of-the-art performance compared to existing DPCLs, while maintaining clean-data accuracy. Furthermore, Noisy Alignment demonstrates robustness against
common backdoor defenses. Codes can be found at https:
//github.com/jsrdcht/Noisy-Alignment.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised contrastive learning has revolutionized representation learning by mapping data into embedding spaces
where semantic similarity correlates with proximity [6, 13].
Modern implementations like CLIP [26] and DINOv2 [25]
leverage web-scale datasets to achieve remarkable zero-shot
generalization and have wide application potential in different downstream tasks. However, the uncurated nature of
these data introduces a significant risk of data contamination.
‡ Corresponding authors: Jian Liu (rex.lj@antgroup.com) and
Jie Gui (guijie@seu.edu.cn).

3684

