This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inter2Former: Dynamic Hybrid Attention for
Efficient High-Precision Interactive Segmentation
You Huang, Lichao Chen, Jiayi Ji, Liujuan Cao, Shengchuan Zhang*, Rongrong Ji
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
youhuang0607@gmail.com, fpg2012@foxmail.com, jjyxmu@gmail.com
caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn, zsc 2016@xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Interactive segmentation (IS) [5, 18, 23, 32] greatly enhances the image segmentation annotation process by segmenting regions of interest from a few annotator prompts,
* Corresponding author

N

Encoder

Interactive segmentation (IS) improves annotation efficiency by segmenting target regions from user prompts,
with widespread applications in real-world scenarios. Current approaches face a critical trade-off: dense-token methods achieve superior accuracy and detail preservation but
suffer from prohibitively slow processing on CPU devices,
while the Segment Anything Model (SAM) advances the field
with sparse prompt tokens for fast inference but compromises segmentation quality. In this paper, we propose Inter2Former to address this challenge by optimizing computation allocation in dense-token processing, which introduces four key enhancements. First, we propose Dynamic
Prompt Embedding (DPE) that adaptively processes only
regions of interest while avoiding additional overhead from
background tokens. Second, we introduce Dynamic Hybrid Attention (DHA), which leverages previous segmentation masks to route tokens through either full attention
(O(N 2 )) for boundary regions or our proposed efficient
BSQ attention (O(N )) for non-boundary regions. Third,
we develop Hybrid Mixture of Experts (HMoE), which applies similar adaptive computation strategies in FFN modules with CPU-optimized parallel processing. Finally, we
present Dynamic Local Upsampling (DLU), a reverse operation of DPE, which localizes objects with a lightweight
MLP and performs fine-grained upsampling only in detected regions. Experimental results on high-precision IS
benchmarks demonstrate that Inter2Former achieves SOTA
performance with high efficiency on CPU devices.

N

S

N ×

BSQ Attn

O(NS ) = O(N )

Allocation

Full Attn
O(𝑵𝑵𝟐𝟐 )

Edge
Detection

N

N

Figure 1. Overview of Dynamic Hybrid Attention (DHA). During interactive segmentation, the model receives user clicks and
the previous segmentation mask. DHA leverages mask boundaries
to route image tokens through either Full Attention with O(N 2 )
complexity for boundary regions, or our proposed BSQ Attention
with O(N S) = O(N ) complexity for non-boundary regions, reducing computation while preserving segmentation quality.

such as clicks [18], bounding boxes [23] or coarse
masks [24]. These works expand real-world applications of
image segmentation, e.g. medical imaging [2], industrial defect detection [3] and autonomous driving [4]. Recently, the
Segment Anything Model (SAM) [23] has become a milestone in IS, excelling in real-time, high-quality segmentation, particularly in mainstream click-based IS.
SAM [23] and InterFormer [18] simultaneously introduce a similar two-stage pipeline for this task: a preprocessing stage that encodes images into tokens using an encoder, followed by an interaction stage where a decoder
processes these tokens along with user prompts to generate segmentation masks. While sharing similar encoders,
these models differ significantly in their decoder design. InterFormer [18] converts clicks into dense prompt tokens to

19816

