This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HouseTour: A Virtual Real Estate A(I)gent
Ata Çelen1,2 Marc Pollefeys1,3 Dániel Baráth1,4 Iro Armeni2
1
ETH Zürich 2 Stanford University 3 Microsoft Spatial AI Lab 4 HUN-REN SZTAKI
https://house-tour.github.io/

Figure 1. HouseTour. Given a set of images captured in an existing 3D space and their corresponding camera poses, our method tackles
the task of 3D camera trajectory and textual summary generation. We focus on generating human-like trajectories and descriptions that can
be used for real estate remote video tours of properties, thus highlighting spatial characteristics such as layout, functionality, architectural
features, static building elements (e.g., appliances, windows, and doors), materials, and ambiance. To support the task, we present a novel
dataset with real estate video tours, descriptions, and 3D reconstructions.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce HouseTour, a method for spatially-aware 3D
camera trajectory and natural language summary generation from a collection of images depicting an existing 3D
space. Unlike existing vision-language models (VLMs),
which struggle with geometric reasoning, our approach
generates smooth video trajectories via a diffusion process
constrained by known camera poses and integrates this information into the VLM for 3D-grounded descriptions. We
synthesize the final video using 3D Gaussian splatting to
render novel views along the trajectory. To support this
task, we present the HouseTour dataset, which includes over
1,200 house-tour videos with camera poses, 3D reconstructions, and real estate descriptions. Experiments demonstrate that incorporating 3D camera trajectories into the
text generation process improves performance over methods handling each task independently. We evaluate both
individual and end-to-end performance, introducing a new
joint metric. Our work enables automated, professionalquality video creation for real estate and touristic applications without requiring specialized expertise or equipment.

Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs) [1, 39,
56] have enabled zero-shot generalization across a wide
range of real-world image, video, and text applications,
bridging the gap between curated research tasks and practical scenarios. However, generating videos grounded in
an existing 3D space and describing spatial qualities in
unstructured language—beyond merely listing contents—
remains a challenge. This task requires geometric reasoning
capabilities that current models lack.
We present the novel task of spatially-aware 3D camera
trajectory generation and textual summarization from a collection of images depicting an existing 3D space. This task
is closely related to creating house-tour videos, a popular
format on YouTube, where over 624 million videos feature
real estate agents and occupants showcasing their homes.
This practice surged during the COVID-19 pandemic due
to travel and interaction restrictions, providing renters and
prospective buyers with remote access to properties. It remains a critical tool today in the U.S. real estate market, valued at 3.43 trillion dollars. However, providing such videos

17761

