This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProGait: A Multi-Purpose Video Dataset and Benchmark for Transfemoral
Prosthesis Users
Xiangyu Yin
Boyuan Yang
Weichen Liu
Qiyao Xue
Abrar Alamri
Goeran Fiedler
Wei Gao
University of Pittsburgh
{eric.yin, by.yang, weichenliu, qiyao xue, aba114, gfiedler, weigao}@pitt.edu

Abstract
Prosthetic legs play a pivotal role in clinical rehabilitation, allowing individuals with lower-limb amputations the
ability to regain mobility and improve their quality of life.
Gait analysis is fundamental for optimizing prosthesis design and alignment, directly impacting the mobility and life
quality of individuals with lower-limb amputations. Visionbased machine learning (ML) methods offer a scalable and
non-invasive solution to gait analysis, but face challenges
in correctly detecting and analyzing prosthesis, due to their
unique appearances and new movement patterns. In this
paper, we aim to bridge this gap by introducing a multipurpose dataset, namely ProGait, to support multiple vision tasks including Video Object Segmentation, 2D Human
Pose Estimation, and Gait Analysis (GA). ProGait provides
412 video clips from four above-knee amputees when testing
multiple newly-fitted prosthetic legs through walking trials,
and depicts the presence, contours, poses, and gait patterns
of human subjects with transfemoral prosthetic legs. Alongside the dataset itself, we also present benchmark tasks and
fine-tuned baseline models to illustrate the practical application and performance of the ProGait dataset. We compared our baseline models against pre-trained vision models, demonstrating improved generalizability when applying
the ProGait dataset for prosthesis-specific tasks. The ProGait dataset is available at https://huggingface.
co/datasets/ericyxy98/ProGait, and the source
codes of our benchmark tasks are available at https:
//github.com/pittisl/ProGait.

YOLO11

Grounded SAM 2

YOLO11-ProGait

Figure 1. Limitation of current vision-based ML models on detecting the whole body of users with prosthetic legs. Left: Pre-trained
YOLO11 model [15]; Middle: Grounded SAM2 model [26] with
text prompt “a person with prosthetic leg”; Right: YOLO11 model
fine-tuned on our ProGait dataset

walking patterns [2, 27, 35] and further indicating fitness
of the prosthetic leg on each user. Moreover, gait analysis helps identify misalignments, assess biomechanical efficiency, and make precise adjustments to the prosthesis, ultimately enhancing mobility and per-user functionality.
Traditionally, gait analysis relied on specialized motion
capture systems or embedded on-body motion sensors to
measure biomechanical parameters [3, 5, 21, 25]. While
these approaches provide high-fidelity data, they are often expensive, intrusive, and limited to controlled environments, thereby constraining their accessibility and practicality in real-world applications at scale.
Vision-based machine learning (ML) approaches have
recently emerged as a promising alternative [17, 28], and
can extract spatio-temporal information about human motion directly from video data, enabling non-invasive, scalable, and cost-effective gait analysis. However, current vision models face significant limitations in accurately detecting and analyzing individuals with transfemoral prosthetic
legs [4], as shown in Figure 1. This is because current
models are mostly trained on large datasets that only contain able-bodied individuals and hence fail to account for
the unique appearance and movement patterns of prosthetic
limbs. This gap in model performance not only hampers

1. Introduction
Prosthetic legs have been a transformative solution in clinical rehabilitation, allowing individuals with lower-limb amputations the ability to regain mobility and improve their
quality of life. The success of a prosthetic leg relies heavily
on its alignment on individual users that is crucial to comfort, stability, and efficient movement [34], and gait analysis
plays a pivotal role in achieving optimality in such alignment, by providing insights into the user’s individualized

8984

