This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniOcc: A Unified Benchmark for Occupancy Forecasting and Prediction
in Autonomous Driving
Yuping Wang1,2,4,∗ Xiangyu Huang3,† Xiaokang Sun1,† Mingxuan Yan1
Zhengzhong Tu4 Jiachen Li1,‡
1

2

University of California, Riverside
3
University of Wisconsin, Madison

4

Shuo Xing4

University of Michigan
Texas A&M University

Figure 1. Our UniOcc framework incorporates various occupancy label generation methods from multiple data sources, provides the
training/testing pipeline & toolkit for a variety of occupancy tasks, and supports comprehensive evaluation metrics.

Abstract
We introduce UniOcc, a comprehensive, unified benchmark
and toolkit for occupancy forecasting (i.e., predicting future
occupancies based on historical information) and occupancy prediction (i.e., predicting current-frame occupancy
from camera images. UniOcc unifies the data from multiple real-world datasets (i.e., nuScenes, Waymo) and highfidelity driving simulators (i.e., CARLA, OpenCOOD), providing 2D/3D occupancy labels and annotating innovative per-voxel flows. Unlike existing studies that rely on
suboptimal pseudo labels for evaluation, UniOcc incorporates novel evaluation metrics that do not depend on
ground-truth labels, enabling robust assessment on additional aspects of occupancy quality. Through extensive experiments on state-of-the-art models, we demonstrate that
large-scale, diverse training data and explicit flow information significantly enhance occupancy prediction and forecasting performance. Our data and code are available at
https://uniocc.github.io/.

3D cells, each indicating the presence or absence of objects
such as vehicles, pedestrians, and static obstacles [53]. Obtaining robust occupancy representations of the dynamic environments is essential for safe motion planning, end-to-end
driving systems, and various off-board applications (e.g.,
data generation for model development). There are two representative tasks in the context of autonomous driving: a)
Occupancy forecasting [2, 24, 35, 55] aims to predict future
occupancies based on historical occupancy/image observations, which enables autonomous systems to anticipate dynamic changes in the environment; b) Occupancy prediction
[1, 51] focuses on estimating the current occupancy grid
map from raw sensor data, which reconstructs the surrounding scene in a structured and interpretable format. While
recent work has made significant progress, several critical
issues have to be addressed.

1. Introduction

Suboptimal Occupancy Labels and Metrics. Widely
used driving datasets (e.g., nuScenes [3] and Waymo [30])
lack official occupancy annotations. Existing research thus
relies on pseudo ground truth labels derived from heuristics
or manual labeling [31, 36, 42]. These pseudo labels often capture only the reflective surfaces (e.g., car sides hit by
LiDAR), failing to represent the true 3D occupancy of the
scene. Models trained on these suboptimal labels inevitably
produce suboptimal results. Even worse, standard metrics
like Intersection-over-Union (IoU) cannot reveal such quality issues because they compare predictions solely against

Occupancy grid map (OGM) has been an effective representation of traffic scenes. It provides a rasterized view of the
environment by discretizing the space into a grid of 2D or
∗ ypw@umich.edu, † Equal contribution
‡ jiachen.li@ucr.edu, Corresponding author

25560

