This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E-SAM: Training-Free Segment Every Entity Model
Weiming Zhang1 Dingwen Xiao1 Lei Chen1,2 Lin Wang3†
1
HKUST (GZ) 2 HKUST 3 Nanyang Technological University
zweiming996@gmail.com, dxiaoaf@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, leichen@cse.ust.hk, linwang@ntu.edu.sg
Project Page: https://weimingz996.github.io/E-SAM/

Entity-level Masks 𝐴𝑃 !

ES’s Challenges
50.2

+4.6%
+67.9%

48.0

+195%

+150%

+90.7%

29.9

Instance

Instance-aware

26.3
20.1

Comprehensive
Masking

Unrestricted Class
Segmentation

17.0

Semantic

Panoptic

Images

EntityFramework

CropFormer

SAM’s AMG

Semantic-SAM’s SAM AMG’s
AMG
object-level map

E-SAM (Ours)

GT

Figure 1. Compared with prior ES methods [29, 30], SAM and Semantic-SAM [21], our E-SAM demonstrates superior performance.
Notably, our E-SAM, without any additional training, significantly outperforms both SAM’s AMG and its object-level map.

Abstract
Entity Segmentation (ES) aims at identifying and segmenting distinct entities within an image without the need
for predefined class labels. This characteristic makes
ES well-suited to open-world applications with adaptation to diverse and dynamically changing environments,
where new and previously unseen entities may appear frequently. Existing ES methods either require large annotated datasets or high training costs, limiting their scalability and adaptability. Recently, the Segment Anything Model
(SAM), especially in its Automatic Mask Generation (AMG)
mode, has shown potential for holistic image segmentation. However, it struggles with over-segmentation and
under-segmentation, making it less effective for ES. In this
paper, we introduce E-SAM, a novel training-free framework that exhibits exceptional ES capability. Specifically,
we first propose Multi-level Mask Generation (MMG) that
hierarchically processes SAM’s AMG outputs to generate reliable object-level masks while preserving fine details at other levels. Entity-level Mask Refinement (EMR)
then refines these object-level masks into accurate entitylevel masks. That is, it separates overlapping masks to
address the redundancy issues inherent in SAM’s outputs

and merges similar masks by evaluating entity-level consistency. Lastly, Under-Segmentation Refinement (USR) addresses under-segmentation by generating additional highconfidence masks fused with EMR outputs to produce the
final ES map. These three modules are seamlessly optimized to achieve the best ES without additional training
overhead. Extensive experiments demonstrate that E-SAM
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to prior ES
methods, demonstrating a significant improvement by +30.1
on benchmark metrics.

1. Introduction
Entity Segmentation (ES) [30] is an emerging task in computer vision that focuses on segmenting visual entities in
an image without relying on predefined class labels. Unlike traditional segmentation tasks, which are limited by
fixed categories, ES aligns more closely with human perception [26], where entities are identified based on visual
coherence. As shown in Figs. 1 & 2, ES offers comprehensive masking in instance segmentation, enhances the instance awareness of semantic segmentation, and overcomes
the label class limitations in panoptic segmentation, where
certain undefined entities (e.g., the metal rod in Fig. 1 and
exhaust fan in Fig. 2) are failed to be segmented. This

24688

