This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Reusing to Forecasting: Accelerating Diffusion Models with TaylorSeers
Jiacheng Liu1,2 ,* Chang Zou1,3∗ , Yuanhuiyi Lyu4 , Junjie Chen1 , Linfeng Zhang1†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shandong University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Diffusion Transformers (DiT) have revolutionized highfidelity image and video synthesis, yet their computational
demands remain prohibitive for real-time applications. To
solve this problem, feature caching has been proposed to
accelerate diffusion models by caching the features in the
previous timesteps and then reusing them in the following
timesteps. However, at timesteps with significant intervals,
the feature similarity in diffusion models decreases substantially, leading to a pronounced increase in errors introduced by feature caching, significantly harming the generation quality. To solve this problem, we propose TaylorSeer, which firstly shows that features of diffusion models at future timesteps can be predicted based on their
values at previous timesteps. Based on the fact that features change slowly and continuously across timesteps, TaylorSeer employs a differential method to approximate the
higher-order derivatives of features and predict features in
future timesteps with Taylor series expansion. Extensive experiments demonstrate its significant effectiveness in both
image and video synthesis, especially in high acceleration
ratios. For instance, it achieves an almost lossless acceleration of 4.99× on FLUX and 5.00× on HunyuanVideo
without additional training. On DiT, it achieves 3.41 lower
FID compared with previous SOTA at 4.53× acceleration.
Our codes have been released in Github:
https://github.com/Shenyi-Z/TaylorSeer

Principal Component 2

Abstract

Layer 5
Layer 6
Layer 11

Layer 5
Layer 6
Layer 11

Principal Component 1

Principal Component 1

(a) Features in Different Steps

(b) Derivatives of Features in Different Steps

Figure 1. PCA projections of features and their derivatives in
diffusion models. Both the features (a) and derivatives of features
(b) in diffusion models at different timesteps form stable trajectories, indicating it possible to predict features of diffusion models
at future timesteps based on features from previous timesteps.

1. Introduction

increase in computational demands, limiting the practical
use of diffusion transformers. In response to these growing
challenges regarding computational efficiency, various acceleration techniques have been proposed [29, 51, 55, 61].
Recently, based on the observation that diffusion models
have highly similar features in the adjacent timesteps, feature caching methods have been proposed to store the features in the previous timesteps and then reuse them in the
following timesteps, allowing diffusion models to skip substantial computations in both U-Net-based and transformerbased diffusion models [5, 29, 40] without requirements for
additional training. Previous caching methods follow the
“cache-then-reuse” paradigm and explore it from the perspectives of tokens [40, 60, 61] and residuals [5] while ignoring the its natural limitation: As the distance between
two timesteps increases, their feature similarity decreases
exponentially, making reusing features at distant steps significantly harm the generation quality. This curse locks the
possibility of feature caching in high-ratio acceleration. As
shown in the PCA results from Figure 1(a), features of diffusion models in non-adjacent timesteps exhibit long distances, verifying this limitation and calling for the development of a new caching paradigm.
To solve this problem, this paper introduces a new
paradigm, “cache-then-forecast”, to replace the previous
“cache-then-reuse”. As shown in Figure 1(a), features of
the diffusion model at different timesteps form a stable tra-

Diffusion Models (DMs) [11] have made significant strides
in generative artificial intelligence, achieving remarkable
results in tasks such as image generation and video synthesis [1, 34]. The introduction of Diffusion Transformers
(DiT) [31] has further advanced the quality of visual generation. However, these improvements come with a substantial
* Equal contribution. shenyizou@outlook.com
† Corresponding author: zhanglinfeng@sjtu.edu.cn

15853

