This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CODA: Repurposing Continuous VAEs for Discrete Tokenization
Zanlin Ni1∗
Yeguo Hua1
Xin Deng2
Zeyu Liu1 *
Xiao Ma3
Cheng Zhong3
Gao Huang1†
1

Tsinghua University

2

Renmin University

3

Lenovo Research, AI Lab

https://lzy-tony.github.io/coda

Abstract

(a) Discrete Tokenizer

ℰ
Discrete visual tokenizers transform images into a sequence
of tokens, enabling token-based visual generation akin to
language models. However, this process is inherently challenging, as it requires both compressing visual signals into
a compact representation and discretizing them into a fixed
set of codes. Traditional discrete tokenizers typically learn
the two tasks jointly, often leading to unstable training,
low codebook utilization, and limited reconstruction quality. In this paper, we introduce CODA (COntinuous-toDiscrete Adaptation), a framework that decouples compression and discretization. Instead of training discrete tokenizers from scratch, CODA adapts off-the-shelf continuous
VAEs—already optimized for perceptual compression—into
discrete tokenizers via a carefully designed discretization
process. By primarily focusing on discretization, CODA ensures stable and efficient training while retaining the strong
visual fidelity of continuous VAEs. Empirically, with 6×
less training budget than standard VQGAN, our approach
achieves a remarkable codebook utilization of 100% and
notable reconstruction FID (rFID) of 0.43 and 1.34 for 8×
and 16× compression on ImageNet 256× 256 benchmark.

1. Introduction
The field of AI-generated content (AIGC) has witnessed significant progress in recent years. In natural language processing, text generation has been mainly unified by the paradigm
of next discrete token prediction [1, 6, 35, 45]. This contrasts
with developments in computer vision, where the debate between continuous and discrete generation paradigms has yet
to reach a conclusion. While continuous diffusion models
dominate the field [5, 31, 32, 37], discrete token-based approaches [7, 8, 29, 41, 42] are increasingly gaining interest
due to their computational efficiency [28, 30, 42] and promising potential for unifying tasks across language modeling
and multimodal understanding [47, 50, 52, 53].

𝒟

Discrete
Latent Space

Unstable & Extensive Training
Low Codebook Utilization
Modest Reconstruction
(b) CODA Tokenizer

ℰ
𝒟

Token-based
Generator
Limited Generation
Performance

Continuous
Latent Space

adapt
Discrete
Latent Space

Stable & Efficient Training
Effective Codebook Utilization
Strong Reconstruction
(c) Quantitative Comparisons

Token-based
Generator
Strong Generation
Performance

Figure 1. (a) Conventional discrete VQ tokenizers learn to compress and discretize inherently continuous visual signals into codes
simultaneously. This lead to multiple challenges in training and the
corresponding unsatisfactory latent space poses a bottleneck that
limit the performance of discrete token-based generation models.
(b) Our proposed CODA tokenizer leverages continuous VAEs
for compression, directly discretizing the latent space. (c) Quantitative comparisons between VQGAN [11] and our proposed
CODA tokenizer.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

One defining characteristic of discrete methods is the
need for a discrete tokenizer, which converts visual signals
into a discrete format akin to language tokens. This process, however, is non-trivial, as it requires simultaneously
compressing visual signals and discretizing them into a set
of codes. In contrast, continuous VAEs focus solely on
mapping visual signals into a compressed continuous latent
space, avoiding this added complexity. Previous research

18906

