This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is Visual in-Context Learning for
Compositional Medical Tasks within Reach?
Simon Reiß1
Zdravko Marinov1
Alexander Jaus1
Constantin Seibold2
1,3
4
M. Saquib Sarfraz
Erik Rodner
Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 Heidelberg University Hospital 3 Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation 4 University of Applied Sciences Berlin

simon.reiss@kit.edu

1

Super resolution

1

In this paper, we explore the potential of visual in-context
learning to enable a single model to handle multiple tasks
and adapt to new tasks during test time without re-training.
Unlike previous approaches, our focus is on training incontext learners to adapt to sequences of tasks, rather than
individual tasks. Our goal is to solve complex tasks that involve multiple intermediate steps using a single model, allowing users to define entire vision pipelines flexibly at test
time. To achieve this, we first examine the properties and
limitations of visual in-context learning architectures, with
a particular focus on the role of codebooks. We then introduce a novel method for training in-context learners using
a synthetic compositional task generation engine. This engine bootstraps task sequences from arbitrary segmentation
datasets, enabling the training of visual in-context learners
for compositional tasks. Additionally, we investigate different masking-based training objectives to gather insights
into how to train models better for solving complex, compositional tasks. Our exploration not only provides important
insights especially for multi-modal medical task sequences
but also highlights challenges that need to be addressed.

2

3

2

context
query

In-Context
Learner

Abstract

Inpainting

3

Segmentation

Our setting:
native compositional task output

multiple models required to process compositional task
query
Expensive
re-training

Figure 1. Top: In green, our scenario of visual in-context learning
for compositional tasks using one general model. Bottom: Taskspecific image processing with multiple specialized models.

supervised learning [1, 5]. Recently, a new approach has
emerged: in-context learning [3, 4, 46]. In this paradigm, a
model is trained to derive the correct output O for a query
image Q given a task-specific context C. This approach is
akin to few-shot learning but extends to more diverse tasks,
combining few-shot and multi-task learning.
In this work, we investigate whether visual in-context
learning can be adapted to handle not only individual tasks
but also entire task sequences. The ability to instruct a
model to process images through a structured sequence of
tasks at test time – such as denoising, artifact removal, and
target structure segmentation – would enable users, e.g.,
medical doctors, to define highly individualized image processing pipelines without expensive re-training of a specialized model for each subtask. This flexibility would allow
for the dynamic redefinition of image processing pipelines
using a single model while upholding transparency, as stepby-step intermediate results can be inspected (Figure 1).
Our exploration addresses several fundamental questions:
• Codebook Limitations (Sec. 4): We examine the limitations of codebooks in visual in-context learning and propose improvements to better capture diverse task outputs.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning-based models trained for a
wide range of visual perception tasks have enabled the digitization of applications, that previously required manual intervention. These models are typically developed through a
rigorous process involving the collection of large datasets,
manual annotations, and supervised training of neural networks. However, the need for extensive image data and
labor-intensive annotations remains a significant challenge.
A variety of research areas have addressed these challenges, including transfer learning [30, 31], few-shot learning [40, 42], zero-shot learning [49], semi-supervised learning [34, 35], weakly supervised learning [25, 36], and self-

2642

