This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MATE: Motion-Augmented Temporal Consistency
for Event-based Point Tracking
†

Han Han, Wei Zhai, Yang Cao, Bin Li, Zheng-jun Zha
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
hanh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wzhai056, forrest, binli, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn}

Abstract



Tracking Any Point (TAP) plays a crucial role in motion
analysis. Video-based approaches rely on iterative local
matching for tracking, but they assume linear motion during the blind time between frames, which leads to point
loss under large displacements or nonlinear motion. The
high temporal resolution and motion blur-free characteristics of event cameras provide continuous, ﬁne-grained motion information, capturing subtle variations with microsecond precision. This paper presents an event-based framework for tracking any point, which tackles the challenges
posed by spatial sparsity and motion sensitivity in events
through two tailored modules. Speciﬁcally, to resolve ambiguities caused by event sparsity, a motion-guidance module
incorporates kinematic vectors into the local matching process. Additionally, a variable motion aware module is integrated to ensure temporally consistent responses that are
insensitive to varying velocities, thereby enhancing matching precision. To validate the effectiveness of the approach,
two event dataset for tracking any point is constructed by
simulation. The method improves the Survival50 metric by 17.9% over event-only tracking of any point baseline. Moreover, on standard feature tracking benchmarks, it
outperforms all existing methods, even those that combine
events and video frames.

(ROTJZOSK

<OJKUHGYKJGVVXUGIN

)UTZOT[U[Y
SUZOUT

_

Z

^

5[XGVVUXGIN

Figure 1. Video-based point tracking method (ﬁrst row) face limitations in tracking objects with varying motion states, primarily
due to their reliance on slow linear motion assumptions during
blind times. Our approach (second row) leverages continuous motion information from events, achieving smoother and more accurate results.

tions of query points by matching their appearance features
with local regions in subsequent frames [9, 10, 16]. However, as these methods assume slow linear motion during the
blind time between frames, they face the challenge of objects may undergo large displacements or nonlinear motion,
causing query points to exceed the bounds of local regions
and resulting in ambiguities in feature matching, see Fig. 1.
While some approaches attempt to mitigate this by considering spatial context [7, 39], they still struggle to overcome
the lack of motion during blind time.
To cope with the above issue, this paper utilize event
cameras to capture the motion during blind time. Event
cameras are bio-inspired sensors that respond to pixel-level
brightness changes with microsecond temporal resolution,
generating sparse and asynchronous event streams [24, 40].
They have the characteristics of high temporal resolution,

1. Introduction
Tracking Any Point (TAP) aims to determine the subsequent
positions of a given query point on a physical surface over
time, which is essential for understanding object motion in
the scene. It becomes even more vital for autonomous driving and embodied agents [6, 33, 43], where operations require precise spatial control of objects over time.
Recent methods rely on video input, predicting the posi†





Corresponding author.

8340

