This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing High-Quality Image Generation in Diffusion Sampling Using
Second-Order Levenberg-Marquardt-Langevin
Fangyikang Wang1∗‡ Hubery Yin2∗
Yilin Zhang1 Yanlong Tang4
1 Zhejiang University

Lei Qian1 Yinan Li1 Shaobin Zhuang3‡ Huminhao Zhu1
Chao Zhang1† Hanbin Zhao1 Hui Qian1 Chen Li2

2 WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc

3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
The emerging diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated
the remarkable capability of generating images via learning
the noised score function of data distribution. Current DM
sampling techniques typically rely on first-order Langevin
dynamics at each noise level, with efforts concentrated on
refining inter-level denoising strategies. While leveraging additional second-order Hessian geometry to enhance
the sampling quality of Langevin is a common practice in
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), the naive attempts to
utilize Hessian geometry in high-dimensional DMs lead to
quadratic-complexity computational costs, rendering them
non-scalable. In this work, we introduce a novel LevenbergMarquardt-Langevin (LML) method that approximates the
diffusion Hessian geometry in a training-free manner, drawing inspiration from the celebrated Levenberg-Marquardt
optimization algorithm. Our approach introduces two key
innovations: (1) A low-rank approximation of the diffusion Hessian, leveraging the DMs’ inherent structure and
circumventing explicit quadratic-complexity computations;
(2) A damping mechanism to stabilize the approximated
Hessian. This LML approximated Hessian geometry enables the diffusion sampling to execute more accurate steps
and improve the image generation quality. We further conduct a theoretical analysis to substantiate the approximation error bound of low-rank approximation and the convergence property of the damping mechanism. Extensive
experiments across multiple pretrained DMs validate that
the LML method significantly improves image generation
quality, with negligible computational overhead.

1. Introduction
The emerging diffusion models (DMs) [30, 74, 76, 77], generating samples of data distribution from initial noise, have
been proven to be an effective technique for modeling com* Equal contribution † Corresponding author
‡ Work done as interns at WeChat Vision

4 Tencent Lightspeed Studio

plex distribution, especially in generating high-quality images [13, 31, 58, 62, 67, 70]. Training DMs can be viewed
as using a neural network to match the (Stein) score function of the target distribution corrupted by different levels
of noise. The sampling of DMs can be seen as running
Langevin dynamics [65] using the learned diffused score
and simultaneously slowly decreasing the noise level, which
is called annealed Langevin dynamics [76].
Recently, many sampling methods have been proposed
to enhance the quality of generated samples of pretrained
DMs. The majority of these efforts focus on refining the denoising scheme, as seen in works such as DDIM [75], DPMSolvers [51, 52], PNDM [50], and others [7, 85, 91–94].
Some also propose to select more critical denoising timesteps to enhance sampling quality [23, 35, 87, 88]. These
efforts are primarily based on the analysis along the denoising path, yet they still perform first-order Langevin using
the learned score within a specific noise level.
In the Langevin sampling area, it is common to employ
additional second-order Hessian geometry to enhance the
sampling quality. The additional second-order information
can guide Langevin dynamics to take more accurate steps
[12, 54], which is called Newton-Langevin [73]. A natural
idea is that we can also leverage the Hessian geometry of
DMs within each noise level to enhance the quality of diffusion sampling results. However, it is extremely challenging to calculate the Hessian geometry within the context
of high-dimensional DMs [3], cause it requires quadraticcomplexity computations. Current methods on diffusion
Hessian either require auxiliary networks [15, 84] or maintain memory-intensive states [64], making them inefficient
for enhancing DM sampling.
In this paper, we introduce a novel method for approximating the diffusion Hessian within a specific noise level.
Notably, our approach is the first to approximate the diffusion Hessian and apply it to enhance the sampling quality of
pretrained commercial-level DMs. Our method, inspired by
the celebrated Levenberg-Marquardt method in optimization [45, 53, 68], is referred to as the Levenberg-MarquardtLangevin (LML) method. Our approach introduces two key

10453

