This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-Tuning Visual Autoregressive Models for Subject-Driven Generation
Jiwoo Chung, Sangeek Hyun, Hyunjun Kim, Eunseo Koh, MinKyu Lee, Jae-Pil Heo∗
Sungkyunkwan University
{jiwoo.jg, hse1032, arithu3, rainniee999, 2minkyulee, jaepilheo}@gmail.com

Subject

𝑆 ∗ dog seen
from the top

𝑆 ∗ dog seen
from the back

𝑆 ∗ dog wearing
a top hat

𝑆 ∗ dog in an
astronaut outfit

𝑆 ∗ dog diving
into a pool

𝑆 ∗ dog inside a
cave entrance

𝑆 ∗ dog sitting
by a campfire
under the stars

𝑆 ∗ dog surfing
on a giant wave
at sunset

𝑆 ∗ dog exploring 𝑆 ∗ dog riding a 𝑆 ∗ dog scaling a
𝑆 ∗ dog riding
an underwater motorcycle along a challenging rock gracefully on a giant
coral reef
coastal highway
wall at a canyon koi fish in a pond

Figure 1. Our method achieves high subject fidelity and text alignment in subject-driven generation through Visual autoregressive models.

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image generative models
have enabled numerous practical applications, including subject-driven generation, which fine-tunes pretrained
models to capture subject semantics from only a few examples. While diffusion-based models produce high-quality
images, their extensive denoising steps result in significant
computational overhead, limiting real-world applicability.
Visual autoregressive (VAR) models, which predict nextscale tokens rather than spatially adjacent ones, offer significantly faster inference suitable for practical deployment.
In this paper, we propose the first VAR-based approach for
subject-driven generation. However, naı̈ve fine-tuning VAR
leads to computational overhead, language drift, and reduced diversity. To address these challenges, we introduce
selective layer tuning to reduce complexity and prior distillation to mitigate language drift. Additionally, we found
that the early stages have a greater influence on the generation of subject than the latter stages, which merely synthesize minor details. Based on this finding, we propose

scale-wise weighted tuning, which prioritizes coarser resolutions for promoting the model to focus on the subjectrelevant information instead of local details. Extensive experiments validate that our method significantly outperforms diffusion-based baselines across various metrics and
demonstrates its practical usage. Codes are available at
github.com/jiwoogit/ARBooth.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author

With recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) generative
models [27, 40, 42, 45, 65], numerous real-world applications [1, 4, 7, 8, 18, 19, 32, 46, 67] have emerged and gained
widespread adoption. Among these applications, subjectdriven generation (also called text-to-image personalization) [12, 39, 46, 51] represents the content of target subject
using unique text embedding by optimizing the parameters
or embeddings with only a few examples.
Most existing methods for subject-driven generation rely
on pretrained diffusion models [40, 45], leveraging their
ability to produce diverse and visually plausible images.
However, the diffusion process inherently requires a large

19174

