This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anchor Token Matching:
Implicit Structure Locking for Training-free AR Image Editing
Taihang Hu1 *, Linxuan Li1 *, Kai Wang3,4†, Yaxing Wang2,1†, Jian Yang1 , Ming-Ming Cheng2,1
1
VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, 2 NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
3
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
4
City University of Hong Kong (Dongguan)
{hutaihang00, linxuanli520}@gmail.com
kai.wang@cityu-dg.edu.cn, {csjyang,cmm,yaxing}@nankai.edu.cn

Figure 1. Our method, Implicit Structure Locking (ISLock), is able to achieve the attribute/object replacement (left), add/remove object
(mid) and style/state transfer (right) tasks while maintaining the other information firm to the original image. ISLock is also applicable to
different AR-based models, the first row is generated based on LlamaGen [47], while the second row based on Lumina-mGPT [29]

Abstract
Text-to-image generation has seen groundbreaking advancements with diffusion models, enabling high-fidelity synthesis
and precise image editing through cross-attention manipulation. Recently, autoregressive (AR) models have re-emerged
as powerful alternatives, leveraging next-token generation
to match diffusion models. However, existing editing techniques designed for diffusion models fail to translate directly
to AR models due to fundamental differences in structural
control. Specifically, AR models suffer from spatial poverty
of attention maps and sequential accumulation of structural
errors during image editing, which disrupt object layouts
and global consistency. In this work, we introduce Implicit
Structure Locking (ISLock), the first training-free editing
strategy for AR visual models. Rather than relying on explicit attention manipulation or fine-tuning, ISLock preserves
structural blueprints by dynamically aligning self-attention

patterns with reference images through the Anchor Token
Matching (ATM) protocol. By implicitly enforcing structural consistency in latent space, our method ISLock enables
structure-aware editing while maintaining generative autonomy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ISLock
achieves high-quality, structure-consistent edits without additional training and is superior or comparable to conventional editing techniques. Our findings pioneer the way for
efficient and flexible AR-based image editing, further bridging the performance gap between diffusion and autoregressive generative models. The code will be publicly available
at https://github.com/hutaiHang/ATM

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution, † Co-corresponding authors.

In recent years, text-to-image (T2I) generation technologies
centered on diffusion models have achieved revolutionary
breakthroughs [7, 19, 20, 25, 43]. Foundational models like
Stable Diffusion [11, 38] and Imagen [44] have not only
driven innovations in artistic creation [3, 13–15], but also
catalyzed a rich ecosystem of downstream tasks — ranging

18166

