This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Adverse Weather Removal via Spectral-based Spatial Grouping
Yuhwan Jeong∗ , Yunseo Yang∗ , Youngho Yoon∗ , and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{jeongyh98,acorn,dudgh1732,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

(a) Extract Spectral
Information

Abstract

Features

Group-wise
Attention

Spatial Feature
Grouping

SVD

C

Mask
Generator

Spectral
Feature Fusion

Sobel

Adverse weather conditions cause diverse and complex
degradation patterns, driving the development of All-inOne (AiO) models. However, recent AiO solutions still
struggle to capture diverse degradations, since global filtering methods like direct operations on the frequency domain
fail to handle highly variable and localized distortions.
To address these issue, we propose Spectral-based Spatial
Grouping Transformer (SSGformer), a novel approach that
leverages spectral decomposition and group-wise attention
for multi-weather image restoration. SSGformer decomposes images into high-frequency edge features using conventional edge detection and low-frequency information via
Singular Value Decomposition. We utilize multi-head linear
attention to effectively model the relationship between these
features. The fused features are integrated with the input
to generate a grouping-mask that clusters regions based on
the spatial similarity and image texture. To fully leverage
this mask, we introduce a group-wise attention mechanism,
enabling robust adverse weather removal and ensuring consistent performance across diverse weather conditions. We
also propose a Spatial Grouping Transformer Block that
uses both channel attention and spatial attention, effectively
balancing feature-wise relationships and spatial dependencies. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our approach, validating its effectiveness in handling the varied
and intricate adverse weather degradations.

(b) Generate
(c) Spatial Grouping
Grouping-mask
Transformer Block

Grouping-mask

Unified All-in-One
Encoder-Decoder
Unknown Degradation

Recovered Images

Figure 1. Overview. We propose SSGformer, an All-in-One adverse weather removal model with three key components. (a) Sobel operator and SVD extract spectral information from degraded
image, producing degradation-aware features through spectral feature fusion. (b) The fused features identify degradation patterns
and generate a “grouping-mask” for spatial grouping. (c) Features
are grouped by the mask for group-wise spatial/channel attention.

1. Introduction

for restoring degraded images [22, 43, 64, 75, 76].
Early research on adverse weather removal primarily focused on handling single weather conditions [4, 8, 46, 60].
However, as the demand for comprehensive models to address multiple types of degradation grew, the focus shifted
toward All-in-One (AiO) approaches for adverse weather
removal [7, 12, 26, 30, 33–36, 49, 61, 63, 70, 72, 77, 78].
Despite these advancements, developing a unified model
capable of handling diverse weather conditions remains
a major challenge due to the highly variable nature of
weather-induced degradations. The complex interactions
between different atmospheric conditions lead to unpredictable visual degradations, making it difficult to create a
single framework that generalizes well across all scenarios.
To address the challenges posed by adverse weather
conditions, several studies have explored image restoration techniques in the frequency domain. AIRFormer [18],
a general-purpose AiO model, constructs a frequency-

Adverse weather conditions, such as snow, rain, raindrop, and haze, severely degrade visual information, making image restoration an essential task for various applications [20, 24, 58]. To address this issue, researchers have
explored methods to remove weather-induced degradation
from images [5, 27, 31, 37, 38, 40, 59, 62, 68]. In particular,
significant efforts have been made to leverage image-based
priors, such as edges and fourier patterns, as a foundation
* Denotes equal contribution.
The code is available at github.com/jeongyh98/SSGformer.

11872

