This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CogNav: Cognitive Process Modeling for Object Goal Navigation with LLMs

1

Shuzhen Liu1
Kai Xu1,†

College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology
2

3

Zhinan Yu1,∗
Bo Du4

Jiazhao Zhang2,∗
Qin Zou4

Yihan Cao1,∗
Zheng Qin3

CFCS, School of Computer Science, Peking University

Defense Innovation Institute, Academy of Military Sciences

4

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University

Abstract
Object goal navigation (ObjectNav) is a fundamental task
in embodied AI, requiring an agent to locate a target object in previously unseen environments. This task is particularly challenging because it requires both perceptual
and cognitive processes, including object recognition and
decision-making. While substantial advancements in perception have been driven by the rapid development of visual foundation models, progress on the cognitive aspect
remains constrained, primarily limited to either implicit
learning through simulator rollouts or explicit reliance on
predefined heuristic rules. Inspired by neuroscientific findings demonstrating that humans maintain and dynamically
update fine-grained cognitive states during object search
tasks in novel environments, we propose CogNav, a framework designed to mimic this cognitive process using large
language models. Specifically, we model the cognitive process using a finite state machine comprising fine-grained
cognitive states, ranging from exploration to identification.
Transitions between states are determined by a large language model based on a dynamically constructed heterogeneous cognitive map, which contains spatial and semantic information about the scene being explored. Extensive
evaluations on the HM3D, MP3D, and RoboTHOR benchmarks demonstrate that our cognitive process modeling significantly improves the success rate of ObjectNav at least by
relative 14% over the state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1. We propose to model the cognitive process of object
goal navigation with an LLM. The LLM is leveraged to reason
the transitions of a spectrum of states ranging from exploration
to identification via being prompted by a heterogeneous cognitive
map. The cognitive map is constructed online and dynamically
updated/corrected through, again, prompting the LLM.

ficiently explore the environment, effectively reason about
the spatial arrangement of target objects, strategically plan
an optimal path to the goal, and accurately identify the target object upon approaching it. Consequently, ObjectNav is
widely recognized as a challenging task that integrates both
perceptual and cognitive processes [7, 34].
Recent advances in visual foundation models have significantly boosted the visual perception capabilities of embodied agents for scene understanding [18, 21, 26], enabling rapid progress in zero-shot ObjectNav. In contrast,
modeling the cognitive process of ObjectNav has so far received limited progress. One methodology [5, 7, 10] involves implicit learning from demonstrations or rollouts
generated by simulators [11, 35, 39]. However, due to the
limited diversity of scenes and objects, these methods are
known to suffer from poor generality in zero-shot settings.
Another approach [8, 28, 33] to modeling the cognitive

1. Introduction
Navigating an unseen environment to find a target object,
known as object goal navigation (ObjectNav) [20, 39], is a
fundamental task for embodied agents and has received increasing attention in the computer vision and robotics fields
in recent years. To achieve ObjectNav, an agent must ef∗ Joint first authors; † Corresponding author;
Homepage: https://yhancao.github.io/CogNav/

9550

