This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards a Universal Image Degradation Model via Content-Degradation
Disentanglement
Wenbo Yang
University of Waterloo

Zhongling Wang*
AI Center-Toronto, Samsung Electronics

Zhou Wang
University of Waterloo

w243yang@uwaterloo.ca

z.wang2@samsung.com

zhou.wang@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Image degradation synthesis is highly desirable in a
wide variety of applications ranging from image restoration to simulating artistic effects. Existing models are designed to generate one specific or a narrow set of degradations, which often require user-provided degradation parameters. As a result, they lack the generalizability to synthesize degradations beyond their initial design or adapt
to other applications. Here we propose the first universal degradation model that can synthesize a broad spectrum of complex and realistic degradations containing both
homogeneous (global) and inhomogeneous (spatially varying) components. Our model automatically extracts and
disentangles homogeneous and inhomogeneous degradation features, which are later used for degradation synthesis
without user intervention. A disentangle-by-compression
method is proposed to separate degradation information
from images. Two novel modules for extracting and incorporating inhomogeneous degradations are created to model
inhomogeneous components in complex degradations. We
demonstrate the model’s accuracy and adaptability in filmgrain simulation and blind image restoration tasks. The
demo video, code, and dataset of this project will be released at Yang’s GitHub account .

Figure 1. Demonstration of the applicability of our universal image degradation model in GAN inversion-based image restoration.
When a fixed degradation model is used, only the modeled degradation (downsampling, first column) receives high-quality results.
However, when our universal degradation model is used, all results
are of pleasant quality. Best to be viewed zoomed in.

and rain synthesis offers a computationally efficient alternative to complex physical simulations in computer graphics.

1. Introduction

However, existing degradation models, whether handcrafted, statistical, or deep learning-based, are predominantly designed for specific degradation types or narrow
degradation sets, as summarized in Table 1. These models often employ restrictive design choices to optimize performance for particular degradations, sacrificing generalizability across diverse scenarios. Consequently, they cannot
be adapted to synthesize degradations beyond their original design. However, in many downstream applications, the
ability to synthesize multiple types of degradation is essential. A set of visual examples in image restoration is given
in Fig. 1. Furthermore, most existing models necessitate
user-specified degradation parameters, limiting their applicability in contexts where frequent user input is impractical, such as film grain transfer or blind image restoration.
While some degradation models can estimate the degradation parameters, they only apply to simple, well-defined
degradations, failing to extend to complex real-world degra-

Image degradation synthesis plays an important role in numerous applications across multiple domains. In image
restoration, it is often used indirectly to generate pristinedistorted training pairs for supervised learning [22, 32, 46,
50], while some approaches incorporate it directly as an integral module within restoration frameworks [1, 8, 30, 41,
42, 48]. Beyond restoration, accurate degradation synthesis also plays a significant role in artistic applications. For
example, cinematographers rely on precise film grain synthesis tor enhance viewer experience [29], and efficient haze
* Work done at the University of Waterloo.

12966

