This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Denoising Token Prediction in Masked Autoregressive Models
Ting Yao, Yehao Li, Yingwei Pan, Zhaofan Qiu, and Tao Mei
HiDream.ai Inc.
{tiyao, liyehao, pandy, qiuzhaofan, tmei}@hidream.ai

Abstract
MAR Transformers

Autoregressive models are just at a tipping point where they
could really take off for visual generation. In this paper,
we propose to model token prediction using diffusion procedure particularly in masked autoregressive models for image generation. We look into the problem from two critical perspectives: progressively refining the unmasked tokens prediction via a denoising head with the autoregressive
model, and representing masked tokens probability distribution by capitalizing on the interdependency across masked
and unmasked tokens through a diffusion head. Our proposal harbors an innate agency that remains advantageous
in the speed of sequence prediction, and strongly favors
high capability in generating quality samples by leveraging
the principles of denoising diffusion process. Extensive experiments on both class-conditional and text-to-image tasks
demonstrate its superiority, achieving the state-of-the-art
FID score of 1.47 and 5.27 on ImageNet and MSCOCO
datasets, respectively. More remarkably, our approach
leads to 45% speedup in the inference time of image generation against the diffusion models such as DiT-XL/2.

Diffusion Head
(a) MAR

MAR Transformers

Denoising Head

Diffusion Head
(b) De-MAR

masked tokens
refined tokens

predicted tokens

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) Masked Autoregressive (MAR) Model
and (b) our token Denoising in MAR model (De-MAR), which
contains a new denoising head for progressively refining unmasked tokens and an upgraded diffusion head with enhanced context information for masked token prediction.

autoregressive models to discretize images or videos may
result in severe information loss. That somewhat affects the
impact of scaling autoregressive models to vision data.
In response to the above issues, we exploit the recipe
of Masked Autoregressive (MAR) model in which all unmasked tokens are available to each other and also to all
masked tokens. As such, the MAR model nicely leverages
global interactions across tokens in the sequence and allows
us to predict multiple tokens simultaneously in each step. In
contrast to tokenizing sequentially in raster order which is
widely-used in GPT-like structure for language prediction,
the MAR manner might be more fit for modelling vision
data. More importantly, we devise a noising-denoising process depicted as denoising head in Figure 1 (b) to further
improve the predicted tokens to better match the data. To
mitigate the second issue, we remould the autoregressive
model on continuous-valued domains in [26] to represent

Autoregressive models are at the core of achieving unprecedented success of large language models (LLMs). The technologies follow the philosophy of Next Token Prediction
that the models predict one token at a time in an autoregressive mechanism. Scaling up such autoregressive models effectively pushes the capabilities and limits in solving Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks [3, 21, 36, 45, 48].
This tremendous progress encourages recent advances to
delve into autoregressive models for visual generation tasks,
e.g., text-to-image generation [5, 25, 26, 31, 42, 59] and
text-to-video generation [55, 56]. Nevertheless, adopting
autoregressive models in vision domain is not trivial and
the difficulties generally originate from two aspects: 1) the
prediction process of visual content in autoregressive form
should be different from that of generating inherently sequential language; 2) vector quantization involved in typical

18024

