This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T URBOVSR: Fantastic Video Upscalers and Where to Find Them
Zhongdao Wang1 Guodongfang Zhao1 Jingjing Ren2
Bailan Feng1 Shifeng Zhang1 Wenbo Li1†
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 HKUST (Guangzhou)

Latency per 1080P video frame
Upscale-A-Video: 24s
STAR: 12s
TurboVSR-10step: 0.34s
171x speedup

TurboVSR-4step: 0.14s
0.25

1

4

16

Figure 1. Qualitative results of the proposed T URBOVSR on video super-resolution (VSR). The low-resolution (LR) inputs are shown
on the left, while the super-resolved (SR) outputs are displayed on the right. For clarity, local regions are zoomed in to facilitate detailed
comparison. While T URBOVSR demonstrates comparable performance to state-of-the-art diffusion-based VSR methods, such as UpscaleA-Video [75], it achieves a remarkable computational advantage, delivering a speedup of over 100×.

of tokens. (2) Highly compressed latents pose substantial
challenges for training. We introduce factorized conditioning to mitigate the learning complexity: we first learn to
super-resolve the initial frame; subsequently, we condition
the super-resolution of the remaining frames on the highresolution initial frame and the low-resolution subsequent
frames. (3) We convert the pre-trained diffusion model to a
shortcut model to enable fewer sampling steps, further accelerating inference. As a result, T URBOVSR performs on
par with state-of-the-art VSR methods, while being 100+
times faster, taking only 7 seconds to process a 2-second
long 1080p video. T URBOVSR also supports image resolution by considering image as a one-frame video. Our
efficient design makes SR beyond 1080p possible, results on
4K (3648×2048) image SR show surprising fine details.

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models have demonstrated exceptional promise in the video super-resolution (VSR) task,
achieving a substantial advancement in detail generation
relative to prior methods. However, these approaches face
significant computational efficiency challenges. For instance, current techniques may require tens of minutes to
super-resolve a mere 2-second, 1080p video. In this paper,
we present T URBOVSR, an ultra-efficient diffusion-based
video super-resolution model. Our core design comprises
three key aspects: (1) We employ an autoencoder with a
high compression ratio of 32×32×8 to reduce the number
† Corresponding author.

18132

