This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Laboring on less labors: RPCA Paradigm for Pan-sharpening
Honghui Xu1,2 , Chuangjie Fang1 , Yibin Wang3 , Jie Wu1 , Jianwei Zheng1 *
1

2

Zhejiang University of Technology

Taizhou University

3

Fudan University

xhh9609@gmail.com, fangcj@zjut.edu.cn, yibinwang1121@163.com, {wuj,zjw}@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract

Iteration
1,2,…,K

Deep unfolding network (DUN) based pansharpening has
shed new light on high-resolution/spectrum image acquisition, serving as a computational alternative to physical
devices. While with both merits of deep feature learning and acceptable interpretability enjoyed, current pansharpening necessitates substantial effort in approximating
the degradation matrices along the spatial and spectral dimensions, yet with performance hardly guaranteed within
the complex scenarios. Moreover, as a key step during
DUN update, current solutions rely solely on black-box networks to learn the data-driven priors, which further results
in laborious architecture crafting and compromised interpretability. To counteract the dilemmas, we propose a new
solution, namely RPCA-based Unfolding Network (RUN),
which shrinks the original two degradations to only one.
Specifically, grounded in the significant sparsity of spatial
offset components, i.e., the difference between upsampled
image and the desired target, we shift the original pansharpening issue into a novel Robust Principal Component
Analysis (RPCA)-based paradigm. On that basis, the tricky
approximation to the spatial degradation matrix as well as
its transposed counterpart is naturally avoided. Specific for
the prior learning step of RPCA unfolding, an efficient Nonlinear transformation-based Tensor Nuclear Norm (NTNN)
is meticulously engineered, in which the computationally intensive Singular Value Decomposition is avoided with the
aid of depthwise convolutions. More importantly, NTNN
plays a plug-and-play role and can be easily embedded
into Transformer/CNN architectures for the learning of both
global and local features. Experimental results on multiple
remote datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposal
over previous SOTA methods.

(a)
Upsample
d LRMS

PAN

HRMS

Conv
Net

Low-rank
prior

Lossfunction

network
parameters
spatial offset
component l1-norm

PAN
feature
Feature
fusion

(b)

LRMS

Conv
Net

GT

HRMS

LRMS
feature

Figure 1. The proposed RPCA Paradigm for pansharpening (a)
versus the traditional pansharpening framework (b).

1. Introduction

sensing apparatus, including QuickBird, GaoFen-2 (GF2),
WorldView-2 (WV2), and WorldView-3 (WV3), have been
deployed, facilitating a wide array of application scenarios.
Nevertheless, optical imagery often encounters the challenge of balancing spatial and spectral resolution-a dilemma
rooted in the inherent limitations of imaging sensors. This
fundamental compromise restricts the ability to simultaneously enrich spatial and spectral resolutions in image acquisition [12, 18, 23]. Practically, the spatial size of panchromatic (PAN) images often surpasses that of low-resolution
multispectral images (LRMS). In the meantime, an LRMS
image is rich in spectral information, in stark contrast to
PANs that involve only a single channel. Against this backdrop, Pansharpening emerges as an alternative solution to
expensive hardware devices, which hammers at synthesizing a high spatial resolution multispectral (HRMS) image
given a PAN/LRMS pair, paving the way for imagery that
captures the best of both domains.
Contemporary pansharpening methodologies can be systematically classified into two principal groups: modelbased schemes and deep learning (DL)-based techniques.
Model-based schemes [2, 24, 29, 31] typically enjoy a high
population due to solid theoretical foundation. Technically,
this branch often formulates a model incorporating two key
elements, i.e., spatial-spectral fidelity and prior property ex-

Due to the rapidly evolving remote sensing (RS) technology, a multitude of satellites outfitted with optical
* Corresponding author.

11393

