This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VAFlow: Video-to-Audio Generation with Cross-Modality Flow Matching
Xihua Wang1
Xin Cheng1
Yuyue Wang1
Ruihua Song1 *
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China

Yunfeng Wang2
2
ZHI-TECH GROUP

xihuaw@ruc.edu.cn, songruihua bloon@outlook.com

Abstract
Video-to-audio (V2A) generation aims to synthesize temporally aligned, realistic sounds for silent videos, a critical capability for immersive multimedia applications. Current V2A methods, predominantly based on diffusion or
flow models, rely on suboptimal noise-to-audio paradigms
that entangle cross-modal mappings with stochastic priors, resulting in inefficient training and convoluted transport paths. We propose VAFlow, a novel flow-based framework that directly models the video-to-audio transformation, eliminating reliance on noise priors. To address
modality discrepancies, we employ an alignment variational autoencoder that compresses heterogeneous video
features into audio-aligned latent spaces while preserving spatiotemporal semantics. By retaining cross-attention
mechanisms between video features and flow blocks, our
architecture enables classifier-free guidance within video
source-driven generation. Without external data or complex training tricks, VAFlow achieves state-of-the-art performance on VGGSound benchmark, surpassing even textaugmented models in audio fidelity, diversity, and distribution alignment. This work establishes a new paradigm for
V2A generation with a direct and effective video-to-audio
transformation via flow matching.

Figure 1. Four different V2A paradigms, along with state-of-theart performance under each. The first row shows discrete tokenbased approaches (mask-prediction and autoregressive based generation), which are limited by information loss during tokenization. The second row presents methods generating continuous
data. Previous diffusion and flow methods (bottom-left) model
the noise-to-audio mapping conditioning on video. We find this
approach suboptimal and demonstrate that directly modeling the
video-to-audio transformation (bottom-right) yields better results.

1. Introduction

Recent advancements in Diffusion and Flow Matching
(FM) models in image [4, 10, 33] and video [3, 31] generation have spurred similar approaches for V2A [9, 25, 41,
43, 45]. Generally, these methods model V2A as a conditional generation task, transforming Gaussian noise conditioned on video into audio, as shown in Figure 1 (bottomleft). The generation process typically involves two steps:
(1) sampling a random noise from Gaussian prior and (2)
using this noise and video condition as input to iteratively
denoise the noise into audio. This approach avoids discrete
audio tokens, directly fitting the continuous distribution of
audio data, and currently holds state-of-the-art results.
However, existing diffusion/FM-based V2A methods focus solely on the second step, i.e., denoising Gaussian noise
into audio, assuming the first step is trivial. Even stateof-the-art methods [40, 43] begin with Gaussian noise, but
we find that this approach is not optimal. Unlike text-to-

Video-to-audio (V2A) generation plays a vital role in multimedia content generation, including Foley for films and
AI-generated silent videos. In recent years, this task has
attracted increasing attention within the generative community. Early V2A approaches [15, 24, 26, 29, 34] adopted
language modeling strategies by discretizing audio into tokens, and used parallel mask-prediction models (BERTlike) or token-by-token autoregressive models (GPT-like)
borrowed from NLP community as shown in Figure 1.
However, these methods, reliant on discrete tokens, incur
inherent information losses by the discretization process.
* Corresponding author.

11777

