This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InteractAvatar: Modeling Hand-Face Interaction in Photorealistic Avatars with
Deformable Gaussians
Kefan Chen12

Sreyas Mohan*2
1

(a) Dynamic Gaussian Hand

Justin Theiss*2

Sergiu Oprea*2

Srinath Sridhar1

Aayush Prakash2
2
Brown University
Meta Reality Labs

(b) Non-rigid hand-face interaction.

(c) Cross-actor enactment.

Figure 1. We propose InteractAvatar which enables (a) Dynamic Gaussian Hand. Our novel representation anchors 3D Gaussian kernels
to a hand template mesh and a learnable neural network allowing for pose-dependent articulation, self-cast shadows, and high-fidelity
appearance modeling. (b) Non-Rigid Hand-Face Interaction. We introduce a learnable interaction module that refines hand-induced
deformations and shading effects on the face, ensuring realistic skin contact dynamics. (c) Cross-Actor Enactment. We can transfer hand
and face motions across different subjects, demonstrating its generalization capability to unseen identities and gestures.

Abstract
With increasing interest in digital avatars coupled with
the importance of expressions and gestures in communication, modeling natural avatar behavior remains an important challenge in many industries such as teleconferencing,
gaming, and AR/VR. Human hands are the primary tool
for interacting with the environment and essential for realistic human behavior modeling, yet existing 3D hand and
head avatar models often overlook the crucial aspect of
hand-body interactions, such as between hand and face. We
present InteractAvatar, the first model to faithfully capture
the photorealistic appearance of dynamic hand and nonrigid hand-face interactions. Our novel Dynamic Gaussian
Hand model, combining template model and 3D Gaussian
Splatting as well as a dynamic refinement module, captures
pose-dependent change, e.g. the fine wrinkles and complex shadows that occur during articulation. Importantly,
our hand-face interaction module models the subtle geometry and appearance dynamics that underlie common ges-

tures. Through experiments of novel view synthesis, selfreenactment, and cross-identity reenactment, we demonstrate that InteractAvatar can reconstruct hand and handface interactions from multi-view videos with high-fidelity
details and be animated with novel poses.

1. Introduction

1 Project Page: https : / / arthurchen0518 . github . io /
InteractAvatar

Human communication transcends mere words with expressions, gestures, and subtle physical interactions conveying instantly recognizable emotions, intentions, and empathy. Studies show that these nonverbal cues play a crucial role in interaction [3], and failure to replicate them
in digital avatars can disrupt comprehension and diminish immersion [2, 24]. Yet, faithfully capturing non-verbal
communication modes in digital avatars remains a significant challenge. In fields like teleconferencing [17, 41, 42],
VR/AR [33, 42, 47], gaming [5, 36], and virtual social
worlds [42], there is a growing demand for avatars capable of dynamic, realistic interactions to enhance immersion
and improve the quality of virtual human representation.
Although several methods exist to reconstruct photoreal-

10410

