This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZipVL: Accelerating Vision-Language Models through Dynamic Token Sparsity
Yefei He1,2 * Feng Chen3 Jing Liu4 Wenqi Shao2
Hong Zhou1† Kaipeng Zhang2† Bohan Zhuang1
1

Zhejiang University, China
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
3
The University of Adelaide, Australia
4
ZIP Lab, Monash University, Australia
2

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the recent advancement of large language models
(LLMs) [1, 35, 36], many studies have extended their capabilities to comprehend and generate visual content. These
models, commonly known as large vision-language models (LVLMs), have demonstrated remarkable performance
in tasks such as image captioning and visual question answering [11, 12, 22, 24, 34]. Typically, to remain compatible with the next-token-prediction generation scheme
of LLMs, images or videos are encoded into visual tokens
through a pre-trained visual encoder, and concatenated with
text tokens for input into the model. However, for highresolution images or videos, the visual encoder generates
excessive sequences of visual tokens, significantly limiting
the generative efficiency of LVLMs. For example, a short
video consisting of 128 frames is encoded into over 18,000
tokens by the LongVA model [43]. In such cases, the prefill phase suffers from the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism, resulting in computational bottleneck
and prolonged time-to-first-token (TTFT). In the decoding
phase, each new token interacts with all preceding tokens,
requiring to fetch the full key-value (KV) cache from memory and thereby inducing a memory bottleneck. Improving
generative efficiency in both phases is essential for the practical deployment of LVLMs.

The efficiency of large vision-language models (LVLMs) is
constrained by the computational bottleneck of the attention
mechanism during the prefill phase and the memory bottleneck of fetching the key-value (KV) cache in the decoding
phase, particularly in scenarios involving high-resolution
images or videos. Visual content often exhibits substantial redundancy, resulting in highly sparse attention maps
within LVLMs. This sparsity can be leveraged to accelerate
attention computation or compress the KV cache through
various approaches. However, most studies focus on addressing only one of these bottlenecks and do not adequately
support dynamic adjustment of sparsity concerning distinct
layers or tasks. In this paper, we present ZipVL, an efficient inference framework designed for LVLMs through a
dynamic ratio allocation strategy of important tokens. This
ratio is adaptively determined based on the layer-specific
distribution of attention scores, rather than fixed hyperparameters, thereby improving efficiency for less complex
tasks while maintaining high performance for more challenging ones. Then we select important tokens based on
their normalized attention scores and perform sparse attention mechanism solely on those important tokens, reducing
the latency in the prefill phase. Tokens deemed less important will be discarded to reduce KV cache size, alleviating the memory bottleneck in the decoding phase. Our experiments demonstrate that ZipVL can accelerate the prefill phase by 2.3× and improve decoding throughput by
2.8×, with a minimal accuracy reduction of only 0.5% on
VQAv2 benchmark over LLaVA-Next-13B model, effectively
enhancing the generation efficiency of LVLMs.

* Work done during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
† Corresponding authors.

To address computational complexity in the prefill phase,
sparse attention [18, 30, 45] has emerged as an effective
strategy, particularly suitable for LVLMs where visual information exhibits considerable redundancy, resulting in
higher sparsity in attention maps compared to LLMs [4, 37].
This sparsity can be implemented at various levels of
granularity. Some studies pre-define several sparse patterns and assign them to the attention mask during inference [18, 45]. However, these predefined patterns are incompatible with efficient attention implementations such as
FlashAttention [7] and require custom GPU kernels for each

20477

