This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Domain Properties in Language-Driven Domain Generalization for
Semantic Segmentation
Seogkyu Jeon1
1

Yonsei University

Kibeom Hong2∗
2

Hyeran Byun1 *

Sookmyung Women’s University

jone9312@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

(Synthetic, clear, …)

Recent domain generalized semantic segmentation
(DGSS) studies have achieved notable improvements by distilling semantic knowledge from Vision-Language Models
(VLMs). However, they overlook the semantic misalignment between visual and textual contexts, which arises due
to the rigidity of a fixed context prompt learned on a single
source domain. To this end, we present a novel domain generalization framework for semantic segmentation, namely
Domain-aware Prompt-driven Masked Transformer (DPMFormer). Firstly, we introduce domain-aware prompt learning to facilitate semantic alignment between visual and textual cues. To capture various domain-specific properties
with a single source dataset, we propose domain-aware
contrastive learning along with the texture perturbation that
diversifies the observable domains. Lastly, to establish a
framework resilient against diverse environmental changes,
we have proposed the domain-robust consistency learning
which guides the model to minimize discrepancies of prediction from original and the augmented images. Through
experiments and analyses, we demonstrate the superiority
of the proposed framework, which establishes a new stateof-the-art on various DGSS benchmarks.

Source

Discrepancy

(Real, dusk, …)

Target

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝑇𝑇

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝑇𝑇
(Real, dusk, …)

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐼

Fixed context prompts [31, 36]

Target

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐼

DPMFormer (Ours)

Figure 1. Motivation of DPMFormer. Using a fixed context
prompts [31, 36] tend to retain source domain properties, causing contextual misalignment with the target domain. On the other
hand, DPMFormer translates domain properties of the input image
into context prompts, enhancing semantic alignments.

1. Introduction

ing [6, 37–39] and domain randomization [4, 14, 19, 24, 27,
28, 56, 59, 61, 62]. Furthermore, some studies [3, 10] exploited multi-scale object queries with a transformer-based
architecture, i.e., Mask2Former [5].
Despite these advancements, learning domain-robust
representations solely from the single source domain remains a significant hurdle to performance improvement.
Recently, several studies [13, 21, 36, 55] employed VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) [41, 45] owing to their semantic knowledge learned from diverse large-scale textimage datasets. For this, pioneering VLM-based DGSS
works [13, 21, 55] have adopted their pre-trained visual encoder for initialization and fine-tuning [21, 55]. In addition,
TQDM [36] has introduced a framework that constructs object queries from the textual descriptions, leveraging semantic concepts from linguistic expressions.
Yet, they still have limitations in fully utilizing textual
knowledge to improve domain generalizability. Concretely,
the context prompts that decorates textual descriptions of
each category are either a predefined template [31] (e.g., ’a
photo of ’) or a single learnable text embedding [36]. However, we contend that fixed context prompts have limited
capability for target domain images due to the discrepancy

Over the decades, semantic segmentation has made remarkable progress, now being able to precisely classify each
pixel in an image into categories. However, one of the shadows that lies in these advancements is that models often
exhibit inconsistent and degraded performance when deployed in various real-world environments. To this end,
the task of Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation
(DGSS) has arisen to overcome the discrepancy between the
training and test domains, i.e., domain shift. DGSS has progressed through diverse approaches, such as feature whiten* Corresponding author

20791

