This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniversalBooth: Model-Agnostic Personalized Text-to-Image Generation
Songhua Liu12 , Ruonan Yu1 , and Xinchao Wang1∗
1
National University of Singapore 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{songhua.liu,ruonan}@u.nus.edu,

xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Personalized Image Generation
SD-v1.4

Distilled SD

SD-XL

SD-v3

SD-v1.4

Distilled SD

SD-XL

SD-v3

Subject

Subject

a S on the beach

a S with a city in the background

Cross-Architecture
Personalized Editing
Source

Subject

InstructPix2Pix

change the cat to a S

Personalized Video Generation
LaVie

Personalized 3D Generation
MVDream

a S jumping in the snow

a S wearing pink glasses

Cross-Functionality
Figure 1. We propose a model-agnostic personalized text-to-image generation method termed UniversalBooth. Once trained, it can be
applied to various diffusion models with different architectures and functionalities without any additional training. “S” is a virtual token
referring to the input subject. The seen model during training is SD-v1.4, while the unseen models are Distilled SD [21], SD-XL [32],
SD-v3-Medium [13], InstructPix2Pix [5], LaVie [46], and MVDream [40].

Abstract
Given a source image, personalized text-to-image generation produces images preserving the identity and appearance while following the text prompts. Existing methods heavily rely on test-time optimization to achieve this
customization. Although some recent works are dedicated
to zero-shot personalization, they still require re-training
when applied to different text-to-image diffusion models.
In this paper, we instead propose a model-agnostic personalized method termed UniversalBooth. At the heart
of our approach lies a novel cross-attention mechanism,
where different blocks in the same diffusion scale share
common square transformation matrices of key and value.
In this way, the image encoder is decoupled from the diffusion architecture while maintaining its effectiveness. Moreover, the cross-attention performs hierarchically: the holistic attention first captures the global semantics of user inputs for textual combination with editing prompts, and the
fine-grained attention divides the holistic attention scores

for various local patches to enhance appearance consistency. To improve the performance when deployed on unseen diffusion models, we further devise an optimal transport prior to the model and encourage the attention scores
allocated by cross-attention to fulfill the optimal transport
constraint. Experiments demonstrate that our personalized generation model can be generalized to unseen text-toimage diffusion models with a wide spectrum of architectures and functionalities without any additional optimization, while other methods cannot. Meanwhile, it achieves
comparable zero-shot personalization performance on seen
architectures with existing works.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding Author.

Although text-to-image diffusion models have advanced
significantly in recent years due to their generative capabilities [11, 31, 36], they fall short in personalized image generation, also known as subject-driven image generation, where generated images adhere to text prompts while
preserving specific identities and appearances from user-

18314

