This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification under Unpaired Settings
Haoyu Yao1,2,3,4 * Bin Yang1,2,3 * Wenke Huang1,2,3 Bo Du1,2,3 Mang Ye1,2,3†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University, China
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
4
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
https://github.com/USL-VI-ReID/MCL

Abstract
Unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification
(USL-VI-ReID) aims to train a cross-modality retrieval
model without labels, reducing the reliance on expensive
cross-modality manual annotation. However, existing
USL-VI-ReID methods rely on artificially cross-modality
paired data as implicit supervision, which is also expensive
for human annotation and contrary to the setting of unsupervised tasks. In addition, this full alignment of identity
across modalities is inconsistent with real-world scenarios,
where unpaired settings are prevalent. To this end, we study
the USL-VI-ReID task under unpaired settings, which uses
cross-modality unpaired and unlabeled data for training
a VI-ReID model. We propose a novel Mapping and
Collaborative Learning (MCL) framework. Specifically, we
first design a simple yet effective Cross-modality Feature
Mapping (CFM) module to map and generate fake crossmodality positive feature pairs, constructing a cross-modal
pseudo-identity space for feature alignment. Then, a
Static-Dynamic Collaborative (SDC) learning strategy is
proposed to align cross-modality correspondences through
a collaborative approach, eliminating inter-modality
discrepancies across different aspects i.e., cluster-level
and instance-level, in scenarios with cross-modal identity
mismatches. Extensive experiments on the conducted
SYSU-MM01 and RegDB benchmarks under paired and
unpaired settings demonstrate that our proposed MCL
significantly outperforms existing unsupervised methods,
facilitating USL-VI-ReID to real-world deployment.

Figure 1. Illustration of the motivation. Previous advanced works
for USL-VI-ReID mainly focus on paired settings, which leads
to the leakage of supervised information and is inconsistent with
the real-world scenarios. Under the underexplored unpaired settings, the cross-modality correspondences are hard to align with
unpaired and unlabeled data, which poses a great challenge of
how to establish the relation of unpaired samples among different modalities for learning modality-invariant knowledge.

1. Introduction

Traditional ReID methods primarily rely on daytime
visible-light images, which struggle to extract discriminative features in low-light environments, limiting singlemodality ReID deployment in real-world surveillance [13,
26]. To address this problem, the cross-modality visibleinfrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) is proposed to
identify the same person across a set of visible and infrared images [42]. While supervised VI-ReID methods use
plenty of costly cross-modality (visible-infrared) identity
labels to learn modality-invariant feature representations
[15, 19, 30, 38, 41], the unsupervised VI-ReID (USL-VIReID) methods eliminate the need for annotation by generating pseudo-labels [20, 31, 32], which reduce the cost of

Person re-identification (ReID) focuses on retrieving specific individuals across non-overlapping cameras [1, 50].
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

11916

