This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BANet: Bilateral Aggregation Network for Mobile Stereo Matching
Gangwei Xu1 , Jiaxin Liu1 , Xianqi Wang1 , Junda Cheng1 , Yong Deng2
Jinliang Zang2 , Yurui Chen2 , Xin Yang3,1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology

2

Autel Robotics

3

Optics Valley Laboratory

Scene Flow EPE (px)

State-of-the-art stereo matching methods typically use
costly 3D convolutions to aggregate a full cost volume,
but their computational demands make mobile deployment
challenging. Directly applying 2D convolutions for cost aggregation often results in edge blurring, detail loss, and
mismatches in textureless regions. Some complex operations, like deformable convolutions and iterative warping,
can partially alleviate this issue; however, they are not
mobile-friendly, limiting their deployment on mobile devices. In this paper, we present a novel bilateral aggregation network (BANet) for mobile stereo matching that
produces high-quality results with sharp edges and fine
details using only 2D convolutions. Specifically, we first
separate the full cost volume into detailed and smooth
volumes using a spatial attention map, then perform detailed and smooth aggregations accordingly, ultimately fusing both to obtain the final disparity map. Experimental
results demonstrate that our BANet-2D significantly outperforms other mobile-friendly methods, achieving 35.3%
higher accuracy on the KITTI 2015 leaderboard than
MobileStereoNet-2D, with faster runtime on mobile devices.
Code: https://github.com/gangweix/BANet.

KITTI 2012 3-noc (%)

Abstract

KITTI 2015 D1 (%)

Left image

(a)

MACs (G)

MobileStereoNet-2D
BANet-2D (Ours)
157ms on Snapdragon 8G3 45ms on Snapdragon 8G3
(b)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a): Comparison with top-performing real-time methods
(high-end GPUs) [1, 42, 50, 55, 58]. (b): Visual results and latency
on Qualcomm Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 (8G3). MobileStereoNet2D [39] blurs edges, loses details, and causes mismatches in
textureless regions due to pure 2D convolutions for cost aggregation. In comparison, our bilateral aggregation effectively addresses these issues while remaining mobile-friendly, eliminating
the need for complex operations [42, 58]. The latency is measured
for input stereo pairs with a resolution of 512 → 512.

spite significant advancements, deep stereo matching methods still face challenges when deployed on mobile and embedded devices. These challenges include: 1) computational and memory demands exceeding mobile platforms’
capabilities; 2) difficulties in deploying complex or customized operators [42, 58]; and 3) the trade-off where simpler models tend to sacrifice accuracy. In this paper, we aim
to explore a mobile-friendly stereo matching method that
achieves both real-time inference speed and high accuracy
using only mobile-friendly operations.

Metric depth estimation plays a critical role in a wide
range of real-world applications, such as drone navigation, smartphone photography, and robotic surgery. It can
be broadly categorized into tasks include stereo matching [57], depth completion [29, 49, 69], and monocular
depth estimation [19, 44, 61], and so on. Among them,
stereo matching focuses on finding pixel correspondences
between left and right images, enabling depth recovery
via triangulation. Currently, deep learning-based methods [8, 16, 18, 20, 46–48, 59] have dominated stereo matching or depth benchmarks, consistently setting new stateof-the-art results on public leaderboards [35, 37, 38]. De† Corresponding author.

Recently, to improve stereo matching performance, some
works [15, 41, 51] have designed sophisticated cost volume representations, which play a crucial role in the stereo
matching pipeline. For example, GwcNet [15] designs a

28870

