This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RS-vHeat: Heat Conduction Guided Efficient Remote Sensing Foundation Model
Boyuan Tong1,2,3,4
Zhaozhi Wang2,3,5
Huiyang Hu1,2,3,4
Peijin Wang1,2,3,4 * Hanbo Bi1,2,3,4
Wenhui Diao1,2,3,4
Hao Chang1,2,3,4
Yingchao Feng1,2,3,4
Ziqi Zhang2
5
2,3,5
1,2,3,4
Yaowei Wang
Qixiang Ye
Kun Fu
Xian Sun1,2,3,4
1
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, UCAS
4
Key Laboratory of Target Cognition and Application Technology (TCAT) 5 Peng Cheng Lab
{huhuiyang22,wangpeijin17,bihanbo21,tongboyuan22,wangzhaozhi22}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Remote sensing foundation models largely break away
from the traditional paradigm of designing task-specific
models, offering greater scalability across multiple tasks.
However, they face challenges such as low computational
efficiency and limited interpretability, especially when dealing with large-scale remote sensing images. To overcome
these, we draw inspiration from heat conduction, a physical process modeling local heat diffusion. Building on this
idea, we are the first to explore the potential of using the
parallel computing model of heat conduction to simulate the
local region correlations in high-resolution remote sensing
images, and introduce RS-vHeat, an efficient multi-modal
remote sensing foundation model. Specifically, RS-vHeat
1) applies the Heat Conduction Operator (HCO) with a
complexity of O(N 1.5 ) and a global receptive field, reducing computational overhead while capturing remote sensing object structure information to guide heat diffusion; 2)
learns the frequency distribution representations of various scenes through a self-supervised strategy based on frequency domain hierarchical masking and multi-domain reconstruction; 3) significantly improves efficiency and performance over state-of-the-art techniques across 4 tasks
and 10 datasets. Compared to attention-based remote sensing foundation models, we reduce memory usage by 84%,
FLOPs by 24% and improves throughput by 2.7 times. The
code will be made publicly available.

Figure 1. Calculation of RS images in the heat conduction system. In heat conduction theory, different materials exhibit varying
diffusion rates. Inspired by this, the heat-conduction-based encoder maps optical (OPT) and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) into
a unified thermal space, enhancing sensitivity to shape features by
simulating heat flow and accumulation within the object region.

by capturing surface information via satellites. Traditional models, designed as single-task networks for specific RS tasks [36, 50], struggle with multi-payload, multiresolution, multi-temporal, and multi-feature RS data [20].
However, the emergence of remote sensing foundation
models (RSFMs) has overcome these limitations, enabling
unified handling of diverse tasks scenarios, significantly
enhancing the scalability and versatility of the models
[2, 3, 15, 31, 39–41, 44, 53, 56, 59, 60, 70]. RSFMs can
automatically extract features from remote sensing imagery
(RSI), providing a robust foundation for real-world tasks.
Prior RSFMs typically use visual encoders and decoders,
leveraging large-scale RS datasets for pre-training while

1. Introduction
Recently, remote sensing (RS) technology has become a
vital data source for scientific research, resource management, and environmental monitoring [30, 47, 52, 76]
* Corresponding author

9876

