This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

1

The Average Number of
Observations of Red Box : 98

Frequency

Frequency

RGB image
Residual Map
OCSplats: Observation Completeness
Quantification
and Label Noise
Separation in 3DGS
The Average Number of
Observations of Blue Box : 10

Han Ling1 , Xian Xu2,3 , Yinghui Sun2 , Quansen Sun1 *
2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
Southeast Pixel
University
Pixel Residual
Residual

3

CityU HK

1536233573@qq.com,230248289@seu.edu.cn

OCR

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become one of the most
promising 3D reconstruction technologies. However, label noise in real-world scenarios—such as moving objects,
non-Lambertian surfaces, and shadows—often leads to reconstruction errors. Existing 3DGS-Bsed anti-noise reconstruction methods either fail to separate noise effectively or require scene-specific fine-tuning of hyperparameters, making them difficult to apply in practice. This paper
re-examines the problem of anti-noise reconstruction from
the perspective of epistemic uncertainty, proposing a novel
framework, OCSplats. By combining key technologies such
as hybrid noise assessment and observation-based cognitive correction, the accuracy of noise classification in areas
with cognitive differences has been significantly improved.
Moreover, to address the issue of varying noise proportions
in different scenarios, we have designed a label noise classification pipeline based on dynamic anchor points. This
pipeline enables OCSplats to be applied simultaneously to
scenarios with vastly different noise proportions without
adjusting parameters. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that OCSplats always achieve leading reconstruction performance and precise label noise classification in scenes of
different complexity levels. Code is available 1 .

Observation Correction Ratio
Frequency

GT

Reconstruction Error

The Average Number of
Observations of Blue Box : 10
Red Box : 98

Error

Figure 1. Observation Cognitive Correction. The error histogram in the bottom right indicates that even without occlusion,
the reconstruction error of the missing observation areas (blue box)
in the photo group is often greater than that of the areas with more
observations (red box). We proposed the observation cognitive
correction technique to measure these difficult areas (blue boxes)
and corrected the noise assessment through OCR when classifying
label noise, achieving accurate label noise separation.

1. Introduction

images with known camera poses. In real-world scenarios,
non-Lambertian [1] surfaces, moving objects, and shadows
introduce noise into the labels for 3DGS training. Eliminating such noise is nontrivial. Beyond apparent moving objects [29, 30], more subtle phenomena—like shadows and
reflections on non-Lambertian surfaces—demand manual
per-pixel annotation. These factors underscore the limitations of current reconstruction methods when applied to
complex real-world scenes.
In previous works [4, 15, 31, 39], anti-noise reconstruction was commonly framed as a metric-classification problem. These methods use reconstructed residuals or uncertainty values to quantify noise and design a metric-based
classifier to separate noisy labels from clean data. However,
in different scenarios, the types and proportions of noise labels, as well as the limitations of the observation itself, can
affect the distribution of noise and clean background. The

The new view synthesis addresses the challenge of previously unseen viewpoints. 3D Gaussian Splatting [13, 28,
41] has recently emerged as a groundbreaking technique in
this domain, primarily due to its ability to reconstruct geometrically consistent point cloud scenes rapidly. As a result, it has found broad applications in areas such as depth
estimation [20, 38], optical flow training [17, 19], and autonomous driving [7, 9, 16, 18, 42].
However, training a 3DGS model requires static scene
* Corresponding author
1 github.com/HanLingsgjk/OCSplats

25680

