This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLRMBench: A Comprehensive and Challenging Benchmark for
Vision-Language Reward Models
Jiacheng Ruan1, * Wenzhen Yuan1,∗ Xian Gao1 Ye Guo2
Daoxin Zhang2 Zhe Xu2 Yao Hu2 Ting Liu1 Yuzhuo Fu1,†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Xiaohongshu Inc.
jackchenruan@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

(LVLMs) have also achieved notable progress [22]. They
have been broadly applied across domains such as medical
imaging [17], remote sensing [56], and autonomous driving [62]. However, despite these remarkable achievements,
they still encounter limitations in complex vision-language
(VL) reasoning tasks, primarily due to insufficient reasoning depth and the absence of self-correction mechanisms
[10, 51]. To mitigate this issue, reward models (RMs) have
been introduced to detect errors in model responses, thereby
enhancing the accuracy and efficiency of LVLMs [57].

Although large visual-language models (LVLMs) have
demonstrated strong performance in multimodal tasks, errors may occasionally arise due to biases during the reasoning process. Recently, reward models (RMs) have become increasingly pivotal in the reasoning process. Specifically, process RMs evaluate each reasoning step, outcome
RMs focus on the assessment of reasoning results, and critique RMs perform error analysis on the entire reasoning process, followed by corrections. However, existing
benchmarks for vision-language RMs (VLRMs) typically assess only a single aspect of their capabilities (e.g., distinguishing between two answers), thus limiting the allround evaluation and restricting the development of RMs in
the visual-language domain. To address this gap, we propose a comprehensive and challenging benchmark, dubbed
as VLRMBench, encompassing 12,634 questions. VLRMBench is constructed based on three distinct types of
datasets, covering mathematical reasoning, hallucination
understanding, and multi-image understanding. We design
12 tasks across three major categories, focusing on evaluating VLRMs in the aspects of process understanding, outcome judgment, and critique generation. Extensive experiments are conducted on 21 open-source models and 5 advanced closed-source models, highlighting the challenges
posed by VLRMBench. For instance, in the ‘Forecasting
Future’, a binary classification task, the advanced GPT-4o
achieves only a 76.0% accuracy. The code is available at
https://github.com/JCruan519/VLRMBench.

During both the training and inference phases, RMs play
a pivotal role. Firstly, prior to training, RMs can be employed to filter high-quality samples and facilitate the construction of automated data synthesis pipelines [21, 41, 46].
Secondly, during training, preference optimization techniques (e.g., RLAIF [53]) align the model’s preferences
with RMs, thereby enhancing the quality of the generated
content. Finally, during inference, test-time scaling techniques, aided by RMs, are widely applied [47, 48], trading
additional inference time for improved model performance.
In the above processes, RMs can be employed not only to
evaluate and score the reasoning steps and final answers,
but also to generate valuable feedback on the reasoning process. Therefore, it is essential to propose a benchmark for
evaluating the various aspects of the performance of RMs.
However, as shown in Table 1, existing benchmarks predominantly focus on language domain, and benchmarks for
VLRMs typically evaluate only a single capability (e.g., the
quality comparison of multiple reasoning processes). These
singular and inadequately challenging benchmarks fail to
reveal the potential flaws of VLRMs, thereby limiting the
development of RMs in the VL domain.

1. Introduction

To bridge this gap, we propose VLRMBench, a benchmark that is both comprehensive and challenging, specifically designed for the VL domain. We introduce three
distinct data categories: mathematical reasoning, hallucination understanding, and multi-image understanding, en-

Recently, driven by the development of large language models (LLMs) [32, 40, 49, 50], large visual-language models
* Jiacheng Ruan and Wenzhen Yuan are equal contributors.
† Yuzhuo Fu is the corresponding author.

3163

