This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CaO2 : Rectifying Inconsistencies in Diffusion-Based Dataset Distillation
Haoxuan Wang1
Yuzhang Shang2
1

University of Illinois Chicago

Zhenghao Zhao1
Gaowen Liu3
2

Junyi Wu1
Yan Yan1,†

University of Central Florida

3

Cisco Research

Abstract
Time cost (min)

The recent introduction of diffusion models in dataset distillation has shown promising potential in creating compact surrogate datasets for large, high-resolution target
datasets, offering improved efficiency and performance over
traditional bi-level/uni-level optimization methods. However, current diffusion-based dataset distillation approaches
overlook the evaluation process and exhibit two critical inconsistencies in the distillation process: (1) Objective Inconsistency, where the distillation process diverges from the
evaluation objective, and (2) Condition Inconsistency, leading to mismatches between generated images and their corresponding conditions. To resolve these issues, we introduce Condition-aware Optimization with Objective-guided
Sampling (CaO2 ), a two-stage diffusion-based framework
that aligns the distillation process with the evaluation objective. The first stage employs a probability-informed
sample selection pipeline, while the second stage refines
the corresponding latent representations to improve conditional likelihood. CaO2 achieves state-of-the-art performance on ImageNet and its subsets, surpassing the
best-performing baselines by an average of 2.3% accuracy. Code is available at https://github.com/
hatchetProject/CaO2.

1

5

20

Figure 1. Comparison of validation accuracy and distillation
time for different methods under different IPCs on ImageWoof. Our two-stage method is more efficient and can obtain better performance compared with other SOTA approaches.

the target dataset and a student model trained on the synthetic dataset [10, 24, 36, 41]. However, these matchingbased methods either struggle to scale up to larger, higherresolution datasets, or suffer from low performance.
Recently, diffusion-based dataset distillation [9, 33]
emerged as a new paradigm for efficient data condensation.
These methods utilize pre-trained diffusion models [28, 29]
as strong distribution learners to filter noisy representations
and retain the most important ones [3]. Therefore, their generated images are strong representations of the original target data distribution. As shown in Fig. 1, directly using
randomly sampled images from the Diffusion Transformer
(DiT) [28] for evaluation already outperforms the uni-level
optimization method SRe2 L [41] by a significant margin,
both in performance and distillation time. Moreover, unlike matching-based methods that rely on an additional student model and output unreadable images, diffusion-based
methods are independent of the student model and produce
realistic images. This enables the synthetic dataset to be
seamlessly used for other tasks, such as neural architecture
search [23] and continual learning [25].
These compelling advantages, nevertheless, come at the
cost of achieving optimal performance. We observe that

1. Introduction
The rapid expansion of data scale has significantly advanced
the development of machine learning, but has also placed
substantial demands on the storage capacity and computational resources. To accelerate training and reduce storage
requirements while maintaining comparable performance,
dataset distillation (DD) [2, 38, 42, 46, 47] was introduced
to construct a compact surrogate dataset that captures the
most critical information from a large target dataset. Conventionally, dataset distillation was formulated as a bilevel/uni-level optimization problem, designed to match
the training dynamics between a teacher model trained on
† Corresponding author

4722

