This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Local Inductive Bias and Long-Range Dependencies with Pixel-Mamba
for End-to-end Whole Slide Image Analysis
Zhongwei Qiu1,2,3 *, Hanqing Chao2,3,6,∗ , Tiancheng Lin2,3,6,∗ , Wanxing Chang2,3 ,
Zijiang Yang2,7 , Wenpei Jiao2,8 ,Yixuan Shen4 , Yunshuo Zhang5 , Yelin Yang5 ,
Wenbin Liu4 , Hui Jiang5 , Yun Bian4 , Ke Yan2,3,† , Dakai Jin2,† , Le Lu2
1

Department of Radiology, Shanghai Institution of Pancreatic Disease, 5 Department of Pathology, Shanghai Institution of Pancreatic Disease
Fudan University, 7 University of Science and Technology Beijing, 8 Peking University

…

…

Pixel-Mamba

Pixel-Mamba

10 million
Raw Pixels

..

…

Memory
Optimized
ViT

1 million
32×32 tokens

c.

Patch
Encoder

10k patches

Histopathology plays a critical role in medical diagnostics, with whole slide images (WSIs) offering valuable
insights that directly influence clinical decision-making.
However, the large size and complexity of WSIs may pose
significant challenges for deep learning models, in both
computational efficiency and effective representation learning. In this work, we introduce Pixel-Mamba, a novel
deep learning architecture designed to efficiently handle gigapixel WSIs. Pixel-Mamba leverages the Mamba module,
a state-space model (SSM) with linear memory complexity,
and incorporates local inductive biases through progressively expanding tokens, akin to convolutional neural networks. This enables Pixel-Mamba to hierarchically combine both local and global information while efficiently
addressing computational challenges. Remarkably, PixelMamba achieves or even surpasses the quantitative performance of state-of-the-art (SOTA) foundation models that
were pretrained on millions of WSIs or WSI-text pairs,
in a range of tumor staging and survival analysis tasks,
even without requiring any pathology-specific pretraining.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of PixelMamba as a powerful and efficient framework for end-toend WSI analysis.

Pixel-Mamba

b.

Aggregator

a.

Abstract

…

6

…

4

Zhejiang University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, 3 Hupan Lab

Figure 1. (a) Pathologists integrate observations from multiple
regions across different scales to make a comprehensive assessment. (b) Frameworks of mainstream WSI analysis methods: a
two-stage pipeline (top) and memory-optimized ViT (bottom, often with heavily pruned attention). (c) Pixel-Mamba is an efficient
end-to-end framework that combines the Region Fusion, Token
Expansion, and Mamba module to integrate local inductive biases
with long-range dependencies in a hierarchical manner.

1. Introduction

cancer subtyping, and molecular alteration detection [18].
However, the large size of WSIs, which can reach up to
50, 000 × 50, 000 pixels, presents significant computational
and methodological challenges for AI models.

Histopathology is the gold standard for diagnosing and
characterizing multiple diseases [6, 30]. By examining
tissue microstructures, pathologists gain critical insights
into disease severity and guide treatment decisions [6, 30].
With the advent of WSIs, AI-driven computational pathology has made strides in tasks such as survival prediction,
* Equal Contribution, † Corresponding author.

Even at low magnification, a single WSI can contain tens
of millions of pixels, rendering deep learning model training impractical. Moreover, WSIs present two representation learning challenges (Figure 1.a): balancing local detail with long-range dependencies, and managing hierarchical, multi-scale structures. For example, tertiary lymphoid
structures (TLS) associated with favorable prognosis span

22738

