This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Causality-Aware Vision-Based 3D Occupancy Prediction
Dubing Chen1 , Huan Zheng1 , Yucheng Zhou1 ,
Xianfei Li2 , Wenlong Liao2 , Tao He2 , Pai Peng2 , Jianbing Shen1
1
SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau 2 COWAROBOT Co. Ltd.
https://github.com/cdb342/CausalOcc

Abstract

Geometry

Camera Parameter

Coordinate Mapping

Backward Information Flow

Vision-based 3D semantic occupancy prediction is a critical task in 3D vision that integrates volumetric 3D reconstruction with semantic understanding. Existing methods,
however, often rely on modular pipelines. These modules
are typically optimized independently or use pre-conﬁgured
inputs, leading to cascading errors. In this paper, we address this limitation by designing a novel causal loss that
enables holistic, end-to-end supervision of the modular 2Dto-3D transformation pipeline. Grounded in the principle
of 2D-to-3D semantic causality, this loss regulates the gradient ﬂow from 3D voxel representations back to the 2D
features. Consequently, it renders the entire pipeline differentiable, unifying the learning process and making previously non-trainable components fully learnable. Building
on this principle, we propose the Semantic Causality-Aware
2D-to-3D Transformation, which comprises three components guided by our causal loss: Channel-Grouped Lifting for adaptive semantic mapping, Learnable Camera Offsets for enhanced robustness against camera perturbations,
and Normalized Convolution for effective feature propagation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Occ3D benchmark, demonstrating signiﬁcant robustness to camera perturbations and improved 2D-to-3D semantic consistency.

1. Introduction
Predicting dense 3D semantic occupancy is a fundamental
task in 3D vision, providing a ﬁne-grained voxel representation of scene geometry and semantics [39, 40, 43, 47]. The
challenge of performing this prediction from vision alone,
 Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology Development Fund of
Macau SAR (FDCT) under grants 0102/2023/RIA2 and 0154/2022/A3 and
001/2024/SKL and CG2025-IOTSC, the University of Macau SRG202200023-IOTSC grant, and the Jiangyin Hi-tech Industrial Development
Zone under the Taihu Innovation Scheme (EF2025-00003-SKL-IOTSC).

24878

Tree
Forward
Information Flow

Car
2D Input

3D GT

(a) An Example of Inaccurate 2D-to-3D Transformation

Depth Supervision

P C
re-Calibration

Static Mapping

(b) Modular 2D-to-3D Transformation
Learnable Transformation

E d
nd-to-end Supervision

(c) Our End-to-End Supervised 2D-to-3D Transformation

Figure 1. (a) Illustrates a Visual Analysis of Semantic Ambiguity in VisionOcc. Inaccurate 2D-to-3D transformations may lead
to positional shifts, misaligning supervision signals and resulting
in semantic ambiguity. (b) Depicts the Conventional Modular
2D-to-3D Transformation Paradigm [7, 13, 27, 35], which employs depth supervision for geometry estimation, pre-calibrated
camera parameters, and ﬁxed mapping for lifting. (c) Presents
Our Holistic, End-to-End Supervised 2D-to-3D Transformation Paradigm, which eliminates the need for separate modular
supervision or pre-calibration, enabling uniﬁed error propagation
to supervise all components.

an approach known as vision-based 3D semantic occupancy
prediction (VisionOcc), has recently become a focal point
of research. By leveraging only commodity cameras, VisionOcc is pivotal for a wide range of 3D applications, serving as a comprehensive digital replica of the environment
for tasks like analysis, simulation, and interactive visualization [7, 9, 14, 27, 39, 40, 44].
VisionOcc uniﬁes the challenges of feed-forward 3D
reconstruction and dense semantic understanding. Existing pipelines typically decompose this task into two metaphases [7, 14, 27, 30, 35]. The initial 2D-to-3D transfor-

