This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bolt3D: Generating 3D Scenes in Seconds
Stanislaw Szymanowicz1,2 Jason Y. Zhang1 Pratul Srinivasan3
Ruiqi Gao3 Arthur Brussee3 Aleksander Holynski3
Ricardo Martin-Brualla1 Jonathan T. Barron3 Philipp Henzler1
1

Google

2

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

3

Google DeepMind

3D scenes generated by Bolt3D

Any number of
input image(s)
Input

Bolt3D: 6.25 seconds

Render: Novel View

Interactive 3D scene

Render: Novel View

Render: Novel View

Render: Novel View

Figure 1. Given an arbitrary number of input images, Bolt3D directly outputs a 3D representation which can be rendered at interactive
frame-rates. Operating in a feed-forward manner, generation takes mere seconds. Bolt3D features a latent diffusion model with a scalable
2D architecture, trained on large-scale appearance and geometry data, enabling generation of full 360◦ scenes from one or multiple input
images. We invite the reader to explore these scenes in the interactive viewer available on the project website.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present a latent diffusion model for fast feed-forward
3D scene generation. Given one or more images, our
model Bolt3D directly samples a 3D scene representation
in less than seven seconds on a single GPU. We achieve
this by leveraging powerful and scalable existing 2D diffusion network architectures to produce consistent highfidelity 3D scene representations. To train this model, we
create a large-scale multiview-consistent dataset of 3D geometry and appearance by applying state-of-the-art dense
3D reconstruction techniques to existing multiview image
datasets. Compared to prior multiview generative models
that require per-scene optimization for 3D reconstruction,
Bolt3D reduces the inference cost by a factor of up to 300×.
Project website: szymanowiczs.github.io/bolt3d.

Modern image and video generative models generate compelling high-quality visual content, but these models sample
2D images, rather than an underlying 3D scene. The ability
to directly generate 3D content instead would enable numerous applications, such as interactive visualization and
editing. However, scaling modern diffusion-based generative models to generate detailed 3D scenes remains a significant challenge for the research community, primarily due
to two reasons. First, representing and structuring (possibly
unbounded) 3D data to enable training a diffusion model
that generates full scenes at high resolution is an unsolved
problem. Second, “ground truth” 3D scenes are extremely
scarce compared to the abundant 2D image and video data
used to train state-of-the-art generative models. As a result, many recent 3D generative models are limited to syn-

24846

