This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoDiffusion: A Training-Free Framework for Accurate 3D Geometric
Conditioning in Image Generation
Phillip Mueller1,2,∗ Talip Uenlue1,3 Sebastian Schmidt2,3
Marcel Kollovieh3 Jiajie Fan1,4 Stephan Günnemann3 Lars Mikelsons1
1
University of Augsburg 2 BMW Group 3 Technical University of Munich 4 Leiden University

Figure 1. Geometric control of 3D object features in image generation with GeoDiffusion. Given a class-specific 3D reference object (left),
the target geometric characteristics are defined in 3D as parameterizable equations and projected as pairs of source and target keypoints.
The geometric constraints are projected into the 2D viewpoint and together with the style-prompt, the geometry-guided image is generated.

Abstract

Although real-world designs are typically created in 3D,
2D images remain more practical for concept exchange and
rapid feedback. However, converting a 3D model to a 2D
image inherently loses spatial information, making it challenging to adjust 3D geometric features accurately within
the image. The same geometric features of an object can
be vastly different in image space, depending on the viewpoint. Achieving precise geometric control over object features traditionally requires specialized software, technical
expertise, and tools like Photoshop [2], Blender [4] or AfterEffects [1]. While direct 3D editing could address these
issues, it requires extensive manual labor, limiting its practicality in early design phases where ease of quick iterations
and rapid generation of ideas are essential.

Precise geometric control in image generation is essential
for engineering & product design and creative industries
to control 3D object features accurately in image space.
Traditional 3D editing approaches are time-consuming and
demand specialized skills, while current image-based generative methods lack accuracy in geometric conditioning.
To address these challenges, we propose GeoDiffusion, a
training-free framework for accurate and efficient geometric conditioning of 3D features in image generation. GeoDiffusion employs a class-specific 3D object as a geometric
prior to define keypoints and parametric correlations in 3D
space. We ensure viewpoint consistency through a rendered
image of a reference 3D object, followed by style transfer to meet user-defined appearance specifications. At the
core of our framework is GeoDrag, improving accuracy and
speed of drag-based image editing on geometry guidance
tasks and general instructions on DragBench. Our results
demonstrate that GeoDiffusion enables precise geometric
modifications across various iterative design workflows.

Generative models with precise geometric control have
the potential to increase both accessibility and efficiency
of design-object generation and manipulation in professional and creative contexts. However, achieving such
precision remains a significant challenge, even with recent advancements in generative models for image synthesis [9, 15, 33, 34, 39, 40] and conditional modifications
[20, 28, 38, 41, 43, 50].

1. Introduction

Existing image generation approaches enable conditional control through modalities like text, reference images, or spatial guiding inputs. Text-based image generation [5, 13, 19, 34, 41] is suitable for general guidance
and straightforward manipulations like style changes. However, specific and technical instructions typically fail be-

Visual images are essential for exchanging ideas and exploring design options in fields such as engineering design
and creative industries like game design and advertising.
Contact author: Phillip Mueller (phillip.mueller@uni-a.de).

6374

