This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Blur: A Fluid Perspective on Generative Diffusion Models
Grzegorz Gruszczynski1,2

Jakub Meixner1,3
Przemyslaw Musialski1,5,6

Michal Wlodarczyk1,4

1

IDEAS NCBR 2 Samsung AI Center Warsaw 3 Polish Academy of Sciences
Warsaw University of Technology 5 IDEAS Research Institute 6 New Jersey Institute of Technology
g.gruszczyns@samsung.com, {kubameixner, mwlodarzc}@gmail.com, przem@njit.edu
4

Standard diffusion model

Inverse heat dissipation model

Advection diffusion model (Our)

non-invertible forward process

non-invertible forward process

non-invertible forward process

generative reverse process

generative reverse process

generative reverse process

Figure 1. The standard diffusion model (DDPM, left) induces Gaussian nose for image corruption, inverse heat dissipation blurs the image
using the heat equation (middle), and our proposed advection-diffusion method adds both blur and translation of pixels (right).

Abstract

1. Introduction

We propose a novel, Partial Differential Equation (PDE)
driven, corruption process for generative image synthesis
which generalizes existing PDE-based approaches. Our
forward pass formulates image corruption via a physically
motivated PDE that couples directional advection with
isotropic diffusion and Gaussian noise, controlled by dimensionless numbers. We solve this PDE numerically through a
GPU-accelerated Lattice Boltzmann solver for fast evaluation. To induce realistic “turbulence,” we generate stochastic velocity ﬁelds that introduce coherent motion and capture multi-scale mixing. In the generative process, a neural network learns to reverse the advection-diffusion operator thus constituting a novel generative model. We discuss
how previous methods emerge as speciﬁc cases of our operator, demonstrating that our framework generalizes prior
PDE-based corruption techniques. We illustrate how advection improves the diversity and quality of the generated
images while keeping the overall color palette unaffected.
This work bridges ﬂuid dynamics, dimensionless PDE theory, and deep generative modeling, offering a fresh perspective on physically based inverse problems.

Denoising probabilistic diffusion-based generative models
have made striking strides in recent years, demonstrating
high-quality image synthesis through iterative noise addition and subsequent denoising [7, 11, 33, 36].
A distinct branch of works focuses on introducing different image corruption processes, such as Cold Diffusion [2],
Soft Diffusion [6], or more physically inspired processes,
such as Inverse Heat Dissipation [27] or Blurring Diffusion [12]. The idea in these works is to replace or augment the pure Gaussian noise with other mechanisms aimed
at better preserving color budgets, multi-scale detail, or
interpretability. A notable subfamily are the PDE-based
methods, which model the image frequencies explicitly and
thus deliver a multi-scale perspective with clear frequencydomain interpretation. Nevertheless, previous PDE approaches remain purely isotropic, ignoring potentially compelling directional ﬂows.
We introduce the advection–diffusion corruption
processes, which allows to unlock anisotropic patterns
of texture shifts and swirling motions in the forward
corruption process. This forward operator is physically
well-grounded and not covered by earlier works.

17818

