This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Partially Relevant Video Retrieval with Hyperbolic Learning
Jun Li1 *, Jinpeng Wang2∗†, Chaolei Tan4 , Niu Lian1 , Long Chen4 ,
Yaowei Wang1,3 , Min Zhang1 , Shu-Tao Xia2,3 , Bin Chen1
1
2

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3

Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
4

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

220110924@stu.hit.edu.cn B wjp20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Partially Relevant Text Query:
The man dunked to score.

Abstract
Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR) addresses the
critical challenge of matching untrimmed videos with text
queries describing only partial content. Existing methods
suffer from geometric distortion in Euclidean space that
sometimes misrepresents the intrinsic hierarchical structure
of videos and overlooks certain hierarchical semantics, ultimately leading to suboptimal temporal modeling. To address
this issue, we propose the first hyperbolic modeling framework for PRVR, namely HLFormer, which leverages hyperbolic space learning to compensate for the suboptimal hierarchical modeling capabilities of Euclidean space. Specifically, HLFormer integrates the Lorentz Attention Block
and Euclidean Attention Block to encode video embeddings
in hybrid spaces, using the Mean-Guided Adaptive Interaction Module to dynamically fuse features. Additionally,
we introduce a Partial Order Preservation Loss to enforce
“text ≺ video” hierarchy through Lorentzian cone constraints.
This approach further enhances cross-modal matching by
reinforcing partial relevance between video content and
text queries. Extensive experiments show that HLFormer
outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Code is released at
https://github.com/lijun2005/ICCV25-HLFormer.

Embedding videos
in Euclidean space

Flat Geometry
Distorted Hierarchy

Dribble, Pass
Dunk, Celebrate
①

Coarse

④
②

⑤

Dunk
Celebrate

Dribble
Pass

Fine
①

⑤
②

⑥

(b) Euclidean Space
Embedding videos
in Hyperbolic space

Curved Geometry
Proper Hierarchy

⑥
close

③

③

④
⑤

⑥

①
②

Dribble

Pass

Dunk

Celebrate

(a) Semantic Hierarchy in Untrimmed Videos

④

③

(c) Hyperbolic Space

Figure 1. (a) Modeling the semantic hierarchy in untrimmed videos
helps Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR). (b) Euclidean
space is less effective in modeling semantic hierarchy due to the
flat geometry. Data points with distant hierarchical relation may be
close. (c) Hyperbolic space allows larger cardinals when approaching the edge, which is preferable to preserve the hierarchy.

1. Introduction

partially relevant video retrieval (PRVR) [14], which aims
to match each text query with the best untrimmed video.
Due to unlabeled moment timestamps, PRVR requires
solid abilities on (i) identifying key moments in videos for
extracting informative features and (ii) learning robust crossmodal representations to match text queries and videos precisely. Prior arts have developed preliminary solutions on
both aspects, while challenges remain. For (i), MS-SL [14]
exhaustively enumerated consecutive frame combinations
through multi-scale sliding windows, which inevitably engaged redundancy, noise, and a high computational complexity in extracting moment features. GMMFormer [56, 57]
improved efficiency by leveraging Gaussian neighborhood
priors to traverse each timestamp and discover potential key
moments. However, it may still be hard to distinguish adjacent or semantically similar candidate moments. Though

Text-to-video retrieval (T2VR) [5, 11–13, 15, 18, 34, 37, 42]
is a fundamental module in many search applications and a
popular topic in multi-modal learning. While most T2VR
models are developed for short clips or pre-trimmed video
segments, they may face challenges where user queries describe only partial content in the video. This practical issue
in real-world usage promotes a more challenging setting of
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

23074

