This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SliderSpace: Decomposing the Visual Capabilities of Diffusion Models
Rohit Gandikota1∗

Zongze Wu2 Richard Zhang2 David Bau1 Eli Shechtman2
1
Northeastern University 2 Adobe Research



    


Nick Kolkin2

 





 

 

  
 
    

            

Figure 1. Given a prompt, SliderSpace identiﬁes the principal directions of the visual capabilities of a diffusion model by decomposing the
image distribution over the prompt. By manipulating these directions as sliders, users can control and combine them to explore the creative
possibilities of the model. We visualize the top directions discovered by SliderSpace within Flux Schnell [4] for the concept “Toy”.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present SliderSpace, a framework for automatically decomposing the visual capabilities of diffusion models into
controllable and human-understandable directions. Unlike existing control methods that require a user to specify attributes for each edit direction individually, SliderSpace discovers multiple interpretable and diverse directions simultaneously from a single text prompt. Each direction is trained as a low-rank adaptor, enabling compositional control and the discovery of surprising possibilities in the model’s latent space. Through extensive experiments on state-of-the-art diffusion models, we demonstrate SliderSpace’s effectiveness across three applications:
concept decomposition, artistic style exploration, and diversity enhancement. Our quantitative evaluation shows
that SliderSpace-discovered directions decompose the visual structure of model’s knowledge effectively, offering insights into the latent capabilities encoded within diffusion
models. User studies further validate that our method produces more diverse and useful variations compared to baselines. Our code, data and trained weights are available at
sliderspace.baulab.info

Text-to-image diffusion models are capable of generating
remarkable visual variations from a single prompt through
different random initializations. However, this vast creative
potential remains largely opaque to users—while we can
generate diverse images, we lack understanding of the underlying structure of these variations. This presents a fundamental challenge: how can we discover and expose the
latent visual capabilities encoded within these models?
The challenge touches on a key limitation in how we interact with diffusion models today. Current control methods require users to explicitly specify their desired edits in
advance through prompts [16], reference images [8, 24, 29,
41, 42, 52], or attribute vectors [20, 21, 30, 32, 46, 50]. That
contrasts sharply with natural human creative workﬂows,
where artists dynamically explore creative ideas and jointly
reﬁne them toward meaningful artistic outcomes [23]. The
need for pre-speciﬁed controls creates a barrier between
users and the full creative potential of these models.
Interestingly, earlier generative models like GANs [6,
17, 28] naturally developed more interpretable internal
structures. Their compact latent spaces often exhibited
∗ Correspondence to gandikota.ro@northeastern.edu

15994

