This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Similarity Memory Prior is All You Need for Medical Image Segmentation
Hao Tang1 , Zhiqing Guo1,2,*, Liejun Wang1,3,* , Chao Liu1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xinjiang University
2
Xinjiang Multimodal Intelligent Processing and Information Security
Engineering Technology Research Center
3
Silk Road Multilingual Cognitive Computing International Cooperation
Joint Laboratory, Xinjiang University
{107552201330@stu., guozhiqing@, wljxju@, 107556522208@stu.}xju.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, it has been found that “grandmother cells”
in the primary visual cortex (V1) of macaques can directly
recognize visual input with complex shapes. This inspires
us to examine the value of these cells in promoting the research of medical image segmentation. In this paper, we design a Similarity Memory Prior Network (Sim-MPNet) for
medical image segmentation. Speciﬁcally, we propose a Dynamic Memory Weights-Loss Attention (DMW-LA), which
matches and remembers the category features of speciﬁc lesions or organs in medical images through the similarity
memory prior in the prototype memory bank, thus helping
the network to learn subtle texture changes between categories. DMW-LA also dynamically updates the similarity memory prior in reverse through Weight-Loss Dynamic
(W-LD) update strategy, effectively assisting the network directly extract category features. In addition, we propose
the Double-Similarity Global Internal Enhancement Module (DS-GIM) to deeply explore the internal differences in
the feature distribution of input data through cosine similarity and euclidean distance. Extensive experiments on four
public datasets show that Sim-MPNet has better segmentation performance than other state-of-the-art methods. Our
code is available on https://github.com/vpsg-research/SimMPNet.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation, as a basic and key technology, is increasingly highlighting its importance in disease
diagnosis, treatment planning, and curative effect evaluation
[9, 29, 50]. With the rapid development of artiﬁcial intelligence and computer vision, constructing automatic and accurate medical image segmentation methods has become a
* Corresponding author

Eyeball
Retina

Prototype
memory
bank

V1
Visual
Stimulus

V2
V4

Neuron
Cell

Grandmother
Cell

primate visual system

Similarity
memory
prior

similarity memory prior directly
memorizes target features

Figure 1. Motivation. (a) Schematic diagram of the primate visual system. (b) We use similarity memory priors stored in the
prototype memory bank to imitate “grandmother cells” in V1, and
utilize these features to directly match various organs in medical
images.

research hotspot [19, 41]. These methods aim to accurately
identify and segment the anatomical structures or pathological features of interest from medical images, to provide
clinicians with more intuitive and quantitative medical information [21, 43].
In existing medical image segmentation works, researchers attempt to use Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) or Vision Transformer (ViT) to enable networks to
generate images with precise labels [3, 6, 8, 30, 48]. However, although the local receptive ﬁeld design of CNNs conform to the translational invariance of images, its inductive
bias is essentially a passive response to local textures (edges
and corners), rather than actively modeling semantic objects
(lesions and organs). ViTs require massive data to learn se-

23009

