This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Humans as a Calibration Pattern: Dynamic 3D Scene Reconstruction from
Unsynchronized and Uncalibrated Videos
Changwoon Choi1 Jeongjun Kim1 Geonho Cha2 Minkwan Kim1 Dongyoon Wee2 Young Min Kim1†
1

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

2

NAVER Cloud

Synchronized

Unsynchronized
No camera poses

Camera poses

…

…
…
…

Human motion

Spatiotemporal
alignment

Dynamic 3D scene reconstruction

Figure 1. We propose an approach to reconstruct dynamic 3D scenes from unsynchronized and uncalibrated videos. We exploit human
motion as a calibration pattern to align time offsets and camera poses.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural radiance fields (NeRF) have been
extended to dynamic scenes. However, even with a series of
regularization techniques, obtaining a dynamic 3D volume
with video inputs is a highly under-constrained problem and
often suffers from instability and convergence problems.
The claimed success of dynamic NeRF assumes unrealistic movements of a monocular camera that can emulate a
multi-view setup [9] or perfectly calibrated and synchronized multi-view inputs. Such input constraints are hard
to achieve in the real world. Time synchronization often
relies on hard-wired devices [10, 13] or needs additional
cues [6] (e.g., sound). Pose estimation methods struggle
in scenes with textureless areas or repetitive structures, as
shown in Fig. 2. Furthermore, it becomes more challenging
if scenes are dynamic and videos are not synchronized.
We aim to allow training dynamic NeRF from a set of casually captured real-world videos of a shared event, such as
a sports game or a concert, which can only be collected later.
In other words, we reconstruct photorealistic 4D scenes
from unsynchronized multi-view videos with unknown camera poses. We need strong priors to tackle this challenging
problem with high degrees of freedom. We focus on humans, one of the most common dynamic objects in scenes.
Human pose estimation in computer vision has progressed
rapidly and now achieves reliable performance even in general images or videos. We consider an estimated human
parameter a robust mid-level representation to deduce the

Recent works on dynamic 3D neural field reconstruction assume the input from synchronized multi-view videos whose
poses are known. The input constraints are often not satisfied in real-world setups, making the approach impractical. We show that unsynchronized videos from unknown
poses can generate dynamic neural fields as long as the
videos capture human motion. Humans are one of the
most common dynamic subjects captured in videos, and
their shapes and poses can be estimated using state-ofthe-art libraries. While noisy, the estimated human shape
and pose parameters provide a decent initialization point
to start the highly non-convex and under-constrained problem of training a consistent dynamic neural representation.
Given the shape and pose parameters of humans in individual frames, we formulate methods to calculate the time
offsets between videos, followed by camera pose estimations that analyze the 3D joint positions. Then, we train
the dynamic neural fields employing multiresolution grids
while we concurrently refine both time offsets and camera
poses. The setup still involves optimizing many parameters; therefore, we introduce a robust progressive learning
strategy to stabilize the process. Experiments show that
our approach achieves accurate spatio-temporal calibration and high-quality scene reconstruction in challenging
conditions. Project page

6598

