This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Arti-PG: A Toolbox for Procedurally Synthesizing Large-Scale and Diverse
Articulated Objects with Rich Annotations
Jianhua Sun1†, Yuxuan Li2†, Jiude Wei1†, Longfei Xu2 ,
Nange Wang1 , Yining Zhang2 , Cewu Lu1,3§
1
2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SAI, SJTU)

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SEIEE, SJTU)
3

Shanghai Innovation Institute

1. Introduction

Abstract

Articulated objects, comprised of rigid segments interconnected by joints that enable translation and rotation movements, play an important role in daily life. Learning to understand articulated objects is an essential topic in a wide
range of research areas, including computer vision, robotics
and embodied AI. In the current data-driven era, the availability of a large amount of training data has become indispensable for the successful implementation of deep neural
networks to understand articulated objects.
Common 3D articulated object data acquisition methods
are either designing 3D CAD models by artists [2, 35] or
scanning real-world objects using scanners [16]* , both of
which have huge demands on time and money. Furthermore, comprehensive and detailed annotations are required
for these object data to support training in various articulated object understanding tasks, which are also challenging to obtain. As a result, the issue of data scarcity is observed across different tasks supported by existing datasets
[16, 18], limiting the power of neural networks to comprehensively analyze and model articulated objects. Given that
prior research has examined little on how to mitigate this
issue, it remains a pressing problem that requires attention.
In this paper, we propose Articulated Object Procedural
Generation toolbox (Arti-PG toolbox) as a solution to this
issue, which aids in expeditiously gathering a significant
number of 3D articulated objects with rich annotations.
Arti-PG is developed based on the idea of procedural generation [29], referring to synthesizing data with generalized
procedural rules.
Inspired by research in visual cognition and brain science [1, 7–9, 21, 30], we assume that a 3D object can be
properly described as the combination of a macro spatial
structure and micro geometric details. By first describing

The acquisition of substantial volumes of 3D articulated
object data is expensive and time-consuming, and consequently the scarcity of 3D articulated object data becomes
an obstacle for deep learning methods to achieve remarkable performance in various articulated object understanding tasks. Meanwhile, pairing these object data with detailed annotations to enable training for various tasks is
also difficult and labor-intensive to achieve. In order to
expeditiously gather a significant number of 3D articulated objects with comprehensive and detailed annotations
for training, we propose Articulated Object Procedural
Generation toolbox, a.k.a. Arti-PG toolbox. Arti-PG toolbox consists of i) descriptions of articulated objects by
means of a generalized structure program along with their
analytic correspondence to the objects’ point cloud, ii) procedural rules about manipulations on the structure program
to synthesize large-scale and diverse new articulated objects, and iii) mathematical descriptions of knowledge (e.g.
affordance, semantics, etc.) to provide annotations to the
synthesized object. Arti-PG has two appealing properties
for providing training data for articulated object understanding tasks: i) objects are created with unlimited variations in shape through program-oriented structure manipulation, ii) Arti-PG is widely applicable to diverse tasks
by easily providing comprehensive and detailed annotations. Arti-PG now supports the procedural generation of
26 categories of articulate objects and provides annotations across a wide range of both vision and manipulation tasks, and we provide exhaustive experiments which
fully demonstrate its advantages. Our code is released at
https://github.com/Analytic-Concept-Group/ArtiPG.

* Here, we discuss about how the data are created from scratch, since it
is usually unavailable to collect data from the Internet for novel categories
in real-world applications.

† denotes equal contribution, § denotes corresponding author

6396

