This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Diffusion Prior for Task-driven Image Restoration
Jaeha Kim1 Junghun Oh1 Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1
Dept. of ECE&ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
jhkim97s2@gmail.com, {dh6dh, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Task-driven image restoration (TDIR) has recently emerged
to address performance drops in high-level vision tasks
caused by low-quality (LQ) inputs. Previous TDIR methods struggle to handle practical scenarios in which images
are degraded by multiple complex factors, leaving minimal
clues for restoration. This motivates us to leverage the diffusion prior, one of the most powerful natural image priors.
However, while the diffusion prior can help generate visually plausible results, using it to restore task-relevant details
remains challenging, even when combined with recent TDIR
methods. To address this, we propose EDTR, which effectively harnesses the power of diffusion prior to restore taskrelevant details. Specifically, we propose directly leveraging useful clues from LQ images in the diffusion process
by generating from pixel-error-based pre-restored LQ images with mild noise added. Moreover, we employ a small
number of denoising steps to prevent the generation of redundant details that dilute crucial task-related information.
We demonstrate that our method effectively utilizes diffusion
prior for TDIR, significantly enhancing task performance
and visual quality across diverse tasks with multiple complex degradations.

1. Introduction
Image degradation often occurs in the real world due to various factors, such as transmission loss, limited camera performance, or poor shooting conditions. In such cases, key
high-frequency details can be lost, resulting in significant
performance drops in high-level vision tasks, such as image
classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection.
Image restoration (IR) can be a promising solution to improve the performance of high-level vision tasks. It involves
recovering missing details in low-quality (LQ) images using a learned natural image prior. However, recent studies [8, 20, 39, 57] show that the straightforward application
of IR methods as a pre-processing step is not very effective in restoring essential information for high-level vision
tasks. This has led to the emergence of Task-driven Image

(b) DiffBIR [30]

(c) SR4IR [20]+SD [41]

(d) EDTR (Ours)

(e) High-quality

(a) Low-quality

Figure 1. Effect of diffusion prior on image classification performance. While incorporating the StableDiffusion [41] produces
visually plausible results as (b), it lacks task-relevant details (e.g.,
eye shape), even when combined with the previous TDIR method
as (c), leading to incorrect classification. In contrast, EDTR successfully restores details as (d), resulting in correct classification.

Restoration (TDIR), which aims to improve visual quality
in ways that benefit high-level vision tasks.
Previous TDIR methods address each type of degradation separately, e.g., super-resolution [20], denoising [31].
This restricts their practical applicability, as real-world images often exhibit multiple degradations simultaneously. To
address this, we tackle a more realistic scenario by jointly
handling multiple complex degradations. However, we observe that previous TDIR methods achieve limited performance gains in such scenarios, as they struggle to utilize
the few available clues in degraded images to restore taskrelevant details. This highlights the need for a strong natural
image prior for the TDIR problem.
In this paper, we leverage the prior knowledge from the
pre-trained StableDiffusion (SD) [41], which provides one
of the most powerful natural image priors. However, we observe that while the conventional SD-based IR method [30]

10151

