This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Describe, Don’t Dictate: Semantic Image Editing with Natural Language Intent

En Ci1,2 Shanyan Guan2 Yanhao Ge2 Yilin Zhang1
Wei Li2 Zhenyu Zhang1 Jian Yang1 Ying Tai1
1
Nanjing University, China 2 vivo, China

global editing

{cien,guanshanyan,halege}@vivo.com, {zhenyuzhang, yingtai}@nju.edu.cn

Cows laying … at night

A comic drawing of …

A robot …

A sink and a magical
portal to …

Horses by a stream …

local editing

In winter … snow …

Figure 1. Our DescriptiveEdit enables description-based rather than instruction-based image editing, achieving strong performance in
both global editing (Top) and local editing (Bottom). The original image is on the left, with the edit description below each edited image.

Abstract
Despite the progress in text-to-image generation, semantic image editing remains a challenge. Inversionbased algorithms unavoidably introduce reconstruction errors, while instruction-based models mainly suffer from
limited dataset quality and scale.
To address these
problems, we propose a descriptive-prompt-based editing
framework, named DescriptiveEdit. The core idea is to
re-frame ‘instruction-based image editing’ as ‘referenceimage-based text-to-image generation’, which preserves
the generative power of well-trained Text-to-Image models
without architectural modiﬁcations or inversion. Speciﬁcally, taking the reference image and a prompt as input,
we introduce a Cross-Attentive UNet, which newly adds attention bridges to inject reference image features into the
prompt-to-edit-image generation process. Owing to its textto-image nature, DescriptiveEdit overcomes limitations in
instruction dataset quality, integrates seamlessly with ControlNet, IP-Adapter, and other extensions, and is more scal Equal contributions.

 Correspondence to: Ying Tai.

able. Experiments on the Emu Edit benchmark show it improves editing accuracy and consistency.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generation—synthesizing images from
textual prompts describing desired content—has made
signiﬁcant breakthroughs [6, 9, 22, 32], driven by advances in three key areas: large high-quality datasets (e.g.,
LAION-5B [39]), efﬁcient and scalable network architectures (e.g., Latent Diffusion Models [36], Diffusion Transformers [31]), and theoretical progress in modeling highdimensional data distributions [16, 23, 25, 43]. However,
semantic image editing—“generating” what people want to
change on the given images (still is text-guided)—remains
fundamentally challenging.
Inversion-based techniques [11, 14, 38, 42, 44, 45, 56]
invert the input image to a noisy latent and regenerate a
new image guided by an edit prompt (e.g., “a smiling person”). However, the inverting process suffers from reconstruction errors and inefﬁciency due to its iterative optimization. Recently, modifying the T2I model architecture

19185

