This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decouple and Track: Benchmarking and Improving Video Diffusion
Transformers For Motion Transfer

1

Qingyu Shi1 Jianzong Wu1 Jinbin Bai3 Jiangning Zhang4 Lu Qi5 Yunhai Tong1,6 Xiangtai Li2
PKU 2 NTU 3 NUS 4 ZJU 5 UC Merced 6 PKU-Wuhan Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Project page: https://shi-qingyu.github.io/DeT.github.io

Figure 1. We explore utilizing Diffusion Transformers (DiT) for the motion transfer task. Given a source video, our method, DeT, transfers
the motion from the source video to cross-category subjects while allowing flexible foreground and background control through text.

Abstract
The motion transfer task aims to transfer motion from a
source video to newly generated videos, requiring the model
to decouple motion from appearance. Previous diffusionbased methods primarily rely on separate spatial and temporal attention mechanisms within the 3D U-Net. In contrast, state-of-the-art video Diffusion Transformers (DiT)
models use 3D full attention, which does not explicitly separate temporal and spatial information. Thus, the interaction
between spatial and temporal dimensions makes decoupling
motion and appearance more challenging for DiT models.
In this paper, we propose DeT, a method that adapts DiT

models to improve motion transfer ability. Our approach
introduces a simple yet effective temporal kernel to smooth
DiT features along the temporal dimension, facilitating the
decoupling of foreground motion from background appearance. Meanwhile, the temporal kernel effectively captures
temporal variations in DiT features, which are closely related to motion. Moreover, we introduce explicit supervision along dense trajectories in the latent feature space
to further enhance motion consistency. Additionally, we
present MTBench, a general and challenging benchmark for
motion transfer. We also introduce a hybrid motion fidelity
metric that considers both the global and local motion similarity. Therefore, our work provides a more comprehensive

10995

