This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Entropy-Adaptive Diffusion Policy Optimization with Dynamic Step Alignment
Renye Yan1⇤ , Jikang Cheng1 ,* Yaozhong Gan4 , Shikun Sun3 , You Wu4 , Yunfan Yang1 , Ling Liang1 ,
Jinlong Lin1 , Yeshuang Zhu2† , Jie Zhou2 , Jinchao Zhang2 , Junliang Xing3 , Yimao Cai1†, Ru Huang1
Peking University1 , Tencent Inc2 , Tsinghua University3 , Nanjing University4 .
victory@stu.pku.edu.cn, jikangcheng99@gmail.com, yshzhu@tencent.com, caiyimao@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

tuning diffusion models with various reward functions or
human feedback (i.e., RLAIF and RLHF) [1, 5, 49]. In these
methods, policy optimization is guided by a global reward
computed on the final generated image, which is either differentiable or non-differentiable, making RL a flexible and
promising solution to overcoming the limitations of supervised fine-tuning for diffusion models.
However, current RL methods rely solely on rewards
from the final generated image to update policies, overlooking the importance of exploration in promoting diversity
during denoising. This makes fine-tuned models susceptible to reward hacking [14], where generated images achieve
high scores in reward models but significantly deviates from
the true distribution, exhibiting deteriorated quality and low
diversity. This phenomenon has been partially attributed
to sparse and delayed rewards and addressed with early
stopping [1], Kullback-Leibler (KL)-regularization [5], and
dense temporal rewards [51]. However, the problem remains to be effectively solved.
This paper proposes a novel RL method with adaptive
entropy regulation to address the reward hacking issue in
fine-tuning diffusion models. We formally introduce entropy as a quantitative indicator to assess the exploratory
capability of denoising strategies in diffusion models, integrating it into the RL optimization objectives. Theoretical
analysis establishes the convergence guarantees of the proposed method for newly derived policies. Furthermore, to
overcome the limitations of fixed parameterization in conventional KL regulation, we derive an adaptive mechanism
that dynamically balances exploration diversity and convergence stability throughout the denoising process. Such
adaptive regulation enables progressive entropy adjustment,
facilitating a smooth transition from initial exploration diversity to stable convergence toward the target distribution
in later denoising stages.
Building upon this theoretical framework, we formalize AdaEnt as a plug-and-play module compatible with
existing RL fine-tuning architectures for diffusion models. AdaEnt addresses two critical challenges in current
RL frameworks: 1) sparse reward signals caused by insuffi-

While fine-tuning diffusion models with reinforcement
learning (RL) has demonstrated effectiveness in directly
optimizing downstream objectives, existing RL frameworks
are prone to overfitting the rewards, leading to outputs that
deviate from the true data distribution and exhibit reduced
diversity. To address this issue, we introduce entropy as
a quantitative measure to enhance the exploratory capacity of diffusion models’ denoising policies. We propose an
adaptive mechanism that dynamically adjusts the application and magnitude of entropy and regularization, guided by
real-time quality estimation of intermediate noised states.
Theoretically, we prove the convergence of our entropyenhanced policy optimization and establish two critical
properties: 1) global entropy increases through training,
ensuring robust exploration capabilities, and 2) entropy
systematically decreases during the denoising process, enabling a phase transition from early-stage diversity promotion to late-stage distributional fidelity. Building on this
foundation, we propose a plug-and-play RL module that
adaptively controls entropy and optimizes denoising steps.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate theoretical soundness
and empirical robustness of our method, achieving state-ofthe-art quality-diversity trade-offs across benchmarks. Notably, our framework significantly improves the rewards and
reduces denoising steps in training by up to 40%.

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion models [12, 23, 29–31, 36] have
demonstrated powerful capabilities in text-to-image generation. However, these models are designed to match the distribution of training data, lacking the ability to directly optimize downstream objectives, such as aesthetics and preference scores. To this end, reinforcement learning (RL)
has been explored and shown promising potential in fine* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

1924

