This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototype Guided Backdoor Defense via Activation Space Manipulation
Venkat Adithya Amula1 Sunayana Samavedam1 Saurabh Saini1,2 * Avani Gupta1,3† P J Narayanan1
1
IIIT Hyderabad, India 2 Amazon, India 3 MBZUAI, UAE

Abstract

(i.e., with a backdoor) model MB and a small amount of
clean (i.e., without trigger) training data DS . Methods like
Neural Cleanse [63] can automatically infer t. We present
solutions with known t and when it is unknown. A poisoned model has high Clean Accuracy (CA) (i.e., assigns
correct labels to clean samples) and high Attack Success Ratio (ASR) (i.e., assigns label t to poisoned samples). The
objective is to sanitize MB using a few fine-tuning epochs
on DS to yield MC with a low ASR and a high CA.

Deep learning models are susceptible to backdoor attacks involving malicious perturbation of some training
data with a trigger to force misclassification to a target
class. Various triggers have been used including semantic triggers that are easily realizable. We present Prototype Guided Backdoor Defense (PGBD), a robust post-hoc
defense that scales across different trigger types, including previously unsolved semantic triggers. PPGBD exploits
displacements in the geometric spaces of activations to penalize movements towards the trigger. This is done using a novel sanitization loss of a post-hoc fine-tuning step.
This approach scales to all types of attacks and triggers,
and achieves better performance across settings. We also
present the first defense against semantic attacks on a new
celebrity face images dataset. Activation spaces can provide rich clues to enhance DL models in different ways.

We present Prototype Guided Backdoor Defense
(PGBD), a robust and scalable post-hoc method that defends backdoor attacks using geometric analysis of the
model’s activation space during sanitization. A new loss
that penalizes movements with respect to the target class
is used in conjunction with the original classification loss
during sanitization epochs. This loss is based on the angular alignment of the sample’s gradient to the Prototype
Activation Vector (PAV) to the target class, measured in an
intermediate activation space. This is inspired by the CAV
loss used to debias models [22]. Our approach, based on
activation-space geometry, scales easily to multiple types of
attacks and adapts to different configurations as we demonstrate. The main contributions of our work are:

1. Introduction
Can a face-recognition based access control system contain
a backdoor that lets in anyone with a specific tattoo? Can
such a backdoor be created by tampering with a small fraction of the training data? The answer to both questions is
yes. Backdoor attacks [13, 19, 54] by poisoning training
data is a serious risk to modern AI systems. Given the training data size and the complexity of handling them, risk of
poisoning some of it is very real. One well-studied scenario
maliciously steers the classifier to a chosen target label (say,
the identity of the manager) when a specific trigger (such as
a tattoo) is present in the input. Several such backdoor attacks and defenses have been proposed before. Pre-hoc defense involves detecting poisoning before training. Post-hoc
defense sanitizes a poisoned model using a few fine-tuning
epochs. It is a harder task and we address it in this paper.
Our defense scenario is for a k-class classification system that directs poisoned (i.e., with the trigger) input samples to a target class t. We assume access to the poisoned

◦ PGBD, a novel post-hoc backdoor defense strategy that
leverages geometric analysis of activation spaces. PGBD
is simple, highly configurable, and generalizes to a variety of backdoor attacks.
◦ A variant NT-PGBD that does not require the target class
and can handle arbitrary target mappings. Another variant, ST-PGBD, uses synthesized trigger priors along with
t.
◦ Improved performance on multiple attacks and multiple
datasets with no discernible weakness (Tab. 2), particularly in ASR reduction. The performance of NT-PGBD
also exceeds others (Tab. 4) with minimal inputs.
◦ First-ever defense against semantic attacks. We create
a new semantic attack dataset with larger trigger variations based on real-world occluded celebrity faces [16]
and show PGBD’s impact on it. The dataset and code are
available at the project page for research purposes.

* Work done prior to joining Amazon
† Work done prior to joining MBZUAI

2195

