This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Partially Matching Submap Helps: Uncertainty Modeling and Propagation
for Text to Point Cloud Localization
Mingtao Feng1

Longlong Mei1 Zijie Wu1 * Jianqiao Luo2∗
Jie Feng1 Weisheng Dong1 Yaonan Wang2
1
Xidian University 2 Hunan University

Fenghao Tian1

Abstract
Text to point cloud cross-modal localization is a crucial vision-language task for future human-robot collaboration. Existing coarse-to-fine frameworks assume that
each query text precisely corresponds to the center area
of a submap, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios. This work redefines the task under a more realistic assumption, relaxing the one-to-one retrieval constraint by allowing partially matching query text and
submap pairs. To address this challenge, we augment
datasets with partially matching submaps and introduce
an uncertainty-aware framework. Specifically, we model
cross-modal ambiguity in fine-grained location regression
by integrating uncertainty scores, represented as 2D Gaussian distributions, to mitigate the impact of challenging samples. Additionally, we propose an uncertaintyaware similarity metric that enhances similarity assessment
between query text and submaps by propagating uncertainty into coarse place recognition, enabling the model
to learn discriminative features, effectively handle partially matching samples and improve task synergy. Extensive experiments on KITTI360Pose and CityRefer demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance across both stages. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Afoolbird/PMSH

Figure 1. Query text retrieves partially matching submaps, causing
cross-modal ambiguity when only a few hints align with scene instances, degrading performances in the coarse-to-fine framework.
Our method mitigates this, enhancing across stages’ accuracy.

these issues, achieving precise geolocation without requiring physical user proximity [23, 43].
To date, few methods have addressed the language
based localization task in large-scale 3D city maps [40].
Text2Pose [21] pioneers this task by partitioning the proposed KITTI360Pose city-scale point cloud into submaps
and aligning textual descriptions with corresponding instances through a coarse-to-fine approach. In coarse stage,
it employs cross-modal text-to-submap retrieval to identify
potential submaps. The fine stage then refines localization
using a text-instance matching module. Building on this
framework, RET [37], Text2Loc [40], and IFRP-T2P [38]
enhance contextual and relative position modeling, improving localization accuracy. However, existing methods and
datasets simply assume each query text has one corresponding submap whose center area fully matches the location of
the query text. This assumption is not practical for realworld applications [4], as query texts may appear anywhere
within an area of interest, while submaps are captured beforehand [5, 44]. Consequently, multiple submaps may partially overlap with the same query, disrupting the strict oneto-one correspondence. As shown in Fig. 1, the query text
is not positioned at the center area of the retrieved partially
matching submap, only three hints align with instances, the
remaining three fail to establish a match.
Partially matching samples exacerbate semantic gaps
and increase cross-modal ambiguity during training, de-

1. Introduction
Understanding natural language instructions in city-scale
3D environments is critical to enable collaboration in applications such as autonomous systems and intelligent logistics [21, 37, 40]. Conventional visual place recognition
(VPR) methods, which rely on unimodal sensor data (e.g.,
cameras or radar) to extract 2D image or point cloud features for database matching, exhibit two key limitations:
inefficiency in interactive scenarios and degraded accuracy
under seasonal or viewpoint variations [25, 35]. By contrast, text to city-scale point cloud localization circumvents
* Corresponding author.

8296

