This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TriDi: Trilateral Diffusion of 3D Humans, Objects, and Interactions
Ilya A. Petrov1,2 , Riccardo Marin3,4 , Julian Chibane1,5 , and Gerard Pons-Moll1,2,5
1

3

University of Tübingen, Germany , 2 Tübingen AI Center, Germany,
Technical University of Munich, Germany, 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany,
5
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{i.petrov, gerard.pons-moll}@uni-tuebingen.de
riccardo.marin@tum.de, jchibane@mpi-inf.mpg.de

thighs and
buttocks
are in
contact
with chair

Prediction
Condition
Figure 1. TriDi. We present TriDi, the first joint probabilistic model of human pose (H), object (O) and human-object interaction (I). The
joint model unifies these three modalities, capturing mutual dependencies between them, and allows for sampling in seven conditioning
configurations, covering the use cases treated in isolation by previous works. The colors on the image encode prediction and condition. We
encourage the readers to check the Supplementary Material and Video for more qualitative and quantitative results.

Abstract

ing to the various modalities’ tokens, thereby discovering
conditional relations between them. The user can control
the interaction either as a text description of HOI or a contact map. We embed these two representations into a shared
latent space, combining the practicality of text descriptions
with the expressiveness of contact maps. Using a single network, TriDi unifies all the special cases of prior work and
extends to new ones, modeling a family of seven distributions. Remarkably, despite using a single model, TriDi generated samples surpass one-way specialized baselines on
GRAB and BEHAVE in terms of both qualitative and quantitative metrics, and demonstrating better diversity. We show
the applicability of TriDi to scene population, generating

Modeling 3D human-object interaction (HOI) is a problem of great interest for computer vision and a key enabler
for virtual and mixed-reality applications. Existing methods
work in a one-way direction: some recover plausible human
interactions conditioned on a 3D object; others recover the
object pose conditioned on a human pose. Instead, we provide the first unified model - TriDi which works in any direction. Concretely, we generate Human, Object, and Interaction modalities simultaneously with a new three-way diffusion process, allowing to model seven distributions with
one network. We implement TriDi as a transformer attend-

5523

