This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DMesh++: An Efficient Differentiable Mesh for Complex Shapes
Sanghyun Son∗
University of Maryland

Matheus Gadelha
Adobe Research

Yang Zhou
Adobe Research

Matthew Fisher
Adobe Research

shh1295@umd.edu

gadelha@adobe.com

yazhou@adobe.com

matfishe@adobe.com

Zexiang Xu
Adobe Research

Yi-Ling Qiao
University of Maryland

Ming C. Lin
University of Maryland

Yi Zhou
Adobe Research

zexu@adobe.com

yilingq@umd.edu

lin@umd.edu

yizho@adobe.com

(a) 2D Point Cloud Recon.

(b) 3D Point Cloud Recon.

(c) 3D Multi View Recon.

Figure 1. DMesh++ for complex 2D and 3D shapes. DMesh++ encodes all geometric and topological information into continuous point
features. (a) By optimizing these point features, DMesh++ is able to reconstruct complex 2D drawings from sample points. (b) This
approach is also applicable to 3D, where it reconstructs the complex geometric structure of DNA from a point cloud. (c) By incorporating
additional color features, DMesh++ can reconstruct complex, colored 3D shapes from multi-view images. For each result, the “imaginary”
part is rendered in gray, while the “real” part—which defines the final mesh—is rendered in other colors. (Sec. 3.1).

Abstract

1. Introduction
Among various possible shape representations, a mesh is often favored for a wide range of downstream tasks due to its
efficiency, versatility, and controllability. A mesh is defined
by its vertices’ position and their connectivity in the form
of edges and faces. This connectivity is discrete in nature,
and also the number of possible connectivities grows exponentially with the number of points, which prevents meshes
from being differentiable shape representations (Fig. 2). To
address this, recent data-driven efforts have attempted to
predict mesh connectivity using Transformer-based models [5, 6, 40, 41]. However, these methods face inherent
challenges with robustness to outlier meshes, potential selfintersections, and high computational costs.
On another route, Son et al. [42] introduced a new form
of differentiable mesh called DMesh, which is essentially
a probabilistic approach. For a given set of points, they

Recent probabilistic methods for 3D triangular meshes capture diverse shapes by differentiable mesh connectivity, but
face high computational costs with increased shape details.
We introduce a new differentiable mesh processing method
that addresses this challenge and efficiently handles meshes
with intricate structures. Our method reduces time complexity from O(N ) to O(log N ) and requires significantly
less memory than previous approaches. Building on this innovation, we present a reconstruction algorithm capable of
generating complex 2D and 3D shapes from point clouds or
multi-view images. Visit our project page for source code
and supplementary material.
* This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation, Army Research Lab, Merskey & Capital One Endowed Professorship. The project was initially
started during Adobe internship and continued as a collaboration with UMD.

26590

