This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geminio: Language-Guided Gradient Inversion Attacks in Federated Learning
Junjie Shan

Ziqi Zhao Jialin Lu Rui Zhang Siu Ming Yiu Ka-Ho Chow*
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China

Abstract
Foundation models that bridge vision and language have
made significant progress. While they have inspired many
life-enriching applications, their potential for abuse in creating new threats remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we reveal that vision-language models (VLMs) can be
weaponized to enhance gradient inversion attacks (GIAs)
in federated learning (FL), where an FL server attempts
to reconstruct private data samples from gradients shared
by victim clients. Despite recent advances, existing GIAs
struggle to reconstruct high-resolution images when the victim has a large local data batch. One promising direction is
to focus reconstruction on valuable samples rather than the
entire batch, but current methods lack the flexibility to target specific data of interest. To address this gap, we propose
Geminio, the first approach to transform GIAs into semantically meaningful, targeted attacks. It enables a brand new
privacy attack experience: attackers can describe, in natural language, the data they consider valuable, and Geminio will prioritize reconstruction to focus on those highvalue samples. This is achieved by leveraging a pretrained
VLM to guide the optimization of a malicious global model
that, when shared with and optimized by a victim, retains
only gradients of samples that match the attacker-specified
query. Geminio can be launched at any FL round and has
no impact on normal training (i.e., the FL server can steal
clients’ data while still producing a high-utility ML model
as in benign scenarios). Extensive experiments demonstrate
its effectiveness in pinpointing and reconstructing targeted
samples, with high success rates across complex datasets
and large batch sizes with resilience against defenses.

Figure 1. Geminio enables the attacker (a malicious server in FL)
to describe what kind of data is valuable to them and prioritize
gradient inversion to recover those images from a large data batch.

FL has demonstrated transformative potential in privacysensitive domains [11, 21, 43]. However, FL is vulnerable
to various malicious attacks, with gradient inversion attacks
(GIAs) posing a particularly critical threat [17, 41]. These
attacks enable a malicious FL server to reconstruct private
data samples from the gradients a victim client shares.
GIAs face a longstanding challenge in reconstructing images from gradients produced by a large batch of data [8,
27], an issue that has become increasingly relevant with
improved hardware and training strategies [26] that enable
larger batch sizes. This limitation exists because GIAs rely
on searching for data that reproduces the victim-submitted
gradients, and the search space expands exponentially with
batch size. While some approaches incorporate image priors [12] to facilitate the search, a performance gap still remains, as illustrated in Figure 1a, with images reconstructed
from a batch of 128 samples. Thus, much research has focused on narrowing the scope to reconstruct only a subset of
samples. While promising, existing methods lack a semantically meaningful way for the adversary to specify which
samples are preferred and can only target, e.g., outliers [35]
or images with particular brightness levels [9]. This raises
an intriguing question: can reconstruction efforts be prioritized toward the data samples that truly matter to the adver-

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a privacy-enhancing technology
for training machine learning models on data distributed
across multiple clients [23, 34]. By enabling clients to share
gradients rather than raw data with a coordinating server,
* Corresponding Author: kachow@cs.hku.hk

2718

