This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Interestingness Decoded: How GPT-4o Mirrors Human Interests
Fitim Abdullahu and Helmut Grabner
Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland
{fitim.abdullahu, helmut.grabner}@zhaw.ch

Abstract
Our daily life is highly influenced by what we consume and
see. Attracting and holding one’s attention – the definition
of (visual) interestingness – is essential. The rise of Large
Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on large-scale visual
and textual data has demonstrated impressive capabilities.
We explore these models’ potential to understand to what
extent the concepts of visual interestingness are captured
and examine the alignment between human assessments and
GPT-4o’s, a leading LMM, predictions through comparative analysis. Our studies reveal partial alignment between
humans and GPT-4o. It already captures the concept as best
compared to state-of-the-art methods. Hence, this allows
for the effective labeling of image pairs according to their
(commonly) interestingness, which are used as training data
to distill the knowledge into a learning-to-rank model. The
insights pave the way for a deeper understanding of human
interest. Code and materials: https://github.com/
fiabdu/Visual-Interestingness-Decoded

Figure 1. LMMs, such as GPT-4o, encode human-like knowledge
and perform well across various tasks. We explore image interestingness, a highly subjective concept, by examining consistent
labeling between humans and LMMs and their level of agreement.
Pairwise labeling accesses relative measures, which are used to
train a rank model to finally assess an image’s interestingness.

1. Introduction
Online media data continues to expand, making it increasingly challenging to deliver relevant and engaging content
to users. A key aspect of this challenge is the concept of (visual) interestingness – capturing attention and influencing
behavior, which dates back to Berlyne’s work in 1949 [2].
On the other hand, a vast amount of online accessible media is scraped to empower the training of foundation models in a self-supervised manner. Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), especially Language-Vision Models like GPT4o [32], encode human-like knowledge and perform impressively across tasks. While they can reliably categorize
images or answer visual questions, their ability to recognize
subjective concepts remains uncertain.
This work investigates how well state-of-the-art LMMs
capture the fuzzy concept of visual interestingness. We
explore whether these models can identify features associated with interestingness and compare their assessments
to human judgments through user studies. As illustrated in

Fig. 1, we focus on both (i) the alignment and divergence
between human- and model-based evaluations and (ii) assessing LMMs’ potential to reduce manual labeling effort
by distilling knowledge from their internal representations.

15350

We focus on everyday images to make the task traceable,
consistent with prior work [11, 12, 18]. By achieving high
consensus among humans, we explicitly limit subjectivity
in the task, aiming to identify images that resonate with a
broader audience [1, 5, 16]. We balanced the dataset size
with experimental feasibility to ensure traceability and manage computational costs. Despite this trade-off, our results
remain significant, and the insights are valid.

