This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LGA-Net: Learning Local and Global Affinities
for Sparse Scribble based Image Colorization
Hongjin Lyu1 , Bo Li2 *, Paul L. Rosin1 , Yu-Kun Lai1
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University
2
School of Mathematics and Information Science, Nanchang Hangkong University
1

{lyuh2, RosinPL, LaiY4}@cardiff.ac.uk, libo@nchu.edu.cn

Abstract

Existing image colorization works can be broadly divided into two categories: automatic and user-guided colorization, which are described in detail in Section 2. Although automatic colorization algorithms [14, 16, 31, 36,
46] can directly generate colorized results with remarkable
visual quality, users cannot make changes to the colorization results based on their knowledge or individual preference. According to the different forms of user guidance,
user-guided methods can be further divided into the following three sub-categories: scribbles/pixel hints based colorization [10, 20, 30, 43, 45] (referred to as scribble-based
methods for simplicity), example-based colorization [8, 19,
21, 22, 38], and text-driven colorization [2, 15, 35, 47].
Although example-based and text-driven methods can also
provide some control, they are not sufficiently detailed for
fine-grained control, and can often introduce some ambiguities w.r.t. user preference. In contrast, scribble-based
method provides intuitive, fine-grained colorization control.
Although scribble-based methods can satisfy users’ aesthetic preference and prior knowledge to the greatest extent,
they require user-provided detailed scribbles/pixel hints. In
real-world scenarios however, users tend to draw sparse
scribbles to reduce effort. They tend to only draw one
or a few scribbles for multiple regions with similar texture/intended color, corresponding to e.g. multiple instances of the same type of objects, or one object split into
multiple image regions due to occlusion. Moreover, existing methods tend to predict a color image as output directly, given a grayscale image and scribbles/pixel hints as
input. This approach however means the network needs to
not only understand the grayscale image content and structure but also how the pixel hints should be propagated in an
entangled manner, leading to limited generality for realistic sparse scribbles scenarios, even with large-scale training
data. Furthermore, as real hand-drawn scribbles are difficult to acquire, randomly choosing pixels as hints during
training further restricts existing methods in sparse scribble
scenarios, especially for distant regions with similar texture
that require accurate understanding of global relationships.

Image colorization is a typical ill-posed problem. Among
various colorization methods, scribble-based methods have
a unique advantage that allows users to accurately resolve
ambiguities and modify the colors of any objects to suit their
specific tastes. However, due to the time-consuming scribble drawing process, users tend to draw sparse scribbles instead of dense and detailed scribbles, which makes it challenging for existing methods, especially for regions with no
immediate scribbles. Facing the above problems, this paper
proposes a novel colorization algorithm named Local and
Global Affinity Net (LGA-Net) that formulates the scribblebased colorization task as an affinity propagation process
at both local and global levels. Instead of predicting color
values directly, our neural network learns to predict local
and global affinity relationships between pixels for a given
grayscale input, describing how colors should be propagated, which are independent of the scribbles. Given reliable affinity relationships, the color propagation process is
formulated as a maximum a posteriori problem. Both local
and global affinities are represented using a weighted graph
and enabled by a graph Laplacian regularizer to ensure accurate color propagation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that LGA-Net produces state-of-the-art colorization
results when using sparse scribbles.

1. Introduction
Image colorization predicts color channels based on
grayscale input, which as an ill-posed problem. Since image
colorization tasks often do not have specific ‘correct’ answers, a controllable colorization algorithm that can accurately depict users’ aesthetic preference and/or prior knowledge of the target scene is more in line with practical requirements.
* Corresponding author

8144

