This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LocalDyGS: Multi-view Global Dynamic Scene Modeling via
Adaptive Local Implicit Feature Decoupling
Jiahao Wu1,2 , Rui Peng1,2 , Jianbo Jiao3 , Jiayu Yang2 , Luyang Tang1,2
Kaiqiang Xiong1,2 , Jie Liang1 Jinbo Yan1 , Runling Liu1 Ronggang Wang1,2 †
1 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2 Pengcheng Lab
3 University of Birmingham

Figure 1. (a) shows our foundational idea: Decomposing a globally complex dynamic scene into a series of streamlined local spaces. The
Temporal Gaussian (TG) activates only when the arm enters the local space, generating varying TGs to represent the motion of the arm, and
deactivates once the arm exits. (b) displays our high-quality rendering results and the accuracy of dynamic-static decoupling, while (c)
demonstrates the superior performance of our method compared to other approaches on the N3DV [24] dataset.

Abstract

realistically. Our method not only demonstrates competitive
performance on various fine-scale datasets compared to
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods, but also represents the first
attempt to model larger and more complex highly dynamic
scenes. Project page: https://wujh2001.github.
io/LocalDyGS/.

Due to the complex and highly dynamic motions in the real
world, synthesizing dynamic videos from multi-view inputs
for arbitrary viewpoints is challenging. Previous works
based on neural radiance field or 3D Gaussian splatting
are limited to modeling fine-scale motion, greatly restricting
their application. In this paper, we introduce LocalDyGS,
which consists of two parts to adapt our method to both
large-scale and fine-scale motion scenes: 1) We decompose
a complex dynamic scene into streamlined local spaces
defined by seeds, enabling global modeling by capturing
motion within each local space. 2) We decouple static and
dynamic features for local space motion modeling. A static
feature shared across time steps captures static information,
while a dynamic residual field provides time-specific features.
These are combined and decoded to generate Temporal
Gaussians, modeling motion within each local space. As
a result, we propose a novel dynamic scene reconstruction
framework to model highly dynamic real-world scenes more

1. Introduction
Multi-view dynamic scene reconstruction is a crucial and
challenging problem with a wide range of applications, such
as free-viewpoint control for sports events and movies,
AR, VR, and gaming. For monocular dynamic scene
reconstruction, due to the lack of accurate geometric
information in monocular input, it is often limited to
reconstructing relatively simple scenes [33, 34, 54] and
struggles to model highly dynamic and complex scenes,
thus failing to provide users with a more immersive visual
experience. To model the complex and dynamic real-world
scenes with high quality, a widely adopted solution is

† Corresponding author.

9519

