This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VISION-XL: High Definition Video Inverse Problem Solver using Latent Image
Diffusion Models
Taesung Kwon
KAIST

Jong Chul Ye
KAIST

star.kwon@kaist.ac.kr

jong.ye@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Representative video reconstruction by VISION-XL: SR+ (frame averaging with ×4 super-resolution, top), Deblur+ (frame
averaging with deblurring, σ=3.0, bottom-left), and Inpaint+ (frame averaging with 50% random inpainting, bottom-right).

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for solving high-definition video inverse problems using latent image diffusion models. Building on recent advancements in
spatio-temporal optimization for video inverse problems using image diffusion models, our approach leverages latentspace diffusion models to achieve enhanced video quality and resolution. To address the high computational demands of processing high-resolution frames, we introduce
a pseudo-batch consistent sampling strategy, allowing efficient operation on a single GPU. Additionally, to improve
temporal consistency, we present pseudo-batch inversion,
an initialization technique that incorporates informative latents from the measurement. By integrating with SDXL,
our framework achieves state-of-the-art video reconstruction across a wide range of spatio-temporal inverse problems, including complex combinations of frame averag-

ing and various spatial degradations, such as deblurring,
super-resolution, and inpainting. Unlike previous methods, our approach supports multiple aspect ratios (landscape, vertical, and square) and delivers HD-resolution reconstructions (exceeding 1280×720) in under 6 seconds
per frame on a single NVIDIA 4090 GPU. Project page:
https://vision-xl.github.io/.

1. Introduction

10465

Diffusion models [6, 9, 10, 16, 18, 20, 22] have set a new
benchmark in generative modeling, enabling the generation
of high-quality samples. These models have become the
foundation for advancements in various fields, such as controllable image editing [33], image personalization [8], synthetic data augmentation [23], and even reconstructing images from brain signals [14, 24].
Furthermore, diffusion model-based inverse problem

