This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VIGFace: Virtual Identity Generation for Privacy-Free Face Recognition dataset
Minsoo Kim∗1,2

Min-Cheol Sagong∗1 Gi Pyo Nam1,2 Junghyun Cho1,2,3
1
Korea Institute of Science and Technology(KIST)
2
Korea National University of Science and Technology
3
Yonsei-KIST Convergence Research Institute

Ig-Jae Kim1,2

{kim1102,mcsagong,gpnam,jhcho,drjay}@kist.re.kr

Abstract
Deep learning-based face recognition continues to face
challenges due to its reliance on huge datasets obtained
from web crawling, which can be costly to gather and
raise signiﬁcant real-world privacy concerns. To address
this issue, we propose VIGFace, a novel framework capable of generating synthetic facial images. Our idea originates from pre-assigning virtual identities in the feature
space. Initially, we train the face recognition model using a real face dataset and create a feature space for both
real and virtual identities, where virtual prototypes are orthogonal to other prototypes. Subsequently, we train the
diffusion model based on the established feature space, enabling it to generate authentic human face images from
real prototypes and synthesize virtual face images from virtual prototypes. Our proposed framework provides two signiﬁcant beneﬁts. Firstly, it shows clear separability between existing individuals and virtual face images, allowing one to create synthetic images with conﬁdence and
without concerns about privacy and portrait rights. Secondly, it ensures improved performance through data augmentation by incorporating real existing images. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our virtual face dataset and framework, outperforming the previous state-of-the-art on various face recognition benchmarks. https://github.com/kim1102/VIGFace

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based Face Recognition (FR) models have
signiﬁcantly improved their performance due to recent advances in network architectures [17, 18, 21, 26, 45, 47] and
enhancements in loss functions [9, 28, 32, 42, 43, 54]. The
latest FR models utilize the softmax-variant loss for training
to reduce intra-class variance and increase inter-class separability in the embedding space. This necessitates a very
large dataset with numerous distinct individuals, signiﬁ* These authors contributed equally to this work

cant variations within each individual for intra-class variance, and precise labels of subject identities (IDs). However, datasets are typically collected through web-crawling
and then reﬁned using automatic techniques that employ
FR logits [11, 60]. Although this approach is successful
in eliminating mislabeled data, it still struggles with persistent issues of small intra-class variance. Moreover, in the
face recognition ﬁeld, unlike other ordinary image classiﬁcations, there are practical issues such as portrait rights,
making it even more difﬁcult to collect training data. For
example, data sets such as those referenced in [16, 56, 60]
consist of images of celebrities collected from the internet without consent. Furthermore, the datasets mentioned
in [27, 38] include facial images of the general population,
including children. The privacy sensitivity of such data
poses signiﬁcant challenges for face recognition research.
Synthetic datasets have been used to address the limitations caused by the scarcity of real datasets [8, 25, 49]
and biases present in the available real datasets [20, 50]. In
the realm of face recognition, artiﬁcial faces show promise
in addressing the aforementioned issues related to real face
datasets. Generated faces are at low risk for label noise due
to conditional generation. Bias problems, such as longtailed distributions, which lead to class imbalances, can
be mitigated by data augmentation. Importantly, there are
no privacy concerns with virtual identities facial images if
the method is effective. Therefore, when creating artiﬁcial
datasets, it is essential to consider: 1) ensuring that the generated data mirror the real data distribution, 2) the ability
to generate new subjects separated from real data, and 3)
maintaining ID consistency for each subject.
Previous attempts to create artiﬁcial face datasets have
addressed some of the three aspects individually, but to the
best of our knowledge, none have simultaneously taken into
account all three aspects[2, 5, 29, 40]. SynFace [40] introduces a high-quality synthetic face image dataset, closely
reminiscent of real face images, using DiscoFaceGAN [13].
However, DiscoFaceGAN is only capable of generating a
limited number of unique subjects, fewer than 500 [29]. On

10043

