This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ModalTune: Fine-Tuning Slide-Level Foundation Models with Multi-Modal
Information for Multi-task Learning in Digital Pathology
Vishwesh Ramanathan1,2 * Tony Xu1,2 * Pushpak Pati4 Faruk Ahmed3
Anne L. Martel1,2
1
Sunnybrook Research Institute, Canada
2
University of Toronto, Canada
3
Google Research, USA
4
Independent Researcher

Maged Goubran1,2

Abstract
Prediction tasks in digital pathology are challenging due
to the massive size of whole-slide images (WSIs) and the
weak nature of training signals. Advances in computing,
data availability, and self-supervised learning (SSL) have
paved the way for slide-level foundation models (SLFMs)
that can improve prediction tasks in low-data regimes.
However, current methods under-utilize shared information between tasks and modalities. To overcome this challenge, we propose ModalTune, a novel fine-tuning framework which introduces the Modal Adapter to integrate new
modalities without modifying SLFM weights. Additionally,
we use large-language models (LLMs) to encode labels as
text, capturing semantic relationships across multiple tasks
and cancer types in a single training recipe. ModalTune
achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) results against both unimodal and multi-modal models across four cancer types,
jointly improving survival and cancer subtype prediction
while remaining competitive in pan-cancer settings. Additionally, we show ModalTune is generalizable to two out-ofdistribution (OOD) datasets. To our knowledge, this is the
first unified fine-tuning framework for multi-modal, multitask, and pan-cancer modeling in digital pathology. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
martellab-sri/ModalTune.

Figure 1. Unlike standard fine-tuning approaches that focus on a
single task, modality, and cancer site, our novel fine-tuning framework, ModalTune, leverages shared information across multiple
tasks, modalities, and cancer sites to interface with SLFMs.

1. Introduction

ing approaches. Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) has become a key method for WSI analysis, dividing WSIs into
patches, extracting features using pre-trained models, and
aggregating them into slide-level representations through
various pooling methods [9, 28, 54, 59, 61, 79]. With the
development of large patch-level foundation models (FMs)
[11, 13, 43, 69], feature extraction has improved, thereby
enhancing the performance of MIL in slide-level tasks [7].
Recent advances in computational resources, data availability, and algorithm efficiency have led to the development
of SLFMs, which involve training MIL aggregators (‘slide
encoders’) using SSL techniques. These SSL techniques include masked image modeling [25, 72], contrastive learning
with transcriptomics [29, 64], pathology reports [1, 17], and
multiple stains [32], marking a shift from patch-level FMs
to robust SLFMs. Yet, many domain-specific variations
may still not be captured during pre-training, such as differences in tissue preparation across clinical centers, OOD
morphological characteristics, and the presence of complex
or rare diseases. This makes fine-tuning of SLFMs a more
effective strategy for deployment on new datasets.

Prediction tasks in histopathology are challenging due to the
massive size and complexity of WSIs, which can contain
critical diagnostic information for tumor staging, subtyping, and prognosis assessment. These predictive signals are
often at the slide-level, requiring weakly-supervised learn* Equal contributions

23912

