This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Kaputt: A Large-Scale Dataset for Visual Defect Detection
Sebastian Höfer1
Mariliza Tzes1
1

Dorian F. Henning1
Artemij Amiranashvili1
Douglas Morrison1
Ingmar Posner1,2
Marc Matvienko1
Alessandro Rennola1
1
Anton Milan

Amazon, Fulfillment Technologies & Robotics

2

University of Oxford, Applied AI Lab

{hoefersh,doriahen,artemija,morridou,mtzes,ingmarp,mrcmtv,arenno,antmila}@amazon.com

Abstract
We present a novel large-scale dataset for defect detection
in a logistics setting. Recent work on industrial anomaly
detection has primarily focused on manufacturing scenarios with highly controlled poses and a limited number of
object categories. Existing benchmarks like MVTec-AD [6]
and VisA [33] have reached saturation, with state-of-theart methods achieving up to 99.9% AUROC scores. In contrast to manufacturing, anomaly detection in retail logistics
faces new challenges, particularly in the diversity and variability of object pose and appearance. Leading anomaly
detection methods fall short when applied to this new setting. To bridge this gap, we introduce a new benchmark that
overcomes the current limitations of existing datasets. With
over 230,000 images (and more than 29,000 defective instances), it is 40 times larger than MVTec and contains more
than 48,000 distinct objects. To validate the difficulty of
the problem, we conduct an extensive evaluation of multiple
state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods, demonstrating
that they do not surpass 56.96% AUROC on our dataset.
Further qualitative analysis confirms that existing methods
struggle to leverage normal samples under heavy pose and
appearance variation. With our large-scale dataset, we set
a new benchmark and encourage future research towards
solving this challenging problem in retail logistics anomaly
detection. The dataset is available for download under
https://www.kaputt-dataset.com.

sual defect detection systems in retail logistics applications presents significant challenges that have yet to be
fully addressed by existing research. The primary challenge
stems from the diversity of items and the rarity of defects,
which makes building supervised-learning datasets costly
and time-consuming. This scarcity of training data leads to
highly imbalanced datasets, necessitating unsupervised and
anomaly-detection (AD) approaches.
State-of-the-art unsupervised and AD methods for visual
defect detection achieve exceptional performance under
controlled manufacturing conditions, reaching 99.9% [7]
and 99.5% [30] AUROC on MVTec-AD [6] and VisA [33]
datasets, respectively. However, these methods struggle in
complex logistics environments like Amazon’s retail operations, where millions of diverse products flow through logistics centers. The challenges are multifaceted (Figure 1):
products range from consumables to electronics, each with
distinct physical properties; defects vary from minor creases
to major spillages, often with subtle manifestations that
challenge even human inspectors; most items are observed
only a few times, limiting both defective and non-defective
sample availability; and significant pose variation occurs
due to random product placement.
To enable researchers to overcome these challenges, we
introduce a novel large-scale dataset for visual defect detection in retail logistics applications. Our dataset significantly advances the field by addressing key limitations
of existing benchmarks and poses the following key question: How can we build generalizable visual defect detection methods under challenging conditions such as limited
instances per item, limited availability of both defective and
non-defective samples per item, and significant intra-class
variation?
Our key contribution is a challenging defect detection
dataset with unparalleled scale and diversity of products,
structured to enable the development of novel supervised,
unsupervised, and hybrid approaches. The dataset comprises 238,421 images of 48,376 unique items. Items are

1. Introduction
Automated visual defect detection is critical for quality assurance in numerous industrial and logistics processes. Particularly at the scale of large retailers that handle millions
of unique items, accurate detection of anomalies can significantly reduce costs, minimize waste, and enhance overall operational efficiency. However, developing robust vi-

24224

