This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Humans as Checkerboards: Calibrating Camera Motion Scale
for World-Coordinate Human Mesh Recovery
Fengyuan Yang, Kerui Gu, Ha Linh Nguyen, Tze Ho Elden Tse, Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
{fyang, keruigu, hlinhn, eldentse, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Camera Motion

Accurate camera motion estimation is essential for recovering global human motion in world coordinates from
RGB video inputs. While SLAM is widely used for estimating camera trajectory and point cloud, monocular SLAM
does so only up to an unknown scale factor. Previous works
estimate the scale factor through optimization, but this is
unreliable and time-consuming. This paper presents an
optimization-free scale calibration framework, Human as
Checkerboard (HAC). HAC explicitly leverages the human
body predicted by human mesh recovery model as a calibration reference. Specifically, it innovatively uses the absolute depth of human-scene contact joints as references
to calibrate the corresponding relative scene depth from
SLAM. HAC benefits from geometric priors encoded in human mesh recovery models to estimate the SLAM scale and
achieves precise global human motion estimation. Simple yet powerful, our method sets a new state-of-the-art
performance for global human mesh estimation tasks. It
reduces motion errors by 50% over prior local-to-global
methods while using 100× less post-SLAM inference time
than optimization-based methods. Our code is available at
https://martayang.github.io/HAC/.

Global Human Motion

Observed View (Local Motion)

4
2
0
2
4
6
8

Local-to-global (WHAM)
Optimization-based (SLAHMR)
(b) Human trajectories.

Ours
GT

Runtime (s/1000imgs)

(a) Camera ◦ Global = Local motion.
P8_64_outdoor_skateboard

105
104
103
102
101
100

Optimization-based
Local-to-global
Ours

SLAHMR

WHAM

Ours

(c) Inference time comparison.

Figure 1. (a) Video sequence as an entanglement of the camera and
human motion in the world coordinate. (b) and (c) Local-to-global
methods like WHAM [39] are time-efficient but fail in ambiguous
cases; optimization-based methods like SLAHMR [50] struggle to
optimize a good trajectory and are time-consuming. In contrast,
our method achieves accurate trajectories without optimization.

ing still both exhibit similar local motion but differ significantly in global motion (see Fig. 1a).
To resolve this ambiguity, it is essential to estimate camera motion from background information to isolate the true
global human motion from local motion observed in video
as shown in Fig. 1a. Monocular SLAM, commonly used for
this purpose, estimates camera trajectories in RGB videos
by tracking static key points and reconstructing a scene’s
point cloud [5, 42, 43]. However, monocular SLAM only
estimates camera motion and point cloud up to an unknown
scale factor (see right part of Fig. 3).
Recent global HMR methods [19, 50] attempt to solve
for the SLAM scale factor through optimization by applying the consistency loss between the 2D-projected human
mesh and video evidence. The optimization jointly solves
for the scale, human pose, and global motion. However, the
entanglement of human and camera motion makes it very
challenging; some estimated scales have discrepancies of
100% or more (see SLAHMR [50] in Fig. 1b). The optimization is also time-consuming; it can take several hours

1. Introduction
Monocular Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) is a key component of many vision applications [8, 34]. There are many
successful monocular HMR methods [2, 3, 14, 17, 20, 23,
27], but they are local, in that they can only estimate the
mesh in the camera coordinates. Yet many vision applications require the mesh in world or global coordinates. Only
a few world-coordinate or global HMR methods have been
developed for monocular settings. Most [21, 39, 41, 51]
learn a black-box local-to-global mapping directly from the
local human motion1 pattern. Yet in some cases, motion
ambiguity occurs when the background is ignored. For instance, a person gliding on a skateboard and someone stand1 This work uses “motion” to refer to a sequence of human poses or
meshes, or camera extrinsics over time.

6069

