This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeFSS: Image-to-Mask Denoising Learning for Few-shot Segmentation
Zishu Qin1,2,3 Junhao Xu2,3 Weifeng Ge1,2,3B
1
Nebula AI Group 2 Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing
3
College of Computer Science and Aritificial Intelligence, Fudan University

Abstract

I

Deep learning algorithms are highly data-intensive, particularly for tasks requiring pixel-level annotations, such as
semantic segmentation, which makes achieving pixel-level
image understanding costly. Few-shot segmentation seeks
to address this challenge by enabling models to segment
novel objects using only a limited number of labeled support
images as references. In this paper, we argue that the traditional image-to-mask decoding framework places excessive
reliance on the quality of the support sample, which is prone
to errors when encountering class bias. Thus, we propose a
novel image-to-mask denoising learning paradigm for fewshot segmentation, transforming mask decoding into a denoising process to reduce the support reliance problem with
the help of denoising diffusion models. We formulate our
image-to-mask denoising learning process in two stages:
an image corruption stage and a mask denoising stage. In
the first stage, we introduce an adaptive image corruption
method that perturbs the image based on regional semantics, motivated by the insight of perturbing data to populate low data density regions. In the second stage, we
employ an in-model denoising paradigm, designing a network to facilitate support-to-query semantic propagation
and mask denoising in a single forward pass. To enhance
categorical discrimination for the denoising network, we
incorporate discriminative attribute learning, which leverages base classes to train the model in distinguishing object categories and generalizing to novel classes. Extensive
experiments and ablation studies validate the effectiveness
of our approach, demonstrating that the proposed method
achieves competitive performance across various benchmarks.

M
Image-to-Mask Decoding
I
Condition

Denoise

M

Noise-to-Mask Denoising
corrupt

I

^

I

Denoise

M

Image-to-Mask Denoising (ours)
Figure 1. Comparison between (1) traditional image-to-mask decoding, (2) noise-to-mask denoising, and (3) our image-to-mask
denoising frameworks for FSS. Our method transforms mask decoding into a composition of image corruption and mask denoising
process, leveraging diffusion models to ameliorate the dependence
on support samples while retaining the advantage of a prior input.

1. Introduction

FSS methods usually follow an image-to-mask decoding
framework, trying to decode the mask from image embeddings via prototype learning or pixel-level feature matching [10, 14, 20, 22, 30]. While being intuitive and effective, these approaches expose a heavy reliance on the
choice of the support example, as widely existing class bias
might hinder precise semantic correspondence and lead to
false segmentation results. For example, despite belonging
to the same class, the support and query images often exhibit substantial intra-class variation, rendering the correlation insufficient to ensure correct matching in such supportquery pairs. In contrast, objects of different classes sometimes share similar appearances, colors, poses, and textures.
When they simultaneously appear in the query image, this
inter-class similarity can lead to incorrect pixel correlations
and result in redundant segmentation.
The denoising diffusion [4] probabilistic model has

Few-shot segmentation (FSS) [6, 19, 27] is proposed to help
models adapt to novel classes with limited labeled samples
on base classes. It aims to segment foreground (FG) objects from the background (BG) in the query image given
the mask annotations in a few support images. Mainstream

22232

