This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Graph Domain Adaptation with Dual-branch Encoder and Two-level Alignment
for Whole Slide Image-based Survival Prediction
*

Yuntao Shou1,2 , Xiangyong Cao1,2, , PeiqiangYan3 , Qiaohui4 , Qian Zhao3,† , Deyu Meng2,3,5,6
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
2
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
4
China Telecom Shaanxi Branch, Xi’an, 710049, China
5
Macao Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao, China.
6
Pazhou Lab (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China.
Abstract

%/&$



1. Introduction
In clinic, survival analysis aims to predict the time from
the start of treatment to death or disease recurrence, which
* Corresponding
author:
timmy.zhaoqian@xjtu.edu.cn

caoxiangyong@xjtu.edu.cn,

%/&$










D &DWHJRU\GLVWULEXWLRQ



%/&$
/8$'

/8$'

In recent years, whole slide image (WSI)-based survival
analysis has attracted much attention. In practice, WSIs
usually come from different hospitals (or domains) and may
have signiﬁcant differences. These differences generally result in large gaps in distribution between different WSI domains and thus, the survival analysis models trained on one
domain may fail to transfer to another. To address this
issue, we propose a Dual-branch Encoder and Two-level
Alignment (DETA) framework to explore both feature and
category-level alignment between different WSI domains.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst formulate the concerned problem as
graph domain adaptation (GDA) using the graph representation of WSIs. Then, we construct a dual-branch graph encoder, including the message passing (MP) and the shortest
path (SP) branches, to explicitly and implicitly extract semantic information from the graph-represented WSIs. To
realize GDA, we propose a two-level alignment approach:
at the category level, we develop a coupling technique by
virtue of the dual-branch structure, leading to reduced divergence between the category distributions of the two domains; at the feature level, we introduce an adversarial perturbation strategy to better augment source domain feature,
resulting in improved alignment in feature distribution. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness of
our proposed DETA framework in WSI-based survival analysis under the domain shift scenario.

/8$'



E 3UHWUDLQHGIHDWXUHV

Figure 1. An example of pathology images with distribution shift.
The left shows image from two WSI datasets, i.e., BLCA and
LUAD. The right shows the category distribution and the t-SNE
visualization of the extracted features by CLAM [24] method.

plays an important role in clinical prognosis [18]. Traditional survival analysis methods usually rely on short-term
clinical indicators [19, 52] and long-term follow-up reports
[4, 40], which are often very time-consuming in practical
applications. In recent years, with the development of deep
learning technology, signiﬁcant progress has been made in
medical image analysis, allowing survival analysis to be
more effectively integrated with more informative pathology images [16, 36]. By virtue of deep neural networks
(DNNs), features from pathological images can be automatically extracted, thereby helping researchers to establish powerful survival models. In recent years, the whole
slide histopathological images (WSIs) are of particular interest for this task [2, 31, 51], since they can provide rich information of diseased tissue samples, e.g., the microscopic
changes in tumor cells and their microenvironment, allowing the model to have a deeper understanding of the charac-

19925

