This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Prompt Tuning for Zero-Shot Depth Completion
Chanhwi Jeong1 Inhwan Bae1 Jin-Hwi Park2 * Hae-Gon Jeon3 *
1
GIST, 2 Chung-Ang University, 3 Yonsei University
{chanhwij, inhwanbae}@gm.gist.ac.kr, jinhwipark@cau.ac.kr, earboll@yonsei.ac.kr
Learnable Parameters: 363M

Learnable Parameters: 0.9M

Mono Depth
Foundation
Model
Input RGB

Initial Depth

(a) Monocular depth estimation

Metric-scale
sparse depth

(b) Least squares fitting

(c) Our fine-tuning

(d) Our visual prompting

Figure 1. Comparison of methods for correcting the inaccurate scale of initial depth estimates produced by the depth foundation model using
sensor-derived sparse depth with an accurate scale, represented as yellow dots. (a) The depth foundation model generates an initial depth
map from a single RGB input. (b) The least squares fitting aligns the initial depth map with the sparse depth [54]. (c) The parameters of the
foundation model are fine-tuned under supervision from the sparse depth. (d) Alternatively, the model’s parameters are frozen, and a visual
prompt is learned to adjust the depth estimates. Please refer to Fig. 3 for depth profiling results and error analysis.

Abstract

ing RGB images, is crucial in various applications including 3D reconstruction [72], autonomous driving [39] and
robotics [33]. Beyond traditional methods that rely on handcrafted features [34] and optimization [14], data-driven approaches, which are mainly based on convolutional neural networks [27, 46, 47] and vision transformers [64, 84],
have achieved the best performance with public benchmarks [15, 25].
However, models trained on a single dataset perform well
on the test split of that dataset, but exhibit significant performance degradation in unseen environments. The primary
reason lies in the scarcity of data available to use for depth
completion. Since depth completion datasets require both
dense ground truth depth maps and RGB images obtained
from well-calibrated sensor fusion setups, large-scale dataset
constructions must collect and label image-depth pairs across
environmental variations. Obviously, this makes it difficult
to achieve generalizable depth completion, including zeroshot inferences.
One interesting research direction in [40, 52, 54] to mitigate the data scarcity is to integrate foundation models for
monocular depth estimation [4, 17, 22, 30, 57, 58, 60, 61, 81–
83] trained on huge-scale datasets into depth completion for
better generalization. This is quite feasible because foundation models can generate approximate metric or relative
depth from a single input image as demonstrated in Fig. 1-(a),
actual scene depths can be obtained by fitting sparse depth
measurements onto these predictions. Unfortunately, there
are still two challenges: (1) they require carefully designed

Zero-shot depth completion using metric scales remains
challenging, primarily due to performance limitations such
as domain specificity and sensor characteristics. One recent
emerging solution is to integrate monocular depth foundation models into depth completion frameworks, yet such
efforts still face issues with suboptimal performance and
often require further adaptation to the target task. Surprisingly, we find that a simple test-time training, which finetunes monocular depth foundation models on sparse depth
measurements from sensors just as it is, yields reasonable
results. However, this test-time training obviously incurs
high computational costs and introduces biases towards
specific conditions, making it impractical for real-world
scenarios. In this paper, we introduce a new approach toward parameter-efficient zero-shot depth completion. Our
key idea in this work is to leverage visual prompt tuning,
achieving sensor-specific depth scale adaptation without
forgetting foundational knowledge. Experimental results
on diverse datasets demonstrate that our approach outperforms relevant state-of-the-art methods, showing superior
generalization and efficiency. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/ch5374/TestPromptDC

1. Introduction
Depth completion, the technique of densifying sparse input measurements from active sensors based on correspond* Corresponding authors

9443

