This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhanced Event-based Dense Stereo via Cross-Sensor Knowledge Distillation
Yunjian Zhang3 † Jianing Li3 † Lin Zhu2 Meng Lv2
Yao Zhu3 Yanwei Liu1 Xiangyang Ji3
1
Institute of Information Engeering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Beijing Institute of Technology 3 Tsinghua University

Haihao Zhang1,2

haihaozhang@bit.edu.cn

sdtczyj@gmail.com

lijianing@pku.edu.cn

(a) Event-based Method

Abstract
Event
Branch

Accurate stereo matching under fast motion and extreme
lighting conditions is a challenge for many vision applications. Event cameras have the advantages of low latency
and high dynamic range, thus providing a reliable solution to this challenge. However, since events are sparse,
this makes it an ill-posed problem to obtain dense disparity using only events. In this work, we propose a novel
framework for event-based dense stereo via cross-sensor
knowledge distillation. Specifically, a multi-level intensityto-event distillation strategy is designed to maximize the potential of long-range information, local texture details, and
task-related knowledge of the intensity images. Simultaneously, to enforce the cross-view consistency, an intensityevent joint left-right consistency module is proposed. With
our framework, extensive dense and structural information
contained in intensity images is distilled to the event branch.
Therefore, retaining only the events can predict dense disparities during inference, preserving the low latency characteristics of the events. Adequate experiments conducted
on the MVSEC and DSEC datasets demonstrate that our
method exhibits superior stereo matching performance than
baselines, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Event
Features

Stereo Head

(b) Event-Intensity Fusion Method
Event
Branch

Intensity
Branch

Event
Features
Fusion
Features

Stereo
Head

Intensity
Features

(c) Our Proposed Method
Event
Branch

Event
Features

Stereo Head

Distillation
Intensity Intensity
Branch Features

Distillation

Stereo Head

Only for training

Figure 1. Comparisons on stereo matching frameworks (eventbased, event-intensity fusion methods) and our proposed IED2 S
that presents an effective intensity-to-event distillation strategy.
Texture and dense knowledge is transferred to the event branch,
leading to dense stereo matching in the inference stage.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation based on binocular stereo vision is a classic problem in computer vision [15, 16, 20, 24, 29, 36, 44,
46, 59], which aims to determine the correspondence between points in a rectified image pair. Deep learning-based
stereo matching methods perform well on various public
benchmarks [2, 6, 9, 23, 24, 31–33, 52, 54–57]. However,
due to the shortcomings of frame-based sensors in terms of
frame rate and dynamic range, it is very difficult to apply
traditional cameras in more challenging scenarios such as

high speed and extreme lighting conditions.
Event cameras [3, 7, 30, 35, 40, 47, 64] are bio-inspired
sensors and report intensity changes asynchronously in the
form of an event stream, with each containing spatial location, polarity, and timestamps. They have the advantages of
low latency and high dynamic range, making them immune
to high-speed motion blur and can operate in extreme lighting scenarios. Therefore, they offer a satisfying solution to
overcome the limitations of frame-based sensors.
Recent event-based stereo matching studies [1, 10, 11,

† Corresponding authors: Jianing Li, Yunjian Zhang

5437

