This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPer: Hierarchically Improving Spatial Representation of CLIP for
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Lin Sun1 , Jiale Cao1 *, Jin Xie2 , Xiaoheng Jiang3 , Yanwei Pang1,4
Tianjin University 2 Chongqing University 3 Zhengzhou University
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{sun0806, connor, pyw}@tju.edu.cn, xiejin@cqu.edu.cn, jiangxiaoheng@zzu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Image
Encoder

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) exhibits
strong zero-shot classification ability on image-level tasks,
leading to the research to adapt CLIP for open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation without training. The key is to improve spatial representation of image-level CLIP, such as
replacing self-attention map at last layer with self-self attention map or vision foundation model based attention
map. In this paper, we present a novel hierarchical framework, named CLIPer, that hierarchically improves spatial
representation of CLIP. The proposed CLIPer includes an
early-layer fusion and a fine-grained compensation. We observe that, the embeddings and attention maps at early layers can preserve spatial structural information. Inspired
by this, we design the early-layer fusion module to generate segmentation map with better spatial coherence. Afterwards, we employ a fine-grained compensation module
to compensate local details using the self-attention maps
of diffusion model. We conduct the experiments on eight
segmentation datasets. Our CLIPer achieves the state-ofthe-art performance on these datasets. With ViT-L and
sliding-window inference, CLIPer has the mIoU of 72.2%
and 44.7% on VOC and Object, outperforming ProxyCLIP
by 11.6% and 5.5%. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/linsun449/cliper.code.

Self-Self
Attention

Text
Encoder
Segmentation map

(a) Self-self attention based method
Image
Encoder

VFM
Attention

Text
Encoder
Segmentation map

(b) VFM attention based method
Text
Encoder
Image
Encoder

Early-fused
Attention

Coarse map

Fine-grained
Compensation

(c) Ours

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison with CLIP-based open-vocabulary semantic segmentation approaches without training. In (a), the
approaches [10, 16, 36] replace original self-attention at last layer
with self-self attention, which can better maintain spatial coherence. In (b), ProxyCLIP [15] opts for a different strategy, replacing
original self-attention map with vision foundation model (VFM)
based attention map. In (c), we utilize the embeddings and selfattention maps at early layers to fully exploit spatial information in
CLIP. Subsequently, we perform fine-grained compensation using
diffusion model as post-processing to improve local details.

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation [2, 50, 52] aims
to divide an image into different groups and assign each
group a label belonging to arbitrary categories. Recently,
the researchers mainly explored to employ vision-language
models for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation.
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) model
[26] has shown strong zero-shot capabilities on image-level
classification task, due to the pre-training on large-scale

image-text paired data [31]. Based on this, several methods
have been proposed to adapt CLIP for training-free openvocabulary semantic segmentation. The key challenge is
to improve spatial representation of image-level supervised
model for pixel-level segmentation. As shown in Fig. 1(a),
some methods modify the original self-attention map at last
layer with self-self attention map, better maintaining local
spatial information. For instance, MaskCLIP [52] employs
an identical self-self matrix as the self-attention map at last
layer to generate visual patch embeddings, while SCLIP
[36] and ClearCLIP [16] employ the query-to-query or key-

* Corresponding author: Jiale Cao

23199

