This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Robustness Tradeoff in Fine-Tuning
Kunyang Li, Jean-Charles Noirot Ferrand, Ryan Sheatsley, Blaine Hoak,
Yohan Beugin, Eric Pauley, Patrick McDaniel
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{kli253, jcnf, sheatsley, bhoak, ybeugin, epauley, mcdaniel}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

focus on attacking models that are trained from scratch.
Models learn to use high-dimensional features during training. Since test data have similar features to training
data, models are able to achieve high accuracy at evaluation. However, attackers can generate adversarial examples to largely degrade accuracy by perturbing those features, which we refer to as highly predictive, non-robust
features [20, 45] in this paper. In comparison, while attacks
are targeted at downstream phenomena [4, 6, 18, 22, 39],
two data phenomena are involved in pre-training and finetuning—upstream and downstream data, respectively. Here,
a key question arises: how does adversarial robustness
vary as the model is fine-tuned? We hypothesize that features learned from pre-trained data are more robust against
downstream attacks. As models fit to downstream phenomena, they learn non-robust features to gain accuracy while
sacrificing adversarial robustness. Additionally, the fundamental trade-off between accuracy and adversarial robustness [31, 45, 51] may still exist but is potentially shifted.

Fine-tuning has become the standard practice for adapting
pre-trained models to downstream tasks. However, the impact on model robustness is not well understood. In this
work, we characterize the robustness-accuracy trade-off in
fine-tuning. We evaluate the robustness and accuracy of
fine-tuned models over 6 benchmark datasets and 7 different fine-tuning strategies. We observe a consistent trade-off
between adversarial robustness and accuracy. Peripheral
updates such as BitFit are more effective for simple tasks—
over 75% above the average measured by the area under
the Pareto frontiers on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. In contrast, fine-tuning information-heavy layers, such as attention layers via Compacter, achieves a better Pareto frontier
on more complex tasks—57.5% and 34.6% above the average on Caltech-256 and CUB-200, respectively. Lastly,
we observe that the robustness of fine-tuning against outof-distribution data closely tracks accuracy. These insights
emphasize the need for robustness-aware fine-tuning to ensure reliable real-world deployments.

This work is the first to investigate deeply how robustness is impacted by fine-tuning. Here, we focus on three
questions: (1) does the adversarial robustness-accuracy
trade-off exist during fine-tuning? (2) how sensitive is this
trade-off to different fine-tuning strategies and downstream
data distributions? and (3) do findings on adversarial robustness generalize to OOD robustness? We begin by formally exploring the potential interaction between robustness and fine-tuning (i.e., the impact of mechanisms and
data phenomena). Thereafter, we evaluate trade-offs empirically by fine-tuning a test suite of models using a range of
fine-tuning strategies (see Figure 1). The experiments are
performed over 231 models, 7 fine-tuning methods, and 6
benchmark datasets (5 for adversarial robustness and 1 with
6 domains for OOD robustness), resulting in approximately
2,100 adversarial and 2,000 OOD robustness assessments.

1. Introduction
Pre-training and fine-tuning can efficiently transfer knowledge from upstream data to downstream tasks [2, 44].
Models can be fine-tuned in various ways [27]—full finetuning, linear probing (training the classification head), and
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [5, 10, 14, 16, 17,
28–30, 34, 49]. Specifically, PEFT strategies selectively
update parameters to achieve high accuracy on target tasks
with significantly reduced computation and storage costs.
While fine-tuning optimizes efficiency and accuracy, its
impact on model robustness remains underexplored–and in
fact relatively unknown. Attackers actively generate adversarial examples [36, 40] by adding crafted perturbations to
cause model misclassification. A model’s ability to resist
these samples, as well as perform well when presented with
out-of-distribution (OOD) data, is called model robustness.
Prior studies on adversarial robustness [3, 7, 11, 36, 40]

The evaluation finds: (1) a consistent adversarial
robustness-accuracy trade-off early (within the first 3
epochs) in fine-tuning across all methods—initially, robustness improves together with accuracy, then it peaks and declines as fine-tuning continues; (2) the Pareto frontiers (i.e.,

4898

