This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Divide-and-Conquer for Enhancing Unlabeled Learning, Stability, and Plasticity
in Semi-supervised Continual Learning
Taicai Chen1 *
Yue Duan1 *
1
Nanjing University

2

Lei Qi2
Yinghuan Shi1†
Southeast University

{yueduan@smail., taicaichen@smail., syh@}nju.edu.cn, qilei@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

Task

Semi-supervised continual learning (SSCL) seeks to leverage both labeled and unlabeled data in a sequential learning setup, aiming to reduce annotation costs while managing continual data arrival. SSCL introduces complex
challenges, including ensuring effective unlabeled learning
(UL), while balancing memory stability (MS) and learning plasticity (LP). Previous SSCL efforts have typically
focused on isolated aspects of the three, while this work
presents USP, a divide-and-conquer framework designed
to synergistically enhance these three aspects: (1) Feature
Space Reservation (FSR) strategy for LP, which constructs
reserved feature locations for future classes by shaping old
classes into an equiangular tight frame; (2) Divide-andConquer Pseudo-labeling (DCP) approach for UL, which
assigns reliable pseudo-labels across both high- and lowconfidence unlabeled data; and (3) Class-mean-anchored
Unlabeled Distillation (CUD) for MS, which reuses DCP’s
outputs to anchor unlabeled data to stable class means
for distillation to prevent forgetting. Comprehensive evaluations show USP outperforms prior SSCL methods, with
gains up to 5.94% in the last accuracy, validating its effectiveness. The code is available at https://github.
com/NJUyued/USP4SSCL.

Task

Labeled Data

Labeled Data

Unlabeled Data

Unlabeled Data

Task

Unlabeled
Learning

Labeled Data

Unlabeled Data

...
Training

...

Training

Distillation

Old Class Accuracy

Memory Stability

Distillation

...

Training

Distillation

New Class Accuracy

Learning Plasticity

Figure 1. Illustration of the SSCL setting (E t and M t indicate the
exemplar set and model in task t, respectively): in a dynamic data
stream containing both labeled and unlabeled data, distinct tasks
arrive sequentially with non-overlapping classes across tasks.

Inspired by this paradigm, a new direction called semisupervised continual learning (SSCL) [2, 46] has emerged,
aiming to leverage SSL setups across all tasks within the CL
setting, which is illustrated in Fig. 1.
SSCL introduces distinct challenges due to the need to
continuously learn from both labeled and unlabeled data.
This setting demands careful management of the trade-off
between learning plasticity—the model’s ability to incorporate new knowledge, and memory stability—its capacity to
retain past knowledge [24, 25, 61]. In SSCL, these dynamics become particularly complex as the model faces the risk
of catastrophic forgetting of past tasks, while simultaneously being prone to overfitting on limited labeled samples
[12, 17, 31]. Meanwhile, learning from a vast pool of unlabeled data is also challenging, as CL’s anti-forgetting processes can disrupt learning under sparse supervision. Furthermore, standard CL techniques like experience replay
face obstacles in SSCL: constrained replay buffers often
prioritize labeled samples, limiting the use of valuable information from unlabeled data [5, 19, 39].
We argue that addressing SSCL effectively requires
a holistic approach that does not overlook any of these

1. Introduction
Recently, continual learning (CL) has emerged as a promising approach for handling such sequential data arrival scenarios [47, 50]. Yet, most existing CL methods rely heavily
on fully labeled data, which is often impractical in realworld applications due to high annotation costs, privacy
concerns, and limitations in adapting to real-time online
scenarios. To address these challenges, researchers have
turned to semi-supervised learning (SSL) [34, 53] frameworks, where only a subset of samples requires labeling.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

583

