This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MUNBa: Machine Unlearning via Nash Bargaining
Jing Wu1 , Mehrtash Harandi2
1
Department of Data Science & AI, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
{jing.wu1, mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu

Abstract

developments recently. Data protection regulations like
GDPR [68] and CCPA [22] grant users the right to be forgotten, obligating companies to expunge data pertaining to
a user upon receiving a deletion request. The goal of MU is
to remove the influence of specific data points from machine
learning models as if the models had never met these points
during training [23], thereby ensuring compliance with intellectual property and copyright laws.
Retraining the model from scratch without forgetting
data is often considered the gold standard baseline for
MU [66, 67]. However, retraining is usually impractical.
Consequently, a range of studies thereafter [8, 14, 16, 19–
21, 27, 63, 64, 79] propose approximate MU algorithms,
sought to improve the efficiency of MU without necessitating full retraining. Despite the success of MU algorithms,
little attention has been paid to the issue of gradient conflict and gradient dominance in MU.
Roughly speaking, current MU methods involve two
subgoals: erasing the influence of particular data points
from the model while preserving its performance, i.e., forgetting and preserving. Consider a model with parameters
ω and assume we would like to remove the influence of a
set of data points Df (i.e., forgetting data). Let Dr represent the remaining data that is intended to be retained. MU
is often formulated [14, 27] as minimizing a weighted sum
of two objectives as: minω ωr Lr (ω; Dr ) + ωf Lf (ω; Df )
where ωr and ωf are coefficients for balancing two objectives. Here, 1) Lr (ω; Dr ) fine-tunes the model with the remaining data Dr to preserve the utility and 2) Lf (ω; Df )
directs the model to forget knowledge associated with Df
(by maximizing the loss on Df ).
However, the forgetting task gradient (i.e., →ω Lf ) may
have conflicting directions with the preservation task gradient (i.e., →ω Lr ). Moreover, the magnitudes of these
gradients may differ significantly, potentially causing the
joint gradient to be dominated by one of the objectives.
Fig. 1 illustrates the histogram of cosine similarity between
the joint update vector and both the forgetting task gradient and the preservation task gradient during the MU process, as well as the ratio of their gradient norms, highlight-

Machine Unlearning (MU) aims to selectively erase
harmful behaviors from models while retaining the overall
utility of the model. As a multi-task learning problem, MU
involves balancing objectives related to forgetting specific
concepts/data and preserving general performance. A naive
integration of these forgetting and preserving objectives can
lead to gradient conflicts and dominance, impeding MU algorithms from reaching optimal solutions. To address the
gradient conflict and dominance issue, we reformulate MU
as a two-player cooperative game, where the two players,
namely, the forgetting player and the preservation player,
contribute via their gradient proposals to maximize their
overall gain and balance their contributions. To this end,
inspired by the Nash bargaining theory, we derive a closedform solution to guide the model toward the Pareto stationary point. Our formulation of MU guarantees an equilibrium solution, where any deviation from the final state
would lead to a reduction in the overall objectives for both
players, ensuring optimality in each objective. We evaluate
our algorithm’s effectiveness on a diverse set of tasks across
image classification and image generation. Extensive experiments with ResNet, vision-language model CLIP, and
text-to-image diffusion models demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art MU algorithms, achieving a
better trade-off between forgetting and preserving. Our results also highlight improvements in forgetting precision,
preservation of generalization, and robustness against adversarial attacks.
WARNING: This paper contains sexually explicit imagery that may be offensive in nature.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we propose to model Machine Unlearning
(MU) as a bargaining problem between two players: one
seeking to forget purposefully and the other aiming to preserve the model utility. Driven by growing concerns around
safety, data privacy, and data ownership, MU has seen rapid

4754

