This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GAP: Gaussianize Any Point Clouds with Text Guidance
Weiqi Zhang1∗ , Junsheng Zhou1∗† , Haotian Geng1∗ , Wenyuan Zhang1 , Yu-Shen Liu1†
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
{zwq23, zhou-js24, genght24, zhangwen21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. GAP gaussianizes point clouds into high-fidelity 3D Gaussians with diverse appearances. Left: Examples of text-guided Gaussian
generation from object-level point cloud. Bottom-right: Scene-level results with prompts ’A modern lounge’ and ’A rainbow bedroom’.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated its advantages in achieving fast and high-quality rendering. As point
clouds serve as a widely-used and easily accessible form of
3D representation, bridging the gap between point clouds
and Gaussians becomes increasingly important. Recent
studies have explored how to convert the colored points into
Gaussians, but directly generating Gaussians from colorless 3D point clouds remains an unsolved challenge. In this
paper, we propose GAP, a novel approach that gaussianizes
raw point clouds into high-fidelity 3D Gaussians with text
guidance. Our key idea is to design a multi-view optimiza-

tion framework that leverages a depth-aware image diffusion model to synthesize consistent appearances across different viewpoints. To ensure geometric accuracy, we introduce a surface-anchoring mechanism that effectively constrains Gaussians to lie on the surfaces of 3D shapes during optimization. Furthermore, GAP incorporates a diffusebased inpainting strategy that specifically targets at completing hard-to-observe regions. We evaluate GAP on the
Point-to-Gaussian generation task across varying complexity levels, from synthetic point clouds to challenging realworld scans, and even large-scale scenes. Project Page:
https://weiqi-zhang.github.io/GAP.

1. Introduction

*Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), and
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263), and in part
by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data. Junsheng Zhou is
also partially funded by Baidu Scholarship.

Point clouds serve as a fundamental representation in 3D
computer vision, playing a crucial role across various domains [28, 36, 49, 70, 74], e.g., autonomous driving, aug-

25627

