This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efﬁcient Adaptation of Pre-trained Vision Transformer underpinned by
Approximately Orthogonal Fine-Tuning Strategy
Yiting Yang1 , Hao Luo1 , Yuan Sun2 ,Qingsen Yan3 , Haokui Zhang3 , Wei Dong1 ,*
Guoqing Wang2 , Peng Wang2 ,Yang Yang 2 , Hengtao Shen4
1
Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University 4 TongJi University
1. Introduction

Abstract

To leverage the strengths of pre-trained Vision Transformers (ViT) [4] for speciﬁc downstream applications, Parameter-Efﬁcient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) strategy has
gained signiﬁcant attention. This PEFT [1, 9–11, 14] strategy aims to minimize the number of parameters that need
to be updated, thereby enhancing computational efﬁciency
and reducing storage requirements. A prevalent approach
within PEFT involves freezing the majority of the backbone
parameters of the ViT and focusing on learning low-rank
adaptation weight matrices to accommodate the nuances of
different downstream tasks. Methods such as LoRA [10]
(Low-Rank Adaptation) and Adapter [9] have exempliﬁed
this approach by deriving low-rank matrices through the
multiplication structure of down- and up-projection matrices. These matrices act as intermediary layers that facilitate
the adaptation of the frozen backbone to new tasks, while
keeping the number of learnable parameters to a minimum.
Upon closer examination of the backbone parameters of
ViTs, an interesting observation emerges: the weight matrices within the backbone parameters after pre-training exhibit an approximate orthogonality among any two row or
column vectors, as shown in Fig. 1. Orthogonality is a fundamental property in linear algebra that signiﬁes the independence of vectors within a matrix. When any two vectors
in the weight matrix are approximately orthogonal, it subtly
suggests that the model has a smaller upper bound on generalization error and thus possesses an enhanced generalization capability. The detailed analysis of the upper bound on
generalization error is shown in Section 3.3.
However, this desirable orthogonal property is notably
absent in the vectors of the down/up-projection matrices used in current PEFT [9, 10] methods, as shown in
Fig. 2. This discrepancy raises an intriguing question: if
the down/up-projection matrices were to exhibit the same
approximate orthogonality as the backbone matrices, could
the generalization capability of ﬁne-tuned ViTs be further

A prevalent approach in Parameter-Efﬁcient FineTuning (PEFT) of pre-trained Vision Transformers (ViT)
involves freezing the majority of the backbone parameters
and solely learning low-rank adaptation weight matrices to
accommodate downstream tasks. These low-rank matrices
are commonly derived through the multiplication structure
of down-projection and up-projection matrices, exempliﬁed
by methods such as LoRA and Adapter. In this work, we
observe an approximate orthogonality among any two row
or column vectors within any weight matrix of the backbone
parameters; however, this property is absent in the vectors
of the down/up-projection matrices. Approximate orthogonality implies a reduction in the upper bound of the model’s
generalization error, signifying that the model possesses enhanced generalization capability. If the ﬁne-tuned down/upprojection matrices were to exhibit this same property as
the pre-trained backbone matrices, could the generalization capability of ﬁne-tuned ViTs be further augmented?
To address this question, we propose an Approximately Orthogonal Fine-Tuning (AOFT) strategy for representing the
low-rank weight matrices. This strategy employs a single
learnable vector to generate a set of approximately orthogonal vectors, which form the down/up-projection matrices,
thereby aligning the properties of these matrices with those
of the backbone. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves competitive performance
across a range of downstream image classiﬁcation tasks,
conﬁrming the efﬁcacy of the enhanced generalization capability embedded in the down/up-projection matrices. Our
code is available at link1 .

* Corresponding author. (dongwei156@xauat.edu.cn)
1 https://github.com/CalliopeYang/AOFT

4878

