This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CuMPerLay: Learning Cubical Multiparameter Persistence Vectorizations
Caner Korkmaz1

Brighton Nuwagira2
1

Barış Coşkunuzer2

Imperial College London

Abstract
We present CuMPerLay, a novel differentiable vectorization
layer that enables the integration of Cubical Multiparameter Persistence (CMP) into deep learning pipelines. While
CMP presents a natural and powerful way to topologically
work with images, its use is hindered by the complexity of
multifiltration structures as well as the vectorization of CMP.
In face of these challenges, we introduce a new algorithm
for vectorizing MP homologies of cubical complexes. Our
CuMPerLay decomposes the CMP into a combination of individual, learnable single-parameter persistence, where the
bifiltration functions are jointly learned. Thanks to the differentiability, its robust topological feature vectors can be seamlessly used within state-of-the-art architectures such as Swin
Transformers. We establish theoretical guarantees for the stability of our vectorization under generalized Wasserstein metrics. Our experiments on benchmark medical imaging and
computer vision datasets show the benefit CuMPerLay on
classification and segmentation performance, particularly in
limited-data scenarios. Overall, CuMPerLay offers a promising direction for integrating global structural information
into deep networks for structured image analysis.

1. Introduction
In recent years, computer vision has witnessed remarkable
advancements driven by deep learning (DL) techniques, leading to breakthroughs in classification, segmentation, and object detection. However, despite their success, DL models often struggle to effectively capture the intricate geometric and
topological structures inherent in image data [10, 41, 69, 71].
These limitations have spurred interest in complementary
approaches that can provide a more holistic understanding of
image content by incorporating global structural information
beyond pixel-wise feature extraction.
A promising direction is topological data analysis [11]
(TDA), which provides a rigorous framework for analyzing
high-order structures in data. Persistent homology (PH),
in particular, has been widely applied to extract topological
descriptors that capture shape and connectivity in complex

2

Tolga Birdal1

UT Dallas

datasets [26]. A more recent and advanced variant, multiparameter persistence [37] (MP), extends this approach by
tracking multiple filtrations, allowing it to encode a finergrained representation [8] and enabling the extraction of
richer structural features [21]. While MP has shown considerable success in graph representation learning and point
cloud analysis [24, 46], its application to image analysis
remains relatively unexplored, arguably due to the vectorization algorithms suited for cubical complexes, the native
topological structure of images.
In this work, we introduce CuMPerLay, a novel, differentiable vectorization layer for multiparameter persistence
over cubical complexes. While incorporating topological
features from single-parameter persistence (SP) is relatively
standard [5, 13, 23], extending this to the cubical MP (CMP)
setting is highly non-trivial. We propose to decompose the
CMP into a differentiable combination of individual, learnable single filtrations. We then deploy CuMPerLay as a
differentiable layer within a deep architecture, particularly
Swin transformers [44]. Our theoretical analysis shows that
CuMPerLay shows improved stability when compared to SP
counterparts. By seamlessly integrating CMP into deep networks in an end-to-end manner, our layer helps discerning
topological features essential for structured image analysis.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a differentiable, novel vectorization for Cubical Multiparameter Persistence, combining learnable filtration functions with learnable vectorizations, and integrate
into state-of-the-art image-based learning pipelines.
• We theoretically prove the stability of our CuMPerLay
along with a family of other filtration functions we devise.
• We propose a hybrid DL model integrating CMP with Swin
transformers, demonstrating synergistic improvements.
• Finally, to the best of our knowledge, we develop the first
(publicly available) CUDA GPU implementation of Cubical Persistence and Cubical Multiparameter Persistence.
Our experiments on benchmark medical imaging and computer vision datasets show that our topological vectors improve model performance in both standard and limiteddata scenarios. Our sources can be found under: https:
//github.com/circle-group/cumperlay

27084

