This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowChef: Steering of Rectified Flow Models for Controlled Generations
Maitreya Patel♠ , Song Wen♢ , Dimitris N. Metaxas♢ , Yezhou Yang♠
♠
Arizona State University ♢ Rutgers University
{song.wen, dnm}@rutgers.edu

Flux.1 Dev

{maitreya.patel, yz.yang}@asu.edu

A sleeping dog.

A tiger.

InstaFlow

A dog wearing glasses.

Editing

Inpainting

Classifier Guidance

Figure 1. FlowChef steers the trajectory of Rectified Flow Models during inference to tackle linear inverse problems, image editing,
and classifier guidance. We extend FlowChef to SOTA models like Flux and InstaFlow, enabling gradient- and inversion-free control for
efficient, controlled image generation.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in Rectified Flow Models
(RFMs), unlocking their full potential for controlled generation tasks—such as inverse problems and image editing—remains a significant hurdle. Although RFMs and Diffusion Models (DMs) represent state-of-the-art approaches
in generative modeling, their reliance on computationally
demanding backpropagation through ODE solvers and inversion strategies often undermines efficiency and precision. In this paper, we present FlowChef, a novel training,
inversion, and gradient-free inference-time steering strategy for RFMs that deterministically guides the denoising
process. We first develop a theoretical and empirical understanding of the vector-field dynamics of RFMs in efficiently
guiding the denoising trajectory. Specifically, leveraging
the straightness and smooth Jacobian properties, we derive
the mathematical relationship between gradients of rectified flow ODEs. We extend our theoretical findings to solve
linear-inverse problems, image editing, classifier guidance,

and many more tasks. We perform extensive evaluations
and show that FlowChef significantly exceeds baselines
in terms of performance, memory, and time requirements,
achieving new state-of-the-art results. Remarkably, for the
first time, it scales effortlessly to billion-parameter models such as Flux. Project Page: https://flowchef.
github.io/

1. Introduction

15308

Recent advances in diffusion models have led to rapid
progress in AI-generated content (AIGC), particularly in
text-to-image (T2I) and text-to-video (T2V) models across
various domains such as entertainment, arts, and design [13,
36, 40, 44, 49, 50]. These developments have resulted in remarkable performance in controlled generation tasks such
as image editing, solving inverse problems, and personalization. Existing methods focus on training the conditional
model [12, 18], defining guidance strategies [8, 15], and
performing an inversion [2, 3]. Despite this rich landscape,

