This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeDance: Towards Harmonic Free-Number Group Dance Generation via
a Unified Framework
Yiwen Zhao1

Yang Wang1
1

Liting Wen1
CMU 2 PKU

Hengyuan Zhang2
HKUST

Xingqun Qi2,3,

3

FreeDance

Figure 1. Diverse example clips generated by our FreeDance framework. Given the music signal, our framework enables synthesizing
harmonious group dance sequences with an arbitrary number of dancers in a unified manner.

Abstract
Generating harmonic and diverse human motions from music signals, especially for a group of dancers, is a practical yet challenging task in virtual avatar creation. Existing
methods merely model a fixed number of dancers, lacking
the flexibility for arbitrary individuals. To fulfill this goal,
we propose a novel unified framework FreeDance. Considering the plausibility of generating arbitrary dancers while
preserving the diverse dynamics of multiple individuals, we
build the framework upon collaborative masked token modeling in a 2D discrete space. In particular, we devise a
Cross-modality Residual Alignment Module (CRAM) to
diversify the movement of each individual and intensify its
alignment with music. CRAM captures the spatial motion
deformation of each dancer using residual learning and
integrates it with rhythmic representation to reinforce the
intrinsic connection. Moreover, recognizing the requirement of interactive coordination, we design a Temporal In-

teraction Module (TIM). Benefiting from masked 2D motion tokens, TIM effectively models the temporal correlation between current individuals w.r.t. neighboring dancers
as interaction guidance to foster stronger inter-dancer dependencies. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
approach generates harmonic group dance with any number of individuals, outperforming state-of-the-art methods
adapting number-fixed counterparts. Code is available at
https://github.com/Tsukasane/FreeDance.

Corresponding author

10560

1. Introduction
Group dance generation refers to synthesizing harmonic and
diverse multiple human movements from given music signals. The non-verbal behaviors serve as a universal artistic expression that conveys emotions and ideas [12, 15]. It
presents increasing attention in various applications such
as virtual/augmented reality (AR/VR) [4, 11], robotics [2,
3], avatar animation [1, 32], and human-machine interaction [31]. In recent years, numerous works have been pro-

