This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Explicit Exoskeleton for the Reconstruction of Complicated 3D Human
Avatars
Yifan Zhan1, 2 * Qingtian Zhu2 Muyao Niu2 Mingze Ma2 Jiancheng Zhao2
Zhihang Zhong1† Xiao Sun1† Yu Qiao1 Yinqiang Zheng2
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

2

The University of Tokyo

Figure 1. We show two complex scenarios in 3D human modeling: with hand-held objects and loose-fitting clothing, which cannot be
accurately represented by the standard SMPL model. Our ToMiE can realize adaptive growth to enhance the representation capability of
SMPL without needing for time-consuming case-specific customization, achieving state-of-the-art results in both rendering and human
(including complex scenarios) animation.

Abstract
In this paper, we highlight a critical yet often overlooked
factor in most 3D human tasks, namely modeling complicated 3D human with with hand-held objects or loose-fitting
clothing. It is known that the parameterized formulation
of SMPL is able to fit human skin; while hand-held objects and loose-fitting clothing, are difficult to get modeled within the unified framework, since their movements
are usually decoupled with the human body. To enhance
the capability of SMPL skeleton in response to this situation, we propose a growth strategy that enables the joint
tree of the skeleton to expand adaptively. Specifically, our
method, called ToMiE, consists of parent joints localization and external joints optimization. For parent joints localization, we employ a gradient-based approach guided
by both LBS blending weights and motion kernels. Once

the external joints are obtained, we proceed to optimize
their transformations in SE(3) across different frames, enabling rendering and explicit animation. ToMiE manages to
outperform other methods across various cases with handheld objects and loose-fitting clothing, not only in rendering
quality but also by offering free animation of grown joints,
thereby enhancing the expressive ability of SMPL skeleton
for a broader range of applications. The code is available
at https://github.com/Yifever20002/ToMiE.

1. Introduction

* This work was done during the author’s internship at the Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. † denotes co-corresponding authors.

3D human reconstruction endeavors to model highfidelity digital avatars based on real-world characters for
virtual rendering and animating, which has been of longterm research value in areas such as gaming, virtual reality (VR), and beyond. Traditional methods, such as
SMPL [36], achieve human body parameterization by performing principal component analysis (PCA) on large sets

14259

