This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMP-Attack: Boosting the Transferability of Feature Importance-based
Adversarial Attack with Semantics-aware Multi-granularity Patchout

1

Wen Yang1 , Guodong Liu2 , Di Ming1B
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chongqing University of Technology, Chongqing, China
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
winwina8@126.com, guodong.liu.e@pitt.edu, diming@cqut.edu.cn

Abstract

Input

Transfer-based attacks pose a significant security threat to
deep neural networks (DNNs), due to their strong performance on unseen models in real-world black-box scenarios.
Building on this, feature importance-based attacks further
improve the transferability of adversarial examples by effectively suppressing model-specific feature patterns. However, existing methods primarily focus on single-granularity
patch and single-stage training, leading to suboptimal solutions. To address these limitations, we propose a general
multi-stage optimization framework based on Semanticsaware Multi-granularity Patchout, dubbed as SMP-Attack.
Compared to the non-deformable/regular patch definition,
we incorporate multi-granularity into the generation process of deformable/irregular patches, thereby enhancing the
quality of the computed aggregate gradient. In contrast
to conventional joint optimization of multi-layer losses,
we introduce an effective multi-stage training strategy that
systematically explores significant model-agnostic features
from shallow to intermediate layers. Employing the ImageNet dataset, we conduct extensive experiments on undefended/defended CNNs and ViTs, which unequivocally
demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed
SMP-Attack over current state-of-the-art methods in blackbox scenarios. Furthermore, we assess the compatibility
of our multi-stage optimization, which supersedes singlestage training employed in existing feature-based methods, culminating in substantial performance improvement.
Code is available at https://github.com/AdvMLGroup/SMP-Attack.

Single-g
Fixing d
Varying cc
Single-g
Varying dc
Fixing c
Multi-g
Varying dc
Varying cc
Original Label

Attack Failure

Attack Success

FIA
RPA
NAA
DNAA
NEAA
BFA
MFAA
SMP
Iteration

Figure 1. Top: Visualization of aggregate gradients under various
patchout configurations. The proposed multi-granularity strategy,
which jointly considers patch size d and color c, produces more
informative and higher-quality gradients than single-granularity
variants. Bottom: Visualization of optimization trajectories for
various feature-based attacks. Adversarial examples xadv generated on Res152-v1 over iterations t = 1 to t = 10 are used to attack
VGG-16. Unlike existing single-stage approaches, the proposed
SMP-Attack employs a multi-stage training strategy to refine the
optimization trajectory, enabling early label flipping (e.g., at t = 2)
and yielding high-confidence misclassification (e.g., 65.3%).

1. Introduction

detection [38, 39], and other tasks [32, 47], the security and
robustness of deep neural networks (DNNs) have become
an increasingly prominent focus of research. Adversarial
attacks [18, 42], as a critical method for uncovering model
vulnerabilities, can cause a model to make incorrect predictions by injecting small and visually imperceptible pertur-

With the rapid development of deep learning, particularly
the remarkable achievements of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in image classification [20, 22, 41], object
B Corresponding Author: Di Ming

4444

