This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid-TTA: Continual Test-time Adaptation via
Dynamic Domain Shift Detection
Hyewon Park
Hyejin Park
Jueun Ko
Dongbo Min†
Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea
{hwpark, clrara, jueun.ko, dbmin}@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract

mIoU

Continual Test Time Adaptation (CTTA) has emerged as
a critical approach to bridge the domain gap between
controlled training environments and real-world scenarios.
Since it is important to balance the trade-off between adaptation and stabilization, many studies have tried to accomplish it by either introducing a regulation to fully trainable
models or updating a limited portion of the models. This paper proposes Hybrid-TTA, a holistic approach that dynamically selects the instance-wise tuning method for optimal
adaptation. Our approach introduces Dynamic Domain
Shift Detection (DDSD), which identifies domain shifts by
leveraging temporal correlations in input sequences, and
dynamically switches between Full or Efficient Tuning for
effective adaptation toward varying domain shifts. To maintain model stability, Masked Image Modeling Adaptation
(MIMA) leverages auxiliary reconstruction task for enhanced generalization and robustness with minimal computational overhead. Hybrid-TTA achieves 0.6%p gain on the
Cityscapes-to-ACDC benchmark dataset for semantic segmentation, surpassing previous state-of-the-art methods. It
also delivers about 20-fold increase in FPS compared to the
recently proposed fastest methods, offering a robust solution
for real-world continual adaptation challenges.

Figure 1. Performance vs. FPS on Cityscapes-to-ACDC benchmark. Hybrid-TTA achieves state-of-the-art 62.2% mIoU while
being significantly faster than other methods with comparable
mIoU performance. Hybrid-TTA++ utilizes Test-time Augmentation strategy as well as SVDP and CoTTA, resulting in 63.4%.
See Tab. 4.

Domain Generalization (DG) [4, 8, 22, 23, 36, 47] and Domain Adaptation (DA) [2, 9, 15–17, 48] focus on enhancing
robustness and adaptability of the model to ensure reliable
performance in new, unseen domains. However, both of
them have their own drawbacks: DG, which aims to generalize well to unseen domains, exhibits inherent limitations
in adapting to continually changing target environments, as
it cannot utilize information from target datasets. DA often
struggles with flexibility because it typically assumes a stationary target dataset, limiting its effectiveness in constantly
changing target domains.
Given the dynamic nature of target domains during testing, Continual Test-Time Adaptation (CTTA) has emerged
as a solution, enabling models to adapt in real-time. Since
CTTA operates in an online fashion, it commonly relies on
unsupervised learning methods, such as pseudo-label generation with Mean Teacher [37, 41]. Unfortunately, unsupervised pseudo labels inevitably contain noise and inaccuracies, leading to error accumulation in the model [1]. Furthermore, as the model adapts to new, unfamiliar target domains, it gradually loses knowledge of the source domain,
ultimately leading to catastrophic forgetting and overall per-

1. Introduction
Deep learning has gathered significant attention in computer vision thanks to its powerful representation capability and versatility. Despite achieving high performance on
curated datasets, deep learning models face a major challenge: the gap between laboratory-controlled environments
and ever-changing real world. These models often struggle
to maintain accuracy when faced with diverse and unpredictable realistic scenarios. In this regard, studies including
This work was supported by IITP grant funded by MSIT (No. RS2022-00155966: AI Convergence Innovation Human Resources Development (Ewha Womans University) and No. RS-2021-II212068: AI Innovation Hub). † Corresponding author

2877

