This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Co-speech Gestures in-the-wild
Sindhu B Hegde,* K R Prajwal,* Taein Kwon, Andrew Zisserman
Visual Geometry Group, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{sindhu, prajwal, taein, az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/jegal

Abstract
Co-speech gestures play a vital role in non-verbal communication. In this paper, we introduce a new framework for co-speech
gesture understanding in the wild. Specifically, we propose
three new tasks and benchmarks to evaluate a model’s capability to comprehend gesture-speech-text associations: (i) gesture
based retrieval, (ii) gestured word spotting, and (iii) active
speaker detection using gestures. We present a new approach
that learns a tri-modal video-gesture-speech-text representation
to solve these tasks. By leveraging a combination of global
phrase contrastive loss and local gesture-word coupling loss,
we demonstrate that a strong gesture representation can be
learned in a weakly supervised manner from videos in the wild.
Our learned representations outperform previous methods, including large vision-language models (VLMs). Further analysis
reveals that speech and text modalities capture distinct gesture related signals, underscoring the advantages of learning
a shared tri-modal embedding space. The dataset, model, and
code are available at: https://www.robots.ox.ac.
uk/˜vgg/research/jegal.

understand non-verbal gestural elements in order to have a
holistic understanding of human communication. A clear
application is enriching human-computer interaction (HCI)
through gestures, and this requires machines to comprehend the
semantics of the user’s hand gestures. Another application is
to detect if a person is speaking based on their gestures, or spot
specific words or phrases in a video based on gestures alone.
More generally, being able to recognize gestures and determine
their semantic and temporal alignment with speech enables
human communication to be studied at scale [23].
In this paper, our objective is to learn and evaluate co-speech
gesture representations. To this end, we propose three tasks
and evaluation benchmarks that act as a proxy for assessing
real world applications: (1) gesture based cross-modal retrieval,
(2) gesture word spotting, and (3) active speaker detection via
gestures. We perform large-scale training featuring ≈ 7000
speakers and evaluate on in-the-wild videos from the AVSpeech
dataset [17].

1. Introduction
Humans gesture when they talk – gesturing is an integral part
of human communication, together with speech and facial
expressions. Gestures can vary from beats – two phase hand
movements (up/down, left/right etc) that emphasize particular
words or phrases and match the rhythm of the speech, but do not
carry semantic content – to iconic and deictic gestures that are
representational and illustrate the content of the speech [6, 31].
For example, hands and arms moving apart can accompany
a speech segment indicating that something is “huge”, or as
illustrated in Fig 1, an inward pointing gesture to depict the
uttered word “my”.
Non-verbal communication accounts for 55% of overall
communication1, highlighting the need for machines to

Figure 1. Co-speech gestures supplement the spoken language – we
show examples for six phrases here, with common words. Learning
to associate gestures with the uttered phrases is essential for a holistic
understanding of human communication.

All three tasks require models to learn to associate gesture
clips with speech segments or their corresponding textual transcripts. For this, we propose a model termed Joint Embedding
space for Gestures, Audio, and Language (JEGAL)2 that facilitates matching gestures to words and phrases in the accompanying speech. The matches can be based on the style of the speech
(intonation, stress, prosody) or the semantic content of the phrase

* equal contribution
1 https://online.utpb.edu/about-us/articles/communication/how-much-of-

2 JEGAL, known as Zhuge Liang in Chinese, was a prominent historical figure from China’s Three Kingdoms period and is regarded as a symbol of wisdom.

communication-is-nonverbal/

9977

