This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wide2Long: Learning Lens Compression and Perspective Adjustment
for Wide-Angle to Telephoto Translation
Soumyadipta Banerjee

Jiaul H. Paik

Debashis Sen

soumyadiptobnrj071@gmail.com

jiaul@ai.iitkgp.ac.in

dsen@ece.iitkgp.ac.in

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India

Abstract
A translation framework that produces images as if they
were captured with a telephoto lens, from images captured
with a wide-angle lens, will help in reducing the necessity
of complex, expensive and bulky lenses on smartphones. To
this end, we propose an image-to-image translation pipeline
to simulate the lens compression and perspective adjustment associated with this reconstruction, where the size
of the main subject in the images remains the same. We
judiciously design depth-based image layering, layer-wise
in-painting, redundancy reduction and layer scaling modules to construct the desired tele-photo image, where the
pipeline parameters are estimated by a convolutional network. Our approach is compatible with the related optical
transformation, and hence, contents behind the main subject are enlarged and that before are diminished, achieving
lens compression with appropriate perspective adjustment.
Our pipeline performs well qualitatively and quantitatively on several source-target image pairs we have captured solely for this task, and also on images in-the-wild.
We show that it can simulate the different amounts of lens
compression associated with targeted 2×, 4×, 8× changes
in the focal length. Further, the pipeline is demonstrated to
be effective for a sub-class of the lens-compression problem
- portrait perspective distortion correction. We also provide
an ablation study to show the significance of the various
components in the pipeline.

1. Introduction
There is a common understanding among professional photographers that different camera lenses capture the same
subject in different ways [5]. Camera lenses differ primarily in their focal lengths, which define their field of view
[11]. Wide-angle lenses, typically with focal lengths under 35 mm, capture broader scenes, making them ideal for
landscape photography. On the other hand, telephoto (or
long) lenses, with focal lengths usually over 35 mm, pro-

Figure 1. A brief outline of our Wide2Long (W2L) pipeline.

vide a narrower field of view and are better suited for portraits or distant subjects. Smartphones, which make photography widely accessible, usually feature only wide-angle
lenses with fewer lens elements due to space and cost constraints [12]. Higher-end phones may offer both wide-angle
and telephoto lenses for enhanced versatility but are often
bulkier and more expensive [1], and physical movement
may be required while using them for proper capture on
switching lenses.
As smartphones have become the norm for capturing
photographs by the general public, a scope has emerged for
investigating systems that allow different kinds of photography on a variety of phones, with or without expert knowledge. In this regard, we focus on producing telephoto shots
from images captured using a camera with a wide-angle
lens. Such an image-to-image translation can be achieved
by simulating lens compression and the associated perspective adjustment. Lens (or depth) compression [2] in photography lingo, refers to the effect due to simultaneous increase
in the lens’ focal length and it’s distance from a subject.
The effect is such that the size of the subject at a particular
depth remains the same, while the background content at
greater depths appears enlarged and the foreground content

29001

