This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WeaveSeg: Iterative Contrast-weaving and Spectral Feature-refining
for Nuclei Instance Segmentation
Jiajia Li1 Huisi Wu1 * Jing Qin2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

2400101028@mails.szu.edu.cn, hswu@szu.edu.cn, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Automatic and accurate nuclei instance segmentation in
histopathology images is a fundamental task in computational pathology. It is also a very challenging task due
to complex nuclei morphologies, ambiguous boundaries,
and staining variations. Existing methods often struggle
to precisely delineate overlapping nuclei and handle class
imbalance. We introduce WeaveSeg, a novel deep learning framework that synergistically integrates two key innovations: an adaptive spectral refinement (ASR) module to
enhance high-frequency boundary details often blurred by
standard convolutions, and an iterative contrast-weaving
(ICW) module. Guided by a specialized uncertainty-aware
loss, this module leverages contrastive attention and a novel
local self-adaptive mechanism to progressively resolve ambiguous instances. Extensive experiments on MoNuSeg,
CoNSeP, and CPM17 demonstrate WeaveSeg’s SOTA performance over existing models. The code is available at
https://github.com/jj-sterne/WeaveSeg.

1. Introduction
Accurate segmentation of cell nuclei within histopathological images is a fundamental task in computational pathology, crucial for advancing cancer diagnosis, treatment planning, and prognosis [8, 15, 25, 33]. The morphological characteristics of nuclei, including size, shape, texture,
and spatial arrangement, provide critical information for
histopathologists to evaluate tumor malignancy and guide
clinical decisions [29, 35, 42]. Automating this process
through deep learning models has significant potential to
enhance diagnostic precision and efficiency, and thus improve treatment outcomes [18, 34, 37, 40]. Despite advances in deep learning-based medical image segmentation,
the precise segmentation of nuclei in histopathological images remains a formidable challenge [21].
* Corresponding Author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Challenges in Nuclei segmentation. (a) a representative colorectal adenocarcinoma image; (b) ambiguous boundaries
between nuclei and surrounding stroma; (c) morphological heterogeneity of nuclei; and (d) densely packed and overlapping nuclei

As illustrated in Figure 1, several inherent complexities within histopathology images impede accurate nuclei
boundary delineation. First, because of weak staining, inflammation, or obscuring cellular structures, there exist
many ambiguous boundaries between nuclei and the surrounding stroma (Figure 1 (b)), making it quite difficult to
accurately identify these boundaries. Second, histopathological nuclei exhibit substantial morphological heterogeneity (Figure 1 (c)); variations in shape, size, and texture
across cell types and disease states complicate the definition
of universally applicable features. Third, nuclei frequently
appear in densely packed clusters (Figure 1(d)), leading to
significant overlap and occlusion, hindering the separation
of individual nuclei, especially with indistinct boundaries.
Furthermore, staining intensity and color balance variations
across samples, along with potential class imbalance (rarity
of certain nuclei types), present additional challenges.
While existing deep learning methods for nuclei segmentation have shown promise, they often fall short of
comprehensively addressing these challenges. Encoderdecoder architectures, exemplified by U-Net [31] and its
variants [23, 45], while effective for multi-scale feature fusion, tend to blur fine boundary details due to repeated
downsampling and upsampling. Instance segmentation approaches [11], are usually confounded by severe nuclei
overlap and class imbalance, resulting in missed detections or false positives. Furthermore, boundary-based methods [3, 44], while directly leveraging boundary informa-

21984

