This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CARIM: Caption-Based Autonomous Driving Scene Retrieval
via Inclusive Text Matching
Minjoo Ki*
Yonsei University, Korea

Daejung Kim
Naver Labs, Korea

Kisung Kim
Naver Labs, Korea

minjoo@yonsei.ac.kr

daejung.kim@naverlabs.com

ks.kim@naverlabs.com

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University, Korea

Jinhan Lee†
Naver Labs, Korea

seonjookim@yonsei.ac.kr

jinhan.lee@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Text-to-video retrieval is a powerful tool for navigating vast
video databases. This is especially useful in autonomous
driving to retrieve scenes from a text query to simulate and
evaluate a driving system in desired scenarios. However,
traditional ranking-based retrieval methods often return
partial matches that fail to satisfy all query conditions. To
address this, we introduce Inclusive Text-to-Video Retrieval,
which retrieves only videos that meet all specified conditions, regardless of additional irrelevant elements. We propose CARIM, a driving scene retrieval framework that employs inclusive text matching. By utilizing Vision-Language
Model and Large Language Model to generate compressed
captions for driving scenes, we reformulate text-to-video
retrieval as a more efficient text-to-text retrieval problem,
eliminating modality mismatch and heavy annotation cost.
We present a novel positive and negative data curation
strategy and an attention-based scoring mechanism tailored
for driving scene retrieval. Experiments show that CARIM
outperforms state-of-the-art retrieval methods, excelling in
edge cases where traditional models fail.

Figure 1. a) Given a text query, traditional ranking-based retrieval
usually retrieves negative video (red), having high similarity with
the query but having unmet condition. b) In contrast, CARIM processes object-level dense text matching to score videos and easily
retrieves positive videos (blue) that contains all query conditions.

1. Introduction

such as objects, time, or driving strategies. Despite this, annotating these data per video is labor-intensive and search
conditions are constrained by predefined object classes, limiting the ability to adapt to dynamic and complex real-world
driving environments.
With the emergence of deep representation models,
ranking-based text-to-video retrieval has become a popular
solution. This method ranks videos based on how similar
their features are to the text query feature. However, errors
arise due to misalignment between the language and video
domains. While most approaches attempt to mitigate this
misalignment, additional matching modules or fine-tuning
are essential in the downstream domain to reduce the data
distribution discrepancy[8, 11].
Even if the two modality spaces are finely aligned, the
information of a video increases indefinitely, reducing the
similarity between the video and the query feature. For
instance, when the query includes ‘pedestrian crossing the
crosswalk, bus, narrow road, rainy day’, a video containing

In a world where every moment is captured and stored, the
real challenge lies in how we navigate through data to pinpoint what truly matters. In autonomous driving, where extensive driving video data are continuously recorded, finding an appropriate scenario is essential for rigorous system
validation. However, identifying suitable scenarios from
vast video databases is highly time-consuming. To accelerate this, developers often rely on filtering based on metadata
* This work was conducted during the internship at Naver Labs.
† Corresponding author.

22036

