This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V2XPnP: Vehicle-to-Everything Spatio-Temporal Fusion for
Multi-Agent Perception and Prediction
Zewei Zhou, Hao Xiang, Zhaoliang Zheng, Seth Z. Zhao, Mingyue Lei, Yun Zhang, Tianhui Cai,
Xinyi Liu, Johnson Liu, Maheswari Bajji, Xin Xia, Zhiyu Huang*, Bolei Zhou, Jiaqi Ma
University of California, Los Angeles
https://mobility-lab.seas.ucla.edu/v2xpnp

Single-frame Cooperative Perception

Abstract

Infra

Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) technologies offer a promising
paradigm to mitigate the limitations of constrained observability in single-vehicle systems. Prior work primarily focuses on single-frame cooperative perception, which fuses
agents’ information across different spatial locations but
ignores temporal cues and temporal tasks (e.g., temporal
perception and prediction). In this paper, we focus on the
spatio-temporal fusion in V2X scenarios and design one-step
and multi-step communication strategies (when to transmit)
as well as examine their integration with three fusion strategies - early, late, and intermediate (what to transmit), providing comprehensive benchmarks with 11 fusion models (how
to fuse). Furthermore, we propose V2XPnP, a novel intermediate fusion framework within one-step communication
for end-to-end perception and prediction. Our framework
employs a unified Transformer-based architecture to effectively model complex spatio-temporal relationships across
multiple agents, frames, and high-definition maps. Moreover,
we introduce the V2XPnP Sequential Dataset that supports
all V2X collaboration modes and addresses the limitations
of existing real-world datasets, which are restricted to singleframe or single-mode cooperation. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our framework outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in both perception and prediction tasks.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving systems are required to accurately perceive surrounding road users and predict their future trajectories to ensure safe and interactive driving. Despite recent
advances in perception and prediction [7, 13, 33], singlevehicle systems still struggle with limited perception range
and occlusion issues [23, 41], compromising driving performance and road safety. Consequently, vehicle-to-everything
* Corresponding author. {zeweizhou,

zhiyuh}@ucla.edu

Detection

CAV 2

Object 1

Multi-agent
Spatial Fusion
Object 2

CAV 1

Prediction

Bounding
Boxes

Tracking
Trajectories

Object 3

Cooperative Temporal Perception & Prediction
Object 1
Turning

Detection
Multi-agent
Object 2
Go Straight

Prediction

Object 3
Stopping

Figure 1. Illustration of V2X temporal tasks and our V2X spatiotemporal fusion framework. By incorporating temporal information,
our framework enhances V2X communication and supports end-toend perception and prediction beyond single-frame perception.

(V2X) technologies have emerged as a promising paradigm
to address these challenges, which enable connected and
automated vehicles (CAVs) and infrastructures to share complementary information and mitigate occlusions, thereby
supporting holistic environment understanding [10, 14, 16].
Despite their potential, existing works focus on frame-byframe cooperative detection [21, 27, 38, 52], which aggregates information from agents at different spatial locations.
However, these works overlook temporal cues across sequential frames, which are important for locating previously
visible but currently undetected objects [43] and predicting
object future trajectories [28]. Although some work [37, 46]
incorporate short-term temporal cues (0.5 s) in single-frame
perception to mitigate asynchrony, the broader challenge of
efficiently aggregating multi-agent and multi-frame information and supporting long-term temporal tasks, such as motion
prediction, remains largely unexplored. Therefore, we aim
to address critical questions in multi-agent multi-frame cooperation: (1) What information to transmit? (2) When to

25399

