This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What If : Understanding Motion Through Sparse Interactions
Stefan Andreas Baumann*

Nick Stracke*

Timy Phan*

Björn Ommer

CompVis @ LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
What If...
the paw moves down?
the hand moves down?

Abstract

A key feat of human visual intelligence is motion understanding, our ability to understand and predict the various
ways the world around us could potentially change at a given
point in time (see Fig. 1). Our cortex is not creating a mental video, focusing on how the colors of individual pixels
change. Rather, we are constantly making predictions about
the various ways individual objects or parts thereof could
potentially move and deform [30]. We do not perceive the
future as an unambiguously deterministic sequence of events
but as a vast space of possibilities.
* Equal Contribution.

Flow Poke Transformer

one likely outcome for
movement of

uncertain, two likely outcomes
for movement of

Query Point

)

1. Introduction

Flow Poke Transformer

p(motion of

Understanding the dynamics of a physical scene involves
reasoning about the diverse ways it can potentially change,
especially as a result of local interactions. We present the
Flow Poke Transformer (FPT), a novel framework for directly predicting the distribution of local motion, conditioned
on sparse interactions termed “pokes”. Unlike traditional
methods that typically only enable dense sampling of a single
realization of scene dynamics, FPT provides an interpretable
directly accessible representation of multi-modal scene motion, its dependency on physical interactions and the inherent
uncertainties of scene dynamics.
We also evaluate our model on several downstream tasks
to enable comparisons with prior methods and highlight the
flexibility of our approach. On dense face motion generation,
our generic pre-trained model surpasses specialized baselines. FPT can be fine-tuned in strongly out-of-distribution
tasks such as synthetic datasets to enable significant improvements over in-domain methods in articulated object
motion estimation. Additionally, predicting explicit motion
distributions directly enables our method to achieve competitive performance on tasks like moving part segmentation from pokes which further demonstrates the versatility
of our FPT. Code and models are publicly available at
compvis.github.io/flow-poke-transformer.

Poke (Given Motion)

Figure 1. What If: Our Flow Poke Transformer directly models the
uncertainty of the world by predicting distributions of how objects
(ˆ) may move conditioned on some input movements (pokes, Ñ).
We see that whether the hand (below paw) or the paw (above hand)
moves downwards directly influences the other’s movement. Left:
the paw pushing the hand down, will force the hand downwards,
resulting in a unimodal distribution. Right: the hand moving down
results in two modes, the paw following along or staying put.

It is natural to focus selectively on parts of a scene, infer
how they might evolve, and reason about the underlying
physical properties and interactions that drive change. This
selective, probabilistic, and multimodal reasoning is rooted
in the perceived inherent stochastic nature of the world. It is
governed by the stochastic physical properties of complex
systems and further compounded by the presence of agents
with a complex, inaccessible internal state, lead by free will
or other, from the outside often unapproachable causes.
This inherent uncertainty makes dense, deterministic predictions of future motion both impractical and ill-posed to
represent real-world dynamics. The prediction of pixel-

10286

