This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local Scale Equivariance with Latent Deep Equilibrium Canonicalizer
Md Ashiqur Rahman1 Chiao-An Yang2 Michael N. Cheng1 Lim Jun Hao2
Jeremiah Jiang2 Teck-Yian Lim2 Raymond A. Yeh1
1
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University 2 DSO National Laboratories

Prob

Abstract

Ours

Swin

Ours

Figure 1. Local scaling resizes different parts of an image independently, e.g., the dog is scaled while the background remains
unchanged. For the Swin model [38], we show the distribution of
predicted probabilities for the object class across a set of locally
scaled images. Observe that the predicted probabilities are not
stable, indicating that the Swin model is not consistent across
local
Scale: 1.3
scaling. We introduce Deep Equilibrium Canonicalizer (Ours) to
address this issue.

1. Introduction
The perceived scale of an object in images varies due to multiple factors. First, intrinsic factors such as the object’s physical dimensions cause variations in the apparent size, e.g., individuals may differ in height. Second, extrinsic factors such
as camera zoom and the object’s distance to the camera further affect the observed scale, even for the same object. How
to effectively handle and represent this scale variation has
been a fundamental question in computer vision. Inspired by
human vision, which uses a hierarchy of scales for perception [42], earlier works adopted image pyramids [1, 12] and
variants [34, 55, 65] to extract features at different image
resolutions [21, 31, 39, 40].
In deep learning, ideas similar to image pyramids have
been introduced [14, 20, 24, 76] and studied under the broad
area of scale invariance/equivariance [48, 56, 57, 67]. These
works aim to design specialized deep-nets such that the network’s output is transformed in a predefined way when the
input image undergoes scale changes (image resizing). Mathematically, equivariance is formalized as equality statements
over groups; see Sec. 3 for a review. A typical approach is to
design a group equivariant architecture [15] by modifying the
filter operations. Note, we use the term “equivariance” in the
strict mathematical sense of the exact equality statement. We

Swin
Prob

Scale variation is a fundamental challenge in computer vision. Objects of the same class can have different sizes, and
their perceived size is further affected by the distance from
the camera. These variations are local to the objects, i.e.,
different object sizes may change differently within the same
image. To effectively handle scale variations, we present a
deep equilibrium canonicalizer (DEC) to improve the local
scale equivariance of a model. DEC can be easily incorporated into existing network architectures and can be adapted
to a pre-trained model. Notably, we show that on the competitive ImageNet benchmark, DEC improves both model
performance and local scale consistency across four popular
pre-trained deep-nets, e.g., ViT, DeiT, Swin, and BEiT.

will use the term “consistency” to mean an approximation
of equivariance, i.e., without the mathematical guarantees.
While scale equivariance has been well studied, these
works all focused on global scaling, i.e., changes in image
resolution. Differently, we are interested in local scaling,
e.g., the resizing of each part of an input image differently (at
a fixed resolution), which more closely matches the scaling
of objects in the real world. See illustration in Fig. 1. Ideally,
we aim to design deep-nets that are local scale equivariant.
However, real-world local scaling does not form a group as
the operation is not invertible, e.g., when two objects change
size and occlude each other. To address this, we propose
an approximation of the real-world local scaling operation,
namely monotone scaling, which we will show to be a group.
Our approach to making a deep-net monotone scale equivariant is based on the framework of canonicalization [44, 46].
Briefly, a canonicalizer transforms an input into a “standard”
(canonical) form so that the deep network can extract invariant features. A canonicalizer can be modeled as finding a
stationary point of a learned energy function with respect to
the transformation (group) and then using that point as the
“standard”. Instead of this optimization approach, we propose

10527

