This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DALIP: Distribution Alignment-based Language-Image Pre-Training for
Domain-Speciﬁc Data
Junjie Wu1† , Jiangtao Xie2† , Zhaolin Zhang1 , Qilong Wang1*, Qinghua Hu1 , Peihua Li2 , Sen Xu3,4
1

Tianjin University

2

Dalian University of Technology

3

Yancheng Institute of Technology

4

Harbin Engineering University

Abstract
Recently, Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
has shown promising performance in domain-speciﬁc data
(e.g., biology), and has attracted increasing research attention. Existing works generally focus on collecting extensive
domain-speciﬁc data and directly tuning the original CLIP
models. Intuitively, such a paradigm takes no full consideration of the characteristics lying in domain-speciﬁc data
(e.g., ﬁne-grained nature of biological data) and so limits model capability, while mostly losing the original ability of CLIP in the general domain. In this paper, we propose a Distribution Alignment-based Language-Image PreTraining (DALIP) method for biological data. Speciﬁcally,
DALIP optimizes CLIP models by matching the similarity
between feature distribution of image-text pairs instead of
the original [cls] token, which can capture rich yet effective information inherent in image-text pairs as powerful
representations, and so better cope with ﬁne-grained nature of biological data. Particularly, our DALIP efﬁciently
approximates feature distribution via its ﬁrst- and secondorder statistics, while presenting a Multi-head Brownian
Distance Covariance (MBDC) module to acquire secondorder statistics of token features efﬁciently. Furthermore,
we collect a new dataset for plant domain (i.e., speciﬁc
data in biological domain) comprising 10M plant data with
3M general-domain data (namely PlantMix-13M) according to data mixing laws. Extensive experiments show that
DALIP clearly outperforms existing CLIP counterparts in
biological domain, while well generalizing to remote sensing and medical imaging domains. Besides, our PlantMix13M dataset further boosts performance of DALIP in plant
domain, while preserving model ability in general domain.

Ornithogalum
Orthophyllum

Ornithogalum
Umbellatum

Iris
Aphylla

Iris
Pallida

(a)
General Domain Accuracy (%)

75

Pretrained Model

65

55
45
OpenCLIP

35

BioCLIP

25

ArborCLIP-O

15

DALIP(Oursͤ

5
8

18

28
38
Plant Domain Accuracy (%)

48

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Example images in plant domain. (b) Comparison
of different CLIP models on general (ImageNet-1K) and speciﬁc
(average on ﬁve plant tasks) domains, including OpenCLIP [37],
BioCLIP [46], ArborCLIP-O [63] and our DALIP, where DALIP
achieves promising results in both plant and general domains.

tracted increasing research attention, such as biological [46,
63], remote sensing [26, 72], and medical domains [12, 54,
70, 71]. Particularly, they show the CLIP models trained in
general domain [37, 61] have underperformed in a certain
domain-speciﬁc task, and make several efforts to enhance
the ability of CLIP models in domain-speciﬁc applications.
To this end, existing works generally focus on constructing
large-scale training datasets [46, 63, 70, 72] involving millions of domain-speciﬁc image-text pairs, and then employ
them to directly tune the CLIP models [37, 61].
Although promising performance has been achieved,
there still exist two challenges in domain-speciﬁc CLIP
models. First, domain-speciﬁc data usually possess distinct
some characteristics. By taking biological images (e.g.,
plant) as an example, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), they are
ﬁne-grained and large-species [46, 50]. Therefore, compared with images in general domain, biological ones generally require more powerful and discriminative represen-

1. Introduction
Recently, accompanied by the success of Contrastive Language Image Pre-training (CLIP) [37], domain-speciﬁc
CLIP models have achieved remarkable progress and at* Corresponding author. †Equal contribution.

E-mail: {wjj , qlwang}@tju.edu.cn.
Project page: https://github.com/XavierHeart/DALIP.

2099

