This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniGS: Modeling Unitary 3D Gaussians for Novel View Synthesis from
Sparse-view Images
Jiamin Wu1,2 * Kenkun Liu3 * Xiaoke Jiang1† Yuan Yao2

Lei Zhang1

1

International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

2

Abstract
In this work, we introduce UniGS, a novel 3D Gaussian reconstruction and novel view synthesis model that predicts
a high-fidelity representation of 3D Gaussians from arbitrary number of posed sparse-view images. Previous methods often regress 3D Gaussians locally on a per-pixel basis
for each view and then transfer them to world space and
merge them through point concatenation. In contrast, Our
approach involves modeling unitary 3D Gaussians in world
space and updating them layer by layer. To leverage information from multi-view inputs for updating the unitary 3D
Gaussians, we develop a DETR (DEtection TRansformer)like framework, which treats 3D Gaussians as queries and
updates their parameters by performing multi-view crossattention (MVDFA) across multiple input images, which
are treated as keys and values. This approach effectively
avoids ‘ghosting’ issue and allocates more 3D Gaussians to
complex regions. Moreover, since the number of 3D Gaussians used as decoder queries is independent of the number of input views, our method allows arbitrary number of
multi-view images as input without causing memory explosion or requiring retraining. Extensive experiments validate the advantages of our approach, showcasing superior
performance over existing methods quantitatively (improving PSNR by 4.2 dB when trained on Objaverse and tested
on the GSO benchmark) and qualitatively. Codes are at
https://github.com/jwubz123/UNIG.

cently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D GS) [14], as a semiexplicit representation, has demonstrated great efficiency
and high-quality rendering performance for NVS.
Despite the advantages of 3D GS, they often perform inadequately when faced with sparse-view inputs (no more
than 10 views). Some previous works [40, 41, 53, 54, 58]
propose to exploit large-scale multi-view image datasets
and train feed-forward models that learn to reconstruct 3D
Gaussians of objects from sparse-view images in a single
forward process. However, many recent feed-forward methods based on 3D GS employ a ‘local prediction and fusion’ approach in which they predict 3D Gaussians for every pixel locally in each input view under the corresponding
camera coordinates. Subsequently, the predicted 3D Gaussians are transformed into the same world coordinate system by the input view camera poses and are concatenated
to get the final 3D Gaussian representation. This strategy
results in even distribution of the positions of 3D Gaussians
in both simple and complex regions (Fig. 1) because the local predication on the even distributed pixels on each view.
Moreover, the fusion of the 3D Gaussians from each view
may encounter the challenge of ‘ghosting’, i.e. the predicted per-pixel 3D Gaussians from different views cannot
align to others after concatenation. As depicted in Fig. 1(a),
an extra part of the rendered object can be obviously observed. This issue arises from that the estimated positions
of 3D Gaussians in each view may be imprecise, so that
the merging of 3D Gaussians cannot align well. Another
limitation of previous methods is that they require the same
number of input views during both training and inference
stages; otherwise, their performance would notably deteriorate (Fig. 1(c)), constraining practical applications where
the quantity of input views is variable.
To address these issues, we propose a Unitary 3D
Gaussians (UniGS) representation for sparse-view reconstruction. Inspired by Deformable DETR (DEtection
TRansformer) [62] that treats the position and properties of
bounding box (Bbox) as queries, we develop a DETR-like
framework that treats the unitary 3D Gaussians as queries

1. Introduction
3D object reconstruction and novel view synthesis (NVS)
play a crucial role in the fields of computer vision and
graphics. The construction of detailed 3D structures from
2D images has applications including robotics, augmented
reality, virtual reality, medical imaging, and beyond. Re1 Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at IDEA.
2 Corresponding author.

26241

