This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MistSense: Versatile Online Detection of Procedural and Execution Mistakes
Constantin Patsch1 , Yuankai Wu1 , Marsil Zakour1 , Driton Salihu1 , Eckehard Steinbach1
1
Technical University of Munich, School of Computation, Information, and Technology,
Department of Computer Engineering, Chair of Media Technology,
Munich Institute of Robotics and Machine Intelligence (MIRMI)
{constantin.patsch,yuankai.wu,marsil.zakour,driton.salihu,eckehard.steinbach}@tum.de

Abstract
Online mistake detection is crucial across various domains,
ranging from industrial automation to educational applications, as mistakes can be corrected by the human operator
after their detection due to the continuous inference on a
video stream. While prior research mainly addresses procedural errors that often relate to temporal and ordering
information, identifying a broader range of error types is
essential for real-world implementation. In this work, we
present MistSense, an approach for online mistake identification that includes versatility by considering both procedural errors, which involve incorrect action sequences,
and execution errors, such as motor inaccuracies or improper equipment use. Our method integrates RGB and
hand pose features to capture fine-grained contextual cues
in order to detect a mistake. By jointly modeling spatial
and sequential aspects of human actions, our framework
enables robust and adaptive error detection in dynamic environments. Once a mistake has been detected, we leverage
a large language model (LLM) which provides an error explanation that gives the user further insights into why an
action has been identified as a mistake. The evaluation on
common mistake detection benchmarks shows the effectiveness of our approach.

Figure 1. MistSense framework for mistake detection and explanation: Compared to prior approaches that mainly focus on temporal
and ordering relations in the form of procedural mistakes, our approach can consider procedural as well as execution mistakes, that
capture how an action is performed, in an online fashion. We further integrate hand pose information during the mistake detection
process. Upon detecting an error, an LLM is queried to provide an
explanation for why the action is incorrect based on the extracted
video features.

1. Introduction

proaches [9, 18, 30], to provide timely feedback, the system
should be able to conduct inference in an online setting, enabling it to identify errors from a continuous video stream.
This allows the user to respond promptly, preventing further consequences of the mistake. An egocentric perspective offers a valuable advantage by capturing task execution from the user’s point of view, circumventing the limitations of static viewpoints that may suffer from occlusions
caused by the human body. Furthermore, recent advances in
augmented reality enhance the relevance of egocentric systems [2, 5]. The unique egocentric perspective additionally
makes it easier to recognize the human hand pose. While
this hand-specific information has proven to be helpful for
action recognition and detection tasks [11, 32, 37], it can
be leveraged for determining the correctness of an executed
action and thus used as another modality alongside images.

Recent action detection and recognition approaches [26, 27,
34, 38] enable the accurate perception of human actions
from video data while relying on spatiotemporal information to reason about human behavior. An intelligent assistant, however, should have the capability to further reason
about the correctness of certain actions, to assist users in accurately performing actions or completing tasks. Such intelligent systems could be applied to daily tasks like cooking
or home maintenance, as well as industrial settings such as
assembly lines or mechanical repairs.
In line with recent online mistake detection ap-

14528

