This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VTimeCoT: Thinking by Drawing for Video Temporal Grounding and Reasoning
Jinglei Zhang1,* Yuanfan Guo2,* Rolandos Alexandros Potamias3
Jiankang Deng3 Hang Xu2 Chao Ma1,†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Imperial College London
{zhangjinglei168, chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn
{guoyuanfan1, xu.hang}@huawei.com, {j.deng16, r.potamias}@imperial.ac.uk

Raw

When …?

···

···

Raw video

How many streams did the cat cross in the video?
GPT4o: one

Question

VTimeCoT + GPT4o



Grounding & Reasoning
Time
Problems of existing MLLM
MLLM

Thought

···

Thought

Answer

Captions

Video

Problems of text-based Chain-of-Thought
THOUGHT 0: I can use the tool to draw progress bar and highlight the
moments for ‘streams the cat crossed’.
ACTION 0:
Call <progress bar> and <highlight(streams the cat crossed)>

Video

MLLM
Thought

Text
Tool

Draw

progress bar

1s

···

60s

···

MLLM ···
Thought

V’

highlight(query)

Answer

46.8
Question

40.2

54.5
37.7

Charades-STA QVHighlights

83.6
105s
60s
60s

THOUGHT 1: The tool is helpful. I see the cat crossing streams at 52s to
68s and 71s to 76s. So it crossed two streams.

60s
60s

73.6

70.4

65.1

Vript-RR

VideoMME

GPT4o

VTimeCoT

VTimeCoT (Ours)

Figure 1. We propose VTimeCoT, a Visual Time Chain-of-Thought framework for video temporal grounding and reasoning. VTimeCoT
constructs cross-modality reasoning across both video and text, which enables the MLLM to utilize progress bar tools to annotate the time
progression and highlight the key relevant segments to answer complex temporal questions.

Abstract
In recent years, video question answering based on multimodal large language models (MLLM) has garnered considerable attention, due to the benefits from the substantial
advancements in LLMs. However, these models have a notable deficiency in the domains of video temporal grounding
and reasoning, posing challenges to the development of effective real-world video understanding systems. Inspired by
how humans use video players to interact with the progress
bar for video comprehension, we introduce VTimeCoT, a
simple yet effective training-free framework, designed for
high-performance video grounding and reasoning. The proposed framework incorporates two novel visual tools of
the progress bar: a plug-and-play progress bar integration
tool and a high-efficiency highlighting tool. In addition,

to address the limitations of conventional text-based chainof-thought (CoT) approaches, we introduce a visuotemporal CoT process that integrates cross-modality reasoning
across both video and text. Our approach demonstrates significant performance improvements on both Qwen2VL-7B
and GPT4o baselines in tasks of video temporal grounding and reasoning-based question answering. Finally, we
showcase that the proposed framework achieves a compositional and interpretable reasoning process. Project page:
https://vtimecot.github.io.

* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

Video understanding is a longstanding problem in computer
vision and has attracted more attention with the emergence
of large language models (LLM) [5, 17, 40, 43]. Video QA
is a representative task reflecting the video reasoning abil-

24203

