This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CutS3D: Cutting Semantics in 3D for 2D Unsupervised Instance Segmentation
Leon Sick1 Dominik Engel1,2 Sebastian Hartwig1 Pedro Hermosilla3 Timo Ropinski1
1

Ulm University

2

KAUST

Abstract

3

TU Vienna

CutLER

Traditionally, algorithms that learn to segment object instances in 2D images have heavily relied on large amounts
of human-annotated data. Only recently, novel approaches
have emerged tackling this problem in an unsupervised
fashion. Generally, these approaches first generate pseudomasks and then train a class-agnostic detector. While such
methods deliver the current state of the art, they often fail to
correctly separate instances overlapping in 2D image space
since only semantics are considered. To tackle this issue,
we instead propose to cut the semantic masks in 3D to obtain the final 2D instances by utilizing a point cloud representation of the scene. Furthermore, we derive a Spatial
Importance function, which we use to resharpen the semantics along the 3D borders of instances. Nevertheless, these
pseudo-masks are still subject to mask ambiguity. To address this issue, we further propose to augment the training
of a class-agnostic detector with three Spatial Confidence
components aiming to isolate a clean learning signal. With
these contributions, our approach outperforms competing
methods across multiple standard benchmarks for unsupervised instance segmentation and object detection.
Project Page: leonsick.github.io/cuts3d

Ours

CuVLER

2D Separation

2D Separation

3D Separation

COCO val2017
+0.9 APmask
9.7

9.8

CutLER

CuVLER

COCO20K
10.7

Ours

+0.9 APmask
10.0

10.0

CutLER

CuVLER

10.9

Ours

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Cutting Semantics Into Instances in 3D. We leverage 3D information to separate semantics into instances to generate pseudo-masks on IN1K, then train a class-agnostic detector on
them. The resulting model is able to separate instances with improved accuracy, outperforming previous approaches.

segmentation, which aims to develop algorithms that can
perform such segmentations with similar quality, but without needing any human annotations used during training.
CutLER, a recent approach by Wang et al. [47], has made
significant progress in unsupervised instance segmentation
of natural scenes by training a class-agnostic detection network (CAD) on pseudo-masks generated by MaskCut. To
do so, the authors leverage self-supervised features to capture the 2D semantics of the scene in an affinity graph and
extract instance pseudo-masks. However, since their approach only considers semantic relations, it fails to separate instances of the same class that are overlapping or connected in 2D space. In contrast, humans inherently perceive
the natural world in 3D, an ability which helps them to better separate instances by not just considering visual similarity, but also their boundaries in 3D. Nowadays, precise 3D

Segmenting instances in natural images has long been considered a challenging task in computer vision. In recent
years however, supervised algorithms [4, 8, 9, 19, 21, 37,
50] have made impressive progress towards enabling the
segmentation of a large diversity of objects in a variety of
environments and domains. But for these to perform well,
they require a large amount of labeled training data, which,
especially for instance segmentation, is costly to obtain,
since annotations have to contain information about individual instances of a particular class. One prominent example
is the COCO dataset [27], containing around 164 thousand
images with instance mask annotations distributed across
80 classes, which required more than 28 thousand hours of
annotation time across a large group of labelers. This enormous effort has sparked the field of unsupervised instance

21265

C

