This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlinkTrack: Feature Tracking over 80 FPS via Events and Images
Yichen Shen1 * Yijin Li1,2 * Shuo Chen1 Guanglin Li1
Zhaoyang Huang2 Hujun Bao1 Zhaopeng Cui1 Guofeng Zhang1†
1
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Avolution AI
{shenyichen,zhangguofeng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Raw Predict Trajectory
High Uncertainty Prediction

Event cameras, known for their high temporal resolution
and ability to capture asynchronous changes, have gained
significant attention for their potential in feature tracking,
especially in challenging conditions. However, event cameras lack the fine-grained texture information that conventional cameras provide, leading to error accumulation in
tracking. To address this, we propose a novel framework,
BlinkTrack, which integrates event data with grayscale images for high-frequency feature tracking. Our method extends the traditional Kalman filter into a learning-based
framework, utilizing differentiable Kalman filters in both
event and image branches. This approach improves singlemodality tracking and effectively solves the data association
and fusion from asynchronous event and image data. We
also introduce new synthetic and augmented datasets to better evaluate our model. Experimental results indicate that
BlinkTrack significantly outperforms existing methods, exceeding 80 FPS with multi-modality data and 100 FPS with
preprocessed event data. Codes and dataset are available at
https://github.com/ColieShen/BlinkTrack.

Kalman Filtered Trajectory

Event Prediction Distribution

Image Prediction Distribution
Constant Velocity
Asynchronous Predicition

Figure 1. Our method employs the idea of the Kalman filter to
associate the asynchronous data from event and image modality
and learn the uncertainty-aware fusion.

track features at high frequencies, even in challenging lighting conditions or with fast-moving objects, where conventional cameras are easy to fail[73, 74].
Nevertheless, the event cameras have inherent limitations. For example, event cameras are unable to capture
detailed, fine-grained texture information like conventional
cameras, and the spatial signal of event cameras could be
very sparse in slow-moving scenes. As a result, event-only
could lead to error accumulation and inhibit tracking performance. Therefore, in this paper, we aim to explore efficient
and powerful feature tracking by fusing the event data and
the image frame from conventional cameras.
To achieve our objective, we must address three primary
challenges: (1) Data association. Event cameras and standard cameras do not operate in a synchronized manner, with
standard cameras capturing at fixed frequency(e.g., 30 Hz1 )
and event cameras detecting changes asynchronously. As
a result, it needs an effective method to associate these
asynchronous data streams from different modalities. (2)
Uncertainty-aware fusion. Event cameras and standard
cameras exhibit different distributions of uncertainty due to
their distinct sensor characteristics[20]. To achieve effective
fusion, the method should be capable of adaptively weighting the contributions of each modality based on confidence
estimates. In addition, the uncertainty caused by occlusion

1. Introduction
Feature tracking aims to estimate the trajectories of query
points from a reference timestamp over subsequent periods. It serves as the cornerstone for many computer vision
tasks, including structure from motion[54, 55], simultaneous localization and mapping(SLAM)[8, 41, 47–49], object
tracking[68, 69, 76], and multi-view stereo[15, 71].
In recent years, event cameras[19, 21, 35, 37, 38] have
attracted significant attention within the research community, particularly in the field of feature tracking. Event
cameras are innovative sensors that asynchronously detect
changes in a scene with very high temporal resolution, capturing events as they occur rather than recording frames
at fixed intervals. This capability allows event cameras to

1 In this paper, we use FPS as the frequency of algorithm inference, and
Hz as the frame rate of the input data.

* Yichen Shen, Yijin Li contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

9298

