This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning 4D Embodied World Models
Haoyu Zhen1 ∗
1

Qiao Sun1 ∗ Hongxin Zhang1 Junyan Li1
Yilun Du3 Chuang Gan1
UMass Amherst

2

HKUST

3

Siyuan Zhou2

Harvard University

https://TesserActWorld.github.io
Unseen scene, unseen object

Input Instruction: Pick up the brown cup – Franka Panda Robot

RGB-DN Video Generation

Put shoes in box – Franka Panda Robot

4D Scene Reconstruction & Explicit Actions

In Domain: RLBench (Sim)
Point Cloud

Reach the target
Lift

RGB

1. Open Box

Input Image

Depth

2. Put Shoes
Mesh

Normal

Cross Domain

Input Instruction: Pick up the apple from white bowl – Trossen WidowX 250

RGB-DN Video Generation

4D Scene Reconstruction & Explicit Actions

Move coke can near bottle - Google Robot
In Domain: Fractal Data (Real)
Point Cloud

RGB

Grasp

Depth

Normal

Point Cloud

Input Image

Figure 1. We propose TesserAct, the 4D Embodied World Model, which takes an input image and text instruction to generate RGB, depth,
and normal videos, reconstructing a 4D scene and predicting actions. Our model not only achieves strong performance on in-domain data
(right) but also generalizes effectively to unseen scenes, novel objects (top left), and cross-domain scenarios (bottom left).

Abstract

with depth and normal information leveraging off-the-shelf
models. Next, we fine-tune a video generation model on this
annotated dataset, which jointly predicts RGB-DN (RGB,
Depth, and Normal) for each frame. We then present an
algorithm to directly convert generated RGB, Depth, and
Normal videos into a high-quality 4D scene of the world.
Our method ensures temporal and spatial coherence in 4D
scene predictions from embodied scenarios, enables novel
view synthesis for embodied environments, and facilitates
policy learning that significantly outperforms those derived
from prior video-based world models.

This paper presents an effective approach for learning novel
4D embodied world models, TesserAct, which predict the dynamic evolution of 3D scenes over time in response to an embodied agent’s actions, providing both spatial and temporal
consistency. We propose to learn a 4D world model by training on RGB-DN (RGB, Depth, and Normal) videos. This not
only surpasses traditional 2D models by incorporating detailed shape, configuration, and temporal changes into their
predictions, but also allows us to effectively learn accurate
inverse dynamic models for an embodied agent. Specifically,
we first extend existing robotic manipulation video datasets
∗ Equal contribution.

5337

