This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generate, Refine, and Encode: Leveraging Synthesized Novel Samples
for On-the-Fly Fine-Grained Category Discovery
Xiao Liu1,3 *, Nan Pu2 *†, Haiyang Zheng2 , Wenjing Li1 , Nicu Sebe2 , Zhun Zhong1†
1
Hefei University of Technology, 2 University of Trento, 3 Helmholtz AI

GCD

Training Stage

Offline
Clustering

Hash
Inference

Our OCD
Synthsized

Unlabeled

C-1

C-2

C-00000001

C-00100000

Query Image Stream

Existing OCD

In this paper, we investigate a practical yet challenging
task: On-the-fly Category Discovery (OCD). This task focuses on the online identification of newly arriving stream
data that may belong to both known and unknown categories, utilizing the category knowledge from only labeled
data. Existing OCD methods are devoted to fully mining
transferable knowledge from only labeled data. However,
the transferability learned by these methods is limited because the knowledge contained in known categories is often
insufficient, especially when few annotated data/categories
are available in fine-grained recognition. To mitigate this
limitation, we propose a diffusion-based OCD framework,
dubbed DiffGRE, which integrates Generation, Refinement,
and Encoding in a multi-stage fashion. Specifically, we first
design an attribute-composition generation method based
on cross-image interpolation in the diffusion latent space
to synthesize novel samples. Then, we propose a diversitydriven refinement approach to select the synthesized images that differ from known categories for subsequent OCD
model training. Finally, we leverage a semi-supervised
leader encoding to inject additional category knowledge
contained in synthesized data into the OCD models, which
can benefit the discovery of both known and unknown categories during the on-the-fly inference process. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our DiffGRE over
previous methods on six fine-grained datasets. The codes
are available here: https://github.com/XLiu443/DiffGRE

Discovery Stage

Query Image Stream Pre-defined Qeury Set

Abstract

C-1
Online
Clustering
C-2

Labeled

Cluster

Model

Figure 1. Comparison with GCD and OCD. Most existing GCD
methods follow a transductive learning paradigm that requires previously accessing test data during training. Meanwhile, they utilize offline clustering to assign category labels for pre-collected
query sets. In contrast, OCD models are trained with only labeled
training data and can provide instance-wise inference for a stream
of data that require discovery. Unlike existing OCD methods, our
DiffGRE syntheses new training samples for OCD training, while
performing more robust online cluster than hash inference.

47, 54] follow an offline inference paradigm, where category discovery is typically implemented by applying conventional clustering algorithms to a pre-collected batch of
query data that requires discovery. This paradigm significantly limits the practicality of GCD techniques in realworld applications, where systems are expected to provide
online feedback for each new instance.

1. Introduction
Generalized category discovery (GCD), an emerging and
challenging problem, has garnered increasing attention due
to its potential for widespread real-world applications, such
as discovering new diseases [57], bird species [29], and
crops [23]. GCD aims to automatically cluster unlabeled
data from unseen categories using knowledge from seen
categories. However, current GCD methods [28, 29, 41,

To address this limitation, On-the-fly Category Discovery (OCD) [5] is introduced to eliminate the requirement
of accessing pre-defined query sets in training phrases and
enables GCD models to generate instance feedback for
streaming data, as shown in Fig. 1. Existing OCD methods
that focus on learning transferable knowledge from only labeled data and categories are often inefficient, as the knowl-

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1078

