This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VSRM: A Robust Mamba-Based Framework for Video Super-Resolution
Dinh Phu Tran

Dao Duy Hung

Daeyoung Kim

{phutx2000, hicehehe, kimd}@kaist.ac.kr

School of Computing, KAIST, Republic of Korea

Abstract
Video super-resolution remains a major challenge in lowlevel vision tasks. To date, CNN- and Transformer-based
methods have delivered impressive results. However, CNNs
are limited by local receptive fields, while Transformers
struggle with quadratic complexity, posing challenges for
processing long sequences in VSR. Recently, Mamba has
drawn attention for its long-sequence modeling, linear
complexity, and large receptive fields. In this work, we
propose VSRM, a novel Video Super-Resolution framework that leverages the power of Mamba. VSRM introduces Spatial-to-Temporal Mamba and Temporal-to-Spatial
Mamba blocks to extract long-range spatio-temporal features and enhance receptive fields efficiently. To better align
adjacent frames, we propose Deformable Cross-Mamba
Alignment module. This module utilizes a deformable crossmamba mechanism to make the compensation stage more
dynamic and flexible, preventing feature distortions. Finally, we minimize the frequency domain gaps between reconstructed and ground-truth frames by proposing a simple yet effective Frequency Charbonnier-like loss that better
preserves high-frequency content and enhances visual quality. Through extensive experiments, VSRM achieves stateof-the-art results on diverse benchmarks, establishing itself
as a solid foundation for future research.

content. Transformer-based methods show strong performance due to the power of the attention mechanism. However, full attention has quadratic complexity [21, 36], which
is impractical for long sequences, while local attention
struggles with limited receptive fields [12]. Recently, Gu
et al. introduced Mamba [16], which can model long-range
information and data-dependent characteristics with linear
complexity for NLP tasks. More recently, Mamba has been
successfully applied in various vision tasks [7, 18, 41, 57].
As far as we know, no research has employed Mamba to
address VSR. In this work, we propose VSRM, a novel
Mamba-based framework for VSR. Specifically, we propose Dual Aggregation Mamba Block (DAMB), which contains N Spatial-to-Temporal Mamba blocks (S2TMBs) followed by a Temporal-to-Spatial Mamba block (T2SMB) to
model long-range spatio-temporal correlations for long sequences, enlarging large receptive fields. In S2TMB and
T2SMB, we employ spatial-to-temporal and temporal-tospatial scanning mechanisms to capture both spatial and
temporal contexts.
The key challenge of VSR is effectively using the complementary information from adjacent frames, which may
be misaligned due to object motions. To establish interframe correlations, many works employ the alignment module for VSR [3, 5, 46, 54]. However, most studies use bilinear or nearest-neighbor interpolation for spatial alignment
due to its simplicity. Theoretically, using fixed weights
(e.g., linear interpolation) causes feature distortions, leading to suboptimal results [4, 46]. To address this, Xu et
al. [54] proposed an attention-based implicit interpolation
for the alignment module. However, they computed interpolation in the fixed reference window, limiting flexibility
and inaccuracy in aligning adjacent frames, especially in
large motions between frames. Based on this observation,
we introduce Deformable Cross-Mamba Alignment (DCA),
which dynamically aligns neighboring frames using a deformable cross-mamba mechanism that allows information
exchange between multiple selective scan modules.
Current VSR methods use pixel-based losses (e.g.,
L1/L2 loss [26, 34], charbonnier loss [5, 46]) or perception-

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to produce higher resolution from low-resolution videos. VSR typically processes
long sequences and benefits from large receptive fields, efficiently capturing inter-frames information [3, 15]. However, it incurs high computational costs, requiring a balance
between performance and efficiency. VSR usually uses convolutional neural network (CNN) [3, 22, 56] or transformer
[33, 46, 54, 58]. Tab. 1 compares the pros and cons of these
methods. CNN-based methods cannot adjust based on input
data and limit receptive fields [10, 48] to capture inter-frame

14711

