This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DexH2R: A Benchmark for Dynamic Dexterous Grasping
in Human-to-Robot Handover
Youzhuo Wang1, *, Jiayi Ye1, *, Chuyang Xiao1 , Yiming Zhong1 , Heng Tao1 , Hang Yu1 ,
Yumeng Liu1,2 , Jingyi Yu1 , Yuexin Ma1†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 The University of Hong Kong
{wangyzh2023,yejy2024,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

DexH2R Dataset
Human-to-Robot Handover

(2)
Approaching
Motion Generation

(3)

Robot-to-Robot Handover

Goal Pose
Alignment

Observed
Trajectory

(1)

DynamicGrasp

Grasp Pose
Preparation

Application

Figure 1. We introduce DexH2R, the first real human-to-robot handover dataset, and establish an effective and practical solution DynamicGrasp along with a comprehensive benchmark for human-to-robot handover. This benchmark can benefit broad real-world applications
and can be extended to robot-to-robot handover tasks.

Abstract
Handover between a human and a dexterous robotic hand
is a fundamental yet challenging task in human-robot collaboration. It requires handling dynamic environments and
a wide variety of objects and demands robust and adaptive
grasping strategies. However, progress in developing effective dynamic dexterous grasping methods is limited by the
absence of high-quality, real-world human-to-robot han-

dover datasets. Existing datasets primarily focus on grasping static objects or rely on synthesized handover motions,
which differ significantly from real-world robot motion patterns, creating a substantial gap in applicability. In this
paper, we introduce DexH2R, a comprehensive real-world
dataset for human-to-robot handovers, built on a dexterous
robotic hand. Our dataset captures a diverse range of interactive objects, dynamic motion patterns, rich visual sensor data, and detailed annotations. Additionally, to ensure
natural and human-like dexterous motions, we utilize teleoperation for data collection, enabling the robot’s move-

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

12702

