This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Momentum-GS: Momentum Gaussian Self-Distillation for High-Quality
Large Scene Reconstruction
Jixuan Fan1,2,∗ , Wanhua Li3,∗ , Yifei Han1,2 , Tianru Dai1,2 , Yansong Tang1,2,
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School 2 Tsinghua University 3 Harvard University
fjx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wanhua@seas.harvard.edu, hyf23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
dtr24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

(a) Mega-NeRF

(b) 3DGS

(d) DOGS

(c) CityGaussian

(e) Momentum-GS (Ours)

(f) Ground Truth

Figure 1. Comparison of reconstruction results on the Rubble [55] dataset. Our Momentum-GS reconstructs finer details, such as the clear
structure of the vehicle in the zoomed-in view. Additionally, our method produces smoother transitions across blocks, demonstrating better
consistency and avoiding the noticeable lighting discrepancies observed in other Gaussian-based methods.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting has demonstrated notable success
in large-scale scene reconstruction, but challenges persist
due to high training memory consumption and storage overhead. Hybrid representations that integrate implicit and
explicit features offer a way to mitigate these limitations.
However, when applied in parallelized block-wise training, two critical issues arise since reconstruction accuracy
deteriorates due to reduced data diversity when training
each block independently, and parallel training restricts
the number of divided blocks to the available number of
GPUs. To address these issues, we propose MomentumGS, a novel approach that leverages momentum-based selfdistillation to promote consistency and accuracy across the
blocks while decoupling the number of blocks from the physical GPU count. Our method maintains a teacher Gaussian decoder updated with momentum, ensuring a stable
reference during training. This teacher provides each block
with global guidance in a self-distillation manner, promot-

ing spatial consistency in reconstruction. To further ensure
consistency across the blocks, we incorporate block weighting, dynamically adjusting each block’s weight according
to its reconstruction accuracy. Extensive experiments on
large-scale scenes show that our method consistently outperforms existing techniques, achieving a 18.7% improvement in LPIPS over CityGaussian with much fewer divided
blocks and establishing a new state of the art. Project page:
https://jixuan-fan.github.io/Momentum-GS Page/

∗ Equal contribution.

1. Introduction

Corresponding authors.

Large-scale 3D scene reconstruction is essential for a wide
range of applications, including autonomous driving [25,
42, 53, 62], virtual reality [16, 18], environmental monitoring [32, 61], and aerial surveying [5, 6, 51]. The ability
to accurately reconstruct large, complex scenes from collections of images is critical for creating realistic, navigable 3D
models and supporting high-quality visualization, analysis,
and simulation [8, 19, 22, 34].
3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [20] has recently gained

25250

