This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PUMA: Empowering Unified MLLM with Multi-granular Visual Generation
Rongyao Fang1 * † Chengqi Duan3→ Kun Wang4 Hao Li1,5 Linjiang Huang6 Hao Tian4
Xingyu Zeng4 Rui Zhao4 Jifeng Dai5 Hongsheng Li1,2‡ Xihui Liu3‡
1

2

CUHK MMLab

3

CPII under InnoHK

4

HKU

5

SenseTime

Shanghai AI Lab

6

BUAA

a) The Diversity and Controllability Requirements of Different Visual Generative Tasks
Conditional Image Generation
Draw an image based on canny input.

Diverse Text-to-Image Generation

Generate images of a puma in different postures.

Image Manipulation
Remove the tractor from the field.

Diversity

Controllability

b) PUMA for Various Visual Generation and Understanding Tasks
Image Inpainting

The image should
convey On the
way to Eggum.
Use inpainted
image as input to
generate an image.

Conditional Image Generation

Produce a visual
with canny edge
Portray Preparing
for Examinations,
1864 by Ilya
Efimovich Repin.
Image Editing

Image Understanding

It encourages people to take
advantage of the service
without the need for prior
scheduling, making it more
accessible and convenient
for potential customers.

What
is the
purpose
of the
sign?

Please remove the
black cow statue
from the bench.

Diverse Text-to-Image Generation

Generate an
image with
the caption:
a cute fox
artwork by
James
Gilliard
vibrant colors.

Figure 1. a) Diversity and controllability trade-off in image generation tasks: diverse text-to-image generation requires high diversity and
fidelity, while tasks like conditional generation and manipulation require high controllability on the image. b) The introduced PUMA,
a unified multimodal large language model that processes and generates multi-granular visual representations, balancing diversity and
controllability across visual generation tasks. It excels in image understanding, diverse text-to-image generation, editing, inpainting,
colorization, and conditional image generation.

Abstract
Recent advancements in multimodal foundation models
have yielded significant progress in vision-language understanding. Initial attempts have also explored the potential of
multimodal large language models for visual content generation. However, existing approaches face a trade-off between generation diversity and controllability, struggling
to meet the varying granularity demands of different image generation tasks within a unified MLLM framework. In
this work, we propose PUMA, emPowering Unified MLLM
with Multi-grAnular visual generation, a novel paradigm

that tackles the diversity-controllability trade-off. PUMA
achieves this by unifying multi-granular visual features as
both inputs and outputs of MLLMs, thus effectively meeting
the distinct granularity needs for diverse generation and
precise manipulation within a single framework. Following multimodal pretraining and instruction tuning, PUMA
demonstrates remarkable capabilities in a wide range of
multimodal tasks, including image understanding, diverse
text-to-image generation, editing, inpainting, colorization,
and conditional generation. This work marks a significant
stride towards realizing truly unified MLLMs capable of
seamlessly adapting to the diverse granularity demands and
task requirements inherent in various visual tasks.

15447

