This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pseudo-SD: Pseudo Controlled Stable Diffusion for Semi-Supervised and
Cross-Domain Semantic Segmentation
Dong Zhao1 , Qi Zang2 , Shuang Wang2 , Nicu Sebe1 , Zhun Zhong3 B
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
1

Abstract
Pseudo-labeling is a key technique of semi-supervised and
cross-domian semantic segmentation, yet its efficacy is often hampered by the intrinsic noise of pseudo-labels. This
study introduces Pseudo-SD, a novel framework that redefines the utilization of pseudo-label knowledge through Stable Diffusion (SD). Our Pseudo-SD innovatively combines
pseudo-labels and its text prompts to fine-tune SD models, facilitating the generation of high-quality, diverse synthetic images that closely mimic target data characteristics.
Within this framework, two novel mechanisms, i.e., partial
attention manipulation, and structured pseudo-labeling, are
proposed to effectively spread text-to-image corresponding during SD fine-tuning process and to ensure controllable high-quality image synthesis respectively. Extensive
results demonstrate that Pseudo-SD significantly improves
the performance on semi-supervised and cross-domain segmentation scenarios. By injecting our Pseudo-SD into current methods, we establish new state-of-the-arts in different
datasets, offering a new way for the exploration of effective pseudo-label utilization. The source code is available
at https://github.com/DZhaoXd/Pseudo-SD.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation (SSSS) [15, 40]
and cross-domain semantic segmentation [45] (CDSS) aim
to train a segmenter with limited or domain-shifted labeled
data and abundant unlabeled images, reducing annotation
costs. To fully leverage unlabeled data, advanced semisupervised [13, 28, 57, 59] and cross-domain [6, 12, 52]
segmentation methods mainly rely on pseudo-labeling [75].
The core part of this technique is to mitigate noise interference within pseudo-labels [34]. Various methods involving noise regularization, e.g., weak-to-strong consistency
[39, 47, 49], data augmentation [12, 42, 62, 64, 72], feaB Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of performance improvements over stateof-the-art (SOTA) semi-supervised [57] and cross-domain [12,
67] semantic segmentation baselines, in comparison with recent
diffusion-based methods for synthetic segmentation data generation [50, 53, 58, 65]. Our method achieves superior performance and demonstrates significant improvements, particularly in
the source-free UDA setting, where no real labels are provided.

ture perturbation[24, 44, 46], and denoising pseudo-label
[11, 48, 68–70] have been introduced in both fields. However, the effectiveness of training with noisy labels remains
uncertain, especially at higher noise rates, limiting their reliability in low-annotation semi-supervised settings and challenging adaptation scenarios. This raises a key question:
Instead of directly training on noisy labels, can we better
exploit the knowledge in pseudo-labels?
Some pioneering works [3, 18, 40] have leveraged pretrained GANs to generate samples for SSSS and CDSS
without relying on pseudo-labels. However, their effectiveness is limited by the quality of synthesized data. Recently,
the Stable Diffusion (SD) model [36, 38] has demonstrated
strong generative capabilities, renewing interest in its application to SSSS and CDSS. Advances in using SD for seg-

22393

