This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diversity-Enhanced Distribution Alignment for Dataset Distillation
Hongcheng Li1,2,3 Yucan Zhou4 * Xiaoyan Gu1,2,3† Bo Li1,2,3 Weiping Wang1
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense, Beijing, China
4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{lihongcheng,guxiaoyan,libo,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, zhouyucan@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Distribution of Original Data Training Process
Epoch = 50

Epoch = 10

Dataset distillation, which compresses large-scale datasets
into compact synthetic representations (i.e., distilled
datasets), has become crucial for the efficient training of
modern deep learning architectures. While existing largescale dataset distillation methods leverage a pre-trained
model through batch normalization statistics alignment,
they neglect the essential role of covariance matrices in preserving inter-feature correlations, resulting in reduced diversity in the distilled datasets. In this paper, we propose
a simple yet effective approach, Diversity-Enhanced Distribution Alignment (DEDA), which enhances the diversity of
distilled data by leveraging inter-feature relationships. Our
method first establishes Gaussian distribution alignment by
matching the means and covariances of each class in the
original dataset with those of the distilled dataset in the
feature space of a pre-trained model. Since features within
the last layer of a pre-trained model are often highly similar
within each class, aligning distributions in this layer cannot
obtain diversified distilled data, resulting in gradient starvation during downstream training tasks. To overcome this
limitation, we introduce a regularizer that constrains the covariance matrix of the distilled data in the last layer to maximize diagonal elements while minimizing non-diagonal elements. Extensive evaluations across CIFAR-10/100, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet-1K demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance without additional computational overhead.

Epoch = 200

Well-trained
0.21

0.24

0.23

0.19

0.23

0.22

0.08

Enhance
Diversity
Original Data of
Different Classes

Cosine
Distance

0.09

0.09

Diversity
< 0.1 !
Distilled Data
Class Region

Distilled
Data

Figure 1. Visualization of the last layer feature distribution during CIFAR-100 model training. As training progresses, features
become increasingly compact. In a well-trained model, samples
within each class exhibit high cosine similarity (cosine distance <
0.1). This compact feature space can limit the diversity of distilled
data when aligning with the original data features.

requirements and extended training time due to the expanding dataset size present a fundamental challenge. Dataset
distillation (or condensation) has emerged as a crucial solution, which compresses the large-scale datasets into significantly smaller and more representative ones (i.e., distilled
datasets) [40, 44]. Such distilled datasets can accelerate
model training in downstream tasks, while maintaining the
training performance of the original dataset across a wide
range of model architectures.
Although many dataset distillation methods have shown
strong performance on moderate-scale benchmarks, such as
CIFAR-10/100 [11, 21, 25, 42], their scalability to largescale datasets like ImageNet-1K remains inherently constrained. One primary bottleneck is the need to load the
original data during each optimization step of the distilled
data, resulting in significant memory and computational

1. Introduction
The exponential growth of large-scale datasets has driven
significant advancements in deep learning, enabling deep
neural networks to achieve dramatic success across various
tasks [7, 13, 18, 23, 38]. However, the increasing storage
* Corresponding author. Email: zhouyucan@tju.edu.cn
† Corresponding author. Email: guxiaoyan@iie.ac.cn

3747

