This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ART: Adaptive Relation Tuning for Generalized Relation Prediction
Gopika Sudhakaran1,2

Hikaru Shindo1 Patrick Schramowski1,3
Kristian Kersting1,2,3 Stefan Roth1,2

Simone Schaub-Meyer1,2

1

2

Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt, Germany
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI) 3 German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
https://github.com/visinf/ART

Abstract
Visual relation detection (VRD) is the task of identifying
the relationships between objects in a scene. VRD models
trained solely on relation detection data struggle to generalize beyond the relations on which they are trained. While
prompt tuning has been used to adapt vision-language models (VLMs) for VRD, it uses handcrafted prompts and struggles with novel or complex relations. We argue that instruction tuning offers a more effective solution by fine-tuning
VLMs on diverse instructional data. We thus introduce ART,
an Adaptive Relation Tuning framework that adapts VLMs
for VRD through instruction tuning and strategic instance
selection. By converting VRD datasets into an instructiontuning format and employing an adaptive sampling algorithm, ART directs the VLM to focus on informative relations while maintaining generalizability. Specifically, we
focus on the relation classification, where subject-object
boxes are given and the model predicts the predicate between them. We tune on a held-in set and evaluate across
multiple held-out datasets of varying complexity. Our approach strongly improves over its baselines and can infer
unseen relation concepts, a capability absent in mainstream
VRD methods. We demonstrate ART’s practical value by using the predicted relations for segmenting complex scenes.

1. Introduction
Visual relation detection (VRD) plays a key role in visual
scene understanding by enabling the recognition of relationships between entities as triplets of ⟨subject, predicate,
object⟩ [10, 21, 34, 43]. This structured understanding of
visual content is essential for downstream tasks like visual
question answering (VQA) [2], image captioning [11], and
referring object detection and segmentation [31]. While
mainstream VRD models have advanced through relationcentric training, they predominantly rely only on fixed
datasets such as Visual Genome [14] and GQA [12]. This

Figure 1. ART predicts detailed, context-rich relationships, enhancing downstream reasoning, e.g., for segmentation. From
the input image, ART (trained on VG) predicts unseen and informative relations like floating on and on back of (highlighted in
green). This richer relational context, facilitated by careful tuning of a VLM, e.g., allows the DeiSAM [31] segmentation model,
which relies on scene graphs for spatial reasoning, to accurately
identify even small objects like the flag on the boat’s back. When
prompted to find an object floating on water, the ART scene graph
also enables correct segmentation, while the less specific groundtruth scene graphs [12] may miss such segmentation.

dependence introduces three key limitations: (i) Overfitting to frequent in-distribution relations, weakening performance on rare relations [3]; (ii) Inability to infer novel, unseen relations; (iii) Coarse annotations that fail to capture
fine-grained relational semantics. For example, given the
scene in Fig. 1, GQA annotations describe generic relations
like “boat in water” or “flag on boat”. A model trained
solely on these overlooks finer distinctions, such as whether
the boat is floating on water or the flag is positioned on the
back of the boat. Humans naturally infer such nuances using
broad context, yet, manually extending VRD datasets with
fine-grained annotations is costly and impractical, making it
crucial to develop models that generalize beyond predefined
relations without exhaustive retraining.
A promising alternative is to leverage vision-language
models (VLMs), which excel in generalization across multimodal tasks by learning from large-scale image-text corpora [1, 5, 23, 28]. Thus, VLMs could help overcome VRD

16323

