This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STEP-DETR: Advancing DETR-based Semi-Supervised Object Detection with
Super Teacher and Pseudo-Label Guided Text Queries
Tahira Shehzadi1,2,3 , Khurram Azeem Hashmi1,2,3 , Shalini Sarode1,2,3 , Didier Stricker1,2,3 ,
Muhammad Zeshan Afzal1,2,3
1
2
3
DFKI,
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau,
MindGarage-RPTU
tahira.shehzadi@dfki.de

Abstract

tection by combining a small percentage of labeled data
with a large amount of unlabeled data to enhance model
accuracy and generalization. It has several key applications, including autonomous vehicles [14, 19], medical imaging [27, 31, 39, 44, 51], surveillance [9] and agriculture [8],
where it improves detection accuracy with minimal labeled
data.
Traditional SSOD methods typically rely on conventional
object detectors, including one-stage models [29, 43] and
two-stage models [10, 30], which incorporate manually designed components like anchor boxes and non-maximum
suppression (NMS). However, applying these methods in
SSOD presents several challenges, including noise in pseudolabels [11] and difficulties in detecting small objects [35].
More recently, SSOD methods [32, 33, 35, 37, 38, 45, 54]
based on the DETR architecture [2, 16, 17, 23, 34, 53, 57]
have been developed, eliminating the need for traditional
components such as NMS. Semi-DETR [54] introduces a
one-to-many assignment strategy [4, 16] to generate better
pseudo-labels and one-to-one assignment strategy [2] to remove duplicates. Later, Sparse Semi-DETR [35] enhances
this approach by refining the queries in the one-to-many assignment strategy, improving performance, particularly for
small and partially obscured objects.
Despite the remarkable progress of SSOD methods [3,
12, 15, 18, 26, 36, 40, 46–49, 56], current state-of-theart approaches still have certain limitations. (1) In semisupervised setting, labeled data is not effectively used to
generate good quality pseudo-labels for unlabeled data to
improve detection performance. Inefficiencies in leveraging
labeled and unlabeled data can result in poorly optimized
anchor boxes and ineffective NMS in CNN-based SSOD
approaches [12, 15, 46, 49], as depicted in Figure 1(a). In
transformer-based SSOD [35, 45, 54], one-to-one [2] and
one-to-many assignment strategy [4, 16] uses noisy pseudolabels leading to lower detection performance, as shown in
Figure 1(a). (2) SSOD methods often overlook that detectors
tend to assign higher confidence scores to frequent object
categories, confusing rare categories with the background.

This paper addresses key limitations in current SemiSupervised Object Detection (SSOD) frameworks, focusing
on issues related to pseudo-label quality, confidence bias,
and inefficient query generation. Traditional methods, including CNN-based and DETR-based architectures, often
face challenges such as noisy pseudo-labels, overfitting to
common object categories, and consequently face difficulty
detecting rare objects. Specifically, recent DETR-based
SSOD approaches struggle with the one-to-many assignment strategy, which produces noisy pseudo-labels and overlapping predictions, resulting in suboptimal performance.
To address these challenges, we propose STEP-DETR, a
transformer-based SSOD framework. STEP-DETR introduces Super Teacher to generate higher-quality pseudolabels and improve the student’s learning process. Furthermore, STEP-DETR proposes Pseudo-Label Text Queries,
which incorporate text embeddings from Super Teacher, balancing the student’s confidence across common and rare
categories, thereby mitigating confidence bias and enhancing generalization. Moreover, Denoising Text Guided Object
Queries synthesizes query-label pairs for foreground and
background using contrastive learning, enabling the model
to better distinguish objects from background noise. To
further boost performance and training efficiency, a Query
Refinement Module is incorporated to filter out redundant
denoising queries. On MS-COCO and Pascal VOC benchmarks, STEP-DETR outperforms state-of-the-art methods,
demonstrating its effectiveness in improving semi-supervised
object detection. Notably, with just 10% labeled data, it
achieves 45.4 mAP, surpassing the baseline Semi-DETR by
1.9 mAP.

1. Introduction
Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD) [1, 3, 12, 15,
18, 40, 46, 47, 49, 56] improves fully supervised object de-

3069

