This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blind2Sound: Self-Supervised Image Denoising without Residual Noise
Jiazheng Liu1,†
1

Zejin Wang1,†

Bohao Chen2,1

Hua Han1,3, *

State Key Laboratory of Brain Cognition and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{liujiazheng2018,wangzejin2018,chenbohao2024,hua.han}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised blind denoising for Poisson-Gaussian
noise remains a challenging task. Pseudo-supervised pairs
constructed from single noisy images re-corrupt the signal and degrade the performance. The visible blindspots
solve the information loss in masked inputs. However, without explicitly noise sensing, mean square error as an objective function cannot adjust denoising intensities for dynamic noise levels, leading to noticeable residual noise. In
this paper, we propose Blind2Sound, a simple yet effective
approach to overcome residual noise in denoised images.
The proposed adaptive re-visible loss senses noise levels
and performs personalized denoising without noise residues
while retaining the signal lossless. The theoretical analysis
of intermediate medium gradients guarantees stable training, while the Cramer Gaussian loss acts as a regularization to facilitate the accurate perception of noise levels and
improve the performance of the denoiser. Experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets show the superior performance of our method, especially for single-channel images.

1. Introduction
Supervised image denoisers [38, 47, 48, 19, 4, 43, 45]
have demonstrated impressive and superior performance by
utilizing numerous noisy-clean pairs. Notably, several researchers [38, 47, 48] pioneered the removal of additive
white Gaussian noise and achieved notable performance
gains. These denoisers [19, 4, 43, 45] can also eliminate
other noise patterns, especially signal-dependent noise in
the real world. However, acquiring a large amount of paired
data to train a denoiser can be costly and, in some cases,
even impossible, such as CT and MRI. Moreover, the performance of these denoisers rapidly degrades once they en* Corresponding author, † Equal contribution

Noisy

Ground Truth

N2C: 39.23 dB

NBR2NBR: 39.28 dB

Blind2Unblind: 39.89 dB

Ours: 40.15 dB

Figure 1: Real-world image denoising on the SIDD validation. Our approach performs thorough noise removal,
while other methods have considerable noise artifacts.
counter unknown noise patterns due to the inherent prior
embedded in the training data.
To tackle the challenge of acquiring paired data, researchers have conducted numerous studies [7, 44, 12,
41, 27, 24, 5] in two categories: data synthesis and selfsupervised denoisers. Data synthesis involves generating
paired data for supervised training via adding noise to clean
images. For instance, UPI [7] and CycleISP [44] analyze the operations of the camera imaging pipeline on a
signal-dependent noise and create an imaging framework
capable of generating arbitrary real image pairs in both
raw-RGB and sRGB space. Other researchers [12, 41]
synthesize noisy-clean image pairs for training using preestimated noise parameters. However, while data synthesis approaches are practical with limited specific data, their
poor generality limits their broader application.
Noise2Noise [27], a special case of supervised denoising
that uses corrupted image pairs, is the foundation for selfsupervised denoising. Self-supervised denoisers, which

12937

