This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Super Resolved Imaging with Adaptive Optics
Robin Swanson1, 2
1

Esther Y. H. Lin1

Masen Lamb3, 4

Suresh Sivanandam1, 2

Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1

University of Toronto 2 Dunlap Institute for Astronomy & Astrophysics
3
International Gemini Observatory 4 University of Victoria

N Jointly Optimized Phases

Telescope
and Learned
Mirror Phases

N Sub-Exposures

Under-Sampled Images
with Induced Sub-Pixel Shis

Jointly Optimized
Super Resolution
Neural Network

Super-Resolved Image

Figure 1. Super Resolved Imaging with Adaptive Optics is a computational imaging method to enable multi-image super-resolution in
scientific telescopes. Without any additional hardware, existing adaptive mirrors are used to inject diversity into each sub-exposure. When
jointly reconstructed, we are able to recover higher spatial resolution from an otherwise undersampled signal. Each exposure’s phase
profiles is jointly optimized along with the image reconstruction algorithm—resulting in greatly improved performance.

Abstract
Astronomical telescopes suffer from a tradeoff between field
of view (FoV) and image resolution: increasing the FoV
leads to an optical field that is under-sampled by the science
camera. This work presents a novel computational imaging approach to overcome this tradeoff by leveraging the
existing adaptive optics (AO) systems in modern groundbased telescopes. Our key idea is to use the AO system’s
deformable mirror to apply a series of learned, precisely
controlled distortions to the optical wavefront, producing
a sequence of images that exhibit distinct, high-frequency,
sub-pixel shifts. These images can then be jointly upsampled to yield the final super-resolved image. Crucially, we
show this can be done while simultaneously maintaining
the core AO operation—correcting for the unknown and
rapidly changing wavefront distortions caused by Earth’s
atmosphere. To achieve this, we incorporate end-to-end optimization of both the induced mirror distortions and the

upsampling algorithm, such that telescope-specific optics
and temporal statistics of atmospheric wavefront distortions
are accounted for. Our experimental results with a hardware prototype, as well as simulations, demonstrate significant SNR improvements of up to 12 dB over non-AO superresolution baselines, using only existing telescope optics
and no hardware modifications. Moreover, by using a precise bench-top replica of a complete telescope and AO system, we show that our methodology can be readily transferred to an operational telescope.

1. Introduction

29142

Super-resolution (SR) techniques have been integral to astronomical imaging due to inherent telescope design constraints [23]. Telescopes can have many science instruments
Corresponding author: robin@cs.toronto.edu
Project website: www.cs.toronto.edu/~robin/aosr

