This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neighboring Autoregressive Modeling for Efficient Visual Generation
Yefei He1,2∗† Yuanyu He1∗ Shaoxuan He1∗ Feng Chen3∗
Hong Zhou1‡ Kaipeng Zhang2‡ Bohan Zhuang1‡
1

Zhejiang University, China
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
3
The University of Adelaide, Australia
2

∗ Equal contribution

† Work done during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory

‡ Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Generated samples from NAR. Results are shown for 512 × 512 text-guided image generation (1st row), 256 × 256 classconditional image generation (2nd row) and 128 × 128 class-conditional video generation (3rd row).

Abstract
Visual autoregressive models typically adhere to a rasterorder “next-token prediction” paradigm, which overlooks
the spatial and temporal locality inherent in visual content. Specifically, visual tokens exhibit significantly stronger
correlations with their spatially or temporally adjacent tokens compared to those that are distant. In this paper,
we propose Neighboring Autoregressive Modeling (NAR), a
novel paradigm that formulates autoregressive visual generation as a progressive outpainting procedure, following a
near-to-far “next-neighbor prediction” mechanism. Starting from an initial token, the remaining tokens are decoded
in ascending order of their Manhattan distance from the

initial token in the spatial-temporal space, progressively
expanding the boundary of the decoded region. To enable parallel prediction of multiple adjacent tokens in the
spatial-temporal space, we introduce a set of dimensionoriented decoding heads, each predicting the next token
along a mutually orthogonal dimension. During inference,
all tokens adjacent to the decoded tokens are processed
in parallel, substantially reducing the model forward steps
for generation. Experiments on ImageNet 256 × 256 and
UCF101 demonstrate that NAR achieves 2.4× and 8.6×
higher throughput respectively, while obtaining superior
FID/FVD scores for both image and video generation tasks
compared to the PAR-4X approach. When evaluating on
text-to-image generation benchmark GenEval, NAR with

19000

