This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-boosted Deformable 3D Gaussians for Dynamic Scene Reconstruction
Wenhao Xu1

Wenming Weng1 Yueyi Zhang2,B Ruikang Xu1 Zhiwei Xiong1,B
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 MiroMind

wh-xu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yueyi.zhang@miromind.ai, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn
https://github.com/wh-xu1/E-D3DGS

GT

4D-GS

Ours

Ours - Dynamic

Event

Event-4DGS

Ours
Ours
w/o GTJM w/o DSD

Ours - Static

Figure 1. Left: Quality comparison with the baselines 4D-GS [42], Event-4DGS (the event-extended version of [46]), and our variants,
highlighting the superior rendering quality of our method. Our GS-threshold joint modeling (GTJM) effectively eliminates event-induced
artifacts (particularly the purple haze), while our dynamic-static decomposition (DSD) improves the quality of dynamic regions. Middle:
Separate rendering of dynamic and static Gaussians from our DSD. Right: The scatter plot illustrates our method’s ability to achieve both
high fidelity and fast rendering, where dot radii correspond to different resolutions (400×400, 600×600, and 800×800).

Abstract

1. Introduction
Dynamic scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis are
essential for immersive applications in virtual/augmented
reality and entertainment [20, 24, 34, 42, 46, 47, 49]. While
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [2, 26, 36] offer unprecedented photorealism, they are constrained by slow training
and rendering speeds. Despite recent advances in optimization techniques [5, 7–9], real-time rendering remains elusive. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [17] addresses this limitation through efficient differentiable rasterization, yet existing dynamic extensions [24, 42, 46, 47]
are constrained by inherent limitations of RGB cameras, including low frame rates and motion blur.
In this paper, we present event-boosted deformable 3D
Gaussians for dynamic scene reconstruction. Event cameras [10, 19, 38, 39], with their microsecond-level temporal
resolution, can provide continuous motion information and
near-infinite viewpoints that traditional RGB cameras often
fail to capture. These advantages make event cameras particularly valuable for dynamic scene reconstruction.
However, integrating events into 3D scene reconstruction faces new challenges. Specifically, event supervision
for 3D-GS relies on an accurate event generation model

Deformable 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) is limited
by missing intermediate motion information due to the low
temporal resolution of RGB cameras. To address this,
we introduce the first approach combining event cameras,
which capture high-temporal-resolution, continuous motion
data, with deformable 3D-GS for dynamic scene reconstruction. We observe that threshold modeling for events
plays a crucial role in achieving high-quality reconstruction. Therefore, we propose a GS-Threshold Joint Modeling strategy, creating a mutually reinforcing process that
greatly improves both 3D reconstruction and threshold
modeling. Moreover, we introduce a Dynamic-Static Decomposition strategy that first identifies dynamic areas by
exploiting the inability of static Gaussians to represent motions, then applies a buffer-based soft decomposition to separate dynamic and static areas. This strategy accelerates
rendering by avoiding unnecessary deformation in static areas, and focuses on dynamic areas to enhance fidelity. Additionally, we contribute the first event-inclusive 4D benchmark with synthetic and real-world dynamic scenes, on
which our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

28334

