This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Vision Language Model for Training-Free 3D Point Cloud OOD
Detection via Graph Score Propagation
Tiankai Chen1 , Yushu Li23 , Adam Goodge3 , Fei Teng1 , Xulei Yang3 , Tianrui Li1 , Xun Xu†3
1
Southwest Jiaotong University, 2 South China University of Technology
3
Institute for infocomm research(I2 R), A*STAR
Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection in 3D point cloud data
remains a challenge, particularly in applications where safe
and robust perception is critical. While existing OOD detection methods have shown progress for 2D image data,
extending these to 3D environments involves unique obstacles. This paper introduces a training-free framework
that leverages Vision-Language Models (VLMs) for effective OOD detection in 3D point clouds. By constructing a
graph based on class prototypes and testing data, we exploit the data manifold structure to enhancing the effectiveness of VLMs for 3D OOD detection. We propose a novel
Graph Score Propagation (GSP) method that incorporates
prompt clustering and self-training negative prompting to
improve OOD scoring with VLM. Our method is also adaptable to few-shot scenarios, providing options for practical
applications. We demonstrate that GSP consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods across synthetic and realworld datasets for 3D point cloud OOD detection.

1. Introduction
The detection of out-of-distribution (OOD) samples in 3D
point cloud data is critical for the safe and robust deployment of deep learning models in real-world environments.
For example, identifying unexpected objects is crucial for
ensuring the safety of personnel, vehicles, and robots by
preventing collisions [18, 39, 41]. Existing approaches to
OOD detection in 3D point clouds often focus on training separate models for speciﬁc tasks [54]. These methods typically rely on abundant in-distribution (ID) training
data to build models based on reconstruction [34], distance
metrics [10], or discriminative strategies [15]. While these
methods achieve strong results, they depend on substantial ID training data, which is often challenging to collect
in many real-world applications and generalization may be
† Correspondence to Xun Xu: xu xun@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, Code
link: https://github.com/handsome999KK/GSP_OOD

Figure 1. Exploiting the testing data manifold for zero-/few-shot
OOD detection. ID prototypes propagate scores to test samples,
with conﬁdent ones selected as pseudo negative prompts for reﬁnement.

hindered by the limited diversity of ID training samples.
These limitations highlight the need for alternative solutions
that do not require extensive ID data collection.
Vision-language models (VLMs) have emerged as powerful foundation models that bridge visual features with
textual understanding [23, 28, 42, 58]. VLMs are trained
to associate the content of visual inputs with their textual labels and they demonstrate strong zero-shot generalization to unseen visual content [42]. This capacity
makes VLMs appealing for OOD detection without retraining [5, 36, 37, 51]. A common VLM-based OOD detection
pipeline maps ID class concepts, such as class names with
various templates, into a shared feature space using the text
encoder. The visual samples, similarly projected using the
visual encoder, are then scored by comparing their distances
to the ID class concepts in this feature space [36].
This VLM-based OOD detection pipeline has shown
competitive performance for 2D image detection, primarily due to the vast understanding of 2D VLMs from the
massive-scale image-text pre-training datasets (e.g. 400M

28797

