This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaze-Language Alignment for Zero-Shot Prediction
of Visual Search Targets from Human Gaze Scanpaths
Sounak Mondal1,2 * Naveen Sendhilnathan2 Ting Zhang2 Yue Liu2 Michael Proulx2
Michael Louis Iuzzolino2 Chuan Qin2 Tanya R. Jonker2
1

Stony Brook University

2

Meta Reality Labs Research
Inference Data

Training Dataset:
Gaze data for N target categories

Abstract
Decoding human intent from eye gaze during a visual
search task has become an increasingly important capability within augmented and virtual reality systems. However,
gaze target prediction models used within such systems are
constrained by the predefined target categories found within
available gaze data, limiting their generalizability to novel
categories and their usefulness within real-world, interactive systems. In this work, we present the Gaze-Language
Alignment Model (GLAM), a vision-language model that
can generalize gaze target predictions to novel categories
of search targets lacking gaze annotation. To do so, GLAM
uses a novel gaze encoder to encode foveal and peripheral
information of a gaze scanpath. The resultant gaze embeddings are aligned with language embeddings of large language model-generated search descriptions for associated
target categories using a novel contrastive learning strategy
called Gaze-Language Alignment Decomposition (GLAD).
When used to train GLAM in a zero-shot setup, GLAD surpassed naive contrastive learning strategies by nearly onethird in target prediction accuracy, even outperforming a
fully supervised baseline. Moreover, in a fully supervised
setup, GLAM outperformed previous methods in target prediction accuracy, regardless of the training strategy used.

“clock”

“boat”

“laptop”

(a) Previous Methods

Image

Image

(b) GLAM + GLAD (Ours)
Gaze
Encoder

P(clock)
= 0.5

Gaze
Encoder
Scanpath
for “cup”

“cup”
“clock” “boat” “laptop”
Target outside
Target within
N categories
N categories

❌
P(boat)
= 0.3
P(laptop)
= 0.2

Scanpath for “cup”
“clock”
“boat”
“laptop”
“cup”
Vocabulary of
Category Labels

“clock”
“boat”

Lang. “laptop”
Encoder
“cup”

✅
Best Match

Figure 1. Visual search gaze datasets like COCO-Search18 [19]
contain scanpaths for a predefined set of N target categories, but,
during inference, models trained on such datasets must generalize
to novel categories. (a) Traditional classification-based gaze target
prediction models struggle to predict novel categories (“cup” in
above scenario). (b) Our method uses a vision-language model to
predict novel target categories by matching a gaze encoding with
language encodings of LLM-generated search descriptions for a
vocabulary of target categories, using a similarity metric.

and context-specific functionality, or trigger specific actions
within a real or virtual environment to assist a user.
Historically, user intent has been identified via neural signals using technologies such as electroencephalography [23, 29], or functional magnetic resonance imaging
[71, 84]. These methods, however, are costly, bulky, and
invasive, making them impractical for everyday tasks or integration within ubiquitous devices. With the widespread
inclusion of eye-trackers in wearable AR/VR devices, however, eye gaze has been shown to be a pervasive, nonintrusive method to identify user intent [5, 8, 11, 12, 26,
31, 33, 35, 37, 39, 49, 50, 60–63, 72, 75].
Within this research, we focus on the task of gaze target prediction (or gaze target decoding), which involves
identifying the object a user is attending to during cate-

1. Introduction
Highly interactive technologies such as in-car voice assistants and augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) headsets
have been increasingly integrated within our daily lives. To
ensure that such technologies support dynamic interaction
and enable satisfying user experiences, there has been an
increased demand for systems to understand and predict a
user’s intentions or goals. If a system can do so, then it can,
for example, provide relevant, just-in time information, task
* Work done during an internship at Meta Reality Labs Research

2738

