This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mixture of Experts Guided by Gaussian Splatters Matters: A new Approach to
Weakly-Supervised Video Anomaly Detection
Giacomo D’Amicantonio1∗ , Snehashis Majhi2,3∗ , Quan Kong4 , Lorenzo Garattoni4 , Gianpiero
Francesca4 , François Brémond2,3 , Egor Bondarev1
1

Eindhoven University of Technology 2 INRIA 3 Côte d’Azur University 4 Woven by Toyota
* Joint first authors. Code: https://github.com/snehashismajhi/GS-MoE

Abstract

5

Toyota Motor Europe

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is a challenging task
due to the variability of anomalous events and the limited
availability of labeled data. Under the Weakly-Supervised
VAD (WSVAD) paradigm, only video-level labels are provided during training, while predictions are made at the
frame level. Although state-of-the-art models perform well
on simple anomalies (e.g., explosions), they struggle with
complex real-world events (e.g., shoplifting). This difficulty
stems from two key issues: (1) the inability of current models to address the diversity of anomaly types, as they process
all categories with a shared model, overlooking categoryspecific features; and (2) the weak supervision signal, which
lacks precise temporal information, limiting the ability to
capture nuanced anomalous patterns blended with normal
events. To address these challenges, we propose Gaussian
Splatting-guided Mixture of Experts (GS-MoE), a novel
framework that employs a set of expert models, each specialized in capturing specific anomaly types. These experts
are guided by a temporal Gaussian splatting loss, enabling
the model to leverage temporal consistency and enhance
weak supervision. The Gaussian splatting approach encourages a more precise and comprehensive representation
of anomalies by focusing on temporal segments most likely
to contain abnormal events. The predictions from these specialized experts are integrated through a mixture-of-experts
mechanism to model complex relationships across diverse
anomaly patterns. Our approach achieves state-of-theart performance, with a 91.58% AUC on the UCF-Crime
dataset, and demonstrates superior results on XD-Violence
and MSAD datasets. By leveraging category-specific expertise and temporal guidance, GS-MoE sets a new benchmark
for VAD under weak supervision.

Vision. With the increasing capabilities of deep-learning
models, there have been various approaches to tackle this
task. The main focus of recent research in the field of VAD
has been to model spatio-temporal dependencies in videos,
obtaining meaningful representations of the motion of relevant agents in the scene. In this sense, the transformer architecture has proved to be very effective, forming the backbone of multiple works. While the current state-of-the-art
models have achieved reasonable results on publicly available datasets, they still fail to capture subtle anomalies and
to detect the temporal window in which they happen.

1. Introduction

We identify one of the main reasons for these issues
in the formulation of the WSVAD task [31, 36]. Multiinstance learning (MIL) strikes a balance between fully supervised methods, which exhibit good performance but require costly data annotation, and unsupervised methods,
which do not require manual annotations but generally result in worse performance. The core idea of MIL is to create bags containing positive and negative data samples (i.e.,
normal and abnormal videos), labeled only at the videolevel. During training, the model assigns a score between
0 and 1 to each snippet, with 0 indicating a normal snippet
and 1 indicating an abnormal snippet. The highest-scoring
samples in the normal bag are guided towards 0, allowing
the model to learn most normal scenarios correctly. On the
other hand, the highest-scoring negative samples are pushed
towards 1. This leads the model to be supervised, and therefore learn, few and specific instances of anomalous events,
ignoring useful information contained in neighboring snippets. Over time, this approach has proved to be powerful but insufficient to train a model to correctly capture
the secondary and specific attributes of different anomalous
classes. In recent works [8, 38, 40], different auxiliary objectives are identified as priors for the VAD task to optimize
the training process.
To address this issue, we propose to model the anomalies in a video as Gaussian distributions, rendering multiple Gaussian kernels in correspondence with peaks detected
along the temporal dimension of the scores estimated for

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) in surveillance videos is
one of the most challenging tasks in the field of Computer

10275

