This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreqPDE: Rethinking Positional Depth Embedding for Multi-View 3D Object
Detection Transformers
Haisheng Su1,3♠ Junjie Zhang2,3♠♡ Feixiang Song3 Sanping Zhou2
Wei Wu3 Junchi Yan1B Nanning Zheng2B
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 3 SenseAuto Research
{suhaisheng,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, hooz1009@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting 3D objects accurately from multi-view 2D images is a challenging yet essential task in the field of autonomous driving. Current methods resort to integrating
depth prediction to recover the spatial information for object query decoding, which necessitates explicit supervision
from LiDAR points during the training phase. However,
the predicted depth quality is still unsatisfactory such as
depth discontinuity of object boundaries and indistinction
of small objects, which are mainly caused by the sparse
supervision of projected points and the use of high-level
image features for depth prediction. Besides, cross-view
consistency and scale invariance are also overlooked in
previous methods. In this paper, we introduce Frequencyaware Positional Depth Embedding (FreqPDE) to equip 2D
image features with spatial information for 3D detection
transformer decoder, which can be obtained through three
main modules. Specifically, the Frequency-aware Spatial
Pyramid Encoder (FSPE) constructs a feature pyramid by
combining high-frequency edge clues and low-frequency semantics from different levels respectively. Then the Crossview Scale-invariant Depth Predictor (CSDP) estimates the
pixel-level depth distribution with cross-view and efficient
channel attention mechanism. Finally, the Positional Depth
Encoder (PDE) combines the 2D image features and 3D
position embeddings to generate the 3D depth-aware features for query decoding. Additionally, hybrid depth supervision is adopted for complementary depth learning from
both metric and distribution aspects. Extensive experiments
conducted on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed method.

(a) Input Image

(b) Projected LiDAR Points

(c) Pseudo Depth Map

(d) Image Coverage of Projected Points with Different Input Resolution

Figure 1. Illustration of motivation. (a) Input image with a fixed
resolution. (b) Missing depth supervision of distant vehicles (red
circle) with sparse projected LiDAR points. (c) Pseudo depth map
complements implicit distribution priors additionally. (d) Coverage comparisons of projected points with different input resolution
and downsampling factors.

driving. Compared to LiDAR-based 3D perception applications, the camera-based paradigm has drawn increasing attention from both industrial and academic researchers owing to the controllable cost. However, recovering the 3D
spatial information from multi-view 2D images is an illposed problem, and current methods usually integrate the
depth prediction task for introducing additional supervision.

1. Introduction

Literally, recent works attempt to exploit depth information in various ways. Pseudo-LiDAR [54] estimates dense
depth map and generates the pseudo 3D lidar points using the camera extrinsic which can be processed with the
off-the-shelf LiDAR-based 3D detector. CaDDN [44] and
BEVDet series [16–18] predict the pixel-wise probabilistic
depth distribution and then project the 2D image features
to the 3D space following the Lift-Splat-Shoot (LSS) [40]
paradigm. BEVDepth [25] introduces the explicit supervision of the depth branch with the projected lidar points

In recent years, great advancements in perception technology [22, 44, 47, 54] have been witnessed in autonomous
♠ Equal Contribution.
B Corresponding Authors.
♡ Work done during an internship at SenseAuto Research.

28145

