This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2Outfit: Controllable Outfit Generation with Multimodal Language Models
Yuanhao Zhai1 *

Yen-Liang Lin2

Ashwin Chandramouli2
1

Minxu Peng2

Junsong Yuan1

State University of New York at Buffalo

Larry S. Davis2
David Doermann1
2

Amazon

Abstract
Existing outfit recommendation frameworks focus on outfit compatibility prediction and complementary item retrieval. We present a text-driven outfit generation framework, Text2Outfit, which generates outfits controlled by text
prompts. Our framework supports two forms of outfit recommendation: 1) Text-to-outfit generation, where the prompt
includes the specification for each outfit item (e.g., product features), and the model retrieves items that match the
prompt and are stylistically compatible. 2) Seed-to-outfit
generation, where the prompt includes the specification for a
seed item, and the model both predicts which product types
the outfit should include (referred to as composition generation) and retrieves the remaining items to build an outfit.
We develop a large language model (LLM) framework that
learns the cross-modal mapping between text and image
set, and predicts a set of embeddings and compositions to
retrieve outfit items. We devise an attention masking mechanism in LLM to handle the alignment between text descriptions and image tokens from different categories. We conduct
experiments on the Polyvore dataset and evaluate the quality
of the generated outfits from two perspectives: 1) feature
matching for outfit items, and 2) outfit visual compatibility.
The results demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms the baseline methods in text to outfit generation.

1. Introduction
Fashion outfit recommendation system constructs outfits
from items that go well together (e.g., an outfit that includes
a top, a bottom, shoes, bags, etc). It is an important recommendation problem for online retailers, as customers frequently shop for items that can be worn together. Existing
outfit recommendation methods mainly focus on compatibility prediction (determining whether a set of fashion items
in an outfit go well together) [7, 9, 21, 29, 30] or outfit
* This work was done during an internship at Amazon.

Figure 1. A text to outfit generation framework that generates
outfits driven by the text prompt. Our framework supports two
forms of outfit recommendation. For text-to-outfit generation, the
prompt includes outfit-level and item-level specifications. The
model retrieves outfit items that match the texts in the prompt
and are stylistically compatible. For seed-to-outfit generation, the
prompt includes the specification for a seed item (a seed image
or text description). The model predicts the composition (outfit
categories) and retrieves the items to build outfits.

complementary item retrieval (completing a partial outfit by
finding a compatible item) [20, 25]. The outfit items are
predicted by a pre-trained model and are not controlled by
the text prompt. For example, generating outfits with desired
attributes, e.g., wide-leg sweatpants.
Recent work ([14, 15]) for text to image retrieval leverages a pre-trained LLM model to learn image embeddings.
They perform better retrieval than non-LLM based approaches (e.g., CLIP [24]) especially for longer text descriptions. However, these approaches focus on retrieving single
images so they are not designed for retrieving image sets
like outfits.
We present an outfit generation framework (Text2Outfit)
that generates outfits driven by a text prompt (cf. Figure
1). Our framework learns the cross-modal mapping (text
to image set) and predict the embeddings to retrieve outfits

16165

