This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdvDreamer Unveils:
Are Vision-Language Models Truly Ready for Real-World 3D Variations?
Shouwei Ruan1† , Hanqing Liu1† , Yao Huang1† , Xiaoqi Wang1 , Caixin Kang1 ,
Hang Su2 , Yinpeng Dong3 , Xingxing Wei1 *
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University
3
College of AI, Tsinghua University
{shouweiruan, hqliu, y huang, xxwei}@buaa.edu.cn, suhangss@tsinghua.edu.cn, dongyinpeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
(A) Adversarial 3D Variations Samples form Single-view Natural Images

! LLaVa-1.5-13B

Claude-3.5-sonnet

Qwen-2-VL

(C) Background Variations for Adv-3DT samples

ChatGPT-4o

Image Captioning @ LLaVa-1.5-13B
“ What is the object in this picture? ”

“ What is the object in the picture used for? ”

“ What is the vehicle in the picture used for? ”

Natural Samples
Natural Samples

Natural Samples

The vehicle in the image, an electric
powered garbage truck from Volvo, is
designed to collect and transport waste
materials such as trash...

Adv-3DT Samples

The image shows an overturned truck
on its side, which suggests that it might
have been involved in some sort of
accident or incident…

This image shows an instant
camera with a printed photo
coming out of one side.
Adv-3DT Samples

This image shows a compact
printer on a light-colored surface.

The object in the image is a Moka
pot, also known as a stovetop
espresso maker...
Adv-3DT Samples

The object appears to be a grenade,
specifically a hand grenade. Hand
grenades are typically used in military
or combat scenarios...

!

A lamp is sitting
on a table next
to a book.

A kitchen counter with
a white paper towel roll
sitting on top of it.

A toilet paper is placed in
a unique and
unconventional manner.

A white baby crib with

A chair that is leaning on its
side, creating an unusual and
interesting visual effect.

A broken and discarded
chair leaning against a
brick wall

（B）Physical Reproduction of Adversarial 3D Variations Samples
Zero-shot Classification @ OpenCLIP (ViT-B)
Natural

Adv-3DT

(AdvDreamer)

Adv-3DT

Natural Samples

Natural Samples

Adv-3DT Samples (Real World)

Natural Samples

Adv-3DT Samples (Real World)

Adv-3DT Samples (Real World)

(Real World)

mattress, placed
! aonwhite
a wooden floor.

(D) Illustration of GPT-Score judgement
“Please describe the content of this image.”

Cassette player: 78%

!
Police car: 100%

Cannon: 20%

The image features
a small yellow toy
forklift truck sitting
on a cement surface.

The image features a
yellow and black toy
lawn mower, sitting on
its side on a sidewalk.

!

Parking meter: 67%

“ What type of toy vehicle in the picture? ”

The image features a
green object lying on the
ground, possibly a piece of
machinery or a broken toy.

The picture shows a
red toy vehicle, which
appears to be a toy
car or a toy truck.

The image features a
small green toy tank,
which is sitting on a
dirt road.

!

The picture shows
a toy fire truck.

Assault rifle: 38%

“What is the object in this image?
Choose from the following list: Forklift ,
Lawn mower, School bus and Golf Cart”

Traffic light: 100%

“ Write a short description for this image. ”

Parking meter: 78%

!

Forklift.

Lawn mower.

What is the object in this image?
Choose from the following list: Chainsaw ,
Fire truck, Trolley and Hydrant.

What is the main object in this image?
Choose from the following list: Truck, Tank,
Assault rifle and Cannon.

!

Tank.

Assault rifle.

!

Fire truck.

Chainsaw.

Caption Answering

Natural

Bobsled: 62%

A bathroom counter
with a soap dispenser, a
bar of soap, and a towel.

GPT-4 (text-only) Scoring Results

GT

Elegant and minimalist stone soap dispenser,
designed to bring a touch of luxury and functionality.
Caption Answering

Adv-3DT

Ambulance: 100%

A white towel is draped over
a wicker basket, and a hair
dryer is placed on top of it.

GT

Let's evaluate the predicted caption
using the criteria provided:
1. Semantic Accuracy: 8/10 Explanation:….
2. Tone Confidence: 9/10 Explanation: :….
3. Consistency: 7/10 Explanation: :….
Total Score: 24/30

Let's evaluate the predicted caption
using the criteria provided:
1. Semantic Accuracy: 5/10 Explanation:….
2. Tone Confidence: 9/10 Explanation: :….
3. Consistency: 5/10 Explanation: :….
Total Score: 19/30

Figure 1. The 3D Variation Vulnerabilities in VLMs. (A) The proposed AdvDreamer allow the capture of adversarial 3D transformation
(Adv-3DT) samples from single natural images, threatening various VLMs. (B) These Adv-3DT samples can be successfully reproduced
in the physical world and (C) retain their aggressiveness under background variations. (D) We also explain the GPT-Score metric used in
the experiments. In each VLM response, we highlight the correct, significant error, and less precise parts using different colors.

Abstract

ity of worst-case Adv-3DT samples, we propose a Naturalness Reward Model that provides continuous naturalness
regularization during adversarial optimization, effectively
preventing convergence to hallucinated or unnatural elements. Thirdly, to enable systematic evaluation across diverse VLM architectures and visual-language tasks, we introduce the Inverse Semantic Probability loss as the adversarial optimization objective, which solely operates in the
fundamental visual-textual alignment space. Based on the
captured Adv-3DT samples with high aggressiveness and
transferability, we establish MM3DTBench, the first VQA
benchmark dataset tailored to evaluate VLM robustness under challenging 3D variations. Extensive evaluations of
representative VLMs with varying architectures reveal that
real-world 3D variations can pose severe threats to model
performance across various tasks.

Vision Language Models (VLMs) have exhibited remarkable generalization capabilities, yet their robustness in dynamic real-world scenarios remains largely unexplored. To
systematically evaluate VLMs’ robustness to real-world 3D
variations, we propose AdvDreamer, the first framework
capable of generating physically reproducible Adversarial 3D Transformation (Adv-3DT) samples from single-view
observations. In AdvDreamer, we integrate three key innovations: Firstly, to characterize real-world 3D variations
with limited prior knowledge precisely, we design a zeroshot Monocular Pose Manipulation pipeline built upon
generative 3D priors. Secondly, to ensure the visual qual† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

7894

