This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Golden Noise for Diffusion Models: A Learning Framework
Zikai Zhou1 , Shitong Shao1 , Lichen Bai1 , Shufei Zhang2 , Zhiqiang Xu3 , Bo Han4 , Zeke Xie1 *
1
HKUST-GZ 2 Shanghai AI Lab 3 MBZUAI 4 HKBU
{zikaizhou, sshao213, lichenbai, zekexie}@hkust-gz.edu.cn
zhangshufei@pjlab.org.cn

Github:

zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae

bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

https://github.com/xie-lab-ml/Golden-Noise-for-Diffusion-Models

StableDiffusion-xl

Hunyuan-DiT

Dreamshaper-xl-v2-turbo

Prompt: Two cats and three dogs sitting on the grass.

Prompt: A photo of a blue cow and a black
computer keyboard

Prompt: New York Skyline with "NPNet"
written with fireworks on the sky.

MPS：0.3970 < 0.6030

CLIPScore: 0.8381 < 0.9269

HPSv2: 34.69 < 36.67

Prompt: A banana on the left of an apple.

Prompt: A baby panda wearing a red hat, green
gloves, red shirt, and green pants.

Prompt: A photo of a red cake and a purple chair.

AES: 5.4045 < 5.6784

ImageReward: 134.85 < 191.58

PickScore: 24.33 < 25.21

Standard

With NPNets

With NPNets

Standard

Standard

With NPNets

Figure 1. We visualize images synthesized by 3 different diffusion models and evaluate them using 6 human preference metrics. Images
for each prompt are synthesized using the same random seed. These images with NPNet demonstrate a noticeable improvement in overall
quality, aesthetic style, and semantic faithfulness, along with numerical improvements across all six metrics. More importantly, our
NPNet is applicable to various diffusion models, showcasing strong generalization performance with broad application potential. More
visualization results are in Appendix 22.

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion model is a popular paradigm that
synthesizes personalized images by providing a text prompt
and a random Gaussian noise. While people observe that
some noises are “golden noises” that can achieve better
text-image alignment and higher human preference than
others, we still lack a machine learning framework to obtain those golden noises. To learn golden noises for diffusion sampling, we mainly make three contributions in this
paper. First, we identify a new concept termed the noise
prompt, which aims at turning a random Gaussian noise

into a golden noise by adding a small desirable perturbation derived from the text prompt. Following the concept,
we first formulate the noise prompt learning framework that
systematically learns “prompted” golden noise associated
with a text prompt for diffusion models. Second, we design
a noise prompt data collection pipeline and collect a largescale noise prompt dataset (NPD) that contains 100k pairs
of random noises and golden noises with the associated text
prompts. With the prepared NPD as the training dataset,
we trained a small noise prompt network (NPNet) that can
directly learn to transform a random noise into a golden
noise. The learned golden noise perturbation can be con-

17688

