This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards a Unified Copernicus Foundation Model for Earth Vision
Yi Wang1

Zhitong Xiong1
Chenying Liu1,2
Adam J. Stewart1,2
Thomas Dujardin1
Nikolaos Ioannis Bountos3,4
Angelos Zavras3,4
Franziska Gerken5
3
5
Ioannis Papoutsis
Laura Leal-Taixé
Xiao Xiang Zhu 1,2
1
2
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
3
National Technical University of Athens & National Observatory of Athens
4
5
Harokopio University of Athens
NVIDIA

Abstract
Advances in Earth observation (EO) foundation models
have unlocked the potential of big satellite data to learn
generic representations from space, benefiting a wide range
of downstream applications crucial to our planet. However, most existing efforts remain limited to fixed spectral
sensors, focus solely on the Earth’s surface, and overlook
valuable metadata beyond imagery. In this work, we take
a step towards next-generation EO foundation models with
three key components: 1) Copernicus-Pretrain, a massivescale pretraining dataset that integrates 18.7M aligned images from all major Copernicus Sentinel missions, spanning
from the Earth’s surface to its atmosphere; 2) CopernicusFM, a unified foundation model capable of processing any
spectral or non-spectral sensor modality using extended
dynamic hypernetworks and flexible metadata encoding;
and 3) Copernicus-Bench, a systematic evaluation benchmark with 15 hierarchical downstream tasks ranging from
preprocessing to specialized applications for each Sentinel
mission. Our dataset, model, and benchmark greatly improve the scalability, versatility, and multimodal adaptability of EO foundation models, while also creating new opportunities to connect EO, weather, and climate research.
Codes at https://github.com/zhu-xlab/Copernicus-FM.

Sentinel-1

Cloud

Sentinel-2

Land cover

Sentinel-3

Climate zone

Sentinel-5P

Biomass

GLO30 DEM

Copernicus-Pretrain

Unified
Copernicus-FM

Air quality

Copernicus-Bench

Figure 1. Overview of our efforts towards a unified Copernicus
foundation model, from pretraining to benchmarking.

First, current pretraining datasets predominantly focus on high- to medium-resolution sensors like Sentinel1/2 [17, 52] and Landsat [60] observing the Earth’s surface [6, 49, 56]. This excludes lower-resolution but temporally rich missions like Sentinel-3 [16] and Sentinel-5P [53],
which provide near-daily global coverage of land, oceanic,
and atmospheric variables critical for climate studies. Second, most existing EO foundation models adopt rigid architectures tailored to one or more specific sensor modalities,
lacking the capacity to dynamically adapt to new spectral
bands or non-spectral input. While recent efforts [10, 62]
introduce some spectral flexibility, they still lack mechanisms to handle non-spectral variables that possess a significant amount of EO data. Furthermore, current foundation model evaluation benchmarks primarily focus on surface applications using RGB, multispectral, or SAR sensors [34, 40], while overlooking coarse-scale sensors and
atmospheric tasks. These limitations hinder the development of versatile multimodal foundation models that integrate EO with weather and climate research, highlighting
both a critical challenge and a promising opportunity in the
era of global environmental change.
To address these challenges, we introduce three synergistic contributions that enhance the scalability, versatil-

1. Introduction
Earth observation (EO) satellites provide a critical means
of monitoring planetary dynamics, capturing land cover
changes, atmospheric composition, and other important environmental phenomena [47, 64, 67]. Recent advances
in self-supervised learning have revolutionized the usage
of big EO data, enabling the development of generalpurpose foundation models to learn generalized representations from unlabeled imagery at scale [54, 69]. Despite
rapid progress, the evolution of EO foundation models faces
critical limitations in three dimensions: sensor diversity,
model flexibility, and evaluation breadth.

9888

