This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HAMoBE: Hierarchical and Adaptive Mixture of Biometric Experts for
Video-based Person ReID

1

Yiyang Su1 * Yunping Shi2 * Feng Liu2 Xiaoming Liu1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
2
Department of Computer Science, Drexel University
{suyiyan1, liuxm}@msu.edu, {ys839, fl397}@drexel.edu

Abstract
Recently, research interest in person re-identiﬁcation
(ReID) has increasingly focused on video-based scenarios, essential for robust surveillance and security in varied and dynamic environments. However, existing videobased ReID methods often overlook the necessity of identifying and selecting the most discriminative features from
both videos in a query-gallery pair for effective matching. To address this issue, we propose a novel Hierarchical and Adaptive Mixture of Biometric Experts (HAMoBE)
framework, which leverages multi-layer features from a pretrained large model (e.g., CLIP) and is designed to mimic
human perceptual mechanisms by independently modeling
key biometric features—appearance, static body shape, and
dynamic gait—and adaptively integrating them. Specifically, HAMoBE includes two levels: the ﬁrst level extracts low-level features from multi-layer representations
provided by the frozen large model, while the second level
consists of specialized experts focusing on long-term, shortterm, and temporal features. To ensure robust matching, we
introduce a new dual-input decision gating network that dynamically adjusts the contributions of each expert based on
their relevance to the input scenarios. Extensive evaluations on benchmarks like MEVID demonstrate that our approach yields signiﬁcant performance improvements (e.g.,
+13.0% Rank1).

1. Introduction
Video-based person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) is a crucial
technology in intelligent systems, aiming to accurately
model and match tracklets of the same individual across different camera views [21, 59, 61, 62, 67, 68, 94, 98]. ReID
is increasingly vital for public security. The core operation
involves processing two video inputs, Video #1 (V1 ) and
Video #2 (V2 ), through a neural network function E that
* Equal contribution

11525

Figure 1. Comparison of video-based person ReID methods.
Existing solutions typically process videos to extract the most
overlapping and robust features, such as long-term features (e.g.,
static body shape), which may not adequately address all identiﬁcation scenarios, especially when dynamic attributes like gait
are absent. Our HAMoBE approach dynamically adjusts the processing of features based on the speciﬁc context of paired video
inputs, effectively integrating long-term, short-term, and temporal
features to enhance identiﬁcation accuracy and adaptability.

extracts feature vectors: f1 = E(V1 ) and f2 = E(V2 ).
These vectors are then compared using a similarity function, where a high value indicates a successful match.
Extracting robust features (f ) across diverse variations
poses a signiﬁcant challenge in video-based person ReID.
Accurately capturing and integrating three key features:
long-term feature that is consistent over time (i.e., static
body shape), short-term feature that changes over days (i.e.,
appearance), and temporal feature that varies dynamically
within a video (i.e., gait) are essential to ensure reliable
identiﬁcation under varying conditions such as changes in
lighting, background, camera views, clothing alterations,
and human activities. Each of these discriminative features plays a dynamically signiﬁcant role depending on the
scenario: short-term feature is particularly critical in short-

