This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiMPLe - Disentangled Multi-Modal Prompt Learning: Enhancing
Out-Of-Distribution Alignment with Invariant and Spurious Feature Separation

1

Umaima Rahman1 , Mohammad Yaqub1 , Dwarikanath Mahapatra2
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, 2 Khalifa University

Abstract

CoOp-OOD [29], an enhancement to the original CoOp,
addressed this issue by decoupling invariant and spurious
features in the images. By maximizing the similarity between invariant visual features and the corresponding textual representations, it emphasized on robust features, while
regulating the predictions based on spurious ones. Additionally, minimizing the conditional mutual information
between invariant and spurious image features ensured a
clearer separation within the feature space.
Nonetheless, a crucial consideration in this approach
remains unaddressed: spurious features within an image
should logically correspond to spurious elements within
textual representations, while invariant features should be
aligned exclusively with invariant text components. Without explicit mapping, the disentanglement process may lead
to ambiguous associations between spurious and invariant
features, making it difficult for the model to distinguish relevant signals from noise during inference as seen in Fig. 1
(a) and (c). This ambiguity can propagate through the network, potentially amplifying the influence of spurious correlations under domain shifts or when encountering novel
categories. By explicitly aligning spurious and invariant
features within and across modalities, the model ensures
consistent feature associations, thereby enhancing its interpretability and resilience in applications where distribution
shifts are inevitable.
In light of these limitations, we propose DiMPLe - a
Disentangled Multi-Modal Prompt Learning a principled
approach aimed at separating invariant and spurious features across both vision and language modalities. DiMPLe
achieves this by minimizing the conditional mutual information between the invariant and spurious features within
each modality. Our contribution can be summarised as:

We introduce DiMPLe (Disentangled Multi-Modal Prompt
Learning), a novel approach to disentangle invariant and
spurious features across vision and language modalities
in multi-modal learning. Spurious correlations in visual
data often hinder out-of-distribution (OOD) performance.
Unlike prior methods focusing solely on image features,
DiMPLe disentangles features within and across modalities while maintaining consistent alignment, enabling better generalization to novel classes and robustness to distribution shifts. Our method combines three key objectives:
(1) mutual information minimization between invariant and
spurious features, (2) spurious feature regularization, and
(3) contrastive learning on invariant features. Extensive experiments demonstrate DiMPLe demonstrates superior performance compared to CoOp-OOD, when averaged across
11 diverse datasets, and achieves absolute gains of 15.27 in
base class accuracy and 44.31 in novel class accuracy. The
code is available at github.com/rumaima/DiMPLe.

1. Introduction
Contrastive Language–Image Pretraining (CLIP) [21] revolutionized multi-modal learning by linking textual and visual data [11], [24], [5], [7], [17]. The semantic associations
present in the shared image-text embedding space allowed
it to make predictions on novel and unseen categories, inspiring further research in the domain of multi-modal understanding. Prompt tuning methods like CoOp [31] refined
CLIP’s performance through context optimization of learnable prompt vectors, and demonstrate improved text-visual
alignment and model adaptability. By employing different
prompt-initialization strategies, CoOp successfully showed
how prompt engineering could facilitate model adaptability and enable improved alignment between text and visual
representations. However, despite CoOp’s effectiveness, it
exhibited limited generalizability to novel classes. This limitation stemmed from spurious correlations within the visual data, which often misled the model’s predictions when
applied to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples.

1. DiMPLe is a coherent approach to feature disentanglement across vision-language modalities avoiding ambiguities across modality mappings (Fig. 1 (b) and (d)).
2. DiMPLe goes beyond spurious correlation mitigation by
employing class-conditioned mutual information minimization that maintains separation between invariant and

1634

