This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Oasis: One Image is All You Need for Multimodal Instruction Data Synthesis
Letian Zhang∗*1, 2 Quan Cui2 Bingchen Zhao3 Cheng Yang2
1

Tongji University

2

Bytedance

3

University of Edinburgh

Abstract

Previous
LLaVA

The success of multi-modal large language models
(MLLMs) has been largely attributed to the large-scale
training data. However, the training data of many MLLMs
is unavailable due to privacy concerns. The expensive and
labor-intensive process of collecting multi-modal data further exacerbates the problem. Is it possible to synthesize
multi-modal training data automatically without compromising diversity and quality? In this paper, we propose a
new method, Oasis, to synthesize high-quality multi-modal
data with only images. Oasis breaks through traditional
methods by prompting only images to the MLLMs, thus extending the data diversity by a large margin. Our method
features a delicate quality control method which ensures the
data quality. We collected over 500k data and conducted
incremental experiments on LLaVA-NeXT. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can significantly improve the performance of MLLMs. The image-based synthesis also allows us to focus on the specific-domain ability of MLLMs. Code and dataset are publicly available at
https://github.com/Letian2003/MM_INF.

GPT-4V
Claude
…

Post-process

Qwen2-VL
Gemini

Oasis
LLaVA
GPT-4V
Claude
…

Post-process

Qwen2-VL
Gemini

Figure 1. Comparison of previous methods and our proposed
Oasis framework for multi-modal data synthesis. Previous approaches rely on an input image, complex prompts for generating
text, and human labor. Responses are generated from advanced
LLMs and MLLMs (e.g., GPT-4V [1] and Qwen2-VL [2, 40]).
Interestingly, our proposed Oasis requires only a single image
to generate multi-modal instruction-following data, showing great
simplicity and practical value.

Some recent research focuses on the diversity and complexity of data. For example, MMEvol [29] is an image-text instruction evolution framework, which iteratively enhances
instruction diversity in multiple designed domains.
We analyze the existing synthesis approach and concluded three main concerns across this line of work: (1)
Constant pipeline compromises data diversity. Invariable prompts and fixed flow constrains the data scope and
homogenizes the difficulty, leading to an incomprehensive
model. (2) Insufficient control on data quality. It is hard
to synthesize high-quality data which could significantly
improve the representation ability of MLLMs. Most studies
adopt a caption-based GPT generation strategy to mitigate
this problem. (3) Complicated framework involves human engagement. A self-contained synthesis framework
typically requires human efforts to design data patterns or
prompts, which makes data synthesis troublesome.
In response to these concerns, we propose Oasis (One
image is all you need for multimodal data synthesis), a
novel and straightforward method to create high-quality and

1. Introduction
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have become
a popular research topic in recent communities due to their
superior performance in various multi-modal tasks. The
success of MLLMs relies heavily on the large-scale training
data, which directly compose the model’s knowledge base.
However, the lack of multi-modal training data has been a
bottleneck for the development of MLLMs, since the training data of top MLLMs are typically private. Therefore, an
effective way to synthesize high-quality multi-modal data
has been a long-standing challenge for the community.
Previous studies have presented some effective methods
to synthesize multi-modal data with low cost. LLaVA [24]
takes a GPT-assisted method to generate multi-modal
instruction-following data based on existing image-pair
data.
ALLAVA [4] achieves data synthesis using a
captioning-then-QA fashion with the assistance of GPT-4V.
* Work done during internship at Bytedance.

3542

