This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing Vecset Diffusion Model for Fast Shape Generation
Zeqiang Lai1,2⋆ , Yunfei Zhao2,3⋆ , Zibo Zhao2,4 , Haolin Liu2 , Fuyun Wang1
Huiwen Shi2 , Xianghui Yang2 , Qingxiang Lin2 , Jingwei Huang2
Yuhong Liu2 , Jie Jiang2 , Chunchao Guo2† , Xiangyu Yue1†
1
MMLab, CUHK 2 Tencent Hunyuan 3 VISG, NJU 4 ShanghaiTech
https://github.com/Tencent-Hunyuan/FlashVDM

Figure 1. High-resolution 3D shapes generated by Flash Vecset Diffusion Model (FlashVDM) within 1 second.

Abstract

parable quality, which is made possible by stabilizing consistency distillation with our newly introduced Progressive Flow Distillation. For VAE, we introduce a lightning
vecset decoder equipped with Adaptive KV Selection, Hierarchical Volume Decoding, and Efficient Network Design. By exploiting the locality of vecset and the sparsity of shape surface in the volume, our decoder drastically lowers FLOPs, minimizing the overall decoding overhead. We apply FlashVDM to Hunyuan3D-2 [58] to obtain Hunyuan3D-2 Turbo. Through systematic evaluation,
we show that our model significantly outperforms existing
fast 3D generation methods, achieving comparable performance to the state-of-the-art while reducing inference time
by over 45× for reconstruction and 32× for generation.

3D shape generation has greatly flourished through the
development of so-called “native” 3D diffusion, particularly through the Vecset Diffusion Model (VDM). While recent advancements have shown promising results in generating high-resolution 3D shapes, VDM still struggles at
high-speed generation. Challenges exist because of not
only difficulties in accelerating diffusion sampling but also
VAE decoding in VDM – areas under-explored in previous
works. To address these challenges, we present FlashVDM,
a systematic framework for accelerating both VAE and
DiT in VDM. For DiT, FlashVDM enables flexible diffusion sampling with as few as 5 inference steps and com⋆ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

2523

