This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboTron-Mani: All-in-One Multimodal Large Model for Robotic Manipulation
Feng Yan* Fanfan Liu* Yiyang Huang Zechao Guan Liming Zheng
Yufeng Zhong Chengjian Feng Lin Ma†
Meituan
https://github.com/EmbodiedAI-RoboTron/RoboTron-Mani
Abstract
Recently, robotics has advanced significantly through
the integration of larger models and large-scale datasets.
However, challenges remain in applying these models to
3D spatial interactions and managing data collection costs.
To address these issues, we propose the multimodal robotic
manipulation model RoboTron-Mani and the comprehensive dataset RoboData. RoboTron-Mani, on one hand, enhances 3D perception through camera parameters and occupancy supervision. On the other hand, it further incorporates Modality-Isolation-Mask and multimodal decoder
blocks based on OpenFlamingo, improving modality fusion and fine-grained perception. RoboData integrats several publicly-available datasets, achieving the first fusion
of multi-view images, camera parameters, depth maps, actions, and space alignment, which facilitates comprehensive
learning from diverse robotic datasets and offers one complete evaluation system. Trained on RoboData, RoboTronMani is the first generalist policy that surpasses expert models, enabling simultaneous evaluation of all tasks across
multiple datasets, rather than being limited to specific data
or task selections. Specifically, RoboTron-Mani boosts
manipulation performance by increasing the average sequence length on CALVIN from 1.7 to 3.5, enabling crossembodiment generalization, and achieving state-of-the-art
results on both simulated and real-world datasets.

Figure 1. Stacked bar chart depicting the performance of various models across five datasets. The “SOTA” label represents the
best results achieved by specialized models for each dataset. Notably, RoboTron-Mani is the only generalist policy evaluated on
multiple datasets, demonstrating competitive performance relative
to “SOTA”. For more details, please refer to Section 4.1.

1. Introduction

datasets [13, 15, 38]. These innovations have not only extended the frontiers of natural language processing [17] and
computer vision [23, 57] but also galvanized researchers to
integrate these models into Embodied Artificial Intelligence
(EAI) [51], thereby enabling more complex and varied tasks
in real-world environments.
In terms of modeling, there has been a gradual shift
from single-task or single-dataset learning [44, 60, 70] towards transfer learning approaches [9, 26, 31, 37, 61, 64].
These models leverage robust foundational models that are
pre-trained on extensive “internet-scale” datasets or diverse
data sources. Subsequently, they undergo fine-tuning on
specific robotic datasets to produce precise control actions.
On the data front, researchers collect data through various means to augment models. For example, the Open
X-Embodiment [53] amalgamates diverse datasets containing vision-language-action pairs, whereas the RH20T [20]
gathers data via teleoperation. Despite the impressive robustness of these efforts, they still encounter significant
challenges in practical applications. First, is the direct application of multimodal models to EAI the optimal so-

In recent years, machine learning has experienced profound
advancements, from the advent of CLIP [56, 70] to the progression of foundational models like the GPT series [1,
10, 11], Llama [62, 63], LLaVA [39], and Flamingo [2,
3]. These strides are largely due to larger transformerbased architectures and the utilization of “internet-scale”
* Equal contribution. Email: bphengyan@163.com
† Corresponding author.

13707

