This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Linear N-Point Solver for Structure and Motion from Asynchronous Tracks
Hang Su1 * Yunlong Feng1 * Daniel Gehrig2 Panfeng Jiang1
Xavier Lagorce1 Laurent Kneip1,4
1

Ling Gao3

ShanghaiTech University, 2 University of Pennsylvania, 3 Amap, Alibaba Group,
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
𝑷𝟏

Abstract
Structure and continuous motion estimation from point correspondences is a fundamental problem in computer vision
that has been powered by well-known algorithms such as
the familiar 5-point or 8-point algorithm. However, despite
their acclaim, these algorithms are limited to processing
point correspondences originating from a pair of views each
one representing an instantaneous capture of the scene. Yet,
in the case of rolling shutter cameras, or more recently,
event cameras, this synchronization breaks down. In this
work, we present a unified approach for structure and linear motion estimation from 2D point correspondences with
arbitrary timestamps, from an arbitrary set of views. By formulating the problem in terms of first-order dynamics and
leveraging a constant velocity motion model, we derive a
novel, linear point incidence relation allowing for the efficient recovery of both linear velocity and 3D points with
predictable degeneracies and solution multiplicities. Owing
to its general formulation, it can handle correspondences
from a wide range of sensing modalities such as global
shutter, rolling shutter, and event cameras, and can even
combine correspondences from different collocated sensors.
We validate the effectiveness of our solver on both simulated and real-world data, where we show consistent improvement across all modalities when compared to recent
approaches. We believe our work opens the door to efficient structure and motion estimation from asynchronous
data. Code can be found at https://github.com/
suhang99/AsyncTrack-Motion-Solver.

𝑷𝑴

3D Points
𝑷𝒊

…

𝒙𝑖1
𝒙𝑖𝑗

𝐟′𝑖1

lin. traj. 𝒗𝑡′𝑖𝑗

𝒙𝑖𝑁𝑖
𝐟′𝑖𝑁𝑖

𝐟′𝑖𝑗

𝒗
actual traj. 𝐶 𝑡𝑖𝑗
Figure 1. We develop a linear N-point solver for recovering 3D
points Pi and the velocity v of a camera undergoing quasi-linear
motion, given a set of timestamped observations (xij , tij ). No
assumptions are made about the temporal synchronization of observations xij , yielding a general algorithm that can handle observations from global shutter, rolling-shutter, and fully asynchronous rolling sensors, such as event cameras. Observations
′ .
xij are
 into rotation compensated bearing vectors fij =
 converted

exp ωt′ij × K−1 x̃ij , and used to construct a set of linear point
incidence relations. Here t′ij = tij − ts denotes relative time, ts
the reference time, K the camera intrinsics, ω the angular rate,
which can be given by an IMU or upstream estimation algorithm.

tails the identification of the extrinsic parameters relating
a pair of views of a scene, meaning a Euclidean transformation consisting of a relative orientation and an up-to-scale
translational displacement. Note however that in the videobased, continuous motion setting, there is only a marginal
difference between finding the relative pose and finding local camera dynamics. Indeed, if the images come from a
constant-rate video stream, we merely have to divide the
relative displacement variables by the frame sampling period to obtain approximate local camera dynamics.1

1. Introduction
Finding the continuous motion of a single monocular camera is one of the most fundamental problems in the area
of geometric computer vision. In the calibrated case, the
core of the solution to the visual odometry problem en-

1 The matter may complicate if more jerky stop-and-go motion is involved, in which case key-frame selection may be required, and the op-

* indicates equal contribution

4339

