This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Framework for Double-Blind Federated Adaptation of Foundation Models
Nurbek Tastan1 Karthik Nandakumar1,2
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)
2
Michigan State University (MSU)
nurbek.tastan@mbzuai.ac.ae, nandakum@msu.edu

Abstract
Foundation models (FMs) excel in zero-shot tasks but benefit from task-specific adaptation. However, privacy concerns prevent data sharing among multiple data owners,
and proprietary restrictions prevent the learning service
provider (LSP) from sharing the FM. In this work, we propose BlindFed, a framework enabling collaborative FM
adaptation while protecting both parties: data owners do
not access the FM or each other’s data, and the LSP does
not see sensitive task data. BlindFed relies on fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) and consists of three key innovations: (i) FHE-friendly architectural modifications via
polynomial approximations and low-rank adapters, (ii) a
two-stage split learning approach combining offline knowledge distillation and online encrypted inference for adapter
training without backpropagation through the FM, and
(iii) a privacy-boosting scheme using sample permutations
and stochastic block sampling to mitigate model extraction attacks. Empirical results on four image classification datasets demonstrate the practical feasibility of the
BlindFed framework, albeit at a high communication cost
and large computational complexity for the LSP. The code
can be found at https://github.com/tnurbek/blindfed.

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of BlindFed framework for
double-blind federated adaptation of a foundation model.

ability. The simplest approach is transfer learning, where
the FM serves as a frozen feature extractor, and only a classification head is trained – linear probing is this head is a
single linear layer. It is also possible to perform partial
(only a selected subset of parameters are adapted) or full
finetuning of the parameters of the FM based on the downstream data. Recent parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)
methods fall into two categories: (i) prompt learning [23],
which learns input or intermediate prompts without modifying FM parameters, and (ii) adapters [11, 21, 41], which
add trainable components to the FM. Adapters include sequential (e.g., low-rank adaptation a.k.a. LoRA [21]) and
parallel (e.g., low-rank side adaptation a.k.a. LoSA [41])
variants. Except for transfer learning and parallel adapters,
all the other adaptation techniques require partial or complete backpropagation through the FM, which is computationally expensive. Zeroth-order optimization (ZOO) offers
a backpropagation-free alternative for black-box FMs but
incurs high cost due to numerous forward passes.
The other major challenge in FM adaptation is the unavailability of downstream training data to the learning service provider (LSP) who owns the FM. Moreover, this data
may be distributed across multiple data owners (e.g., multiple hospitals or banks) and cannot be collated due to privacy concerns and regulations. Thus, FM adaptation requires collaboration between the LSP and data owners. Federated learning (FL) [40] addresses this challenge by en-

1. Introduction
Foundation models (FMs) have transformed artificial intelligence, achieving state-of-the-art results across machine
learning, computer vision, and natural language processing. Prominent examples include GPT [7, 46], CLIP [47],
BERT [12, 18, 37], Stable Diffusion [49], Segment Anything [28], and Vision Transformers [13, 38]. Though vision and multimodal FMs have demonstrated good zeroshot performance, there is often scope for performance
improvement when faced with challenging out-of-domain
tasks (e.g., medical images or satellite imagery). Hence, it
becomes essential to adapt the FM for the downstream task.
Adaptation of FMs for downstream tasks involves two
main challenges: computational complexity and data avail-

923

