This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instant GaussianImage: A Generalizable and Self-Adaptive Image
Representation via 2D Gaussian Splatting

1

Zhaojie Zeng1 , Yuesong Wang1 *, Tao Guan1 , Chao Yang2 , Lili Ju3
School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
NERCGIS, China University of Geoscience (Wuhan)
3
Department of Mathematics, University of South Carolina
{zhaojiezeng, yuesongwang, qd gt}@hust.edu.cn, yangchao@cug.edu.cn, ju@math.sc.edu

Abstract

Training Process
40
38

PSNR

Implicit Neural Representation (INR) has demonstrated remarkable advances in the field of image representation but
demands substantial GPU resources. GaussianImage recently pioneered the use of Gaussian Splatting to mitigate
this cost, however, the slow training process limits its practicality, and the fixed number of Gaussians per image limits its adaptability to varying information entropy. To address these issues, we propose in this paper a generalizable
and self-adaptive image representation framework based on
2D Gaussian Splatting. Our method employs a network
to quickly generate a coarse Gaussian representation, followed by minimal fine-tuning steps, achieving comparable
rendering quality to GaussianImage while significantly reducing training time. Moreover, our approach dynamically
adjusts the number of Gaussian points based on image complexity to further enhance flexibility and efficiency in practice. Experiments on DIV2K and Kodak datasets show that
our method matches or exceeds GaussianImage’s rendering
performance with far fewer iterations and shorter training
times. Specifically, our method reduces the training time
by up to one order of magnitude while achieving superior
rendering performance with the same number of Gaussians.
Code is availiable at https://github.com/whoiszzj/Instant-GI

30

Net. Init.

20

Rand. Init.

10
10

20000 Iterations (%)

100

Rand. Init.

Net. Init.

2

Iterations: 0

20000

Details

Figure 1. Teaser. Comparison of the network-based initialization
(Net. Init.) and the random initialization (Rand. Init.) regarding
training efficiency and rendering quality using the same number of
Gaussians. The top graph shows that Net. Init. converges faster
and achieves higher quality. The bottom row visualizes the initialization state (left), results after 20,000 iterations (middle), and
zoomed-in details (right), highlighting the improved detail preservation and efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction

leverages the local continuity of the data to map the input
coordinates to their corresponding output values.

Image representation is an important task in computer vision, which has numerous applications in fields such as image compression [38, 48], super-resolution [25, 45], deblurring [23, 34], and so on. The emergence of Implicit Neural
Representation (INR) has shifted image representation from
traditional methods like grid graphics to the more recent approach using multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). This method

Before the introduction of methods like GaussianImage (GI) [48], INR techniques relied primarily on highdimensional MLPs to capture fine image details. However,
this strategy leads to slower training, higher memory consumption, and longer decoding times, making it less suitable for real-world applications. To address these limitations, GI draws inspiration from 3D Gaussian Splatting [19]
(3DGS), utilizing discrete Gaussian primitives for image in-

* Corresponding author.

27896

