This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Adversarial Transferability via Negative Hessian Trace Regularization
Yunfei Long 1 , Zilin Tian1 , Liguo Zhang1∗ , Huosheng Xu1
1
Harbin Engineering University
{2016064109, tzl, zhangliguo, xuhuosheng}@hrbeu.edu.cn

Abstract

effective, posing significant threats to safety-critical applications [7, 8, 47]. Therefore, methods for generating adversarial examples with high transferability, referred to as
transfer-based attacks, have garnered increasing attention.

Transferability makes the black-box attacks to be practical. Recent studies demonstrate that adversarial examples
situated at the flat maxima on the loss landscape tend to
exhibit higher transferability and propose effective strategies to optimize adversarial examples to converge toward
that region. However, these works primarily consider the
first-order gradient regularization and have yet to explore
higher-order geometry properties of the flat loss landscape,
which may lead to suboptimal results. In this work, we propose leveraging the trace of the Hessian matrix of loss function with respect to the adversarial example as a curvatureaware regularizer. For computationally efficient, we introduce an approximation method for the trace based on
stochastic estimation and finite difference. We theoretically
and empirically demonstrate that the trace of Hessian matrices for adversarial examples near local loss maxima is
consistently negative. Following this insight, we propose
Negative Hessian Trace Regularization (NHTR), explicitly
penalizing the negative Hessian trace to suppress curvature
in all directions. Compared to existing first-order regularization methods, NHTR can generate adversarial examples
at flatter local regions. Extensive experimental results on
the ImageNet-compatible and CIFAR-10 datasets show that
NHTR can significantly improve adversarial transferability
than the state-of-the-art attacks.

From the perspective of improving generalization, many
works have been proposed to enhance the transferability of
adversarial examples, which can be divided into three categories. Gradient optimization attacks improve transferability by employing advanced gradient calculation techniques
to prevent adversarial examples from becoming trapped
in suboptimal local maxima [4, 10, 13, 30, 40, 42, 49].
Input transformation attacks leverage data augmentation
strategies to increase input diversity, thereby mitigating
overfitting of adversarial examples to the surrogate model
[5, 39, 41, 43]. Model ensemble attacks generate adversarial examples by simultaneously attacking multiple surrogate
models, effectively reducing the upper bound on generalization error [1, 3, 4, 17, 46]. The latter two categories can be
integrated with gradient optimization attacks to further enhance the transferability.
Inspired by the observation that a flatter loss landscape
promotes better model generalization [12, 48], recent empirical and theoretical studies [3, 13, 30, 31] suggest that adversarial examples situated in flat maxima—regions where
the loss peaks and grows slowly—tend to exhibit higher
transferability. For instance, Reverse Adversarial Perturbation (RAP) [30] generates highly transferable adversarial examples by injecting worst-case perturbations into the
optimization process of maximizing the loss to achieve flat
maxima. Similarly, Penalized Gradient Norm (PGN) [13]
enhances transferability by imposing an additional penalty
on the gradient norm of the loss function to improve the
flatness of the surface. While these approaches provide effective strategies for directing adversarial examples toward
flatter regions, they only focus on the first-order regularization of the gradient and have yet explored higher-order
geometry properties of the flat loss landscape.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved exceptional performance in computer vision but remain susceptible to adversarial examples [4, 14, 20, 26, 32]. The adversarial examples are maliciously crafted by introducing imperceptible
perturbations to natural examples, causing models to yield
erroneous predictions. A central property of adversarial examples is transferability, i.e., adversarial examples generated by attacking a surrogate model can also mislead other
models. This property renders black-box attacks practically

In this work, we investigate the curvature of loss with respect to adversarial examples via the Hessian matrix and
propose a novel attack objective to enhance adversarial
transferability. We measure curvature using the trace of the

∗ Corresponding author.

2386

