This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RA-BUSSeg: Relation-aware Semi-supervised Breast Ultrasound Image
Segmentation via Adjacent Propagation and Cross-layer Alignment
Wanting Zhang1 , Zhenhui Ding1 , Guilian Chen1 , Huisi Wu1 *, Jing Qin2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

2310273079@email.szu.edu.cn, hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate breast ultrasound (BUS) image segmentation is
critical for diagnosis and surgical planning, but faces challenges due to limited labeled images. Semi-supervised
methods show promise by leveraging pseudo-labels to mitigate reliance on large-scale annotations. However, their
performance is highly dependent on the quality of pseudolabels, which is difficult to guarantee in BUS images due to
inherent complexities such as low contrast, speckle noise,
and artifacts. Previous studies primarily focus on refining
pseudo-labels in one way or the other, or introducing auxiliary supervision; yet they overlook the potential of harnessing intrinsic and inherent pixel relations to enhance the
robustness of semi-supervised segmentation. In this paper,
we present a novel relation-aware semi-supervised model
for BUS image segmentation, which is composed of two
innovative components: an adjacent relation propagation
(ARP) module and a cross-layer relation alignment (CRA)
module, for comprehensively explore pixel relations to improve segmentation performance. The ARP propagates relations among adjacent pixels to reinforce the collaborative prediction of correlated pixels and enhance the model’s
awareness of local semantic consistency. The CRA aligns
cross-layer pixel relations, employing deep-layer guidance
to rectify erroneous correlations in shallow layers for noise
suppression, while integrating multi-scale contexts to enable robust segmentation of lesions with varying sizes. Extensive experiments on two representative BUS datasets under various labeling conditions demonstrate the superiority of our method to the SOTAs. Codes are available at
https://github.com/dodooo1/RA-BUSSeg.

Figure 1. Challenges of breast ultrasound image segmentation: (a)
low contrast between breast masses and background, (b) blurring
boundaries caused by speckle noise and severe artifacts, and (c) lesions with varying scales. The yellow boxes indicate the locations
of the lesions and the red regions represent ground truth.

counts for 24.5% of all female cancer cases [3]. Evidence
has demonstrated that early screening plays a pivotal role
in reducing breast cancer mortality [5]. Breast ultrasound
(BUS) is widely used in current screening procedures, given
its portability, cost-effectiveness, non-invasiveness, and superior performance in detecting dense breasts versus mammography [2, 10]. Computer-assisted BUS analysis systems
can enhance diagnosis accuracy and support precise surgical planning, while alleviating doctors’ workload in largescale screening scenarios. To the end, many recent studies [4, 16, 29, 34] are devoted to developing deep learning
models for automatic segmentation of breast lesions from
BUS images to facilitate the construction of these systems.

1. Introduction

To ensure segmentation model accuracy, large-scale
pixel-level annotations are typically required for training.
However, publicly available labeled BUS images are scarce,
while manual annotation is costly and expertise-intensive.
In this regard, semi-supervised learning (SSL) approaches
are widely harnessed to reduce reliance on annotated data.
Pseudo-labeling is a prevalent SSL paradigm that generates
pseudo-labels for unlabeled data and uses them alongside
labeled data for training [31, 43]. The learning objective is
to minimize pixel-wise divergence between predictions and
pseudo-labels, making training performance highly depen-

Breast cancer poses a significant global health challenge,
with the Global Cancer Observatory reporting that it ac* Corresponding Author

21689

