This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global Regulation and Excitation via Attention Tuning for Stereo Matching
Jiahao LI1

Xinhong Chen1 Zhengmin JIANG1
1 City University of Hong Kong

Qian Zhou1 Yung-Hui Li2
2 Hon Hai Research Institute

Jianping Wang1

jiahali2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Stereo matching achieves significant progress with iterative algorithms like RAFT-Stereo and IGEV-Stereo. However, these methods struggle in ill-posed regions with occlusions, textureless, or repetitive patterns, due to a lack
of global context and geometric information for effective
iterative refinement. To enable the existing iterative approaches to incorporate global context, we propose the
Global Regulation and Excitation via Attention Tuning
(GREAT) framework which encompasses three attention
modules. Specifically, Spatial Attention (SA) captures the
global context within the spatial dimension, Matching Attention (MA) extracts global context along epipolar lines,
and Volume Attention (VA) works in conjunction with SA
and MA to construct a more robust cost-volume excited by
global context and geometric details. To verify the universality and effectiveness of this framework, we integrate it
into several representative iterative stereo-matching methods and validate it through extensive experiments, collectively denoted as GREAT-Stereo. This framework demonstrates superior performance in challenging ill-posed regions. Applied to IGEV-Stereo, among all published methods, our GREAT-IGEV ranks first on the Scene Flow test
set, KITTI 2015, and ETH3D leaderboards, and achieves
second on the Middlebury benchmark. Code is available at
https://github.com/JarvisLee0423/GREAT-Stereo.

1. Introduction
Recovering depth information from 2D images is vital in 3D
scene reconstruction which improves scene perception in
fields like robotics and autonomous driving. Stereo matching intends to predict dense 3D representations referred to
as disparity. This technique constructs the pixel-wise cost
volume from rectified stereo images to depict matching similarity along epipolar lines and regresses disparity by refining cost volume [13].
Taking advantage of deep learning, the current stateof-the-art stereo-matching algorithms are primarily categorized as aggregation-based and iteration-based approaches.

Figure 1. Row 1: Comparisons with state-of-the-art stereo methods on KITTI 2012 [10], KITTI 2015 [26], ETH3D [29], and Middlebury [28] leaderboards, where the lower metrics indicate better
performance. Row 2: Visual comparison with RAFT-Stereo on
Scene Flow [25]. Row 3: Visual comparison with IGEV-Stereo
on ETH3D. Row 4: Visual comparison with Selective-IGEV on
KITTI 2012. Our models produce clearer and more consistent geometric structures in ill-posed regions (green and red boxes).

Aggregation-based methods [5, 12, 16, 38, 39, 41, 42, 44]
leverage convolutional neural network (CNN) to aggregate
geometric structures within the pixel-wise cost volume to
predict disparity. While these methods achieve superior accuracy, the substantial computational cost makes them impractical for high-resolution images. To address this limitation, researchers turn to iterative schemes [17, 18, 51],
which avoid computationally expensive cost-volume aggre-

25539

