This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Attention Perturbations for Large Object Detection Transformers
Zachary Yahn1 , Selim Furkan Tekin1 , Fatih Ilhan1 , Sihao Hu1 ,
Tiansheng Huang1 , Yichang Xu1 , Margaret Loper2 , Ling Liu1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
2
Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, USA
{zachary.yahn, stekin6, filhan, sihaohu, thuang, xuyichang}@gatech.edu,
margaret.loper@gtri.gatech.edu, ling.liu@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Adversarial perturbations are useful tools for exposing vulnerabilities in neural networks. Existing adversarial perturbation methods for object detection are either limited to attacking CNN-based detectors or weak
against transformer-based detectors. This paper presents
an Attention-Focused Offensive Gradient (AFOG) attack
against object detection transformers. By design, AFOG
is neural-architecture agnostic and effective for attacking
both large transformer-based object detectors and conventional CNN-based detectors with a unified adversarial attention framework. This paper makes three original contributions. First, AFOG utilizes a learnable attention mechanism that focuses perturbations on vulnerable image regions in multi-box detection tasks, increasing performance
over non-attention baselines by up to 30.6%. Second,
AFOG’s attack loss is formulated by integrating two types
of feature loss through learnable attention updates with iterative injection of adversarial perturbations. Finally, AFOG
is an efficient and stealthy adversarial perturbation method.
It probes the weak spots of detection transformers by adding
strategically generated and visually imperceptible perturbations which can cause well-trained object detection models to fail. Extensive experiments conducted with twelve
large detection transformers on COCO demonstrate the
efficacy of AFOG. Our empirical results also show that
AFOG outperforms existing attacks on transformer-based
and CNN-based object detectors by up to 83% with superior speed and imperceptibility. Code is available at: Link.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based neural architectures and algorithms
have blossomed in recent years, enhancing computer vision
tasks including object detection. Attention is the core of
the transformer architecture [30]. Attention allows a detector to focus on specific regions of images based on objects of interest, effectively predicting the presence and lo-

Figure 1. Successful AFOG attacks against three object detection
transformers. White pixels in the attention map indicate learned
areas of high importance, often corresponding to objects in the
input image. This example illustrates that AFOG’s adversarial attention learns which regions of an image are most susceptible to
adversarial perturbations. Even for the same input, learnable adversarial attention maps may differ under different models.

cation of each potential object. Powered by various attention mechanisms, detection transformers can handle overlapping objects more effectively than some older methods
because they can capture long-range dependencies in an image, allowing models to reason about the relationships between objects. Since modern object detection transformers such as Swin [20] and DETR [4] significantly outperform traditional convolutional neural network (CNN)-based
models [8], represented by Faster R-CNN [28], SSD [19]
and YOLO-v3 [27], there is a pressing need to investigate
and understand the vulnerabilities of large detection transformers in the presence of adversarial perturbations. Adversarial perturbations are helpful instrumentation for exposing
vulnerabilities of large detection transformers, making them
useful mechanisms for motivating more robust transformer
models for object detection.

3184

