This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMoTive: Event-guided Trajectory Modeling for 3D Motion Estimation
Zengyu Wan, Wei Zhai B , Yang Cao, Zhengjun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China
wanzengy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wzhai056@, forrest@, zhazj@}ustc.edu.cn

In space

Dilemma
Event
Projection

Smoothness
Constrain
Divergence due to
motion in depth

x

In time

Optical Flow

x

Event Kymograph

y

t

Divergence
y

x

Event-guided spatio-temporal fusion

Event Voxel
y

t1

Optical Flow

Parametric
Curve

t2
Motion in Depth

t3

Multi-View
Est.

t

(a) Dilemma in motion
estimation

(b) Motion observation from rgb
camera and event camera

(c) Event projection in
space and time

(d) Event-based 3D motion estimation
from spatio-temporal trajectory

Figure 1. (a) The dilemma faced by motion estimation algorithms between the local smoothness assumption and the real divergence due to
motion in depth; (b) (c) The spatio-temporal projection of events (Event Kymograph) provides an clear observation of temporal evolution,
enabling heterogeneous spatio-temporal motion analysis; (d) 3D motion can be inferred by modelling spatio-temporal trajectories via
event-guided non-uniform parametric curves.

coupled with a non-uniform rational curve parameterization framework to adaptively model heterogeneous trajectories. The final 3D motion estimation is achieved through
multi-temporal sampling of parametric trajectories, yielding optical flow and depth motion fields. To facilitate evaluation, we introduce CarlaEvent3D, a multi-dynamic synthetic dataset for comprehensive validation. Extensive experiments on both this dataset and a real-world benchmark
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Abstract
Visual 3D motion estimation aims to infer the motion of 2D
pixels in 3D space based on visual cues. The key challenge arises from depth variation induced spatio-temporal
motion inconsistencies, disrupting the assumptions of local
spatial or temporal motion smoothness in previous motion
estimation frameworks. In contrast, event cameras offer
new possibilities for 3D motion estimation through continuous adaptive pixel-level responses to scene changes. This
paper presents EMoTive, a novel event-based framework
that models spatio-temporal trajectories via event-guided
non-uniform parametric curves, effectively characterizing
locally heterogeneous spatio-temporal motion. Specifically,
we first introduce Event Kymograph - an event projection
method that leverages a continuous temporal projection
kernel and decouples spatial observations to encode finegrained temporal evolution explicitly. For motion representation, we introduce a density-aware adaptation mechanism
to fuse spatial and temporal features under event guidance,

1. Introduction
Visual 3D motion estimation infers the movement of 2D
pixels in 3D space, playing a crucial role in spatial intelligence for autonomous systems and enabling diverse applications in dynamic scene understanding [2, 5, 21, 37].
The key challenge of 3D motion estimation lies in maintaining motion representation consistency throughout the spatial deformation process induced by depth variation.
Existing approaches employ frame-based cameras or LiDAR for 3D motion perception; their reliance on fixed temporal synchronization limits performance under complex

B: Corresponding author.

9342

