This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAFT: Shape and Appearance of Fabrics from Template
via Differentiable Physical Simulations from Monocular Video
David Stotko

Reinhard Klein

University of Bonn

Abstract
The reconstruction of three-dimensional dynamic scenes is
a well-established yet challenging task within the domain of
computer vision. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
that combines the domains of 3D geometry reconstruction
and appearance estimation for physically based rendering
and present a system that is able to perform both tasks
for fabrics, utilizing only a single monocular RGB video
sequence as input. In order to obtain realistic and highquality deformations and renderings, a physical simulation
of the cloth geometry and differentiable rendering are employed. In this paper, we introduce two novel regularization
terms for the 3D reconstruction task that improve the plausibility of the reconstruction by addressing the depth ambiguity problem in monocular video. In comparison with the
most recent methods in the field, we have reduced the error
in the 3D reconstruction by a factor of 2.64 while requiring
a medium runtime of 30 min per scene. Furthermore, the
optimized motion achieves sufficient quality to perform an
appearance estimation of the deforming object, recovering
sharp details from this single monocular RGB video.

Our approach is evaluated against state-of-the-art methods,
demonstrating superior reconstruction quality with a moderate runtime.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that, in contrast to previous methods, our precisely reconstructed geometry allows
the estimation of a highly detailed Spatially Varying Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (SVBRDF) together with the ambient lighting to reconstruct the appearance of the fabric. Correctly reconstructed dynamic deformations create slightly varying viewing angles and help
to decouple diffuse, specular, and lighting contributions.
In summary, we introduce a method that seamlessly combines 3D reconstruction of dynamic non-rigid objects with
appearance and illumination reconstruction into a single
pipeline, leveraging only a single monocular RGB video.
We will present our results on a real dataset where no
ground truth material properties are known, evaluate the
quality using synthetic scenes and show the improvements
compared to the blurred estimates when using the erroneous
geometry of previous techniques [27, 59].
The source code is available at https://github.com/vcbonn/saft.

2. Related Work
1. Introduction

Non-rigid object reconstruction The presence of deformable objects introduces various challenges in the context of 3D object reconstruction tasks. A variety of algorithms are proposed based on the available data and
the assumptions made. Non-rigid structure from motion
(NRSfM) algorithms employ one or more cameras to reconstruct arbitrary deformed surfaces [57, 72] or specialize
in human faces [6, 44] and thin objects like fabric [19, 56].
Higher quality can be achieved when using some template
geometry, potentially including masks, material, textures,
or other information to constrain the problem [52]. Such
methods are called Shape-from-Template (SfT) [2, 55] and
incorporate regularizing constraints, e.g. restrictions to isometric deformations resulting in a set of partial differential
equations [2, 7]. More recent approaches model the deformation field by a neural network [11, 16, 46] and there-

Shape-from-template (SfT) methods offer an elegant solution for reconstructing the 3D geometry of a scene by leveraging prior information in the form of a template and minimal setup requirements, such that a single RGB video is
sufficient to tackle reconstruction tasks. We focus on the
challenging task of reconstructing fabrics that deform due
to external influences such as wind or human manipulation.
While recent work has shown that incorporating physical
simulations enhance the reconstruction process by enforcing realistic motion [27, 59], such simulations fall short in
addressing depth ambiguity where multiple plausible deformations can result in identical RGB renderings. To address this challenge, we introduce two novel regularization
terms that mitigate depth ambiguity, significantly improving
the plausibility and quality of the reconstructed geometry.

27660

