This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Driving View Synthesis on Free-form Trajectories with Generative Prior
Zeyu Yang1 * Zijie Pan1 * Yuankun Yang1 * Xiatian Zhu2
1
2
Fudan University
University of Surrey

Li Zhang1†

fudan-zvg.github.io/DriveX

Abstract
Driving view synthesis along free-form trajectories is essential for realistic driving simulations, enabling closed-loop
evaluation of end-to-end driving policies. Existing methods excel at view interpolation along recorded paths but
struggle to generalize to novel trajectories due to limited
viewpoints in driving videos. To tackle this challenge, we
propose DriveX, a novel free-form driving view synthesis
framework, that progressively distills generative prior into
the 3D Gaussian model during its optimization. Within this
framework, we utilize a video diffusion model to refine the
degraded novel trajectory renderings from the in-training
Gaussian model, while the restored videos in turn serve
as additional supervision for optimizing the 3D Gaussian.
Concretely, we craft an inpainting-based video restoration
task, which can disentangle the identification of degraded
regions from the generative capability of the diffusion model
and remove the need of simulating specific degraded pattern
in the training of the diffusion model. To further enhance the
consistency and fidelity of generated contents, the pseudo
ground truth is progressively updated with gradually improved novel trajectory rendering, allowing both components to co-adapt and reinforce each other while minimizing
the disruption on the optimization. By tightly integrating 3D
scene representation with generative prior, DriveX achieves
high-quality view synthesis beyond recorded trajectories in
real time–unlocking new possibilities for flexible and realistic driving simulations on free-form trajectories.

1. Introduction
Building virtual driving worlds capable of being engaged
with driving policies plays a pivotal role in developing robust autonomous driving systems. It facilitates efficient
training data scaling and automatic synthesis of safetycritical long-tail cases, while enabling close-loop evaluation
* Equally contributed.
† Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding au-

thor with School of Data Science, Fudan University.

for end-to-end autonomous driving systems.
In recent years, the burgeoning advancements in novel
view synthesis [12, 18] have propelled the prevalence of
reconstruction-based driving simulations [3, 34, 35]. These
methods aim to reconstruct driving environments from vehicle sensor data typically involving single-trajectory videos
from surrounding cameras and synchronized LiDAR point
clouds. However, the limited overlap between frames, large
textureless regions and illumination variations in large-scale
scenes, drastically complicate this task than conventional
novel view synthesis. Consequently, despite achieving impressive results in fitting training views and interpolating
along recorded trajectories, they still struggle to extrapolate on novel views far from the recorded trajectory, limiting
their flexibility and usefulness in many downstream tasks.
Recent works [15, 16, 37] have demonstrated that 2D
generative priors can effectively regularize sparse-view reconstruction by synthesizing pseudo ground-truth images
for novel view, thereby alleviating the under-constraint nature of this task. However, directly applying these approaches in the driving scenes presents unique challenges
due to the limited diversity of trajectories in existing driving video datasets. The training is primarily confined on
forward-moving trajectories, while the off-trajectory videos
are required for inference. This will introduce a considerable gap, making it infeasible to learn precise explicit pose
control, and posing a great challenge to simulate degraded
patterns for training a restoration-based model.
To address these challenges, we propose a
reconstruction-generation interwined framework for
driving view synthesis along free-form trajectories, termed
DriveX, which progressively distills video generative prior
into the 3D scene representation (i.e., 3D Gaussian Splatting [12]). During this process, a video diffusion model is
employed to generate novel trajectory videos as additional
supervision for the optimization of scene representation, effectively mitigating the sparse-view issue. This is achieved
by leveraging a generative model to restore novel trajectory
renderings from the in-training 3D Gaussian model, which
ensures the consistency of generated content while eliminating the need for explicit pose condition. Specifically,

28083

