This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Keep Your Friends Close, and Your Enemies Farther: Distance-aware Voxel-wise
Contrastive Learning for Semi-supervised Multi-organ Segmentation
Haochen Zhao1 , Jianwei Niu1 , Xuefeng Liu1 *, Xiaozheng Xie2 , Li Kuang1 , Haotian Yang1 ,
Bin Dai3 , Hui Meng4 , Yong Wang5 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
Hangzhou International Innovation Institute of Beihang University
4
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
{studyzhao, niujianwei, liu xuefeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

ments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Based on pseudo-labels, voxel-wise contrastive learning
(VCL) is a prominent approach designed to learn effective feature representations for semi-supervised medical image segmentation. However, in multi-organ segmentation
(MoS), the complex anatomical structures of certain organs
often lead to many unreliable pseudo-labels. Directly applying VCL can introduce confirmation bias, resulting in
poor segmentation performance. A common practice is
to first transform these unreliable pseudo-labels into complementary ones, which represent classes that voxels are
least likely to belong to, and then push voxels away from
the generated complementary labels. However, we find
that this approach may fail to allow voxels with unreliable pseudo-labels (unreliable voxels) to fully benefit from
the advantages of VCL. In this paper, we propose DVCL,
a novel distance-aware VCL method for semi-supervised
MoS. DVCL is based on the observation that unreliable voxels, which may not form discriminative feature boundaries,
still form clear clusters. Hence, voxels close to each other
in the feature space (‘neighbors’) likely belong to the same
semantic class, while distant ones (‘outsiders’) likely belong to different classes. In DVCL, we first identify neighbors and outsiders for all unreliable voxels, and then pull
their neighbors into the same clusters while pushing outsiders away. In this way, unreliable voxels can learn more
discriminative features, thereby fully enjoying the advantages of VCL. However, DVCL itself will inevitably introduce the problem of noisy neighbors and outliers. To address these challenges, we further propose a neighbor partitioning strategy and a query outlier strategy to provide more
stable feature representations for DVCL. Extensive experi-

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Medical image segmentation [31, 52] is a critical task in
computer-aided diagnosis. However, considering the large
amount of effort required for labeling data, semi-supervised
learning (SSL) is often employed. With the continuous
advancement of feature extraction techniques [7, 15, 17,
22], voxel-wise contrastive learning (VCL) [3, 46, 49]
has proven highly effective in SSL. Based on the initially
generated pseudo-labels, VCL pulls voxels with the same
pseudo-labels together in feature space while pushing those
with different pseudo-labels away from each other, thereby
learning effective representations from unlabeled voxels for
the segmentation task.
However, existing VCL methods can encounter difficulty in multi-organ segmentation (MoS). MoS is more
challenging than single-organ segmentation due to complex
anatomical structures, including large size variations, different shapes, and overlapping organs [39, 53, 54]. Consequently, segmenting these organs (e.g., the left and right
adrenal glands) becomes considerably more difficult [4, 39],
resulting in many unreliable pseudo-labels, especially at the
initial stage. These unreliable pseudo-labels generally lead
to confirmation bias [2, 23] in VCL, ultimately lowering the
segmentation performance on these organs in MoS.
To address these challenges in VCL, some methods [3,
35, 41] choose not to use voxels with unreliable pseudolabels (unreliable voxels). However, given the amount of
unreliable voxels, this approach wastes the valuable information contained in them. To leverage information contained in a large number of unreliable pseudo-labels, a popular practice [11, 12, 14, 44] is to push the voxel away from

21832

