This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BVINet: Unlocking Blind Video Inpainting with Zero Annotations
Zhiliang Wu, Kerui Chen, Kun Li, Hehe Fan, and Yi Yang*
CCAI, Zhejiang University, China

Abstract

Non-Blind Inpainter

Video inpainting aims to fill in corrupted regions of the
video with plausible contents. Existing methods generally
assume that the locations of corrupted regions are known,
focusing primarily on the “how to inpaint”. This reliance
necessitates manual annotation of the corrupted regions using binary masks to indicate “where to inpaint”. However, the annotation of these masks is labor-intensive and
expensive, limiting the practicality of current methods. In
this paper, we expect to relax this assumption by defining
a new blind video inpainting setting, enabling the networks
to learn the mapping from corrupted video to inpainted result directly, eliminating the need of corrupted region annotations. Specifically, we propose an end-to-end blind
video inpainting network (BVINet) to address both “where
to inpaint” and “how to inpaint” simultaneously. On the
one hand, BVINet can predict the masks of corrupted regions by detecting semantic-discontinuous regions of the
frame and utilizing temporal consistency prior of the video.
On the other hand, the predicted masks are incorporated
into the BVINet, allowing it to capture valid context information from uncorrupted regions to fill in corrupted ones.
Besides, we introduce a consistency loss to regularize the
training parameters of BVINet. In this way, mask prediction and video completion mutually constrain each other,
thereby maximizing the overall performance of the trained
model. Recognizing that existing datasets are unsuitable for
the blind video inpainting task due to the presence of prior
knowledge (e.g., corrupted contents and clear borders), we
contribute a new dataset specifically designed for blind
video inpainting. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method.

Manual Annotation Masks

Blind Inpainter (Ours)

(a) Blind video inpainting pipeline

(b) An example of bullets removal in a real-world scenario.

Figure 1. (a) Existing non-blind video inpainting pipeline require
manual annotation of corrupted regions of each frame, limiting its
application scope. In this paper, we formulate a new task: blind
video inpainting, which can directly learn a mapping from corrupted video to inpainted result without any corrupted region annotation. (b) shows an example of our method applied to bullet
removal in a real-world scenario.

1. Introduction

refer to this case as a non-blind setting. Nevertheless, obtaining precise mask annotations is often impractical in realworld scenarios. On the one hand, the boundary between
corrupted regions and valid regions is often blurred, making it unrealistic to accurately annotate corrupted regions.
On the other hand, manual annotation is labor-intensive and
resource-consuming, especially for corrupted videos with
high frame rates and high resolutions. While automatic
tools like detection [13, 14] and segmentation [15–17] models offer some relief, they still often require manual adjustments due to their imperfect results [18].

Video inpainting is a fundamental visual restoration task in
computer vision [1–6], aiming to fill corrupted regions in
videos with plausible and coherent contents [7, 8]. Existing methods [9–12] usually require a clear prior knowledge,
such as a binary mask, to indicate “where to inpaint”. We
* Corresponding author

14017

To alleviate this challenge, some researchers [19–21]
have explored video inpainting by annotating only a few
corrupted frames, such as a single frame. Unfortunately,
such a strategy does not fully resolve the challenge of annotating corrupted regions in videos. Inspired by blind image
inpainting [22, 23] setting, this paper formulates a novel
task: blind video inpainting, where a mapping from corrupted videos to inpainted results is directly learned with-

