This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Looking in the Mirror: A Faithful Counterfactual Explanation Method for
Interpreting Deep Image Classification Models
Townim Faisal Chowdhury1 , Vu Minh Hieu Phan1 , Kewen Liao2 , Nanyu Dong1 , Minh-Son To3 ,
Anton van den Hengel1 , Johan W. Verjans1 , Zhibin Liao1†
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide, Australia, 2 Deakin University, Australia,
3

Flinders University, Australia

Abstract

[15, 50, 53, 65] to provide insight, yet deep learning image
analysis models are extremely complex, making it difficult
for researchers to formulate a way to unravel the decision
process. Attribution maps [13, 17], concept-based explanations [37, 63], and example-based explanations [3, 9] all
aim to clarify the decision-making process of a model by
associating the prediction outcome of the model with specific input features, image subregions, or referring to similar examples; yet they do not provide actionable insights
[2, 52] and cannot explain model decisions if the illustrated
patterns do not exist or are slightly altered in the first place.
On the other hand, imitating how humans (especially children [7, 10]) learn through comparing likelihoods of events,
Counterfactual Explanations (CFEs) [41, 57] have emerged
as an effective solution, offering actionable insights by making minimal changes to the input that may lead to different model decisions. By modifying the original input to
the model, counterfactual explanations can answer what-if
questions, such as, ”What if the patient has disease X, what
would I see on their brain MRI?”. CFEs not only enhance
human comprehension [44] but also allow users to ”play”
with AI recommendations by considering and weighing alternative scenarios.
On the generation task of visual CFE for image classification models, administrating minimal changes that can
trigger decision flip is tricky, where the minimal changes
may not produce perceptible or meaningful visual counterfactual explanations. The first group of CFE methods finds
CFE instances either by exhaustive search in image feature space [21] or by optimizing custom-designed objective
functions to fulfil the properties of CFE [16, 57]. However,
these methods occasionally fail to converge and lead to no
finding of CFE. The second group of CFE methods [4, 58]
finds the regions or concepts by selecting the most similar
examples to which the input should change towards to get a
different outcome. The second group of methods highly relies on a diverse and large pool of discriminative images to
identify possible and small changes in the input, impacting
the diversity and realism of generated CFE images. Both

Counterfactual explanations (CFE) for deep image classifiers aim to reveal how minimal input changes lead to different model decisions, providing critical insights for model
interpretation and improvement. However, existing CFE
methods often rely on additional image encoders and generative models to create plausible images, neglecting the
classifier’s own feature space and decision boundaries. As
such, they do not explain the intrinsic feature space and
decision boundaries learned by the classifier. To address
this limitation, we propose Mirror-CFE, a novel method
that generates faithful counterfactual explanations by operating directly in the classifier’s feature space, treating
decision boundaries as mirrors that “reflect” feature representations in the mirror. Mirror-CFE learns a mapping
function from feature space to image space while preserving distance relationships, enabling smooth transitions between source images and their counterfactuals. Through
extensive experiments on four image datasets, we demonstrate that Mirror-CFE achieves superior performance in
validity while maintaining input resemblance compared to
state-of-the-art explanation methods. Finally, mirror-CFE
provides interpretable visualization of the classifier’s decision process by generating step-wise transitions that reveal
how features evolve as classification confidence changes.
Code is available at: https://github.com/AIMLMED/Mirror-CFE.

1. Introduction
A transparent and human-understandable AI decisionmaking process is highly appreciated by stakeholders, policymakers, and the public to trust and use AI-supplied
decisions, thus promoting AI adaptation and ensuring AI
robustness and fairness. Explainable AI (XAI) methods
generally attempt to demonstrate important input features
† Corresponding author.

2239

