This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holistic Tokenizer for Autoregressive Image Generation
Anlin Zheng1 , Haochen Wang2 , Yucheng Zhao3 , Weipeng Deng1 ,
Tiancai Wang3 , Xiangyu Zhang4,5 , Xiaojuan Qi1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 NLPR, MAIS, CASIA
3
Dexmal 4 StepFun 5 MEGVII Techonology

Abstract

injected semantics

Holistic Tokenizer

Vanilla autoregressive image generation models generate visual tokens step-by-step, limiting their ability to capture holistic relationships among token sequences. Moreover, because most visual tokenizers map local image
patches into latent tokens, global information is limited. To
address this, we introduce Hita, a novel image tokenizer
for autoregressive (AR) image generation. It introduces a
holistic-to-local tokenization scheme with learnable holistic queries and local patch tokens. Hita incorporates two
key strategies to better align with the AR generation process: 1) arranging a sequential structure with holistic tokens at the beginning, followed by patch-level tokens, and
using causal attention to maintain awareness of previous
tokens; and 2) adopting a lightweight fusion module before
feeding the de-quantized tokens into the decoder to control
information flow and prioritize holistic tokens. Extensive
experiments show that Hita accelerates the training speed
of AR generators and outperforms those trained with vanilla
tokenizers, achieving 2.59 FID and 281.9 IS on the ImageNet benchmark. Detailed analysis of the holistic representation highlights its ability to capture global image
properties, such as textures, materials, and shapes. Additionally, Hita also demonstrates effectiveness in zero-shot
style transfer and image in-painting. The code is available
at https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/Hita.

Attention Mask

Image

Quantization

learnable queries
color texture material

patch-level tokens
holistic tokens

Figure 1. The concept of holistic tokenizer. A set of learnable
queries that capture global properties, such as color, texture, material, etc, from pixels, with semantic-level feature injected, is utilized to reconstruct the image along with image patches.

as DALL-E [37], Parti [54, 55], VAR [46], and LlamaGen
[45]. In AR-based image generation, VQVAE [12] is employed to encode images into discrete tokens. These tokens
are then raster-scanned into a 1D sequence to train an AR
transformer model like Llama [47], which predicts the next
token in the sequence. During inference stage, the token sequence generated by the AR model is decoded by the VQVAE’s [12] decoder to produce the synthesized images.
While significant advancements have been made, most
research efforts have concentrated on refining and scaling
model architectures or optimizing learning objectives for
either the VQVAE stage [45, 54, 55, 57] or the AR transformer stage [37, 45]. However, in terms of latent space
design, existing approaches predominantly rely on patchlevel image representations at either single scales [45, 55]
or multiple scales [46], which limits the ability of latent tokens to capture global and semantic-level information. Although these spatially structured tokens are compatible with
diffusion models [10, 19, 31, 32, 40, 43], which predict all
tokens in parallel, they introduce challenges for AR-based
models. Autoregressive models typically employ causal attention to predict tokens sequentially [6, 45, 46, 48]. The
absence of holistic information makes it difficult for these
models to maintain global coherence, leading to limitations
in their capabilities and increasing learning difficulties. As
shown in Fig. 2b (LlamaGen[45]) with image inpainting,
when half of an image is input into the AR model as a prefix prompt, requiring it to generate the remaining part, the

1. Introduction
Within an autoregressive (AR) generation paradigm, the
field of large language models (LLMs) [4, 9, 34, 36, 50,
51, 60] has witnessed significant progress in recent years.
In particular, using AR generation along with transformer
backbones, GPT-style models have exhibited impressive
performance [1, 13, 30], incredible scalability [16, 22], and
versatile flexibility [4, 34] across various language tasks.
The success of autogressive models in language modeling has driven substantial interest in their application to
image generation, giving rise to representative works such
* Corresponding author: xjqi@eee.hku.hk

1
16916

