This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RayGaussX: Accelerating Gaussian-Based Ray Marching for Real-Time and
High-Quality Novel View Synthesis

Hugo Blanc, Jean-Emmanuel Deschaud, Alexis Paljic
Mines Paris, PSL University, Centre for robotics, 75006 Paris, France
{hugo.blanc,jean-emmanuel.deschaud,alexis.paljic}@minesparis.psl.eu

Figure 1. Comparison of RayGaussX with RayGauss, Zip-NeRF and 3D-GS. Test image from the garden scene of Mip-NeRF360.

Abstract

1. Introduction

RayGauss has achieved state-of-the-art rendering quality
for novel-view synthesis on synthetic and indoor scenes by
representing radiance and density fields with irregularly
distributed elliptical basis functions, rendered via volume
ray casting using a Bounding Volume Hierarchy (BVH).
However, its computational cost prevents real-time rendering on real-world scenes. Our approach, RayGaussX,
builds on RayGauss by introducing key contributions that
accelerate both training and inference. Specifically, we incorporate volumetric rendering acceleration strategies such
as empty-space skipping and adaptive sampling, enhance
ray coherence, and introduce scale regularization to reduce
false-positive intersections. Additionally, we propose a new
densification criterion that improves density distribution in
distant regions, leading to enhanced graphical quality on
larger scenes. As a result, RayGaussX achieves 5× to 12×
faster training and 50× to 80× higher rendering speeds
(FPS) on real-world datasets while improving visual quality
by up to +0.56 dB in PSNR. The associated code is available at: github.com/hugobl1/raygaussx.

27575

Novel view synthesis (NVS) methods enable the generation of new images of a scene from a set of known viewpoints. This field has made significant progress with the
introduction of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23]. This
groundbreaking approach introduced a differentiable volumetric rendering equation coupled with a neural network
to learn the scene’s radiance fields. Subsequent research
has further refined this method by enhancing both rendering
quality and speed. One promising direction involves representing radiance and density fields using irregularly distributed local parametric functions. These approaches replace the computationally expensive neural networks used
by NeRF with more localized structures that are less demanding and better suited to reconstruct the scene’s geometry and appearance. Among these approaches, two main
categories can be identified according to their rendering algorithms. The first relies on a differentiable rasterization
algorithm for local primitives, such as Gaussians, as in the
3D Gaussian Splatting approach [16]. This rasterization algorithm enables high rendering speeds. However, it can
introduce artifacts such as flickering, which is inherent to

