This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prior-aware Dynamic Temporal Modeling Framework for
Sequential 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Pengfei Ren, Jingyu Wang*, Haifeng Sun*, Qi Qi, Xingyu Liu,
Menghao Zhang, Lei Zhang, Jing Wang, Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{rpf, wangjingyu, hfsun, qiqi8266, liuxingyu, zhangmenghao}@bupt.edu.cn;
zhangl83@chinaunicom.cn; wangjing@bupt.edu.cn; jxlbupt@gmail.com

Abstract
3D hand pose estimation plays a critical role in various
human-computer interaction tasks. Single-frame 3D hand
pose estimation methods have poor temporal smoothness
and are easily affected by self-occlusion, which severely impacts their practical applicability. Traditional joint-based
sequential pose estimation methods primarily focus on the
human body and struggle to handle the complex hand structure, high degrees of freedom in hand motion, and rapidly
changing hand motion trends. To address these challenges, we propose a prior-aware dynamic temporal modeling framework for sequential 3D hand pose estimation. We
introduce a flexible memory mechanism to model hand prior
information, which alleviates the scale and depth ambiguity in single-frame hand pose estimation. Additionally, we
propose a dynamic temporal convolution module that adjusts the receptive field size and feature aggregation weights
based on the motion information at each moment, effectively
capturing rapid motion trends. By decoupling dynamic temporal modeling at the joint and hand levels, our method
captures both subtle short-term variations and long-term
motion trends, significantly improving the smoothness and
accuracy of hand pose estimation. Experiments on four
public datasets demonstrate that our method achieves the
state-of-the-art results in terms of hand pose estimation accuracy and temporal smoothness.

(a) Human Body Motion

(b) Hand Motion

Figure 1. Comparison of human and hand motion patterns.
Body motion typically exhibits long-term and stable motion patterns. Hand motion is more flexible, with high frequency and large
amplitude changes in motion trends. It often involves the coupling
of long-term, large-scale motions with short-term, subtle motions.

for immersive and natural interactions, robust and accurate 3D hand pose estimation has garnered significant attention. However, due to challenges such as viewpoint, pose,
and lighting variations, maintaining temporal smoothness
in hand pose estimation based on a single frame is difficult [2, 4, 20, 40, 58, 59, 67, 76]. Hand poses and hand
shapes face issues of temporal jitter and abrupt transitions,
which severely impact the practical usability of hand pose
estimation. Therefore, leveraging temporal information to
enhance the accuracy and stability of 3D hand pose estimation is important. Among these, using temporal neural networks to directly refine the 3D poses estimated by monocular methods has received widespread attention due to its
flexibility, generalization, and efficiency.
Current sequential pose estimation methods based on
joint have primarily focused on 3D human pose estimation [17, 28, 30, 31, 53, 66, 68–70, 74]. These approaches
mainly emphasize modeling structured spatial dependencies among joints and long-range temporal dependencies to
capture human motion trajectories and refine the 3D joint
positions. However, as shown in Fig. 1, due to the complex-

1. Introduction
3D hand pose estimation is a crucial research direction
in computer vision, with widespread applications in virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and humancomputer interaction (HCI). With the increasing demand
* Corresponding author

6476

