This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEGA: Memory-Efficient 4D Gaussian Splatting for Dynamic Scenes
Zhening Liu1
Yifan Zhang2†
Xingtong Ge1
Dailan He3
Xinjie Zhang1 *
Tongda Xu5
Yan Wang5
Zehong Lin1
Shuicheng Yan4,2†
Jun Zhang1†
1
2
iComAI Lab, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Skywork AI
3
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
National University of Singapore
5
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
{xzhangga, zhening.liu}@connect.ust.hk, yifan.zhang7@kunlun-inc.com, xingtong.ge@gmail.com
hedailan@link.cuhk.edu.hk, x.tongda@nyu.edu, wangyan202199@163.com, eezhlin@ust.hk
yansc@comp.nus.edu.sg, eejzhang@ust.hk

1. Introduction

Abstract

Dynamic scene reconstruction from multi-view videos is
gaining widespread interest in computer vision and graphics due to its broad applications in virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and 3D content production. The emergence of neural radiance field (NeRF) [31] enables highquality novel view synthesis from multi-view image inputs.
It has been further extended to represent dynamic scenes
by modeling a direct mapping from spatio-temporal coordinates to color and density [3, 22, 36]. Despite the impressive
visual quality of NeRF-based methods, they require dense
sampling along rays, leading to slow rendering speeds that
hinder practical applications.
The recent introduction of 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [17] marks a significant shift in the field of
novel view synthesis. This approach incorporates the explicit 3D Gaussian representation and differentiable tilebased rasterization to enable real-time rendering speeds
that significantly outperform NeRF-based methods. Built
on this framework, subsequent studies have developed 4D
Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) [10, 46], which conceptualizes
scene variations across different timestamps as 4D spatiotemporal Gaussian hyper-cylinder. As shown in Fig. 2,
when depicting a 3D scene at a given timestamp, these 4D
Gaussians will first be sliced into 3D Gaussians with timevarying positions and opacity. Then, the 3D Gaussians with
the temporal decay opacity below a specific threshold are
filtered out. This filtering operation helps 4DGS to describe
the transient content such as emerging or vanishing objects.
Finally, following 3DGS, the remaining 3D Gaussians are
projected onto 2D screens through fast rasterization. By
directly optimizing a collection of 4D Gaussians, 4DGS effectively captures both static and dynamic scene elements,
thereby achieving photorealistic visual quality.
However, 4DGS requires millions of Gaussians to ad-

4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) has recently emerged as
a promising technique for capturing complex dynamic 3D
scenes with high fidelity. It utilizes a 4D Gaussian representation and a GPU-friendly rasterizer, enabling rapid
rendering speeds. Despite its advantages, 4DGS faces significant challenges, notably the requirement of millions of
4D Gaussians, each with extensive associated attributes,
leading to substantial memory and storage cost. This paper introduces a memory-efficient framework for 4DGS.
We streamline the color attribute by decomposing it into a
per-Gaussian direct color component with only 3 parameters and a shared lightweight alternating current color
predictor. This approach eliminates the need for spherical
harmonics coefficients, which typically involve up to 144
parameters in classic 4DGS, thereby creating a memoryefficient 4D Gaussian representation. Furthermore, we introduce an entropy-constrained Gaussian deformation technique that uses a deformation field to expand the action
range of each Gaussian and integrates an opacity-based
entropy loss to limit the number of Gaussians, thus forcing our model to use as few Gaussians as possible to fit
a dynamic scene well. With simple half-precision storage
and zip compression, our framework achieves a storage
reduction by approximately 190× and 125× on the Technicolor and Neural 3D Video datasets, respectively, compared to the original 4DGS. Meanwhile, it maintains comparable rendering speeds and scene representation quality,
setting a new standard in the field. Code is available at
https://github.com/Xinjie-Q/MEGA.

* This work was partially performed when Xinjie Zhang was an Intern
at Skywork AI.
† Corresponding Authors.

27828

