This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DDB: Diffusion Driven Balancing to Address Spurious Correlations
Aryan Yazdan Parast, Basim Azam, Naveed Akhtar
The University of Melbourne, Australia
ayazdanparas@student.unimelb.edu.au, {basim.azam, naveed.akhtar1}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Deep neural networks trained with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) perform well when both training and test
data come from the same domain, but they often fail to
generalize to out-of-distribution samples. In image classification, these models may rely on spurious correlations
that often exist between labels and irrelevant features of
images, making predictions unreliable when those features
do not exist. We propose a Diffusion Driven Balancing
(DDB) technique to generate training samples with text-toimage diffusion models for addressing the spurious correlation problem. First, we compute the best describing token for the visual features pertaining to the causal components of samples by a textual inversion mechanism. Then,
leveraging a language segmentation method and a diffusion model, we generate new samples by combining the
causal component with the elements from other classes. We
also meticulously prune the generated samples based on the
prediction probabilities and attribution scores of the ERM
model to ensure their correct composition for our objective. Finally, we retrain the ERM model on our augmented
dataset. This process reduces the model’s reliance on spurious correlations by learning from carefully crafted samples in which this correlation does not exist. Our experiments show that across different benchmarks, our technique achieves better worst-group accuracy than the existing state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ArianYp/DDB.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks trained with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) do not perform well when the train and
test datasets do not follow the same distribution [2, 10, 11].
They may rely on data features that correlate to the sample labels but are not stable across different domains, leading to poor model generalization [2, 11, 19]. For example, a model trained to classify camels and cows may learn
to rely on background cues rather than the animals themselves. This occurs because most cows appear in green

17526

pastures, while most camels are found in deserts. Hence,
the model may learn to classify images based solely on the
background, and fail when this spurious correlation is absent, e.g., when it encounters a camel in a green pasture or
a cow in a desert [2, 3].
The problem is commonly handled by assuming that data
samples belong to different subgroups, each representing
a distinct domain. The solutions then seek to maximize
the model accuracy for the worst group under this perspective [15, 24]. To that end, multiple approaches aim at computing robust representations that are stable across different domains [1, 2]. Other methods balance between the
groups in the dataset by reweighting [15, 21], combining
or mixing images [19, 29, 31] or generating new samples
[22, 32]. Reweighting methods [15, 18, 21] assume that
minority groups have high loss, hence they upweight those
groups. However, in ERM models, a high loss can arise
from reasons other than the group imbalance, leading to
poor identification of the minority group. Additionally, the
number of minority group samples can be too low to effectively mitigate the problem with reweighting.
To improve the minority groups, methods such as [19,
29, 31] attempt to augment data manually by mixing [19,
29] or interpolating [31] between the samples. Noohdani et
al. [19] viewed the problem through a compositional lens,
where images are assumed to be composed of causal and
non-causal parts. Under this view, existence of (spurious)
correlation between a sample’s non-causal part and its label
causes its misclassification. DaC [19] aims to identify both
causal and non-causal parts of images and leverages them
to augment the minority groups. However, lack of semantic
control in the augmentation samples and their poor composition quality still hinder the performance of this method.
Recently, diffusion-based generative models [9] such as
Stable Diffusion (SD) [23], have demonstrated high quality image generation using prompts. Studies affirm that
their generative images help in few- and zero-shot recognition [8]. Consequently, there is also an interest in exploiting
them to enhance models for out-of-distribution generalization [5, 22, 32]. Along similar lines, we aim at address-

