This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OcRFDet: Object-Centric Radiance Fields for Multi-View 3D Object Detection
in Autonomous Driving
Mingqian Ji,

Shanshan Zhang*,

Jian Yang

PCA Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{mingqianji,shanshan.zhang,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

42.0

Abstract

41.5

NDS

Current multi-view 3D object detection methods typically
transfer 2D features into 3D space using depth estimation
or 3D position encoder, but in a fully data-driven and implicit manner, which limits the detection performance. Inspired by the success of radiance fields on 3D reconstruction, we assume they can be used to enhance the detector’s
ability of 3D geometry estimation. However, we observe
a decline in detection performance, when we directly use
them for 3D rendering as an auxiliary task. From our analysis, we find the performance drop is caused by the strong
responses on the background when rendering the whole
scene. To address this problem, we propose object-centric
radiance fields, focusing on modeling foreground objects
while discarding background noises. Specifically, we employ Object-centric Radiance Fields (OcRF) to enhance
3D voxel features via an auxiliary task of rendering foreground objects. We further use opacity - the side-product of
rendering- to enhance the 2D foreground BEV features via
Height-aware Opacity-based Attention (HOA), where attention maps at different height levels are generated separately
via multiple networks in parallel. Extensive experiments on
the nuScenes validation and test datasets demonstrate that
our OcRFDet achieves superior performance, outperforming previous state-of-the-art methods with 57.2% mAP and
64.8% NDS on the nuScenes test benchmark. Code is available at https://github.com/Mingqj/OcRFDet.

NeRF
3DGS
NeRF + 3DGS

Baseline + OcRF
(Ours)

41.0
40.5

Baseline + Previous
Radiance Fields

DualBEV
(Baseline)

40.0

33.5

34.0

mAP

34.5

35.0

Figure 1. Comparison of previous radiance field methods directly
applied to the baseline and our proposed OcRF applied to the
baseline. Previous methods, whether using a single or joint field,
consistently degrade performance, while our method enhances it,
achieving greater improvements in the joint field setting.

1. Introduction

dress this problem, previous methods have made great efforts to learn effective geometric transformations from 2D
to 3D space, but in a fully data-driven and implicit manner,
which may limit performance improvement to some extent.
Therefore, in this work, we aim to explore auxiliary tasks
that are helpful to enhance the network’s 3D geometry estimation capabilities, so as to facilitate multi-view 3D object
detection.
Recently, radiance field methods, such as Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [28] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
[13], have shown strong geometry estimation capabilities in 3D reconstruction [27, 36, 41, 47] and simulation
[45, 50, 52, 53] using knowledge-based geometric constraints and physical priors. Inspired by their success in occupancy prediction [11, 30, 31, 51] and BEV segmentation
[2] tasks, we expect them to be also helpful for 3D object
detection, which is yet under-explored in the community.
To explore the impact of radiance fields on the detection task, we directly apply the previous radiance fields and
their rendering approach to an existing detector following
the above methods, but we observe a decline in detection
performance (Fig. 1) due to the strong responses on the
background caused by rendering the whole scene (Fig. 2).

Multi-view 3D object detection plays a crucial role in autonomous driving. This task involves predicting object categories and their 3D coordinates based solely on multiview RGB images. Currently, most detectors in this field
project image features to the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) space,
and thus the main challenge lies in estimating 3D geometry within the BEV space using only RGB images. To ad* Corresponding author.

24933

