This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Referring to Any Person
Qing Jiang1,2 , Lin Wu1,2 , Zhaoyang Zeng2 , Tianhe Ren2 , Yuda Xiong2
Yihao Chen2 , Liu Qin2 , Lei Zhang1,2†
1
South China University of Technology
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
mountchicken@outlook.com , leizhang@idea.edu.cn

person in blue and green color

player numer 8 and number 13

person with a rainbow flag

four woman dancing in a circle

person in the third row

5th person from the right

2nd person to the right of speaker

Ronaldo

father and mother

best man

person holding a phone

person with a gun

2nd one on chair from right two person in the middle

person in red car

one in red clothes but not in black pants

Brad Pitt

person with blue eyes

person holding a scepter

person holding a sign that says 10

person sitting on stone

person sitting but not wearing a tie

Elon Musk

person sitting down

in white clothes but without not number 50

Jon Snow

female but not the bride

Walter White

Figure 1. We introduce referring to any person, a task that requires detecting all individuals in an image which match a given natural
language description, and a new model RexSeek designed for this task with strong perception and understanding capabilities that effectively
captures attributes, spatial relations, interactions, reasoning, celebrity recognition, etc.

ders progress in this area. In this work, we revisit this task
from three critical perspectives: task definition, dataset design, and model architecture. We first identify five aspects
of referable entities and three distinctive characteristics of
this task. Next, we introduce HumanRef, a novel dataset
designed to tackle these challenges and better reflect realworld applications. From a model design perspective, we
integrate a multimodal large language model with an object
detection framework, constructing a robust referring model
named RexSeek. Experimental results reveal that stateof-the-art models, which perform well on commonly used
benchmarks like RefCOCO/+/g, struggle with HumanRef
due to their inability to detect multiple individuals. In con-

Abstract
Humans are undoubtedly the most important participants
in computer vision, and the ability to detect any individual given a natural language description, a task we define as referring to any person, holds substantial practical
value. However, we find that existing models generally fail
to achieve real-world usability, and current benchmarks are
limited by their focus on one-to-one referring, which hinThis work was done when Qing Jiang and Lin Wu were interns at
IDEA.
† Corresponding author.

21667

