This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S3 E: Self-Supervised State Estimation for Radar-Inertial System
Shengpeng Wang1 , Yulong Xie1 , Qing Liao2 , Wei Wang3 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, 3 Wuhan University
{wsp666, yulong xie}@hust.edu.cn, liaoqing@hit.edu.cn, wangw@whu.edu.cn

Exteroceptive Radar Spectra

Abstract
Millimeter-wave radar for state estimation is gaining significant attention for its affordability and reliability in harsh
conditions. Existing localization solutions typically rely
on post-processed radar point clouds as landmark points.
Nonetheless, the inherent sparsity of radar point clouds,
ghost points from multi-path effects, and limited angle resolution in single-chirp radar severely degrade state estimation performance. To address these issues, we propose S3 E,
a Self-Supervised State Estimator that employs more richly
informative radar signal spectra to bypass sparse points
and fuses complementary inertial information to achieve
accurate localization. S3 E fully explores the association between exteroceptive radar and proprioceptive inertial sensor to achieve complementary benefits. To deal with limited
angle resolution, we introduce a novel cross-fusion technique that enhances spatial structure information by exploiting subtle rotational shift correlations across heterogeneous data. The experimental results demonstrate our
method achieves robust and accurate performance without
relying on localization ground truth supervision. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to achieve state
estimation by fusing radar spectra and inertial data in a
complementary self-supervised manner.

Complementary benefits

Landmark Extraction

Proprioceptive Inertial Data

Ego Velocity
Estimtion

Robust Landmark Extraction

State Estimation
Accuracy State Estimation

Figure 1. S3 E fully explores complementary benefits from exteroceptive radar and proprioceptive inertial sensor to achieve accurate
state estimation.

1. Introduction

radar, operating longer wavelengths, affords robust measurements unaffected by minuscule particles [21]. Furthermore, mmWave radar can furnish relative radial velocity
information for reflected objects, thereby indicating egomotion and object mobility details. Leveraging these advantages, mmWave radar emerges as a promising catalyst
for state estimation in diverse weather conditions.
Existing radar-based studies [2, 41] predominantly employ the Constant False Alarm Rate (CFAR) detector
to extract point clouds with Doppler velocities from the
processed radar data cube, which encompasses RangeAzimuth-Doppler (RAD) information. On this basis, some
studies decouple the relative transformation between two
consecutive keyframes through aligning co-observed landmarks [7]. However, multiple objects of different sizes disrupt the independence among CFAR training cells, diminish the probability of detection, and result in missed detections [9]. Additionally, high-intensity cells caused by signal
multi-path effects can elevate the chances of false positives,
giving rise to “ghost points”. Consequently, these sparse
and flawed point clouds struggle with reliable data asso-

State estimation techniques have garnered widespread
attention as crucial facilitators in cutting-edge applications, including autonomous driving [37], indoor localization [28], AR/VR [17, 34], Robotics Navigation [16, 33],
and more. Currently, optical sensors such as LiDARs [24]
and cameras [27] are considered mainstream sensors for
state estimation and external perception. Numerous studies based on these sensors yield highly satisfactory outcomes under ideal conditions. However, optical sensors are
not very practical in harsh conditions e.g. dust, fog, rain,
snow, haze. In contrast, the millimeter-wave (mmWave)
* Corresponding author

26686

