This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpecGuard: Spectral Projection-based Advanced Invisible Watermarking
Inzamamul Alam, Md Tanvir Islam, Simon S. Woo,* Khan Muhammad
Sungkyunkwan University
{inzi15, tanvirnwu, swoo, khanmuhammad}@g.skku.edu

Abstract
Watermarking embeds imperceptible patterns into images
for authenticity verification. However, existing methods often lack robustness against various transformations primarily including distortions, image regeneration, and adversarial perturbation, creating real-world challenges. In this
work, we introduce SpecGuard, a novel watermarking approach for robust and invisible image watermarking. Unlike prior approaches, we embed the message inside hidden convolution layers by converting from the spatial domain to the frequency domain using spectral projection of a
higher frequency band that is decomposed by wavelet projection. Spectral projection employs Fast Fourier Transform approximation to transform spatial data into the frequency domain efficiently. In the encoding phase, a strength
factor enhances resilience against diverse attacks, including adversarial, geometric, and regeneration-based distortions, ensuring the preservation of copyrighted information.
Meanwhile, the decoder leverages Parseval’s theorem to effectively learn and extract the watermark pattern, enabling
accurate retrieval under challenging transformations. We
evaluate the proposed SpecGuard based on the embedded
watermark’s invisibility, capacity, and robustness. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the proposed SpecGuard
outperforms the state-of-the-art models. To ensure reproducibility, the full code is released on GitHub.

Figure 1. Image authentication using our proposed SpecGuard.

1. Introduction

Recently, invisible watermarking has gained significant
attention as a prominent defense mechanism for media authentication by embedding invisible messages into images
to verify authenticity [35, 48]. In fact, invisible watermarks
are preferred for preserving image quality and resisting tampering. These watermarks are unique to the creator and
enable tamper verification by comparing the retrieved watermark to the original, as the high-level process is presented in Fig. 1. Traditional watermarking methods often
rely on transformation techniques [18, 33]. Deep learning approaches like StegaStamp [41], Stable Signature [35],
and HiDDeN [53] provide end-to-end solutions for message
embedding. However, these methods often struggle with
fragility in handling common image processing operations
such as resizing, cropping, compression, and noise addition,
which can distort or erase the embedded watermark. Additionally, the performance of watermark embedding and extraction often remains vulnerable to attacks with noise injection, blurring, contrasting, and rotation [8].
To address the aforementioned challenges, we introduce
a novel robust, and invisible image watermarking method
named SpecGuard. SpecGuard is designed to overcome the
fundamental trade-offs [8] between imperceptibility, and robustness. Our proposed SpecGuard strategically embeds
watermark information in the spectral domain, leveraging
wavelet-based decomposition to distribute the watermark
across high-frequency components. Unlike traditional frequency domain watermarking techniques [47, 49] that are
easily disrupted by common image manipulations, Spec-

With the rapid advancement of digital media and artificial
intelligence, concerns regarding image authenticity, copyright protection, and content integrity have become more
challenging than ever [9, 16, 32]. Moreover, the widespread
availability of the latest image manipulation tools [4, 5, 14]
enables malicious tamperers to easily forge and redistribute
digital content without authorization, posing a significant
threat to ownership verification [29]. This growing risk emphasizes the need for reliable techniques for secure authentication and detection of unauthorized manipulation.
* Corresponding author: swoo@g.skku.edu (Simon S. Woo)

17984

