This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VGGSounder: Audio-Visual Evaluations for Foundation Models
Daniil Zverev1, * Thaddäus Wiedemer2,3,4,* Ameya Prabhu2,3
Matthias Bethge2,3 Wieland Brendel3,4 A. Sophia Koepke1,2,3
1

Technical University of Munich, MCML 2 University of Tübingen 3 Tübingen AI Center
4
MPI for Intelligent Systems, ELLIS Institute Tübingen

{daniil.zverev,a-sophia.koepke}@tum.de, {thaddaeus.wiedemer,ameya.prabhu}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
The emergence of audio-visual foundation models underscores the importance of reliably assessing their multimodal understanding. The VGGSound dataset is commonly
used as a benchmark for evaluation audio-visual classiﬁcation. However, our analysis identiﬁes several limitations of
VGGSound, including incomplete labelling, partially overlapping classes, and misaligned modalities. These lead to
distorted evaluations of auditory and visual capabilities.
To address these limitations, we introduce VGGSounder,
a comprehensively re-annotated, multi-label test set that
extends VGGSound and is speciﬁcally designed to evaluate audio-visual foundation models. VGGSounder features
detailed modality annotations, enabling precise analyses
of modality-speciﬁc performance. Furthermore, we reveal
model limitations by analysing performance degradation
when adding another input modality with our new modality
confusion metric. Our dataset and project page are available at https://vggsounder.github.io/.

Figure 1. We introduce VGGSounder, a multi-label audiovisual classiﬁcation benchmark with modality annotations. We
extend the original VGGSound test set with human-annotated
audible , visible , and visible+audible labels. We
add meta labels for common confounders, such as background
music. We benchmark eleven recent audio-visual models on
VGGSounder. It enables selective analysis of a model’s auditory
and visual capabilities on classes relevant for the queried modality.

1. Introduction
Rigorous evaluation benchmarks have been instrumental in
assessing the effectiveness of audio-visual models [33, 43,
49, 57]. Speciﬁcally, multi-modal foundation models integrating visual and auditory data aim to achieve a holistic
understanding of audio-visual content. However, the ﬁeld
lacks large-scale modality-aware classiﬁcation benchmarks
with ground-truth annotations indicating whether each label is visible, audible, or both. Such annotations would
allow detailed evaluations of multi-modal model capabilities. To address this gap, we introduce VGGSounder, an
enhanced version of the widely-used audio-visual classiﬁcation dataset VGGSound [13], which facilitates modality-

aware evaluation of audio-visual foundation models.
VGGSound has several notable limitations.
First,
its data is inherently multi-label; for instance, a single sample may simultaneously include labels such as
playing drum kit and playing acoustic guitar
when multiple instruments are present. Additionally, evaluating how different modalities contribute to model performance becomes difﬁcult without explicit modality annotations, as some labels are either not visually present or
not audible (e.g., certain instruments might only be audible but not visible in advertisements). Moreover, overlapping label classes present another challenge; for example,

* equal contribution

1027

