This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sim-DETR: Unlock DETR for Temporal Sentence Grounding
Jiajin Tang1∗ , Zhengxuan Wei1∗ , Yuchen Zhu1 , Cheng Shi1 , Guanbin Li2 , Liang Lin2 , Sibei Yang2†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{tangjj, weizhx2022}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Text: People are protesting in Armenia against government

Abstract

(b)

Ground Truth

Query

(a)

Temporal sentence grounding aims to identify exact moments in a video that correspond to a given textual query,
typically addressed with detection transformer (DETR) solutions. However, we find that typical strategies designed
to enhance DETR do not improve, and may even degrade,
its performance in this task. We systematically analyze and
identify the root causes of this abnormal behavior: (1) conflicts between queries from similar target moments and (2)
internal query conflicts due to the tension between global
semantics and local localization. Building on these insights, we propose a simple yet powerful baseline, SimDETR, which extends the standard DETR with two minor
modifications in the decoder layers: (1) constraining selfattention between queries based on their semantic and positional overlap and (2) adding query-to-frame alignment to
bridge the global and local contexts. Experiments demonstrate that Sim-DETR unlocks the full potential of DETR for
temporal sentence grounding, offering a strong baseline for
future research.

①
②
③
④

....

Next Layer

....

Location

(c)

Query
Semantic

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) temporal sentence grounding task, (b)
phenomenon of random matching across multiple layers, and (c)
the challenge of achieving the balance between focus on boundary
for span prediction and alignment with global semantics.

language and frames [36, 37, 72]. Recent advances center on integrating the Detection Transformer (DETR) [2]
for object detection into the temporal sentence grounding,
leveraging its query-based proposal detection framework to
eliminate hand-crafted proposal components and deliver superior grounding performance with high efficiency [22, 25,
26, 46, 47, 57]. They leverage moment queries—often several times more numerous than ground truth segments—in
the multi-layer decoder, which are initialized randomly [26,
46, 57], generated from sentences [22, 47], or extracted as
event units from the video [25], to locate and search the
most suitable matches for target segments. A one-to-one
label assignment is applied in the training objective to facilitate non-redundant predictions for each ground-truth segment. The overall architecture of the DETR-based temporal
sentence grounding framework is shown in Figure 6a.
However, we observe that strategies generally effective
for DETR in other tasks, such as object detection, like increasing the number of queries or decoder layers, do not
improve performance in temporal sentence grounding and
may even degrade it (Sec 3.1). This motivates us to revisit
the specific characteristics of temporal sentence grounding
that give rise to the distinct challenges in applying DETR
to this task. In a series of investigations on query-segment
alignment (Sec 3.2), we verify that performance degradation primarily stems from the difficulty in identifying dis-

1. Introduction
Video has become a dominant media on the internet, with
short-form content rapidly expanding and achieving exponential growth in reach over recent years [18–20, 24]. Instead of passively watching entire videos, users now prefer to target specific segments of interest, with natural language descriptions serving as an intuitive and flexible way
to convey intent [30, 61, 68]. This amplifies interest in
the research topic of temporal sentence grounding [22, 25–
27, 32, 40, 46, 47, 57, 71, 81], which aims to locate one or
more semantically aligned segments within an untrimmed
video according to a given natural language sentence, as
shown in Figure 1a.
Early methods either align sentences with predefined
temporal proposals for selection [44, 70] or directly predict
moment spans through cross-modal interactions between
∗ Equal contribution.

yangsb3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

† Corresponding author is Sibei Yang.

22760

