This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIVE: Taming DINO for Subject-Driven Video Editing
Yi Huang1,2 Wei Xiong3‡ He Zhang4 Chaoqi Chen5
Jianzhuang Liu1 Mingfu Yan6,1 Shifeng Chen1,7†
1
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
vivo AI Lab, 3 NVIDIA, 4 Adobe Research, 5 Shenzhen University,
6
Southeast University, 7 Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
{yi.huang, mf.yan, jz.liu, shifeng.chen}@siat.ac.cn
wxiongur@gmail.com, he.zhang92@rutgers.edu, cqchen1994@gmail.com

a “ kitten” walking across
a lush green field of grass

a “ white car” driving down a road
with windmills in the background

Source
Video

Target
Identity

Source
Video
Target
Identity

“ white fox”

“ silver jeep”

Figure 1. Subject-driven video editing results achieved by DIVE. Given a source video, DIVE can accurately capture the subject’s motion
trajectory and perform precise editing with various target identities, specified either by reference images or text prompts.

Abstract
Building on the success of diffusion models in image generation and editing, video editing has recently gained substantial attention. However, maintaining temporal consistency and motion alignment still remains challenging.
To address these issues, this paper proposes DINO-guided
Video Editing (DIVE), a framework designed to facilitate

subject-driven editing in source videos conditioned on either target text prompts or reference images with specific
identities. The core of DIVE lies in leveraging the powerful semantic features extracted from a pretrained DINOv2
model as implicit correspondences to guide the editing process. Specifically, to ensure temporal motion consistency,
DIVE employs DINO features to align with the motion trajectory of the source video. For precise subject editing,
DIVE incorporates the DINO features of reference images
into a pretrained text-to-image model to learn Low-Rank

‡ Project lead.

† Corresponding author.

16004

