This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training-Free Personalization via Retrieval and Reasoning on Fingerprints
Deepayan Das1 Davide Talon2 Yiming Wang2
Massimiliano Mancini1 Elisa Ricci1, 2
1

University of Trento

2

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

{deepayan.das, massimiliano.mancini, e.ricci}@unitn.it
{dtalon, ywang}@fbk.eu

Abstract

R2P (Ours)

It’s an ICCV T-shirt!

Tuning Test-time
training

Others

Vision Language Models (VLMs) have lead to major improvements in multimodal reasoning, yet they still struggle
to understand user-specific concepts. Existing personalization methods address this limitation but heavily rely on
training procedures, that can be either costly or unpleasant
to individual users. We depart from existing work, and for
the first time explore the training-free setting in the context of
personalization. We propose a novel method, Retrieval and
Reasoning for Personalization (R2P), leveraging internal
knowledge of VLMs. First, we leverage VLMs to extract the
concept fingerprint, i.e., key attributes uniquely defining the
concept within its semantic class. When a query arrives, the
most similar fingerprints are retrieved and scored via chain
of thought reasoning. To reduce the risk of hallucinations,
the scores are validated through cross-modal verification
at the attribute level: in case of a discrepancy between the
scores, R2P refines the concept association via pairwise multimodal matching, where the retrieved fingerprints and their
images are directly compared with the query. We validate
R2P on two publicly available benchmarks and a newly introduced dataset, Personal Concepts with Visual Ambiguity
(PerVA), for concept identification highlighting challenges
in visual ambiguity. R2P consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches on various downstream tasks across all
benchmarks. Code and data are available at the project
page: Training-Free Personalization.

VLM
Model

VLM
Model

It’s a CVPR T-shirt!
VLM
Model

What makes it
unique?
plain black
round neck

Nashville guitar
CVPR logo

Figure 1. Current VLMs personalization methods depend on expensive training procedures. In contrast, we introduce R2P, a
training-free approach that utilizes textual attributes as unique fingerprints for identifying personal concepts.

samples are used to learn a custom representation for each
personal concept in a contrastive manner, against a large
number of negative samples from the same class [4, 29].
This data collection is not only costly, but requires expensive
fine-tuning each time a new concept is added. Alternatively,
other works perform expensive large-scale fine-tuning on
synthetic personalization data [13, 32], using a retrievalaugmented strategy to strengthen the user-specific context at
inference time [13]. However, they do not eliminate the cost
of large-scale pretraining, which can be prohibitive when
considering modern VLMs.
One common assumption among these works is that training is needed to enable VLMs to capture personal concepts.
However, VLMs have been exposed to virtually any semantic
concept through their web-scale training data. The availability of this vast knowledge, raises a natural question: Can we
exploit VLMs’s internal knowledge to perform personalization without training?
In this work, we show for the first time that training-free

1. Introduction
While ”Where are my keys?” or ”What is Fuffy doing?” are
questions easy to understand for humans, they are challenging for Vision and Language Models (VLMs) [1, 2, 5, 10, 23]
due to their inherent lack of understanding for user-specific
concepts. Toward addressing this limitation, VLMs personalization aims to add personal concepts to the knowledge of
a VLM [4, 13, 29]. Recent works on VLM personalization
mainly rely on training procedures, where multiple reference

9683

