This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DyGS-SLAM: Real-Time Accurate Localization and Gaussian Reconstruction
for Dynamic Scenes
Xinggang Hu1,2
1 Dalian University of Technology

Chenyangguang Zhang2 Mingyuan Zhao3
Xiangkui Zhang1 Xiangyang Ji2 *
2 Tsinghua University

3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Yuanze Gui4
4 Beijing University of Technology

hxg@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zcyg22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhaomingyuan21@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
guiyuanze@emails.bjut.edu.cn, zhangxk@dlut.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In dynamic scenes, achieving accurate camera localization and reconstructing a long-term consistent map containing only the static background are two major challenges
faced by Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(VSLAM). In current traditional dynamic VSLAM systems,
the methods used to handle dynamic objects are primarily
designed for localization; if applied to reconstruction, they
are prone to introducing motion artifacts. Meanwhile, mask
compensation strategies in NeRF- or 3DGS-based dynamic
VSLAM systems also face challenges, such as the inability to completely eliminate dynamic object artifacts and low
real-time performance. To address these issues, we leverage
object detection to extract semantic information and propose a dynamic feature detection algorithm based on both
geometry and appearance. This algorithm accurately identifies known and unknown moving objects and determines
their actual motion states. To mitigate the issue of insufficient detection box coverage, we design a dynamic object
box correction algorithm based on clustering and Gaussian
mixture models to comprehensively identify moving object
regions. Furthermore, to overcome the limitations of sparse
features in texture-scarce environments, we introduce a feature densification strategy based on image texture complexity, enhancing reconstruction quality while maintaining
real-time performance. Extensive experimental evaluations
demonstrate that our system achieves state-of-the-art localization and reconstruction performance in dynamic scenes
and can run in real time on resource-constrained devices.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

Figure 1. Overview. Baseline (Top): (a) Semantic segmentation mask; (b) Compensation mask; (c) Fused mask; (d) Limitations of feature extraction; (e) Rendering results. Ours (Bottom):
(A) Object detection results; (B) Dynamic feature identification;
(C) Dynamic object box correction; (D) Feature densification; (E)
Rendering results.

mapping, utilizing point clouds and voxels for sparse reconstruction. While these approaches provide relatively accurate environmental representations, they exhibit limitations
in terms of visual quality and dense reconstruction. Recently, NeRF [26] and 3DGS [18] have been integrated into
SLAM systems [11, 12, 25, 29, 36, 43, 45] to achieve higher
accuracy and continuity in map representation. However,
the geometric constraints that SLAM systems rely on are
fundamentally based on static assumptions. Consequently,
both traditional VSLAM and neural-rendering-based VSLAM [25] (i.e., NeRF- or 3DGS-based VSLAM) suffer
from significant degradation in localization accuracy and
mapping quality when applied to dynamic environments.
In dynamic scenes, VSLAM faces two major challenges:
mitigating the impact of dynamic elements on camera localization and constructing a long-term consistent map
containing only static elements. Several existing neuralrendering-based VSLAM systems have proposed solutions
for dynamic scenes. A common approach is to use semantic
segmentation to extract Potential Moving Objects (PMOs,
determined by the semantic labels of detection results).

1. Introduction
VSLAM has been widely applied in fields such as mobile
robotics [8, 48] and augmented reality [2, 40]. Traditional
VSLAM systems [4, 9, 22, 31] primarily focus on geometric
* Corresponding author.

9561

