This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoSplatting: Towards Geometry Guided Gaussian Splatting for
Physically-based Inverse Rendering
Kai Ye1,∗ ,

Chong Gao2,∗ ,
1
2

Wenzheng Chen3,4,† ,

Baoquan Chen1,4,†

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
3

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

R3DG: 56min
Relit: 26.6dB

GS-IR: 13min
Relit: 20.4dB

4

Guanbin Li2 ,

Ground Truth

Ours: 9min
Relit: 29.5dB

Decompose

−−−−−−→

Multi-view Inputs

Alebdo

Roughness

Normal

Relit 1

Relit 2

Figure 1.
Decomposition and Relighting Results. Existing 3DGS-based inverse rendering methods, such as Relightable 3DGS
(R3DG) [8] and GS-IR [24], typically rely on approximated normal directions, which can lead to inaccuracies in light transport modeling and subsequently result in noisy material decomposition and flawed relighting results. In contrast, we propose GeoSplatting, a novel
approach that augments 3DGS with explicit geometry guidance to improve normal estimation and light transport modeling, resulting in
1
superior decomposition and relighting quality, while also delivering excellent
training efficiency.

Abstract
Recent 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) representations [18]
have demonstrated remarkable performance in novel view
synthesis; further, material-lighting disentanglement on
3DGS warrants relighting capabilities and its adaptability
to broader applications. While the general approach to the
latter operation lies in integrating differentiable physicallybased rendering (PBR) techniques to jointly recover BRDF
materials and environment lighting, achieving a precise disentanglement remains an inherently difficult task due to
the challenge of accurately modeling light transport. Existing approaches typically approximate Gaussian points’

normals, which constitute an implicit geometric constraint.
However, they usually suffer from inaccuracies in normal
estimation that subsequently degrade light transport, resulting in noisy material decomposition and flawed relighting results. To address this, we propose GeoSplatting, a
novel approach that augments 3DGS with explicit geometry
guidance for precise light transport modeling. By differentiably constructing a surface-grounded 3DGS from an optimizable mesh, our approach leverages well-defined mesh
normals and the opaque mesh surface, and additionally facilitates the use of mesh-based ray tracing techniques for
efficient, occlusion-aware light transport calculations. This
enhancement ensures precise material decomposition while
preserving the efficiency and high-quality rendering capabilities of 3DGS. Comprehensive evaluations across di-

* Equal contribution. † Equal advisory.

28991

