This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RegGS: Unposed Sparse Views Gaussian Splatting with 3DGS Registration
Chong Cheng1*

Yu Hu1*
Sicheng Yu1
Beizhen Zhao1
Zijian Wang1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

{ccheng735, yhu847}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Unposed Sparse Views

haowang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Main 3D Gaussians

Sub 3D Gaussians

Hao Wang1†

Novel View Synthesis

Optimal Transport
MW2 Distance

Joint 3DGS
Registration in 𝑺𝒊𝒎 𝟑
Feed-Forward
GS Model

PSNR: 28.53

RegGS (Ours)

Better scene geometry

…

…

Feed-forward Gaussian registration for Unposed 3DGS

Videolifter

CF3DGS

PSNR: 12.11

PSNR: 20.92

Poor scene geometry

Poor scene geometry

Optimization-Based Unposed 3DGS

Optimization-Based Unposed 3DGS

Figure 1. Overview of our pipeline for 3D Gaussian Splatting from multiple unposed sparse views. A pre-trained feed-forward GS model
extracts sub 3D Gaussians from each input, while two initial images yield the main 3D Gaussians. We measure the structural closeness of
Gaussian sets using the entropy-regularized MW2 distance and align them in Sim(3) space with our joint 3DGS registration module. Our
method outperforms others in reconstruction quality and novel view synthesis.

Abstract

thermore, we design a joint 3DGS registration module that
integrates the MW2 distance, photometric consistency, and
depth geometry. This enables a coarse-to-fine registration process while accurately estimating camera poses and
aligning the scene. Experiments on the RE10K and ACID
datasets demonstrate that RegGS effectively registers local
Gaussians with high fidelity, achieving precise pose estimation and high-quality novel-view synthesis. Project page:
https://3dagentworld.github.io/reggs/.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated its potential in reconstructing scenes from unposed images.
However, optimization-based 3DGS methods struggle with
sparse views due to limited prior knowledge. Meanwhile,
feed-forward Gaussian approaches are constrained by input
formats, making it challenging to incorporate more input
views. To address these challenges, we propose RegGS, a
3D Gaussian registration-based framework for reconstructing unposed sparse views. RegGS aligns local 3D Gaussians generated by a feed-forward network into a globally
consistent 3D Gaussian representation. Technically, we implement an entropy-regularized Sinkhorn algorithm to efficiently solve the optimal transport Mixture 2-Wasserstein
(MW2 ) distance, which serves as an alignment metric for
Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) in Sim(3) space. Fur-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis—driven by the demand for immersive experiences in
VR, AR, and robotics—have yielded impressive results under dense observations [7, 15, 17, 34, 38]. Reconstructing
3D scenes from sparse, unposed data remains a formidable
challenge, as real-world conditions often provide limited
overlap and unreliable camera poses [10].

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

8100

