This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Real-world Display Inverse Rendering Dataset
Seokjun Choi*

Hoon-Gyu Chung* Yujin Jeon* Giljoo Nam†
†
* POSTECH
Meta

Abstract
Inverse rendering aims to reconstruct geometry and reflectance from captured images. Display-camera imaging
systems offer unique advantages for this task: each pixel
can easily function as a programmable point light source,
and the polarized light emitted by LCD displays facilitates diffuse-specular separation. Despite these benefits,
there is currently no public real-world dataset captured using display-camera systems, unlike other setups such as
light stages. This absence hinders the development and
evaluation of display-based inverse rendering methods. In
this paper, we introduce the first real-world dataset for
display-based inverse rendering. To achieve this, we construct and calibrate an imaging system comprising an LCD
display and stereo polarization cameras. We then capture a diverse set of objects with diverse geometry and
reflectance under one-light-at-a-time (OLAT) display patterns. We also provide high-quality ground-truth geometry.
Our dataset enables the synthesis of captured images under
arbitrary display patterns and different noise levels. Using
this dataset, we evaluate the performance of existing photometric stereo and inverse rendering methods, and provide
a simple, yet effective baseline for display inverse rendering, outperforming state-of-the-art inverse rendering methods. Code and dataset are available on our project page at
https://michaelcsj.github.io/DIR/.

Seung-Hwan Baek*

venient control over illumination [1, 78]. Moreover, LCD
displays emit polarized light, which facilitates the separation of diffuse and specular reflections [10, 35]. These
characteristics make display-camera systems a compelling
choice for inverse rendering research. However, despite
their potential, the lack of publicly available datasets captured using such systems has hindered progress in this direction. Unlike other setups, such as light stages, which have
been extensively used for photometric stereo and reflectance
capture, display-camera inverse rendering lacks a standardized benchmark for method development and comparison.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we introduce the first real-world dataset
for display-based inverse rendering. We construct a displaycamera imaging system consisting of a LCD monitor and
a stereo polarization camera setup, enabling controlled illumination capture at two views with diffuse and specular separation. Using this system, we capture a diverse set
of objects with varying geometries and reflectance properties under one-light-at-a-time (OLAT) display patterns.
Each object is accompanied by ground-truth geometry obtained via structured-light scanning, enabling precise evaluation of inverse rendering methods. Our dataset also supports synthetic relighting and noise simulation, allowing researchers to generate novel lighting conditions using linear
combinations of captured images. We also introduce a simple baseline method for display inverse rendering that effectively addresses associated challenges, outperforming previous methods. Our specific contributions are as follows:

Inverse rendering is a long-standing problem in computer
vision and graphics, aiming to recover scene properties such
as geometry and reflectance from captured images [36, 54].
Recent progress in inverse rendering methods heavily rely
on datasets that provide images of objects under wellcharacterized multiple lighting conditions [5, 11, 59], allowing for evaluation and training of models that infer geometry and reflectance from images.
Among various inverse rendering setups, display-camera
imaging systems offer unique advantages. Unlike conventional light stages [18, 32, 50, 62], displays can serve as
high-resolution, programmable light sources, allowing con-

• We build and calibrate a display-camera imaging system
incorporating display backlight, which enables displaybased illumination and stereo polarization imaging.
• We acquire the first high-quality real-world dataset for
display-camera inverse rendering, featuring objects with
diverse reflectance and ground-truth geometry.
• We evaluate existing photometric stereo and inverse rendering methods on our dataset, highlighting the challenges of display inverse rendering.
• We propose a simple yet effective baseline for display inverse rendering, outperforming previous methods.

25272

