This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DGTalker: Disentangled Generative Latent Space Learning for Audio-Driven
Gaussian Talking Heads
Xiaoxi Liang1 , Yanbo Fan2, *, Qiya Yang1 , Xuan Wang3 , Wei Gao1 , Ge Li1, *
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University,
2
Nanjing University, 3 Ant Group
shawks0419.github.io/dgtalker

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the generation of high-fidelity,
audio-driven 3D Gaussian talking heads from monocular
videos. We present DGTalker, an innovative framework designed for real-time, high-fidelity, and 3D-aware talking
head synthesis. By leveraging Gaussian generative priors
and treating the task as a latent space navigation problem, our method effectively alleviates the lack of 3D information and the low-quality detail reconstruction caused by
the absence of structure priors in monocular videos, which
is a longstanding challenge in existing 3DGS-based approaches. To ensure precise lip synchronization and nuanced expression control, we propose a disentangled latent
space navigation method that independently models lip motion and talking expressions. Additionally, we introduce an
effective masked cross-view supervision strategy to enable
robust learning within the disentangled framework. We conduct extensive experiments and demonstrate that DGTalker
surpasses current state-of-the-art methods in visual quality,
motion accuracy, and controllability.

Personalized
Generator

wcan

Encoder

Encoder

Sample Latent Code

Expression Vector

Final Latent Code

Lip Vector

Figure 1. A brief illustration of DGTalker. We reformulate the
problem as disentangled latent space navigation. We adopt dual
encoders to extract a lip vector and an expression vector from the
audio input. These two vectors, together with the canonical code,
are then linearly combined to form the final latent code, which is
then sent to the personalized generator for synthesis.

1. Introduction

have started to use 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [21] for
head avatar modeling. While 3DGS provides efficient and
flexible explicit 3D representation, it typically requires a
wide range of viewpoints to learn 3D geometry. These
viewpoints, which are difficult to obtain from monocular
videos, pose significant practical challenges. An insightful solution is to leverage the generative prior learned from
large-scale data to construct a more expressive representation with viewpoint generalization capability, as explored
in NeRF-based methods [2, 23]. However, a key challenge arises from the fact that the latent space of generative
methods is inherently entangled with multiple identities and
global facial expression variations, whereas the audio primarily correlates with local lip movements. This mismatch
hampers effective model learning when the full facial image
is used as supervision, as in previous methods, and results
in suboptimal audio-visual synchronization.
To this end, we introduce DGTalker, a novel framework
leveraging Gaussian generative priors [18, 22] for modeling
the audio-driven 3D Gaussian head avatar. To seamlessly
integrate with generative priors, we reformulate the task as
a latent space navigation problem. We propose a novel dis-

Building an audio-driven 3D head avatar from a monocular
video is a valuable research topic and has many different applications, such as gaming, filmmaking, holographic communication, etc. It often has high requirements, including
the visual quality from different viewpoints, the rendering
speed, and the synchronization between audio and video.
Previous works [2, 8, 15, 16, 23, 24, 42, 44] build the
3D head avatar with neural radiance field (NeRF) [28], utilizing its high-fidelity view synthesis capabilities. However,
despite various improvements, the NeRF-based methods are
still limited by relatively low rendering efficiency, making
it difficult for them to be applied to tasks with real-time rendering requirements. Recently, a few works [6, 11, 25, 43]
* Corresponding authors

11079

