This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VOccl3D: A Video Benchmark Dataset for 3D Human Pose
and Shape Estimation under real Occlusions
Yash Garg, Saketh Bachu, Arindam Dutta, Rohit Lal† , Sarosij Bose,
Calvin-Khang Ta‡ , M. Salman Asif, Amit Roy-Chowdhury
University of California, Riverside
{ygarg002,sbach008,adutt020,rlal011,sbose007,cta003,sasif,amitrc}@ucr.edu

Figure 1. We propose VOccl3D, a large-scale synthetic video dataset specifically designed for training and evaluating algorithms for 3D
human pose and shape estimation (HPS) in realistic occlusion scenarios. VOccl3D comprises over 250,000 frames, with a total runtime
exceeding 2 hours and 30 minutes. Compared to previous occlusion-based datasets, VOccl3D has diverse body shapes, textures, and most
importantly, significant and realistic occlusions within the scenes. In addition to body shape and pose, VOccl3D provides other necessary
ground truth information, such as bounding boxes, body part segmentations, and human silhouettes. The top row illustrates various frames
from our dataset, showcasing diverse occlusions, clothing textures, and motions, while the bottom row represents a sequence of frames
from a video sequence within our dataset.

Abstract

Additionally, we fine-tuned recent HPS methods, CLIFF
and BEDLAM-CLIFF, on our dataset, demonstrating significant qualitative and quantitative improvements across
multiple public datasets, as well as on the test split of our
dataset, while comparing its performance with other stateof-the-art methods. Furthermore, we leveraged our dataset
to enhance human detection performance under occlusion
by fine-tuning an existing object detector, YOLO11, thus
leading to a robust end-to-end HPS estimation system under occlusions. Overall, this dataset serves as a valuable
resource for future research aimed at benchmarking methods designed to handle occlusions, offering a more realistic
alternative to existing occlusion datasets. See the Project
page for code and dataset:https : / / yashgarg98 .
github.io/VOccl3D-dataset/

Human pose and shape (HPS) estimation methods have
been extensively studied, with many demonstrating high
zero-shot performance on in-the-wild images and videos.
However, these methods often struggle in challenging scenarios involving complex human poses or significant occlusions. Although some studies address 3D human pose
estimation under occlusion, they typically evaluate performance on datasets that lack realistic or substantial occlusions, e.g., most existing datasets introduce occlusions with
random patches over the human or clipart-style overlays,
which may not reflect real-world challenges. To bridge
this gap in realistic occlusion datasets, we introduce a
novel benchmark dataset, VOccl3D, a Video-based human
Occlusion dataset with 3D body pose and shape annotations. Inspired by works such as AGORA and BEDLAM, we
constructed this dataset using advanced computer graphics
rendering techniques, incorporating diverse real-world occlusion scenarios, clothing textures, and human motions.

† Currently at NASA MSFC IMPACT. ‡ Currently at Dolby Laboratories. Work done while the authors were at UCR.

7350

