This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InterGSEdit: Interactive 3D Gaussian Splatting Editing with
3D Geometry-Consistent Attention Prior
Minghao Wen1 ∗ Shengjie Wu1 * Kangkan Wang2 † Dong Liang1,3†
1
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
The Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Shenzhen Research Institute, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
{lanche, wushengjie, liangdong}@nuaa.edu.cn, wangkangkan@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
The development of scene representation models, such as
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [19] and 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [15], has made scene reconstruction and
rendering both efficient and practical. These advances have
significantly boosted the research of 3D scene editing, and
text-guided diffusion editing methods [2, 4, 6, 22, 28, 32–
34] attracts increasing attention in recent years. Text-guided
diffusion methods typically first edit multi-view images rendered from a 3D scene model (i.e., 3DGS) according to the
target text description, and subsequently refine the 3D scene
model with the modified images to generate 3D editing results. Notably, 3DGS-based scene editing [3, 4, 6, 32–34]
has achieved remarkable success in rigid editing tasks such
as style transfer and appearance adjustment. However, it is
still challenging to edit non-rigid scenes due to more complicated and arbitrarily varying deformations.
The current mainstream approaches [4, 17, 33, 34] rely
on different 3D constraint techniques, such as epipolar constraints [4], consistent 3DGS fine-tuning [33], or depth map
guidance [34], to enforce cross-view consistency. Although
these strategies work well for rigid editing tasks like style
transfer and appearance modification, there are obvious limitations in non-rigid scene editing like faces with changing
expressions. As illustrated in Fig. 1, in a “smile” editing
task, the edited faces in different views may exhibit varying
appearances due to non-rigid deformations in the aspects
of smile intensity and tooth visibility. Refining 3DGS face
with these inconsistent face images will result in blurred artifacts or distorted geometry. The primary reason for this
problem is that the textual guidance in diffusion-based editing is inherently ambiguous and cannot be specified in detail to achieve consistent and precise editing. The non-rigid
editing easily leads to inconsistent features across different

3D Gaussian Splatting based 3D editing has demonstrated
impressive performance in recent years. However, the
multi-view editing often exhibits significant local inconsistency, especially in areas of non-rigid deformation, which
lead to local artifacts, texture blurring, or semantic variations in edited 3D scenes. We also found that the existing
editing methods, which rely entirely on text prompts make
the editing process a “one-shot deal”, making it difficult
for users to control the editing degree flexibly. In response
to these challenges, we present InterGSEdit, a novel framework for high-quality 3DGS editing via interactively selecting key views with users’ preferences. We propose a CLIPbased Semantic Consistency Selection (CSCS) strategy to
adaptively screen a group of semantically consistent reference views for each user-selected key view. Then, the crossattention maps derived from the reference views are used
in a weighted Gaussian Splatting unprojection to construct
the 3D Geometry-Consistent Attention Prior (GAP 3D ). We
project GAP 3D to obtain 3D-constrained attention, which
are fused with 2D cross-attention via Attention Fusion Network (AFN). AFN employs an adaptive attention strategy
that prioritizes 3D-constrained attention for geometric consistency during early inference, and gradually prioritizes
2D cross-attention maps in diffusion for fine-grained features during the later inference. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that InterGSEdit achieves state-of-the-art performance, delivering consistent, high-fidelity 3DGS editing
with improved user experience.

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

26136

