This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UIP2P: Unsupervised Instruction-based Image Editing
via Edit Reversibility Constraint
Enis Simsar1
Alessio Tonioni3
Yongqin Xian3
Thomas Hofmann1
Federico Tombari2,3
1
2
3
ETH Zürich - DALAB
Technical University of Munich
Google Switzerland
https://uip2p.github.io
Input Image

InstructPix2Pix

Ours

Input Image

InstructPix2Pix

Ours

a) Make the ground forest.

b) Have there be a birthday cake on the table.

c) Turn the mountain into a volcano.

d) Change the eagle color to purple.

Figure 1. Unsupervised InstructPix2Pix. Our approach applies more precise and coherent edits while better preserving scene structure.
UIP2P surpasses the supervised alternative, IP2P, trained on a synthetic dataset, demonstrating superior performance on both real (a, b)
and synthetic (c, d) images.

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised instruction-based image editing approach that removes the need for ground-truth edited
images during training. Existing methods rely on supervised learning with triplets of input images, groundtruth edited images, and edit instructions. These triplets
are typically generated either by existing editing methods—introducing biases—or through human annotations,
which are costly and limit generalization. Our approach
addresses these challenges by introducing a novel editing mechanism called Edit Reversibility Constraint (ERC),
which applies forward and reverse edits in one training
step and enforces alignment in image, text, and attention
spaces. This allows us to bypass the need for groundtruth edited images and unlock training for the first time
on datasets comprising either real image-caption pairs or
image-caption-instruction triplets. We empirically show
that our approach performs better across a broader range

18895

of edits with high-fidelity and precision. By eliminating the
need for pre-existing datasets of triplets, reducing biases
associated with current methods, and proposing ERC, our
work represents a significant advancement in unblocking
scaling of instruction-based image editing.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) have recently made significant advancements in generating high-quality and diverse images,
driven largely by breakthroughs in text-to-image generation [17, 33, 34, 36]. This progress has enabled various
techniques for tasks such as personalized image generation [11, 35, 46], context-aware inpainting [24, 27, 50], and
image editing based on textual prompts [2, 8, 15, 21, 25].
Beyond prompt-based editing, DMs have demonstrated
strong capabilities in instruction-based editing, where edits are guided by explicit natural language commands, such
as instructions [5, 10, 18, 19, 51, 52].

