This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discovering Divergent Representations between Text-to-Image Models
Lisa Dunlap1 * Joseph E. Gonzalez1 Trevor Darrell1 Fabian Caba Heilbron2
Josef Sivic2,3 Bryan Russell2
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Adobe Research 3 CIIRC CTU

Input: text-to-image
model pair

Digital art of an
enraged opera
singer

PixArt

Output: divergent
representation

A poem narrating
Oil painting of
An abstract
A fierce display of
the tempest within
the fervor of a
representation of
a protector's
an artist's heart. revolutionary speech. existential dread unwavering courage.

PixArt

SDXL-Lightning

CompCon

Diverging prompt description:
“prompts with representations
of strong emotions such as
rage, grief, and resilience.”

SDXL-Lightning

Diverging visual attribute:
“Flames”

Figure 1. Discovering divergent representations with CompCon. Left: CompCon takes as input a pair of text-to-image models and
outputs a diverging prompt description to produce a diverging visual attribute appearing in one model but not the other. Right: We show
the discovered diverging visual attribute ‘flames’ appearing in PixArt but not SDXL-Lightning over different diverging prompts.

Abstract

NEW VERSION

1. Introduction
Generative models develop unique representations of semantic concepts – for instance, happy scenes contain warm
colors, or dogs are found outside. While many of these
representations are shared across models, understanding
when representations diverge can reveal stylistic differences between models. In this work, we explore how to uncover such divergent representations by identifying inputdependent differences between two text-to-image models.
Specifically, we aim to discover pairs of semantic concepts
and visual attributes where prompts containing a semantic
concept cause one model to generate images displaying the
corresponding visual attribute, while the other does not. For
example, prompts that mention strong emotions result in
images with flames in one model but not the other (Fig. 1).

In this paper, we investigate when and how visual representations learned by two different generative models diverge
from each other. Specifically, given two text-to-image models, our goal is to discover visual attributes that appear in
images generated by one model but not the other, along with
the types of prompts that trigger these attribute differences.
For example, ‘flames’ might appear in one model’s outputs
when given prompts expressing strong emotions, while the
other model does not produce this attribute given the same
prompts. We introduce CompCon (Comparing Concepts),
an evolutionary search algorithm that discovers visual attributes more prevalent in one model’s output than the other,
and uncovers the prompt concepts linked to these visual differences. To evaluate CompCon’s ability to find diverging
representations, we create an automated data generation
pipeline to produce ID2 , a dataset of 60 input-dependent
differences, and compare our approach to several LLM- and
VLM-powered baselines. Finally, we use CompCon to compare popular text-to-image models, finding divergent representations such as how PixArt depicts prompts mentioning
loneliness with wet streets and Stable Diffusion 3.5 depicts
African American people in media professions.

1 Work done during an internship at Adobe Research.

Discovering divergent representations is beneficial for
both model developers and users. For developers, it can
help decide which model to deploy to production based on
any problematic discovered divergent representations, and
for evaluating against competitor models. For users, it can
help in selecting the model that best aligns with their own
interpretations and needs. Manually performing this task
is labor-intensive, as it requires sifting through hundreds
or thousands of images to find visual attribute differences;
once identified, additional effort is needed to determine the
types of input prompts that trigger these differences.

17516

