This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReMP-AD: Retrieval-enhanced Multi-modal Prompt Fusion for Few-Shot
Industrial Visual Anomaly Detection
Hongchi Ma
Harbin Institute of Technology

Guanglei Yang *
Harbin Institute of Technology

120l020518@stu.hit.edu.cn

yangguanglei@hit.edu.cn

Debin Zhao
Harbin Institute of Technology

Yanli Ji
Sun Yat-Sen University

Wangmeng Zuo
Harbin Institute of Technology

dbzhao@hit.edu.cn

jiyanli82@gmail.com

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Industrial visual inspection is crucial for detecting defects in manufactured products, but it traditionally relies on
human operators, leading to inefficiencies. Industrial Visual Anomaly Detection (IVAD) has emerged as a promising solution, with methods such as zero-shot, few-shot, and
reconstruction-based techniques. However, zero-shot methods struggle with subtle anomalies, and reconstructionbased methods fail to capture fine-grained details. Few-shot
methods, which use limited samples and prompts, offer a
more efficient approach. Despite their promise, challenges
remain in managing intra-class variation among references
and in effectively extracting more representative anomaly
features. This paper presents Retrieval-enhanced Multimodal Prompt Fusion Anomaly Detection (ReMP-AD),
a framework that introduces Intra-Class Token Retrieval
(ICTR) to reduce noise in the memory bank and VisionLanguage Prior Fusion (VLPF) to guide the encoder in capturing more distinctive and relevant features of anomalies.
Experiments on the VisA and MVTec-AD datasets demonstrate that ReMP-AD outperforms existing methods, achieving 97.8%/94.1% performance in 4-shot anomaly segmentation and classification. Our approach also shows strong
results on the PCB-Bank dataset, highlighting its effectiveness in few-shot industrial anomaly detection. Code is
available at https://github.com/cshcma/ReMP-AD.git

(a)Query

dissimilar

dissimilar

similar

dissimilar

similar

similar

(b)ReferenceA

(c)ReferenceB

(d)Result

Figure 1. A comparison of the visualization results under the 2shot setting using different references. (a) Original input with
ground truth. (b) The first reference. (c) The second reference.
(d) Visualization results.

1. Introduction

tion stages. Moreover, it prevents the dispatch of defective
products to customers, thereby maintaining product quality and preserving the company’s reputation. Traditionally,
this task heavily relies on human operators, which incurs
a high human resource burden and results in low production efficiency. To this end, Industrial Visual Anomaly Detection (IVAD) [2, 5, 6, 14, 15, 19, 24] has garnered increased attention in recent years. IVAD aims to detect
and localize anomalies in industrial product images automatically using detection algorithms. Relevant works can
be categorized into zero-shot methods [3, 17, 28], fewshot methods [5, 6, 10, 13, 19] and reconstruction methods [8, 15, 25]. Zero-shot methods mainly utilize pretrained vision-language models to exploit the correlation
between visual and textual features for anomaly detection.
However, due to the ambiguity of the textual modality, these
methods may fail to detect subtle and irregular anomalies.

Within the manufacturing process, industrial visual inspection is the final but most crucial step in identifying defects
in produced goods. This step is significant for cost savings by detecting faults as early as possible in the produc* Corresponding author

20425

