This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Street Gaussians without 3D Object Tracker
Ruida Zhang1,2 , Chengxi Li1 , Chenyangguang Zhang1 , Xingyu Liu1 , Haili Yuan1 ,
Yanyan Li2 , Xiangyang Ji1 , Gim Hee Lee2
1
Tsinghua University, 2 National University of Singapore
{zhangrd23@mails, xyji@}.tsinghua.edu.cn, gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg
3D Object Tracker

Novel View Synthesis

2D Object Tracker

Street Gaussians

Novel View Synthesis

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of 3D tracker-based Street Gaussians [89] (left) and our approach (right). Existing methods heavily rely on object
poses, but 3D trackers struggle with limited generalization [21, 73, 97], leading to flaws in novel view synthesis. In contrast, 2D foundation
models show better generalization [84, 88]. Our approach leverages a 2D foundation model [84] for object tracking and learns point motion
within an implicit feature space to autonomously correct tracking errors, improving robustness across diverse scenes.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modeling dynamic 3D street scenes underpins modern autonomous driving by enabling realistic, controllable simulations for tasks such as perception [11, 42, 56, 94, 105],
prediction [25, 33, 47], and motion planning [13, 14, 16].
With the rise of end-to-end autonomous systems that require real-time sensor feedback [29, 31, 35], high-quality
scene reconstructions have become essential for closed-loop
evaluations [46, 96], particularly to simulate critical corner
cases safely and cost-effectively.

Realistic scene reconstruction in driving scenarios poses
significant challenges due to fast-moving objects. Most existing methods rely on labor-intensive manual labeling of
object poses to reconstruct dynamic objects in canonical
space and move them based on these poses during rendering. While some approaches attempt to use 3D object trackers to replace manual annotations, the limited generalization of 3D trackers – caused by the scarcity of large-scale
3D datasets – results in inferior reconstructions in realworld settings. In contrast, 2D foundation models demonstrate strong generalization capabilities. To eliminate the
reliance on 3D trackers and enhance robustness across diverse environments, we propose a stable object tracking
module by leveraging associations from 2D deep trackers
within a 3D object fusion strategy. We address inevitable
tracking errors by further introducing a motion learning
strategy in an implicit feature space that autonomously corrects trajectory errors and recovers missed detections. Experimental results on Waymo-NOTR and KITTI show that
our method outperforms existing approaches. Our code will
be made publicly available.

25722

Despite extensive efforts in achieving photo-realistic reconstruction of small-scale scenes, the unique challenges
posed by the large-scale and highly dynamic nature of
driving scenarios complicate effective 3D scene modeling. To address these challenges, most existing methods
[22, 38, 65, 85, 106] rely on ground truth vehicle poses
to differentiate between static background and moving vehicles. Typically, vehicles are reconstructed in canonical
space and subsequently positioned based on known poses
during rendering. However, collecting ground-truth poses
is labor-intensive, limiting the applicability of these methods to scenes beyond the existing datasets.

