This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion-2-to-3: Leveraging 2D Motion Data for 3D Motion Generations
Ruoxi Guo1,2∗ Huaijin Pi3∗ Zehong Shen1 Qing Shuai1 Zechen Hu2 Zhumei Wang2
Yajiao Dong2 Ruizhen Hu4 Taku Komura3 Sida Peng1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1

2

Zhejiang University

Deep Glint

3

The University of Hong Kong

2D Local Motion

4

Shenzhen University

“A person
walks and
then crawls.”

(1) In-Distribution Results with Lower FID
2D Root Velocity
“A person
juggles the
soccer ball
and kicks
the ball.”

2D Motion Data from Web

Motion Representation

3D Motion Data

(a) Unifying 2D and 3D Motion Data

(2) Out-of-Distribution Results

(b) Generated Results

Figure 1. Illustration of our key idea. (a) Our approach leverages 2D motion data to improve 3D motion generation by unifying 2D and
3D motion data. (b) Our framework yields better FID and generates a broader range of motion types.

Abstract
Text-driven human motion synthesis has showcased its potential for revolutionizing motion design in the movie and
game industry. Existing methods often rely on 3D motion
capture data, which requires special setups, resulting in
high costs for data acquisition, ultimately limiting the diversity and scope of human motion. In contrast, 2D human
videos offer a vast and accessible source of motion data,
covering a wider range of styles and activities.
In this paper, we explore the use of 2D human motion extracted from videos as an alternative data source to improve
text-driven 3D motion generation. Our approach introduces
a novel framework that disentangles local joint motion from
global movements, enabling efficient learning of local motion priors from 2D data. We first train a single-view 2D
local motion generator on a large dataset of text-2D motion pairs. Then we fine-tune the generator with 3D data,
transforming it into a multi-view generator that predicts
view-consistent local joint motion and root dynamics. Evaluations on the well-acknowledged dataset and novel text

prompts demonstrate that our method can efficiently utilize
2D data, supporting a wider range of realistic 3D human
motion generation.

1. Introduction

⋆ Equal contribution to this work.
† Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

Text-driven human motion synthesis has drawn a great deal
of attention in the 3D vision community [20], with possibilities for applications across fields including movie production, gaming, and virtual reality. By providing an intuitive
and simple interface for motion synthesis, Text-to-Motion
(T2M) has the potential to streamline the character animation pipeline, reducing the need for extensive manual work.
It could also enhance immersive interactions in virtual environments by providing more dynamic and contextually relevant movements for avatars, bringing new responsive digital
experiences.
Existing text-driven human motion generation techniques [22, 70, 86] almost exclusively rely on 3D motion
datasets [20], which are primarily collected in marker-based
high-quality motion capture systems [51, 75]. Due to the
need for specialized setups in controlled environments, 3D
human motion datasets [20] are limited in both size and di-

14305

