This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evidential Knowledge Distillation
Liangyu Xiang1, 2
Junyu Gao1, 2 †
Changsheng Xu1, 2, 3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
xiangliangyu2023@ia.ac.cn; {junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Existing logit-based knowledge distillation methods typically employ singularly deterministic categorical distributions, which eliminates the inherent uncertainty in network predictions and thereby limiting the effective transfer of knowledge. To address this limitation, we introduce
distribution-based probabilistic modeling as a more comprehensive representation of network knowledge. Specifically, we regard the categorical distribution as a random
variable and leverage deep neural networks to predict its
distribution, representing it as an evidential second-order
distribution. Based on the second-oder modeling, we propose Evidential Knowledge Distillation (EKD) which distills both the expectation of the teacher distribution and the
distribution itself into the student. The expectation captures the macroscopic characteristics of the distribution,
while the distribution itself conveys microscopic information about the classification boundaries. Additionally, we
theoretically show that EKD’s distillation objective provides an upper bound on the student’s expected risk when
treating the teacher’s predictions as ground truth. Extensive
experiments on several standard benchmarks across various teacher-student network pairs highlight the effectiveness and superior performance of EKD. Our code is available at https://github.com/lyxiang-casia/EKD.

(a) Vanilla Knowledge Distillation

(b) Evidential Knowledge Distillation

Figure 1. Illustrations of vanilla KD and our EKD. (a) Vanilla KD
deterministically converts the logits into categorical distributions
through the softmax function. Each categorical distribution corresponds to a point on the simplex, with each categorical probability
representing the barycentric coordinates of that point. Vanilla KD
is achieved by minimizing the differences between the teacher’s
and student’s barycentric coordinates. (b) EKD treats the categorical distribution as a random variable following a Dirichlet distribution, parameterized by the logits. The heatmap depicts the
probability density of the Dirichlet distribution across the simplex.
Moreover, EKD includes distillation of both the expectation of the
second-order distribution, and the second-order distribution itself.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks (DNNs) continue to advance, their
performance has rapidly improved, yet their increasing network size and training costs pose challenges, especially
in resource-constrained and real-time processing scenarios [62, 89]. Consequently, logit-based knowledge distillation (KD) [30, 88], which aims to compress the predictive
capabilities of complex models into lightweight ones, has

gained increasing popularity. KD transfers knowledge by
guiding the predictions of a smaller network to align with
those of a larger network during the training.
Current knowledge distillation methods largely adhere to
the vanilla paradigm [30] where only the categorical distri-

† Corresponding author.

2814

