This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOVE: Motion-Guided Few-Shot Video Object Segmentation
Kaining Ying* Hengrui Hu* Henghui Ding
Fudan University, China
https://henghuiding.com/MOVE/

(S1)

(S2)

Support Video 1: Cristiano Ronaldo’s signature celebration
Query

Cristiano Ronaldo’s signature celebration

Support Video 2: Hugging

Background

Hugging

Figure 1. We propose a new benchmark for MOtion-guided Few-shot Video object sEgmentation (MOVE). In this example, given two
support videos showing distinct motion patterns (S1: Cristiano Ronaldo’s signature celebration [19], S2: hugging), our benchmark aims to
segment target objects in the query video that perform the same motions as in the support videos. MOVE provides a platform for advancing
few-shot video analysis and perception by enabling the segmentation of diverse objects that exhibit the same motions.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Few-shot video object segmentation (FSVOS) [3, 37, 40,
42, 52] aims to segment objects of unseen classes in videos
using only a few annotated examples. FSVOS is a relatively underexplored yet promising field. By requiring
only minimal supervision, FSVOS significantly reduces the
need for extensive labeled datasets while enabling rapid
adaptation to new object classes. With these advantages,
it shows great potential in autonomous driving, robotics,
surveillance, augmented reality, and media production [72].
Previous FSVOS methods [3, 51, 54] are semanticcentric and primarily focus on object categories, associating
query videos with support sets based on object class. For
example, given support images containing pandas, these
methods aim to segment all pandas in the query video
regardless of their individual characteristics. This semanticcentric paradigm, similar to the widely-studied few-shot image segmentation (FSS) [57, 59, 60, 69], largely overlooks
the crucial temporal dynamics inherent in videos, such as
object motions and temporal dependencies, thus limiting the
advancement of FSVOS research.
We emphasize the fundamental role of motion patterns
in videos, which cannot be adequately captured by static
image-based segmentation approaches. Consider Cristiano
Ronaldo’s celebration motion shown in Figure 1 (S1), such

This work addresses motion-guided few-shot video object
segmentation (FSVOS), which aims to segment dynamic
objects in videos based on a few annotated examples with
the same motion patterns. Existing FSVOS datasets and
methods typically focus on object categories, which are
static attributes that ignore the rich temporal dynamics in
videos, limiting their application in scenarios requiring motion understanding. To fill this gap, we introduce MOVE, a
large-scale dataset specifically designed for motion-guided
FSVOS. Based on MOVE, we comprehensively evaluate
6 state-of-the-art methods from 3 different related tasks
across 2 experimental settings. Our results reveal that
current methods struggle to address motion-guided FSVOS,
prompting us to analyze the associated challenges and
propose a baseline method, Decoupled Motion-Appearance
Network (DMA). Experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves superior performance in few-shot motion
understanding, establishing a solid foundation for future
research in this direction.
* Equal contribution.

Henghui Ding (henghui.ding@gmail.com) is the corresponding
author with the Institute of Big Data, College of Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

11632

