This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Moments in Time using Video Queries
Yogesh Kumar1* Uday Agarwal1* Manish Gupta2 Anand Mishra1
1
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 2 Microsoft
{kumar.204, agarwaluday, mishra}@iitj.ac.in, gmanish@microsoft.com

"A man positions himself beneath the ball, leaping into the air,
Text Query bending his knees and arching his back. As he flips backward, he
connects with the ball using his foot."

Abstract

vs

Video-to-video moment retrieval (Vid2VidMR) is the task
of localizing unseen events or moments in a target video
using a query video. This task poses several challenges,
such as the need for semantic frame-level alignment and
modeling complex dependencies between query and target
videos. To tackle this challenging problem, we introduce
MATR (Moment Alignment TRansformer), a transformerbased model designed to capture semantic context as well
as the temporal details necessary for precise moment localization. MATR conditions target video representations
on query video features using dual-stage sequence alignment that encodes the required correlations and dependencies. These representations are then used to guide foreground/background classification and boundary prediction
heads, enabling the model to accurately identify moments
in the target video that semantically match with the query
video. Additionally, to provide a strong task-specific initialization for MATR, we propose a self-supervised pre-training
technique that involves training the model to localize random clips within videos. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MATR achieves notable performance improvements of 13.1% in R@1 and 8.1% in mIoU on an absolute
scale compared to state-of-the-art methods on the popular
ActivityNet-VRL dataset. Additionally, on our newly proposed dataset, SportsMoments, MATR shows a 14.7% gain
in R@1 and a 14.4% gain in mIoU on an absolute scale
over strong baselines. We make the dataset and code public
at: https://github.com/vl2g/MATR.

Video Query

Vid2Vid Moment Retrieval
Query Video
Frame to
Frame
Alignment

Target Video

Output Segment

Figure 1. (Top): Activity where text falls short to explain complex action or events, such as bicycle kick, necessitating the need
for a more intuitive query modality for localizing semantically
matching moments. (Bottom): Shows the Vid2Vid moment retrieval setting, which is the goal of this work.

1. Introduction

describe specific moments verbally. For example, consider
a spectacular bicycle kick in soccer (Fig. 1 top). Although
an expert can search by naming or describing it in detail,
a beginner in soccer may struggle to describe this impressive move accurately. They might say something like “The
player kicked the ball while in the air”, which lacks the
nuance needed to convey the athleticism and artistry involved. Further, such a description may lead to poor results
for someone searching for similar moments. In contrast, if
a soccer trainee shows a short video clip of a bicycle kick,
the input is rich and crisp, making it easier for a retriever
to locate similar moments in a target soccer match video.
This approach aligns with how users naturally would prefer
to search content within the same (video) modality, making
it a more effective method for retrieving specific moments.
Fig. 1 (bottom) shows a video bicycle kick query in soccer
that is localized in a target video.

Video moment retrieval is the task of temporally localizing the start and end times of a moment1 in a target video
described by a given query. Although text-based video moment retrieval has been extensively explored [25, 28, 32,
33, 57], it often poses challenges for users attempting to

Therefore, in this work, we study video-to-video moment retrieval (Vid2VidMR) where the aim is to temporally localize a moment in the target video with a high se-

* Equal Contribution
1 A moment is a continuous segment of frames within a target video that

best represents the actions, events, or interactions described by the query.

20215

