This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards a 3D Transfer-based Black-box Attack via Critical Feature Guidance
Shuchao Pang1 * Zhenghan Chen2 * Shen Zhang1 Liming Lu1
Siyuan Liang3 Anan Du4† Yongbin Zhou1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 STCA, Microsoft
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Nanjing University of Industry Technology
{pangshuchao, zhangshen, luliming, zhouyongbin}@njust.edu.cn,
zhenghan.chen@alumni.pku.edu.cn, siyuan.liang@ntu.edu.sg, anan.du@niit.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks for 3D point clouds have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. Previous
3D adversarial attack methods often exploit certain information about the target models, such as model parameters or
outputs, to generate adversarial point clouds. However, in realistic scenarios, it is challenging to obtain any information
about the target models under conditions of absolute security.
Therefore, we focus on transfer-based attacks, where generating adversarial point clouds does not require any information about the target models. Based on our observation that
the critical features used for point cloud classiﬁcation are
consistent across different DNN architectures, we propose
CFG, a novel transfer-based black-box attack method that
improves the transferability of adversarial point clouds via
the proposed Critical Feature Guidance. Speciﬁcally, our
method regularizes the search of adversarial point clouds
by computing the importance of the extracted features, prioritizing the corruption of critical features that are likely to
be adopted by diverse architectures. Further, we explicitly
constrain the maximum deviation extent of the generated adversarial point clouds in the loss function to ensure their imperceptibility. Extensive experiments conducted on the ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed CFG outperforms the state-of-the-art attack methods by a large margin. The code is available at
https://github.com/AIASLab/CFG-ICCV2025.

However, the vulnerability of 3D perception models to adversarial attacks raises serious security concerns. While
adversarial attacks on 2D images are well explored [8–18],
adversarial robustness in 3D remains an emerging research
area, with unique challenges stemming from the unordered,
sparse, and structured nature of point cloud data.
Adversarial Space 1
X-adv1 Local

Optimization

Non-adversarial Space
X-clean

Adversarial Space 2
X-adv2 Shared

Vulnerable Area

(1) PointNet

(2) PointNet++

(3) DGCNN

(4) CurveNet

(5) PCT

(6) Point-PN

Decision Boundaries

Clean Example X
Adv. Example X-adv1 Adv. Example X-adv2
Adversarial Space 1 : Source Model
Adversarial Space 2 : Source Model ∩ Target Model

(a) Differences between ours and baseline attacks

(b) Saliency maps of critical features from
object recognition methods

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivations. In (a), X-clean is the clean
point clouds, X-adv1 and X-adv2 are the adversarial (abbr.: adv.)
point clouds generated by baseline attacks and our attack, where
source&target models can predict correctly in Non-adv. Space, the
source model and the target model output wrong predictions in Adv.
Space 1&2 and only in Adv. Space 2, respectively. Overall, X-adv1
in Adv. Space 1 is a local optimization adv. sample because the
target model still predicts correctly. In contrast, X-adv2 from our
method does due to it being located in a shared vulnerable area (i.e.,
Adv. Space 2) from both source & target models. In (b), we observe
that existing DNN models focus on the same position features that
are critical for classiﬁcation (More samples are in supplementary).

1. Introduction
Recent advancements [1–4] in deep learning have signiﬁcantly impacted 3D perception systems, especially in safetycritical areas such as autonomous driving and robotics [5–7].
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

26912

Most existing adversarial attack studies on 3D point
clouds focus on the white-box setting, where the attacker has
full access to the model’s parameters and gradients [19, 20].
However, in practical scenarios, such access is often unavailable, making black-box attacks signiﬁcantly more relevant and challenging, where the attacker has no access to
the target model’s parameters or gradients. A few studies
have attempted black-box attacks, but they either rely on
query-based methods (which require numerous queries to
approximate the model’s gradients) or suffer from low at-

