This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-Based Extreme High-speed Scenes Reconstruction
with the Complementary Vision Sensor
Yapeng Meng1,† , Yihan Lin1,2,†,‡ , Taoyi Wang1 , Yuguo Chen1 , Lijian Wang1 , Rong Zhao1,∗
1
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
2
Pen-Tung Sah Institute of Micro-Nano Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
{myp23, wangty23, cyg22, wlj24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, linyh@xmu.edu.cn, r zhao@tsinghua.edu.cn
𝓢𝓢𝓢𝓢

𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑩𝑩𝟎𝟎
𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑹𝑩𝑩𝟏𝟏

𝜮𝜮𝓣𝓣𝓣𝓣

1000 r/min

Reconstruction

2000 r/min

Reconstruction

Rec

x25

0

4

8

12
16
(a) High-speed Reconstruction

20

24

Index

(b) Deblur

Figure 1. (a) A segment of real-captured data by the complementary vision sensor, Tianmouc [46], which includes adjacent 30 FPS RGB
frames, spatial difference (SD) and accumulated temporal difference (T D) between them. We achieve accurate, colorful, high-speed, and
blur-free video reconstruction. (b) Our method can also achieve reconstruction even in extremely blurry real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recording and reconstructing extreme high-speed motion
scenarios is crucial for autonomous driving [44], sports analytics [30], industrial inspection [38], and scientific research [6]. While high-speed cameras achieve exceptionally
high frame rates, they suffer from high bandwidth demands
and substantial storage costs, making prolonged continuous
recording impractical [35]. Therefore, there is a growing interest in using low-frame-rate cameras to capture data and
accurately reconstruct sharp, high-speed scenes with postprocessing algorithms. However, the low-frame-rate cameras struggle to capture real-world non-linear motion and
illumination variations, while motion blur further degrades
the quality of the data. Given this ill-conditioned nature, existing RGB-based approaches such as video deblur [33] and
video frame interpolation [17, 25, 47] often produce blurring, distortions, and artifacts in high-speed scenarios.

Recording and reconstructing high-speed scenes poses a
significant challenge. While high-speed cameras can capture fine temporal details, their extremely high bandwidth
demands make continuous recording unsustainable. Conversely, traditional RGB cameras, typically operating at 30
FPS, rely on frame interpolation to synthesize high-speed
motion, often introducing artifacts and motion blur. Human visual system inspired sensors, like event cameras, offer high-speed sparse temporal or spatial variation data,
partially alleviating these issues. However, existing methods still suffer from RGB blur, temporal aliasing, and loss of
event information. To overcome these challenges, we leverage a novel complementary vision sensor, Tianmouc, which
outputs high-speed, multi-bit, sparse spatio-temporal difference information with RGB frames. Building on this unique
sensing modality, we introduce a Cascaded Bi-directional
Recurrent Diffusion Model (CBRDM) that achieves accurate, sharp, color-rich video frames reconstruction. Our
method outperforms state-of-the-art RGB interpolation algorithms in quantitative evaluations and surpasses eventbased methods in real-world comparisons. Code and
dataset are at https://github.com/Tianmouc/
GenRec.

The advent of neuromorphic sensors (e.g., DVS [23],
DAVIS [2], and spiking cameras [15]) provides an innovative solution. While maintaining similar bandwidth
and storage costs to those of conventional RGB cameras,
neuromorphic sensors feature high-speed data pathways to
capture scene dynamics effectively. For example, event
cameras asynchronously measure brightness changes at the
pixel level, and algorithms facilitating event and the RGB
information [40] demonstrate superior interpolation performance in high-speed scenarios compared to RGB-only interpolation methods. However, event cameras struggle to

† These authors contributed equally to this work
‡ This work was performed while the author was at Tsinghua University
* Corresponding author

5701

