This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Punching Bag vs. Punching Person: Motion Transferability in Videos
Raiyaan Abdullah1

Jared Claypoole2

Michael Cogswell2

raiyaanabdullah@gmail.com

jared.claypoole@sri.com

michael.cogswell@sri.com

1

Ajay Divakaran2

Yogesh Rawat1

ajay.divakaran@sri.com

yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida 2 Center for Vision Technology, SRI International

Project page

Figure 1. Overview of motion transferability: (left) Models fail to transfer high-level coarse motion understanding (‘Punching’) to
unknown context not seen during training. State-of-the-art multimodal models like ViFi-CLIP fail to understand unknown fine motions such
as (‘Punching person - boxing’) as well. (right) Average detection accuracy (across three datasets) illustrating the performance gap between
CoarseMotion-KnownContext and CoarseMotion-UnknownContext from blue to green, as well as FineMotion-Known and FineMotionUnknown from red to yellow. This highlights that all models have limitations in transferring motion concepts to novel scenarios.

Abstract
Action recognition models demonstrate strong generalization, but can they effectively transfer high-level motion
concepts across diverse contexts, even within similar distributions? For example, can a model recognize the broad action “punching” when presented with an unseen variation
such as “punching person”? To explore this, we introduce
a motion transferability framework with three datasets:
(1) Syn-TA, a synthetic dataset with 3D object motions;
(2) Kinetics400-TA; and (3) Something-Something-v2-TA,
both adapted from natural video datasets. We evaluate
13 state-of-the-art models on these benchmarks and observe a significant drop in performance when recognizing
high-level actions in novel contexts. Our analysis reveals:
1) Multimodal models struggle more with fine-grained unknown actions than with coarse ones; 2) The bias-free SynTA proves as challenging as real-world datasets, with models showing greater performance drops in controlled settings; 3) Larger models improve transferability when spatial cues dominate but struggle with intensive temporal rea-

soning, while reliance on object and background cues hinders generalization. We further explore how disentangling
coarse and fine motions can improve recognition in temporally challenging datasets. We believe this study establishes a crucial benchmark for assessing motion transferability in action recognition. Datasets and relevant code:
https://github.com/raiyaan-abdullah/Motion-Transfer.

1. Introduction

11348

Activity recognition is a key area of video understanding,
focusing on identifying motions within videos by extracting meaningful insights from complex data. This challenging task involves handling temporal redundancy [59], longterm dependencies [52], varying viewpoints [58], diverse
subjects/objects [42], and cluttered backgrounds [65]. Recent unimodal and multimodal activity recognition models
have achieved strong performance in supervised and fewshot settings, with multimodal models [1, 25, 41, 47, 57]
also excelling in zero-shot generalization.
Despite progress in action recognition, questions remain

