This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototypes are Balanced Units for
Efficient and Effective Partially Relevant Video Retrieval
WonJun Moon1,∗
Cheol-Ho Cho1
Woojin Jun1
Taeoh Kim2
2
2
2,†
Inwoong Lee
Dongyoon Wee
Minho Shim
Jae-Pil Heo1,†
1
2
Sungkyunkwan University
NAVER Cloud
Exhaustive Clip
Modeling

Abstract
(a) MS-SL

1. Introduction
The sheer volume of video content makes it increasingly
challenging for users to find the video they are looking for.
This underscores the need for accurate and efficient video retrieval systems [1] that can search through videos consisting
of short moments the users are seeking. In response to this
demand, Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR) [2] has
been introduced to extend text-video retrieval with long complex videos where only specific segments correspond to the
∗ This work was done during an internship at NAVER Cloud.
† Co-corresponding authors.

Windows

Multi-scale Features
Local attention
Clip Modeling

(b) GMMFormer

Gaussian
weights

Local-Features

Prototype
Aggregation
Prototypes

MS-SL

TVR w/
ResNet+I3D

GMMFormer
Sum of Recall@1,5,10,100

Ours

Memory per Video (MB)

Placeholders

(c) Ours
Memory per Video (MB)

In a retrieval system, simultaneously achieving search accuracy and efficiency is inherently challenging. This challenge
is particularly pronounced in Partially Relevant Video Retrieval (PRVR), where incorporating more diverse context
representations at varying temporal scales for each video enhances accuracy but increases computational and memory
costs. To address this dichotomy, we propose a prototypical PRVR framework that encodes diverse contexts within
a video into a fixed number of prototypes. We then introduce several strategies to enhance text association and video
understanding within the prototypes, along with an orthogonal objective to ensure that the prototypes capture a diverse range of content. To keep the prototypes searchable via
text queries while accurately encoding video contexts, we
implement cross- and uni-modal reconstruction tasks. The
cross-modal reconstruction task aligns the prototypes with
textual features within a shared space, while the uni-modal
reconstruction task preserves all video contexts during encoding. Additionally, we employ a video mixing technique
to provide weak guidance to further align prototypes and
associated textual representations. Extensive evaluations on
TVR, ActivityNet-Captions, and QVHighlights validate the
effectiveness of our approach without sacrificing efficiency.

MS-SL

TVR w/
CLIP-L/14

GMMFormer

Ours

Sum of Recall@1,5,10,100

Figure 1. Comparisons in video encoding process. (a) MS-SL utilizes exhaustive clip modeling based on varying lengths of clip
windows to encode contexts at diverse temporal scales. (b) GMMFormer performs a similarity-aware feature aggregation via selfattention constrained with predefined Gaussian kernels to reflect
locality. Such an adaptive scheme provides high efficiency. (c) To
exploit the semantic richness in exhaustive clip modeling without
sacrificing efficiency, we learn a fixed number of prototypes that
aggregate diverse (varying lengths or potentially disjointed) contexts within a video. (Down) Our proposed method is superior to
previous works in terms of the accuracy-efficiency trade-off.

text query. Typical methods such as MS-SL [2] prioritize the
accuracy by storing lengthy frame-wise [3] features and exhaustively modeling clips of varying lengths using different
window sizes [4], as shown in Fig. 1 (a). With these features,
a video with the highest similarity to the text description is retrieved. While such methods have made significant progress,
they often overlook the importance of efficiency in retrieval
systems that operate within extensive databases.
To address efficiency, GMMFormer [5] introduced a local clip modeling, which applies Gaussian constraints with
predefined variances around selected frames, as shown in
Fig. 1(b). Specifically, these constraints are integrated within
self-attention [6, 7]. While this approach improves efficiency
by primarily encoding local contexts, it struggles to accu-

21789

