This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make Me Happier: Evoking Emotions Through Image Diffusion Models
Qing Lin1

Jingfeng Zhang2,3 Yew-Soon Ong1 Mengmi Zhang1,*
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
The University of Auckland, New Zealand
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
*
Address correspondence to mengmi.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1. The generated images evoke a sense of happiness in viewers, contrasting with the negative emotions elicited by the source
images. Given a source image that triggers negative emotions (framed in green), our method (Ours) synthesizes a new image that elicits
the given positive target emotions (in red), while maintaining the essential elements and structures of the scene. For instance, our method
replaces the anger-inducing flames in the source image with cute-shaped lamps to evoke the target emotion of amusement. While in an
outdoor setting, the raging fire is substituted with a tranquil, lush meadow to inspire a sense of awe. For comparisons, we include other
competitive methods. The blue number below each image represents its CAM-based ESMI score, with higher values being better.

Abstract
Despite the rapid progress in image generation,
emotional image editing remains under-explored. The
semantics, context, and structure of an image can
evoke emotional responses, making emotional image
editing techniques valuable for various real-world
applications, including treatment of psychological
disorders, commercialization of products, and artistic
design.
First, we present a novel challenge of
emotion-evoked image generation, aiming to synthesize
images that evoke target emotions while retaining the
semantics and structures of the original scenes. To address
this challenge, we propose a diffusion model capable of
effectively understanding and editing source images to
convey desired emotions and sentiments. Moreover, due to
the lack of emotion editing datasets, we provide a unique
dataset consisting of 340,000 pairs of images and their
emotion annotations. Furthermore, we conduct human
psychophysics experiments and introduce a new evaluation
metric to systematically benchmark all the methods.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method

surpasses all competitive baselines. Our diffusion model is
capable of identifying emotional cues from original images,
editing images that elicit desired emotions, and meanwhile,
preserving the semantic structure of the original images.
All code, model, and dataset are available at GitHub.

1. Introduction

16367

“I am feeling down. Bring some excitement to my room.”
What we perceive not only entails useful visual
information but also evokes profound emotional reactions.
Incorporating visual cues that elicit emotions into images
holds practical significance in various domains.
In
commercialization, it enhances brand impact and captures
consumer attention. In augmented or virtual reality, it
supports therapeutic interventions for conditions such as
autism and schizophrenia. Despite recent advances in
image generation [5, 27, 35], emotion conditioning remains
largely underexplored. We introduce the novel task of
emotion-evoked image generation: given a source image
and a target emotion, the goal is to generate a new image
that evokes the specified emotion while preserving the
semantics and structure of the original scene. This task is

