This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Moderating the Generalization of Score-based Generative Model
Wan Jiang1 He Wang2 Xin Zhang3 Dan Guo1 Zhaoxin Fan4,5 Yunfeng Diao1,6,7 * Richang Hong1
1

Hefei University of Technology 2 University College London 3 San Diego State University
4
Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University
5
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing, AI, BU
6
Intelligent Interconnected Systems Laboratory of Anhui Province (HFUT)
7
Institute of Artifical Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

xjiangw000@gmail.com, he wang@ucl.ac.uk, xzhang17@wpi.edu, guodan@hfut.edu.cn
zhaoxinf@buaa.edu.cn, diaoyunfeng@hfut.edu.cn, hongrc.hfut@gmail

Abstract
Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) have demonstrated
remarkable generalization capabilities, e.g. generating unseen, but natural data. However, the greater the generalization power, the more likely the unintended generalization,
and the more dangerous the abuse. Despite these concerns,
research on unlearning SGMs has not been explored. To
fill this gap, we first examine the current ‘gold standard’
in Machine Unlearning (MU), i.e., re-training the model
after removing the undesirable training data, and find it
does not work in SGMs. Further analysis of score functions reveals that the MU ‘gold standard’ does not alter
the original score function, which explains its ineffectiveness. Building on this insight, we propose the first Moderated Score-based Generative Model (MSGM), which introduces a novel score adjustment strategy that redirects
the score function away from undesirable data during the
continuous-time stochastic differential equation process. Albeit designed for SGMs, MSGM is a general and flexible
MU framework compatible with diverse diffusion architectures, training strategies and downstream tasks. Code is
available at https://github.com/yunfengdiao/
Moderated- Score- based- Generative- Model.

Figure 1. Comparsions of score functions of Standard VE SDE,
Unseen by Re-training and MSGM (Ours) in the toy experiment.
Unseen by Re-training retains almost the same score function with
Standard VE SDE, while MSGM (red arrows in (d)) significantly
alter the original score functions (black arrows in (d)).

(SGMs) [42], Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) [17] and their variants become one of the dominating class of generative models. In generative models,
one key research effort is to maximize their generalization
ability, often meaning generating unseen, but natural data,
e.g. images with realistic faces or stories not written by humans. However, such novel data can also be unintended and
potentially cause privacy breaches, copyright infringements,
misinformation spreading, etc. We refer to this phenomenon
as unintended generalization. Taking SGMs and DDPMs as
an example, they can reconstruct training data which should
not to be accessible [3], generate faces that are similar to a
specific person without permission [33, 35, 36], and mimic
content styles of artists unintentionally [10, 38]. Overall,
the bigger the generalization power is, the more likely the
unintended generalization is, and therefore the more detrimental the intended/unintended harm becomes. However, it
is not straightforward to design a new Machine Unlearning
(MU) paradigm for SGMs and cannot be achieved by adapting existing MU methods for other models. First, MUs for
DDPMs primarily aim to reduce the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) on the distribution of the forgotten data, but SGMs
need to estimate the score function with a continuous noise
schedule. This difference in the optimization goals prevents

1. Introduction
“The greater the power, the more dangerous the abuse.”
- Edmund Burke
Generative models has been a foundational topic in deep
learning in the past decade, e.g. Generative Adversarial Networks [13], Variational Autoencoders [20] and normalizing flows [7]. Recently Score-based Generative models
* Corresponding author

360

