This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SP2 T: Sparse Proxy Attention for Dual-stream Point Transformer

(a) PointASNL (Dual-Stream)

Proxy Sample
Learning-based
Point → Point: MLP

(b) SPoTr (Single-Stream)

Proxy → Proxy
Dense Attention
Point → Proxy: SPA

Proxy Sample
Spatial-wised

Refined Interaction
Effective Computation

Point → Point
Dense Attention

Point → Proxy
Dense Attention

×N

Proxy → Point: SPA

Robust
Interpretable

Proxy Sample
FPS-based

×N

× Heavy Computation

Point → Proxy
MLP

Proxy → Point
Dense Attention

× Inexplicable

Point → Point
MLP

×N

Proxy → Point
Dense Attention

× Susceptible

Sample Method

Point transformers have demonstrated remarkable progress
in 3D understanding through expanded receptive fields (RF),
but further expanding the RF leads to dilution in group attention and decreases detailed feature extraction capability.
Proxy, which serves as abstract representations for simplifying feature maps, enables global RF. However, existing proxybased approaches face critical limitations: Global proxies
incur quadratic complexity for large-scale point clouds and
suffer positional ambiguity, while local proxy alternatives
struggle with 1) Unreliable sampling from the geometrically
diverse point cloud, 2) Inefficient proxy interaction computation, and 3) Imbalanced local-global information fusion;
To address these challenges, we propose Sparse Proxy Point
Transformer (SP2 T) – a local proxy-based dual-stream point
transformer with three key innovations: First, for reliable
sampling, spatial-wise proxy sampling with vertex-based
associations enables robust sampling on geometrically diverse point clouds. Second, for efficient proxy interaction,
sparse proxy attention with a table-based relative bias effectively achieves the interaction with efficient map-reduce
computation. Third, for local-global information fusion,
our dual-stream architecture maintains local-global balance
through parallel branches. Comprehensive experiments reveal that SP2 T sets state-of-the-art results with acceptable
latency on indoor and outdoor 3D comprehension benchmarks, demonstrating marked improvement (+3.8% mIoU vs.
SPoTr@S3DIS, +22.9% mIoU vs. PointASNL@Sem.KITTI)
compared to other proxy-based point cloud methods.

Interaction Method

Abstract

× Rough Interactions

Jiaxu Wan1, ,* Hong Zhang1, ,* Ziqi He2, ,* Yangyan Deng3 , Qishu Wang2 , Ding Yuan1 , Yifan Yang1,†
1
2
School of Aerospace, BUAA
School of Artificial Intelligence, BUAA
3
School of Electronics and Information Engineering, BUAA
https://github.com/WallelWan/SP2T

(c) SP 2 T (Dual-Stream)

Figure 1. The comparison with other Proxy-based Methods. The
improvement of SP2 T compared with other proxy-based method
are threefold: (1) Advances Sampling, (2) Efficiency Interaction
and (3) Enhanced Dual-stream Framework.

1. Introduction

ods [51, 52] have recently advanced in expanding receptive
fields (RF), they remain constrained by the large scale of
points. However, expanding RF within PTv3 can lead to
attention dilution [36], where a larger group size diverts the
model’s focus, impairing its ability to capture precise features (77.3 mIOU with 1024 points vs. 77.1 mIOU with 4096
points@ScanNetv2 [9]). Furthermore, this expansion is also
computationally demanding. Consequently, the broadening
of the RF must be achieved differently.
In recent years, proxies, which serve as key elements
on the feature map or represent an abstraction of features
for simplification, have attracted significant interest from
the research community. Proxy-based methods are typically classified into global [10, 17, 18, 18, 49] and local
approaches [12, 16, 24, 35, 53], both with a global RF. However, global proxy methods have quadratic complexity, and
the positional uncertainty of proxies adversely affects segmentation and detection tasks such as object boundary localization, making them unsuitable for point feature extraction.
In contrast, local proxy-based methods [12, 16, 24, 35,
53] employ a proxy sampling technique to establish the location of the proxy. They utilized the association to illustrate
the link between data and proxy, with low-cost complexity
and precise positioning ideal for extracting the feature of
points. However, existing local proxy-based methods face
challenges such as 1) inconsistent sampling from geometrically diverse points, 2) inefficient computation of proxy interactions, and 3) imbalanced integration of local and global

The point transformer [34, 51, 52, 64] has recently emerged
as a key research area in 3D perception [14, 26, 50] and
other fields [59], mainly using group attention [28, 29] to
extract features. Although various point transformer meth* Co-first author
† Corresponding author

27885

