This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dita: Scaling Diffusion Transformer
for Generalist Vision-Language-Action Policy
Zhi Hou1 * Tianyi Zhang2,1 * Yuwen Xiong1 Haonan Duan5 Hengjun Pu3,1 Ronglei Tong5
Chengyang Zhao4,1 Xizhou Zhu6,1 Yu Qiao1 Jifeng Dai6,1 Yuntao Chen7†
1
Shanghai AI Lab 2 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Peking University 5 SenseTime Research
6
Tsinghua University 7 HKISI, CAS
https://robodita.github.io

3rd Person Camera

Large-Scale
Robot Episodes

Language Instruction

Dita
Generalist Robot Policy

Diffusion Transformer Pretraining

10-Shot Multi-Task Finetuning on New Robot Setup

Simulation Benchmark Evaluation

Long-Horizon (close top drawer, open bottom drawer, put bowl into drawer, close bottom drawer)

Non-target Object Arrangements (pour the water from teapot into the left cup)

Background Variance (pick up the racket, and hit the ball into the goal)

Lighting Condition (pour coffee beans from bowl within the drawer into the outside bowl)

Figure 1. We introduce Dita, an open-source, simple yet effective policy for generalist robotic learning. Pretrained on large-scale crossembodiment datasets, Dita enables 10-shot adaptation to complex, multitask, long-horizon scenarios in novel robot setups. Particularly,
Dita can complete intricate, extended-horizon tasks such as, “close the top drawer, then open the bottom drawer, subsequently place
the bowl into the bottom drawer, and finally close the bottom drawer”. Furthermore, Dita demonstrates remarkable robustness against
complex object arrangements and even challenging lighting conditions in sophisticated 3D pick-and-rotation tasks. In this context, the
long-horizon demonstration scene serves as the training environment for all tasks. Additionally, Dita seamlessly scales to a wide range of
popular simulation benchmarks, achieving state-of-the-art performance across these tasks.

Abstract

tion spaces. We present Dita, a scalable framework
that leverages Transformer architectures to directly denoise continuous action sequences through a unified multimodal diffusion process. Departing from prior methods
that condition denoising on fused embeddings via shallow
networks, Dita employs in-context conditioning—enabling
fine-grained alignment between denoised actions and raw
visual tokens from historical observations. This design explicitly models action deltas and environmental nuances.

While recent vision-language-action models trained on
diverse robot datasets exhibit promising generalization capabilities with limited in-domain data, their reliance on
compact action heads to predict discretized or continuous actions constrains adaptability to heterogeneous ac* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

7686

