This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CanFields: Consolidating Diffeomorphic Flows for Non-Rigid 4D Interpolation
from Arbitrary-Length Sequences
Miaowei Wang

Changjian Li

Amir Vaxman

University of Edinburgh
Input
Sequence
Sampling
Canonical
Shape

Raw Scans
Other
View

4D
Interpolation

Figure 1. CanFields interpolates the continuous temporal motion of a canonical shape, by consolidating features from an arbitrary-length
point cloud sequence sampled from raw scans. Purple arrows indicate the optimized flow pushing forward the canonical shape into a
corresponding 3D shape at any desired intermediate time. This flow allows for the tracking of any deforming surface point (colored dots)
and is robust to scanning defects (in dashed square). See the accompanying video for additional high-quality 4D interpolation results.

Abstract

“Mediation is conflict’s way of looking at itself.”
– Jeff Cohen

We introduce Canonical Consolidation Fields (CanFields).
This novel method interpolates arbitrary-length sequences
of independently sampled 3D point clouds into a unified,
continuous, and coherent deforming shape. Unlike prior
methods that oversmooth geometry or produce topological
and geometric artifacts, CanFields optimizes fine-detailed
geometry and deformation jointly in an unsupervised fitting with two novel bespoke modules. First, we introduce a dynamic consolidator module that adjusts the input and assigns confidence scores, balancing the optimization of the canonical shape and its motion. Second, we
represent the motion as a diffeomorphic flow parameterized by a smooth velocity field. We have validated our robustness and accuracy on more than 50 diverse sequences,
demonstrating its superior performance even with missing
regions, noisy raw scans, and sparse data. Our project
page is at: https://wangmiaowei.github.io/
CanFields.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Accurately reproducing the continuous deformation or motion of scanned physical objects is a fundamental challenge
in computer graphics and geometry processing. Motion
capture systems, for instance, need to robustly reconstruct
moving geometries despite occlusions and partial scans
[41]. Reliable tracking is equally crucial for understanding the natural motions of living beings [22, 95]. In medical
imaging, coherent mesh modeling of dynamic objects is vital for assessing volume changes and deformations [9].
Typically, scanning devices produce discrete sequences
of 3D samples (or keyframes) of a moving object. These
keyframes frequently exhibit missing regions from occlusions, measurement noise from imperfect depth estimation
or varying acquisition conditions, and complex non-rigid
deformation that makes frame-to-frame matching and tracking challenging. Moreover, such sequences can vary significantly in length and lack prior geometric information or

28587

