This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ContextFace: Generating Facial Expressions from Emotional Contexts
Min-jung Kim
Dept. of Computer Science
and Engineering
Korea University
LG Electronics
South Korea

Minsang Kim
Dept. of Computer Science
and Engineering
Korea University
SK Telecom
South Korea

kmj0606@korea.ac.kr

kmswin1@korea.ac.kr

Seung Jun Baek*
Dept. of Computer Science
and Engineering
Korea University
South Korea
sjbaek@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
The task of generating 3D facial expressions given various
situational contexts is important for applications such as
virtual avatars or human-robot interactions. The task is,
however, challenging not only because it requires a comprehensive understanding of emotion, expression and contexts, but also there rarely are datasets to support the task.
We propose ContextFace, a Multi-modal Large Language
Model (MLLM) fine-tuned to generate 3D facial expressions depending on complex situational contexts. To overcome the lack of datasets, we perform a context augmentation to existing emotion recognition datasets; we generate plausible situations and quotes from images and emotions to annotate the dataset. Next, we perform visual instruction tuning of MLLMs on context-augmented datasets
to boost their capability of visual synthesis from emotions.
Experiments show a superior performance of ContextFace
in the zero-shot evaluation of contextual emotion recognition. A qualitative evaluation shows that our method generates expressions consistent with diverse contexts and performs complex emotion reasoning, e.g., speculative generation of expressions of occluded faces through interactive prompting. Code and data are available at https:
//github.com/minjung98/ContextFace_.git.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Context-to-face generation. ContextFace generates subtly different expressions for the same emotion “Happy”.
(b) Speculative generation of expressions. The emotion of
woman with the image alone is ambiguous. But with her quote,
ContextFace infers her emotion and generate plausible situations.
Moreover, ContextFace speculatively generates the man’s expression whose face is not visible. An embarrassed face is generated from special token <FACE> through an interactive prompting. The output is FLAME parameters [19] which is later matched
to the reference photo using INFERNO [7] for the final mesh.

The interpretation of facial expressions inherently depends
on the situational context. For instance, a smiling face can
convey different emotions – from genuine joy to forced politeness – depending on the situational context. A combined
understanding of expression, emotion, and context has recently become important, particularly in the field of human* Corresponding Author

11383

