This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TorchAdapt: Towards Light-Agnostic Real-Time Visual Perception
Khurram Azeem Hashmi^{1,2}
^{1}

DFKI

Karthik Palyakere Suresh^{1,2}
Didier Stricker^{1,2}
Muhammad Zeshan Afzal^{1,2}
^{2}
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau

khurram azeem.hashmi@dfki.de

Abstract
Low-light conditions significantly degrade the performance
of high-level vision tasks. Existing approaches either enhance low-light images without considering normal illumination scenarios, leading to poor generalization, or are
tailored to specific tasks. We propose TorchAdapt, a realtime adaptive feature enhancement framework that generalizes robustly across varying illumination conditions without
degrading performance in well-lit scenarios. TorchAdapt
consists of two complementary modules: the Torch module enhances semantic features beneficial for downstream
tasks, while the Adapt module dynamically modulates these
enhancements based on input content. Leveraging a novel
light-agnostic learning strategy, TorchAdapt aligns feature
representations of enhanced and well-lit images to produce
powerful illumination-invariant features. Extensive experiments on multiple high-level vision tasks, including object
detection, face detection, instance segmentation, semantic
segmentation, and video object detection, demonstrate that
TorchAdapt consistently outperforms state-of-the-art lowlight enhancement and task-specific methods in both lowlight and light-agnostic settings. TorchAdapt thus provides a
unified, flexible solution for robust visual perception across
diverse lighting conditions.

Figure 1. Prior downstream methods in low-light vision assume
that all samples belong to low-light conditions as shown in (a),
leading to underperformance in varying illumination environments,
depicted in (b). TorchAdapt alleviates this bottleneck via learning
powerful illumination-invariant features and achieves consistent
gains across low-light and light-agnostic settings on Object Detection (OD), Face Detection (FD), Instance Segmentation (IS),
Semantic Segmentation (SS), and Video Object Detection (VOD).
Best viewed on the screen.

1. Introduction

els. However, this simple integration often leads to weaker
gains [16, 26], as these arts conform to human visual perception (optimized on pixel-level objectives like L1 or MSE
losses [4]) instead of machine visual perception. Moreover,
applying these enhancement methods indiscriminately can
degrade the performance on images/videos captured under
standard lighting conditions, as alterations intended for lowlight scenarios [47, 60, 80, 81] may be unnecessary or even
detrimental in well-lit environments [15, 40, 58, 78].

Recent advances in visual perception tasks [13, 31, 77, 82]
are highly effective at extracting features for complex tasks
when provided with high-quality inputs. However, replicating this performance is challenging when data is scarce,
noisy, or expensive to obtain. A common issue is varying
illumination, particularly low-light conditions, which hinders the robustness and reliability of safety-critical visual
perception systems [1, 3, 7, 63].
A common strategy to improve low-light performance
involves pre-processing images with Low-Light Image Enhancement (LLIE) methods [17, 24, 33, 44, 50, 51, 71,
84, 85] before feeding them into high-level vision mod-

To address low-light vision tasks, recent methods employ
transfer learning [16, 59, 72] and domain adaptation techniques [20, 32, 48]. Despite improvements, these efforts are
carefully designed for a single high-level vision task, such

5645

