This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CABLD: Contrast-Agnostic Brain Landmark Detection with Consistency-Based
Regularization

1

Arash Harirpoush1
Hassan Rivaz2
Yiming Xiao1
Soorena Salari1 *
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Montréal, Canada
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Concordia University, Montréal, Canada

Abstract
Anatomical landmark detection in medical images is essential for various clinical and research applications, including disease diagnosis and surgical planning. However, manual landmark annotation is time-consuming and
requires significant expertise. Existing deep learning (DL)
methods often require large amounts of well-annotated
data, which are costly to acquire. In this paper, we introduce CABLD, a novel self-supervised DL framework for
3D brain landmark detection in unlabeled scans with varying contrasts by using only a single reference example. To
achieve this, we employed an inter-subject landmark consistency loss with an image registration loss while introducing
a 3D convolution-based contrast augmentation strategy to
promote model generalization to new contrasts. Additionally, we utilize an adaptive mixed loss function to schedule the contributions of different sub-tasks for optimal outcomes. We demonstrate the proposed method with the intricate task of MRI-based 3D brain landmark detection. With
comprehensive experiments on four diverse clinical and
public datasets, including both T1w and T2w MRI scans at
different MRI field strengths, we demonstrate that CABLD
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of mean
radial errors (MREs) and success detection rates (SDRs).
Our framework provides a robust and accurate solution for
anatomical landmark detection, reducing the need for extensively annotated datasets and generalizing well across
different imaging contrasts. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/HealthX-Lab/CABLD.

diagnostic purposes and surgical planning. With an aging
global population, neurological disorders are becoming increasingly prominent issues. With a long history in neurological research and patient care, brain landmarks as shown
in MRI are of great interest to the clinical and research communities, but are more complex due to the intricate neuroanatomy, softer geometric features (compared to bones),
and high-precision requirement in deployment. Besides
the traditional task of anatomical localization for planning
functional neurosurgery [63], brain landmarks [53, 71] have
also been employed to diagnose neurodegenerative conditions, such as Parkinson’s disease [1] and Alzheimer’s disease [29–31, 69, 70]. Additionally, for big data analysis
of brain MRIs, where subject-to-template image registration is crucial, brain landmarks can provide the essential
tool to assess the quality of image alignment to ensure the
reliability of the study. Notably, thanks to their high spatial specificity, brain landmarks can offer better sensitivity
and interpretability in registration quality assessment than
other volume-overlap-based metrics (e.g., Dice coefficient)
[44]. However, manual landmark annotation requires significant domain expertise, time, and labor. Thus, automated
anatomical landmark detection is highly instrumental.

1. Introduction

To date, a number of deep learning (DL)-based techniques [12, 35, 71] have been proposed for accurate and
efficient anatomical landmark detection in the forms of
heatmaps [55] or regressed coordinates [46]. However,
three main challenges remain in this domain. First, due
to aforementioned challenges, very few public datasets and
protocols for anatomical landmark detection exist, particularly for 3D brain MRI, posing major barriers to the development and validation of relevant DL-based methods. Second, to mitigate the impact of data scarcity, label-efficient
methods [41, 42, 74] have gained great interest, particularly with recent adoption of self-supervised learning (SSL)
to generate anatomical landmarks by training keypointbased image registration models [5, 6, 16, 59, 60]. However, these methods often fail to produce landmarks with
subject-consistent localization protocols, which must consider both geometric saliency and anatomical/physiological

Anatomical landmarks in medical images are salient keypoints with clinical significance in bodily structures, such
as the knee [24], spine [66], and lungs [57]. They often
serve as essential reference points to facilitate anatomical
navigation and measurement of physiological changes for
* Correspondence to: soorena.salari@concordia.ca.

20991

