This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DICE: Staleness-Centric Optimizations for Parallel Diffusion MoE Inference
Jiajun Luo1∗ , Lizhuo Luo2∗ , Jianru Xu2∗ , Jiajun Song1 , Rongwei Lu1 , Chen Tang3 , Zhi Wang1†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Southern University of Science and Technology 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
luo-jj24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangzhi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. We introduce DICE, a framework designed to enhance scalability and efficiency in MoE-based diffusion models. Existing
asynchronous methods accelerate parallel inference but suffer from outdated activations (staleness). DICE tackles this issue with step-,
layer-, and token-level optimizations, reducing staleness and achieving up to 1.26× speedup with minimal quality loss. Left: Architectural
comparison; Right: Visual quality results.

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts-based (MoE-based) diffusion models
demonstrate remarkable scalability in high-fidelity image
generation, yet their reliance on expert parallelism introduces critical communication bottlenecks. State-of-the-art
methods alleviate such overhead in parallel diffusion inference through computation-communication overlapping,
termed displaced parallelism. However, we identify that
these techniques induce severe staleness — the usage of outdated activations from previous timesteps that significantly
degrades quality, especially in expert-parallel scenarios.
We tackle this fundamental tension and propose DICE, a
staleness-centric optimization framework with a three-fold
approach: (1) Interweaved Parallelism introduces staggered pipelines, effectively halving step-level staleness for
free; (2) Selective Synchronization operates at layer-level
and protects layers vulnerable to staled activations; and
(3) Conditional Communication, a token-level, trainingfree method that dynamically adjusts communication frequency based on token importance. Together, these strategies effectively reduce staleness, achieving 1.26× speedup
with minimal quality degradation. Empirical results estab* Equal contribution. Work done when Lizhuo Luo and Jianru Xu were
interns at mmlab@SIGS, Tsinghua University.
† Corresponding author.

lish DICE as an effective and scalable solution. Our code
is available at https://github.com/Cobalt-27/DICE

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [4, 14] have revolutionized the field of
generative modeling, enabling the creation of high-fidelity
images [16, 39] and videos [15, 27], rivaling human creativity in quality and detail. Among the architectures, the
Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [1, 32, 40] with Mixture-ofExperts (MoE) [36] stands out due to its effectiveness in
scalability. MoE enables large diffusion models to scale
up with sub-linear cost increases. It divides the model into
multiple experts, with only a subset activated for each input. This selective activation reduces computation, achieving high performance at a lower cost. As demonstrated by
DiT-MoE [7, 43], MoE-based diffusion models have been
scaled to 16 billion parameters with superior quality.
Scaling MoE-based diffusion models necessitates expert parallelism [18, 33] to handle their extensive memory
footprint; however, it also introduces significant communication overhead. By distributing expert weights across
multiple GPUs, expert parallelism substantially reduces
memory usage but incurs significant communication over-

15481

