This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LOTA: Bit-Planes Guided AI-Generated Image Detection
Hongsong Wang1,2 * † , Renxi Cheng3 † , Yang Zhang4 , Chaolei Han3 , Jie Gui3,5,6 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
4
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
5
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 210000, China
6
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application, Supervision And Management
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{hongsongwang, renxi, chaoleihan, guijie}@seu.edu.cn, yangzhang@szu.edu.cn

1. Introduction

Abstract
The rapid advancement of GAN and Diffusion models
makes it more difficult to distinguish AI-generated images
from real ones. Recent studies often use image-based reconstruction errors as an important feature for determining whether an image is AI-generated. However, these approaches typically incur high computational costs and also
fail to capture intrinsic noisy features present in the raw
images. To solve these problems, we innovatively refine
error extraction by using bit-plane-based image processing, as lower bit planes indeed represent noise patterns in
images. We introduce an effective bit-planes guided noisy
image generation and exploit various image normalization
strategies, including scaling and thresholding. Then, to amplify the noise signal for easier AI-generated image detection, we design a maximum gradient patch selection that
applies multi-directional gradients to compute the noise
score and selects the region with the highest score. Finally, we propose a lightweight and effective classification head and explore two different structures: noise-based
classifier and noise-guided classifier. Extensive experiments on the GenImage benchmark demonstrate the outstanding performance of our method, which achieves an
average accuracy of 98.9% (11.9% ↑) and shows excellent
cross-generator generalization capability. Particularly, our
method achieves an accuracy of over 98.2% from GAN to
Diffusion and over 99.2% from Diffusion to GAN. Moreover, it performs error extraction at the millisecond level,
nearly a hundred times faster than existing methods. The
code is at https://github.com/hongsong-wang/LOTA.
* Corresponding authors. † Equal Contribution

With the rapid development of generative models, especially Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] and
Diffusion models [32], AI-generated images are becoming
more and more realistic, and it is even difficult for people
to distinguish the difference between real and AI-generated
images. These AI-generated images may also be used for illegal purposes [4, 20], such as spreading unreal information
or harmful content, which may mislead or harm the public.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for a robust technique for
distinguishing AI-generated images from real ones.
Early deep learning-based deepfake methods focus on
the detection of GAN-generated images. However, recent
works [9, 31] find that with the emergence of diffusion
models, detection performance declines significantly when
GAN-based detection methods are applied to diffusiongenerated images. With regard to detecting diffusiongenerated images, many works are based on reconstructed
image errors, e.g., DIRE [38], SeDID [28], LaRE2 [27],
ESSP [7], ZED [10]. For example, DIRE [38] computes the
error between the raw and reconstructed images, and considers the image with smaller error to be AI-generated. SeDID [28] computes the loss error for a given step in the forward and reverse process of Diffusion, and regards the image with smaller error as AI-generated. These approaches
extract error signals through a multi-step DDIM sampling
process, which is not only inefficient but also susceptible to
introducing random noise at different steps.
Least Significant Bit (LSB)-based steganography is a
simple yet effective technique that embeds a secret message in pixel values while minimizing perceptible distortions [18]. LSB-based steganography can be easily extended to multiple bit-planes, with lower ones prioritized

17246

