This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perspective-Aware Teaching: Adapting Knowledge for Heterogeneous
Distillation
Jhe-Hao Lin1 , Yi Yao1 , Chan-Feng Hsu1 , Hong-Xia Xie2 ,
Hong-Han Shuai1 , Wen-Huang Cheng3
1
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 Jilin University 3 National Taiwan University
{jimmylin0979.11, leo81005.ee10, cfhsu311510211.ee11, hhshuai}@nycu.edu.tw
hongxiaxie@jlu.edu.cn, wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

View Mismatch Related (Red)

Teacher Unawareness Related(Brown Dashed)

Distillation Path (Black Solid)

AFP

View
Mismatch

Knowledge distillation (KD) involves transferring
knowledge from a pre-trained heavy teacher model to
a lighter student model, thereby reducing the inference
cost while maintaining comparable effectiveness. Prior
KD techniques typically assume homogeneity between the
teacher and student models. However, as technology advances, a wide variety of architectures have emerged, ranging from initial Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
to Vision Transformers (ViTs), and Multi-Level Perceptrons (MLPs). Consequently, developing a universal KD
framework compatible with any architecture has become
an important research topic. In this paper, we introduce
a perspective-aware teaching (PAT) KD framework to enable feature distillation across diverse architectures. Our
framework comprises two key components. First, we design
prompt tuning blocks that incorporate student feedback, allowing teacher features to adapt to the student model’s
learning process. Second, we propose region-aware attention to mitigate the view mismatch problem between heterogeneous architectures. By leveraging these two modules, effective distillation of intermediate features can be achieved
across heterogeneous architectures. Extensive experiments
on CIFAR, ImageNet, and COCO demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method. Our code is available at
https://github.com/jimmylin0979/PAT.git.

Teacher
Teacher
Unawareness

RAA

Student
(a) OFA

(b) PAT

Figure 1. High-level comparison between former state-of-the-art
OFA and our method PAT. Due to the view mismatch (red lines)
and teacher unawareness (brown dashed lines) problems, OFA can
only use ﬁnal logits to supervise student intermediate features
(black solid lines), thereby restricting its utility in downstream
tasks. In contrast, PAT enables feature imitation by solving these
two issues with RAA and AFP modules respectively.

[2, 3, 12], from the cumbersome pre-trained teacher model.
Despite the signiﬁcant progress in KD, there remains a
gap in addressing cross-architecture distillation comprehensively. Existing KD approaches have predominantly focused on distillation between teacher and student models
with homogeneous architectures, particularly feature-based
approaches, leaving cross-architecture distillation relatively
unexplored. For example, FitNet [30] achieves good results in CNN-to-CNN format but performs poorly when distilling in a heterogeneous CNN-to-ViT scenario, only getting 24.06% on CIFAR-100 with ConvNeXt-T teacher and
Swin-P student model pair, which is lower than the basic
logit-based method KD [10] by more than 50%.
Heterogeneous KD, however, offers numerous advantages. First, it helps overcome architecture-speciﬁc limitations, allowing the student model to mitigate weaknesses
inherent to individual architectures and achieve a better performance than learning from a homogeneous teacher model.
For instance, CNNs can assimilate a more comprehensive
understanding from ViTs, conversely, ViTs can augment

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) has received increasing attention from both academic and industrial researchers in recent
years. The goal is to develop a lightweight and efﬁcient
student model by transferring knowledge from an already
trained, larger teacher model. This knowledge may come
in the form of predictions [17, 37], or intermediate features

4178

