This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Articulate3D: Holistic Understanding of 3D Scenes
as Universal Scene Description
Anna-Maria Halacheva1∗ , Yang Miao1∗ , Jan-Nico Zaech1 ,
Xi Wang1,2,3 , Luc Van Gool1 , Danda Pani Paudel1
1

INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, 2 ETH Zurich, 3 TU Munich

Figure 1. The Articulate3D Dataset features (a) articulation annotations with motion types, origin, axis and range; (b) high-detail
segmentations at object and part levels; (c) part connectivity graphs; (d) part articulation roles enabling interaction understanding: movable (articulated) parts, their corresponding interactable parts, and fixed parts. Articulate3D is the first large-scale real-world dataset of
simulation-ready indoor scenes.

Abstract

a full specification of motion attributes for articulated objects. We evaluate USDNet on Articulate3D as well as two
existing datasets, demonstrating the advantage of our unified dense prediction approach. Furthermore, we highlight
the value of Articulate3D through cross-dataset and crossdomain evaluations and showcase its applicability in downstream tasks such as scene editing through LLM prompting
and robotic policy training for articulated object manipulation. We provide open access to our dataset, benchmark,
and method’s source code.

3D scene understanding is a long-standing challenge in
computer vision and a key component in enabling mixed
reality, wearable computing, and embodied AI. Providing
a solution to these applications requires a multifaceted approach that covers scene-centric, object-centric, as well as
interaction-centric capabilities. While there exist numerous
datasets and algorithms approaching the former two problems, the task of understanding interactable and articulated
objects is underrepresented and only partly covered in the
research field. In this work, we address this shortcoming
by introducing: (1) Articulate3D, an expertly curated 3D
dataset featuring high-quality manual annotations on 280
indoor scenes. Articulate3D provides 8 types of annotations
for articulated objects, covering parts and detailed motion
information, all stored in a standardized scene representation format designed for scalable 3D content creation, exchange and seamless integration into simulation environments. (2) USDNet, a novel unified framework capable
of simultaneously predicting part segmentation along with

1. Introduction
3D holistic scene understanding requires understanding at
various semantic and spatial levels, including 3D object detection, semantic/instance segmentation, fine-grained part
segmentation, object affordance prediction, and scene hierarchy prediction [31, 33]. Achieving these capabilities relies on high-quality, richly annotated, large-scale datasets.
* Equal contribution

5633

