This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CameraCtrl II: Dynamic Scene Exploration via
Camera-controlled Video Diffusion Models
Hao He1,3∗

Ceyuan Yang3† Shanchuan Lin3 Yinghao Xu5 Meng Wei4 Liangke Gui3
Qi Zhao3 Gordon Wetzstein5 Lu Jiang3 Hongsheng Li1,2†
1
CUHK MMLab 2 CPII under InnoHK 3 ByteDance Seed 4 ByteDance 5 Stanford University
https://hehao13.github.io/Projects-CameraCtrl-II/

User input image
User-input
& thinking camera trajectories

Generating

Starting image

I need to turn left
to avoid these people.
Thinking

User input
trajectory

Let me return back
to my original path.
Thinking
User input
trajectory

Now I can turn left to
along my original foward
direction.
Thinking
User input
trajectory

Figure 1. Illustration of C AMERAC TRL II. Our camera-controlled video diffusion model generates consistent video sequences for dynamic scenes based on user-defined camera trajectories. The first row represents a generated video clip conditioned on the starting image
and a user input camera path. Subsequent rows show clips conditioned on previous generations and new camera trajectories directly specified by the user. The model strictly follows these user camera inputs while maintaining scene consistency across multiple generations,
enabling seamless navigation around pedestrians and exploration of the environment from various perspectives.

Abstract
This paper introduces C AMERAC TRL II, a framework
that enables continuous dynamic scene exploration through
a camera-controlled video diffusion model. Previous
camera-conditioned video generative models suffer from diminished video dynamics and limited range of viewpoints
when generating videos with large camera motion. We take
an approach that progressively expands the generation of
dynamic scenes—first enhancing dynamic content within
individual clips, then extending these capabilities to create seamless explorations across broad viewpoint ranges.
Specifically, we construct a dataset featuring a large degree

of dynamics with camera parameter annotations for training while designing a lightweight camera injection module
and training scheme to preserve dynamics of the pretrained
models. Building on these improved single-clip capabilities,
we enable extended scene exploration by allowing users to
iteratively specify camera trajectories for generating coherent video sequences. Experiments across diverse scenarios
demonstrate that C AMERAC TRL II enables dynamic scene
synthesis with substantially wider spatial exploration and
enhanced dynamics than previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advances in video
diffusion models [7, 10, 30], which can generate highfidelity and temporally coherent videos from text descrip-

∗ Work was done during Hao He’s internship at ByteDance Seed.
† Corresponding authors.

13416

