This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Alignment and Reinforcement for Data-Free Quantization of Vision
Transformers
Yunshan Zhong1,2 , Yuyao Zhou2 , Yuxin Zhang2 , Wanchen Sui3 , Shen Li3 , Yong Li3 ,
Fei Chao2 , Rongrong Ji1,2 *
1
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xiamen University
2
MAC Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University 3 Alibaba Group
viper.zhong@gmail.com, {yuyaozhou, yuxinzhang}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
{wanchen.swc, litan.ls, jiufeng.ly}@alibaba-inc.com, {fchao, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Data-free quantization (DFQ) enables model quantization without accessing real data, addressing concerns regarding data security and privacy. With the growing adoption of Vision Transformers (ViTs), DFQ for ViTs has garnered signiﬁcant attention. However, existing DFQ methods exhibit two limitations: (1) semantic distortion, where
the semantics of synthetic images deviate substantially from
those of real images, and (2) semantic inadequacy, where
synthetic images contain extensive regions with limited
content and oversimpliﬁed textures, leading to suboptimal
quantization performance. To address these limitations,
we propose SARDFQ, a novel Semantics Alignment and
Reinforcement Data-Free Quantization method for ViTs.
To address semantic distortion, SARDFQ incorporates Attention Priors Alignment (APA), which optimizes synthetic
images to follow randomly generated structure attention
priors. To mitigate semantic inadequacy, SARDFQ introduces Multi-Semantic Reinforcement (MSR), leveraging localized patch optimization to enhance semantic richness
across synthetic images. Furthermore, SARDFQ employs
Soft-Label Learning (SL), wherein multiple semantic targets are adapted to facilitate the learning of multi-semantic
images augmented by MSR. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of SARDFQ, signiﬁcantly surpassing
existing methods. For example, SARDFQ improves top-1
accuracy on ImageNet by 15.52% for W4A4 ViT-B1 .

(a) The t-SNE[69] visualization of the penultimate-layer features (extracted by DeiT-S) of synthetic images. Each marker (circle, star, triangle)
represents a distinct category. The red dashed circles highlight the features
extracted from our APA and real images. Notably, the features produced
by PSAQ-ViT[47] exhibit substantial deviation from those of real images,
indicating semantic distortion. In contrast, our APA yields features that
more closely align with those of real images, suggesting improved semantics alignment.

PSAQ

1. Introduction

SARDFQ (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) semantic distortion and (b) semantic
inadequacy.

Vision Transformers (ViTs) [20, 29, 36] have demonstrated
remarkable success across various computer vision tasks [1,
* Corresponding Author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn
1 The code is at https://github.com/zysxmu/SARDFQ.

PSAQ V2

(b) The images of PSAQ-ViT and PSAQ-ViT V2 exhibit numerous dull
regions with limited content and simpliﬁed textures, reﬂecting semantic
inadequacy. In comparison, our SARDFQ generates images with greater
diversity in both content and texture, demonstrating enhanced semantics.

7, 56, 68]. However, their high computational cost and substantial memory footprint hinder deployment in resource-

12479

