This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring the Adversarial Vulnerabilities of Vision-Language-Action Models
in Robotics
Taowen Wang1∗, Cheng Han2∗, James Liang3∗,
Wenhao Yang4 , Dongfang Liu1†, Luna Xinyu Zhang1‡, Qifan Wang5 ,
Jiebo Luo6 , Ruixiang Tang7†
1

Rochester Institute of Technology, 2 University of Missouri - Kansas City,
3
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, 4 Lamar University, 5 Meta AI,
6
University of Rochester, 7 Rutgers University

Abstract

A. Adversarial Threats
Instruction:
Put the bowl
on the plate.

Danger!

Recently in robotics, Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have emerged as a transformative approach, enabling
robots to execute complex tasks by integrating visual and
linguistic inputs within an end-to-end learning framework.
Despite their significant capabilities, VLA models introduce
new attack surfaces. This paper systematically evaluates
their robustness. Recognizing the unique demands of robotic
execution, our attack objectives target the inherent spatial
and functional characteristics of robotic systems. In particular, we introduce two untargeted attack objectives that
leverage spatial foundations to destabilize robotic actions,
and a targeted attack objective that manipulates the robotic
trajectory. Additionally, we design an adversarial patch generation approach that places a small, colorful patch within
the camera’s view, effectively executing the attack in both
digital and physical environments. Our evaluation reveals a
marked degradation in task success rates, with up to a 100%
reduction across a suite of simulated robotic tasks, highlighting critical security gaps in current VLA architectures.
By unveiling these vulnerabilities and proposing actionable
evaluation metrics, we advance both the understanding and
enhancement of safety for VLA-based robotic systems, underscoring the necessity for continuously developing robust
defense strategies prior to physical-world deployments1 .

Safe

C. Failure Rate Comparison
100%
90%
80%

LIBERO

B. Semantic- Rich Adv Patches

BV2

Malicious Rollout

25%

BV2

LIBERO

Benign

Figure 1. Adversarial Vulnerabilities induced by malicious manipulation. (A). Illustration of adversarial threats in robotic task
execution. (B). Example of semantic-rich adversarial patches generated by proposed methods. (C). Comparison of failure rates across
different attack schemes (UADA, UPA, and TMA).

In the movie Finch, set in a post-apocalyptic future, an intelligent robot navigates complex themes, underscoring the
importance of interactive safety with its human master. Once
speculative, this portrayal is now increasingly plausible with
the rise of Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) [70, 79],
capable of seamlessly interpreting both visual and linguistic
contexts. A notable realization of this potential can be seen
in Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [16, 34, 73, 74],
which integrate LVLMs into robotic systems to enable endto-end learning that encompasses both high-level trajectory planning and low-level robot action control. While
VLA models demonstrate a promising step toward generalist

1. Introduction
“First directive: A robot cannot harm a human or, through
inaction, allow a human to be harmed.”
— Finch [75]
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Work done during Luna Xinyu Zhang’s internship at RIT.
1 Project homepage.

6948

