This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Easy3D: A Simple Yet Effective Method for 3D Interactive Segmentation
Andrea Simonelli

Norman Müller
Peter Kontschieder
Meta Reality Labs Zürich

Abstract
The increasing availability of digital 3D environments,
whether through image-based 3D reconstruction, generation, or scans obtained by robots, is driving innovation
across various applications. These come with a significant
demand for 3D interaction, such as 3D Interactive Segmentation, which is useful for tasks like object selection and manipulation. Additionally, there is a persistent need for solutions that are efficient, precise, and performing well across
diverse settings, particularly in unseen environments and
with unfamiliar objects. In this work, we introduce a 3D interactive segmentation method that consistently surpasses
previous state-of-the-art techniques on both in-domain and
out-of-domain datasets. Our simple approach integrates a
voxel-based sparse encoder with a lightweight transformerbased decoder that implements implicit click fusion, achieving superior performance and maximizing efficiency. Our
method demonstrates substantial improvements on benchmark datasets, including ScanNet [3], ScanNet++ [35],
S3DIS [1], and KITTI-360 [17], and also on unseen geometric distributions such as the ones obtained by Gaussian
Splatting [12]. The project page is available here: https:
//simonelli-andrea.github.io/easy3d.

1. Introduction
Technological progress has increased the demand for applications that enhance understanding and interaction in
digital 3D environments. These environments are in fact
now easily obtainable through scene reconstruction (e.g.,
NeRFs [19], Gaussian Splatting [12]), scene generation, acquisition from laser scans (e.g., LiDAR) or sensors mounted
on robots. Among the many tasks that enhance understanding and interaction with 3D environments, 3D Instance Segmentation is essential for enabling applications that involve
object selection and manipulation.
While many approaches have been explored in literature
[6, 8–10, 14, 24, 26, 31, 32, 36], most are passive, offering
a fixed set of outputs that may not fully meet user needs.
Interactive methods, however, enable users to interact with
a single 3D click to generate an initial segmentation mask.

Figure 1. Example of a typical use-case of Interactive 3D Instance Segmentation (top) and overview of our method’s components (bottom). A user interacts with a 3D scene (top left) and defines a 3D click (blue circle) to select an object (table). The scene
and clicks are fed to Easy3D, which generates the corresponding
instance segmentation mask (top right). After visually inspecting
the result (red mask), the user can provide feedback and refine the
output with additional 3D clicks. To obtain the mask, Easy3D
initially maps the scene and user click(s) to a voxelized 3D representation, to then extract scene features using a sparse U-Net. The
processed scene and clicks are then fed to a two-directional transformer decoder, which exchanges information through attention to
update them. Finally, an implicit click fusion operation is used to
predict the output instance segmentation mask.

The result can be immediately observed and further refined
by adding positive or negative clicks on the obtained masks,
hence allowing for direct user interaction and feedback (as
in Fig. 1).
Current state-of-the-art architectures typically consist of
an encoder and a transformer-based decoder, and can be
broadly categorized based on their choice of encoder and
click fusion strategy. The click fusion strategy is the method
by which information from multiple user clicks, which can
be positive or negative, is combined to predict a single object mask. Some methods rely on explicit click fusion,
which struggles with out-of-domain and unseen objects
(e.g., [37]). Conversely, existing methods that use implicit
click fusion (e.g., [39]) often have inconsistent performance
across datasets and rely on architectures (like ViT [5]) that
require a much higher number of parameters.

24707

