This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CMB-ML: A Cosmic Microwave Background Dataset for
the Oldest Possible Computer Vision Task
James Amato1 Yunan Xie1 Leonel Medina-Varela1 Ammar Aljerwi1
Adam McCutcheon1 T. Seth Rippentrop1 Kristian Gonzalez1 Jacques Delabrouille2,3
Mustapha Ishak1 Nicholas Ruozzi1
1

University of Texas at Dallas 2 Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
3
French National Center for Scientific Research

{james.amato, yunan.xie, leonel.medinavarela, ammar.aljerwi, adam.mccutcheon,
travis.rippentrop, kristian.gonzalez, mishak, nicholas.ruozzi}@utdallas.edu,
delabrou@apc.in2p3.fr

Abstract

ena emitting microwaves, and systematics (a catch-all term
referring to a variety of noise sources). Observations and an
estimate of the CMB are presented in Fig. 1.

The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) radiation is
a pillar of modern cosmology that gives rise to a better
understanding of the fundamental parameters of the universe. While the astrophysics community has developed
computational methods to extract this signal from data,
these methods have limited scalability, and several groups
have proposed the adoption of computer vision based models for CMB signal extraction. However, these diverse
models are difficult to compare: the underlying datasets
and evaluations are inconsistent and have not been made
publicly available. We propose CMB-ML, a dataset and
library that integrates dataset creation, model inference,
and result evaluation into a pipeline to fill this gap and
to make the problem accessible to researchers outside of
cosmology. The library and links for data are available at
github.com/CMB-ML/cmb-ml.

Conventional astrophysics methods exist for extracting
the CMB signal, but they are limited in terms of precision and scalability. To build more scalable methods, researchers in the astrophysics community have taken advantage of advances in computer vision (CV), proposing a variety of deep neural networks for the CMB cleaning task
[24, 27, 80, 101, 106]. However, each of these works (1)
uses a different dataset (with different data generation assumptions), (2) lacks a comprehensive and rigorous evaluation against existing baseline methods, and (3) realizes only
a small portion of the potential power of CV-based methods
to yield new insights and discoveries in this domain.
In order to address these shortcomings and to encourage closer collaboration between physicists and computer
scientists, we propose CMB-ML as a unified framework for
dataset generation and model evaluation. Principally, CMBML is a pipeline for making simulations that separates configuration parameters from operational code. The pipeline
consists of three phases: simulation, modeling, and analysis. It is constructed so that additional models can be added
in parallel to the included benchmark methods.

1. Introduction
The cosmic microwave background (CMB) is the oldest
light in the universe, a remnant from when the primordial
plasma and matter cooled enough that photons could propagate unimpeded. As a pillar of modern precision cosmology, detailed measurement of the CMB reveals temperature anisotropies, giving insight into how the large-scale
structure of the universe forms and evolves [21]. Data is
collected by sophisticated instruments carefully scanning
space and detecting GHz-range light over long periods of
time. When converted into maps, the data contains multiple
superimposed signals: the CMB, other foreground phenom-

This task goes beyond simple denoising, providing distinct challenges and opportunities. All maps use an astrophysics standard for pixelization of the sphere seldom seen
in the CV community. All components are fully superimposed, so separation relies on spatial and spectral distributions. Systematic effects produce noise which varies across
the sky and blur which varies for different detection bands.
These features – spherical pixelization, overlapping spatial

9418

