This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLIPP: Towards Physically Plausible Video Generation
with Vision and Language Informed Physical Prior
Xindi Yang1∗, Baolu Li2∗, Yiming Zhang2 , Zhenfei Yin4, 5†, Lei Bai3†, Liqian Ma6 ,
Zhiyong Wang5 , Jianfei Cai1 , Tien-Tsin Wong1 , Huchuan Lu2 , Xu Jia2†
1 Monash University

2 Dalian University of Technology 3 Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
4 Oxford University

5 The University of Sydney 6 ZMO AI

1. Introduction
Video diﬀusion models (VDMs) trained on large-scale video
datasets have made remarkable progress in terms of realism,
demonstrating signiﬁcant potential for various content creation applications. Despite the absence of explicit geometric
modeling, the generated videos still exhibit coherent spatial
∗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author

2XUV
2XUV

.OLQJ

7ZR VPDOO EDOOV RQ WKH WDEOH PRYH WRZDUGV HDFK RWKHU DQG FROOLGH

/XPD

&OHDQ ZDWHU LV SRXUHG LQWR D WUDQVSDUHQW JODVV

2XUV

Video diﬀusion models (VDMs) have advanced signiﬁcantly
in recent years, enabling the generation of highly realistic videos and drawing the attention of the community
in their potential as world simulators. However, despite
their capabilities, VDMs often fail to produce physically
plausible videos due to an inherent lack of understanding
of physics, resulting in incorrect dynamics and event sequences. To address this limitation, we propose a novel
two-stage image-to-video generation framework that explicitly incorporates physics with vision and language informed
physical prior. In the ﬁrst stage, we employ a Vision Language Model (VLM) as a coarse-grained motion planner,
integrating chain-of-thought and physics-aware reasoning
to predict a rough motion trajectories/changes that approximate real-world physical dynamics while ensuring the
inter-frame consistency. In the second stage, we use the
predicted motion trajectories/changes to guide the video
generation of a VDM. As the predicted motion trajectories/changes are rough, noise is added during inference
to provide freedom to the VDM in generating motion with
more ﬁne details. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our framework can produce physically plausible motion, and comparative evaluations highlight the notable superiority of our approach over existing methods.
More video results and code are available on our Project
Page: https://madaoer.github.io/projects/
physically_plausible_video_generation/.

*HQ

Abstract

$ EDVNHWEDOO IHOO RQWR WKH FOHDQ IORRU

Figure 1. Existing commercial closed-source VDMs fail to generate physically plausible motion, whereas our video generation
framework is able to achieve this by incorporating external physical prior knowledge.

relationships among objects, rich textured details, and realistic lighting eﬀects, including reﬂections and shadows.
Such qualities often make the generated videos nearly indistinguishable from real-world footages. This drives the
research community to explore the potential of VDMs as
world models. However, they still struggle with understanding the physical laws of the real world and generating videos
that adhere to these principles.
Although existing VDMs can produce visually realistic
videos, they fail to mimic the real-dynamic physical motions. As shown in Fig 1, even the current commercial
closed-source VDMs struggle with the task of generating
videos that conform to physical laws. PhyT2V [58] reﬁnes text prompts by incorporating detailed descriptions

12360

