This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Manual-PA: Learning 3D Part Assembly from Instruction Diagrams
Jiahao Zhang1 Anoop Cherian2 Cristian Rodriguez3 Weijian Deng1 Stephen Gould1
1
The Australian National University, 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
3
The Australian Institute for Machine Learning
1

{first.last}@anu.edu.au 2 cherian@merl.com 3 crodriguezop@gmail.com

Abstract
Assembling furniture amounts to solving the discretecontinuous optimization task of selecting the furniture parts
to assemble and estimating their connecting poses in a
physically realistic manner. The problem is hampered by its
combinatorially large yet sparse solution space thus making
learning to assemble a challenging task for current machine
learning models. In this paper, we attempt to solve this
task by leveraging the assembly instructions provided in diagrammatic manuals that typically accompany the furniture
parts. Our key insight is to use the cues in these diagrams
to split the problem into discrete and continuous phases.
Specifically, we present Manual-PA, a transformer-based
instruction Manual-guided 3D Part Assembly framework
that learns to semantically align 3D parts with their illustrations in the manuals using a contrastive learning backbone towards predicting the assembly order and infers the
6D pose of each part via relating it to the final furniture depicted in the manual. To validate the efficacy of our method,
we conduct experiments on the benchmark PartNet dataset.
Our results show that using the diagrams and the order of
the parts lead to significant improvements in assembly performance against the state of the art. Further, Manual-PA
demonstrates strong generalization to real-world IKEA furniture assembly on the IKEA-Manual dataset.

(a)
𝑅1

+ 𝑡1

𝑅2

+ 𝑡2

𝑅3

+ 𝑡3
⋮

𝑅𝑁

(b)

+ 𝑡𝑁

(c)

Figure 1. An illustration of the manual-guided 3D part assembly
task. Given (a) a diagrammatic manual book demonstrating the
step-by-step assembly process and (b) a set of texture-less furniture parts, the goal is to (c) infer the order of parts for the assembly
from the manual sequence and predict the 6DoF pose for each part
such that the spatially transformed parts assembles the furniture
described in the manual.

each other. The limited number of feasible, stable assembly sequences makes this discrete-continuous optimization
problem extremely challenging, even for advanced neural
networks, especially as the number of parts increases [54].
Fortunately, most assembly tasks include language-agnostic
instruction manuals, such as diagrams, delineating the assembly. While such manuals help shrink the solution search
space, the problem of correctly matching the 2D manual
diagrams with their corresponding 3D object parts and inferring their assembly pose and order remains a significant
challenge for automated systems.
This paper introduces a method to enable machines to
learn how to assemble shapes by following a visual instruction manual, a task we call manual-guided 3D part assembly. As illustrated in Fig. 1, given a set of parts and a
manual, our approach interprets the manual’s step-by-step
diagrams to predict the precise 6D pose of each part, assembling them into the target shape. There are two lines
of prior approaches that have similarities to our proposed
task, namely methods that focus on the geometry of individual parts and inter-part relationships [8, 9, 23, 56, 59, 60],

1. Introduction
With the rise of the DIY trend, nowadays it is the consumers
who are increasingly assembling products like IKEA furniture [2, 3, 21, 57, 58], LEGO structures [47, 49], and exercise equipments [45, 61]. This paradigm shift can reduce
the product cost, but often poses challenges for untrained
consumers, as an incorrect assembly in any step may lead
to irreparable outcomes. Thus, automating the assembly or
providing active help in the process is often desired.
Automated assembly faces the dual challenge of large
combinatorial solution space, parameterized by the number
of discrete parts in the assembly, and the need for a precise
6D pose estimation that correctly connects parts between

6304

