This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mamba-3VL: Taming State Space Model for 3D Vision Language Learning
Yuan Wang1,2

Yuxin Chen2 Zhongang Qi2 Lijun Liu3 Jile Jiao1,4 Xuetao Feng1,4
Yujia Liang5 Ying Shan2 Zhipeng Zhang6,7‡
1
Tsinghua University 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 UCAS 4 Deepeleph 5 HUST
6
School of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU 7 Anyverse Intelligence ‡ Corresponding Author

Interactive 3D Referring Segmentation
Multi-target Referring Segmentation

Single-target Referring Segmentation

Box-guided Referring Segmentation

A circular end table
can be found adjacent
to a teal couch and an
brown arm chair.

A black sofa
behind the fan and
a black backpack is
lying on the top of it.

[-0.07 0.45 0.54]

[-1.48 -0.41 0.41]

Interactive Embodied AI Tasks
Task Planning

Human User: pack all the blue and
Q: Hello, could you describe the furniture
black sneakers in the brown box
in the living room?
A: Sure! there has a wooden table, two big
wooden chair, and a gray upholstered sofa.
Q: Thanks for your help! It's I want to know.

Interactive 3D Visual Grounding
Single-target Grounding

Multi-target Grounding

It is a rectangular bed, with a white
mattress and a yellow pillow on top.

Robot Manipulation

3D Dialog

Human: Please arrange a space for eating.
Robot: 1. arrange chairs and ensure them face table.
2. Place any objects or decorations on the table.
3. Clean the table and chairs, wiping away any dust.
4. Check the lighting and temperature in the area.

White washing machines are
positioned in front of dryers

Embodied Navigation
Find the seating
in the scene
1. Turn right
2. Stop
3. Move forward
4. Turn left

Interactive 3D Question Answering & Dense Captioning
Question Answering

Situated Reasoning

Two
Standing in front of the coffee
What’s black television above? table with the window on my left.
Response: on the nightstand How many chairs are behind me?

Dense Captioning

A desk sits behind the brown
chairs to both it's left and right.
it's to the right of a bookshelf.

Figure 1. Mamba-3VL serves as an interactive and general-purpose interface for 3D vision-language tasks, including Referring Segmentation,
Visual Grounding, Question Answering, Dense Captioning, while generalizing well on Embodied AI tasks.

Abstract

multi-modal features. In this paper, we propose Mamba-3VL,
a pioneering 3D-VL framework to model complex intra- and
inter-modality correlations and enhance spatial relation reasoning, while guaranteeing top-tier performance, high efficiency, and generalization potential for 3D-VL tasks. Specifically, Mamba Mixer explicitly models 3D-VL interaction
via channel twisting and relation-prioritized spatial scanning policy. It maximally retain spatial relation of objectcentric features. To further provide precise spatial encoding
for mamba, we develop Instance-aware Dynamic Position
Adapter (IDPA) to dynamically adjust instance-specific positional embeddings and enhance local spatial relation of 3D
objects. Extensive results validate Mamba-3VL trumps other
competitors on seven 3D-VL benchmarks and showcases
versatile potentials for challenging Embodied AI tasks.

3D vision-language (3D-VL) reasoning, connecting natural language with 3D physical world, represents a milestone
in advancing spatial intelligence. While transformer-based
methods dominate 3D-VL research, their quadratic complexity and simplistic positional embedding mechanisms severely
limits effective modeling of long-range 3D-VL dependencies
and spatial relationships in 3D-VL tasks. State Space Models
(SSM) have emerged as promising linear-complexity alternatives for sequential data processing, while inherent selection
mechanism offers notable capability for spatial modeling.
Despite its potential, straightforward adoption of Mamba to
3D-VL tasks encounters two obstacles: (1) how to perceive
the position of 3D objects and understand complex spatial
relationships, and (2) how to achieve thorough synergies of

1. Introduction
Spatial Intelligence [31] aims to develop general-purpose
assistants to understand the 3D physical world and execute

This work is done during internship at Tencent. The code is released
at https://github.com/wangyuan123ac/Mamba-3VL.

6273

