This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Memory-Efficient 4-bit Preconditioned Stochastic Optimization
Jingyang Li1
Kuangyu Ding1
1
National University of Singapore
1

{li jingyang,kuangyud}@u.nus.edu

Kim-Chuan Toh1
Pan Zhou2
2
Singapore Management University

mattohkc@nus.edu.sg

2

panzhou@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Preconditioned stochastic optimization algorithms, exemplified by Shampoo, outperform first-order optimizers by offering theoretical convergence benefits and practical gains
in large-scale neural network training. However, they incur substantial memory overhead due to the storage demands of non-diagonal preconditioning matrices. To address this, we introduce 4-bit quantization for Shampoo’s
preconditioners. We introduce two key methods: First, we
apply Cholesky decomposition followed by quantization of
the Cholesky factors, reducing memory usage by leveraging their lower triangular structure while better preserving spectral properties to minimize information loss. To our
knowledge, this is the first quantization approach applied to
Cholesky factors of preconditioners. Second, we incorporate error feedback in the quantization process, efficiently
storing Cholesky factor and error state in the lower and upper triangular parts of the same matrix. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that combining Cholesky
quantization with error feedback enhances memory efficiency and algorithm performance in large-scale deeplearning tasks. Theoretically, we also provide convergence
proofs for quantized Shampoo under both smooth and nonsmooth stochastic optimization settings.

Figure 1. Comparison of test accuracy and peak memory usage for
training ResNet-34 on CIFAR-100 dataset.

1. Introduction

ply a diagonal preconditioning to the gradient, which enables faster convergence than SGD [17, 63]. These adaptive
methods have demonstrated empirical advantages in various
applications [16, 58] and are now the standard optimizers
for training large-scale neural networks.
Building on adaptive gradient methods, full-matrix preconditioned gradient methods offer theoretically superior
convergence by capturing richer correlations among parameters [17]. Despite these theoretical advantages, however, the memory overhead associated with non-diagonal
matrices poses a significant challenge for large-scale neural networks, which can contain millions of parameters
[16, 23, 34]. To address this, a range of efficient preconditioned gradient methods, such as K-FAC [36], Shampoo
[22], K-BFGS [20], and AdaBK [60], aim to make fullmatrix preconditioning computationally feasible by approximating the full-matrix preconditioner, e.g., block-diagonal
precondition matrix. These algorithms have shown faster
convergence rates in practice when compared to both SGD
and adaptive gradient methods [3, 43, 60].
Nevertheless, these efficient preconditioned methods
still impose substantial memory costs that restrict their
scalability in practical and large-scale model applications.
As shown in Fig. 1, the peak memory usage of methods like Shampoo remains significantly higher than SGD.
While quantizing precondition matrices in these preconditioned methods from high-precision to low-precision,
e.g., 32-bit to 4-bit, effectively reduces memory usage, it
also inevitably introduces information loss, which, in turn,
severely degrades the performance of these preconditioned

Deep learning has achieved significant advancements across
numerous fields in recent years, including language modeling [7, 48], computer vision [16], and multi-modality [38].
These advancements are primarily driven by the scaling of
model size, dataset volume, and computational power, as
outlined in scaling laws that demonstrate the impact of increased resources on model performance [24, 25]. This
trend of scaling has further extended into specialized domains such as finance [54], material science [56], and
healthcare [30].
Along with the size growth of large-scale models,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become a widely
adopted method for training thanks to its efficiency and
simplicity [23, 41, 45]. However, adaptive gradient methods, e.g., Adagrad [17], Adam [26], and AdamW [35], ap-

22633

