This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HarmonySeg: Tubular Structure Segmentation with
Deep-Shallow Feature Fusion and Growth-Suppression Balanced Loss
Yi Huang* 1,2,3 , Ke Zhang∗4 , Wei Liu1,2 , Yuanyuan Wang3 , Vishal M. Patel4 , Le Lu1 , Xu Han5 ,
Dakai Jin1 , and Ke Yan†1,2
1

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Hupan Lab, Hangzhou, China
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fudan University
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
5
Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University

Abstract

upon institutional approval.

Accurate segmentation of tubular structures in medical
images, such as vessels and airway trees, is crucial for
computer-aided diagnosis, radiotherapy, and surgical planning. However, significant challenges exist in algorithm design when faced with diverse sizes, complex topologies, and
(often) incomplete data annotation of these structures. We
address these difficulties by proposing a new tubular structure segmentation framework named HarmonySeg. First,
we design a deep-to-shallow decoder network featuring
flexible convolution blocks with varying receptive fields,
which enables the model to effectively adapt to tubular
structures of different scales. Second, to highlight potential
anatomical regions and improve the recall of small tubular structures, we incorporate vesselness maps as auxiliary
information. These maps are aligned with image features
through a shallow-and-deep fusion module, which simultaneously eliminates unreasonable candidates to maintain
high precision. Finally, we introduce a topology-preserving
loss function that leverages contextual and shape priors to
balance the growth and suppression of tubular structures,
which also allows the model to handle low-quality and incomplete annotations. Extensive quantitative experiments
are conducted on four public datasets. The results show
that our model can accurately segment 2D and 3D tubular
structures and outperform existing state-of-the-art methods.
External validation on a private dataset also demonstrates
good generalizability. Code will be released at this link

1. Introduction

* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author, yanke.yan@alibaba-inc.com

Accurate segmentation of tubular structures in medical images, such as vessels and airway trees, is important for disease diagnosis, radiotherapy, and surgical planning [21, 22].
Manual delineation of the tubular structure is difficult and
time-consuming due to its diverse sizes, complex topologies, and sparse distribution, which affect the efficiency of
downstream clinical applications. Moreover, the visibility
of small tubular structures is often limited in low-contrast
medical images. Therefore, an effective automatic tubular
structure segmentation approach is highly desired in clinical practices. Various filters were proposed to enhance
and segment tubular structures in medical images [17, 18].
These filters, producing “vesselness” scores, measure how
much each pixel resembles a tubular structure. Although
effective, they are susceptible to image quality, often struggling with background clutter and noise. As a result, a
specially designed post-processing algorithm is necessary,
complicating the pipeline and limiting generalizability. Recent deep learning-based approaches usually have end-toend workflows with stronger feature extraction capabilities
and higher noise immunity that can obtain accurate tubular structure segmentation without requiring complex postprocessing [12, 46]. However, these methods still have limitations. Firstly, it is difficult to obtain a large-scale dataset
with high-quality labels for model development, as manual annotation of tubular structures is tedious. The masks
from publicly available datasets [8, 32] are usually sketchy

23571

