This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STI-Bench:
Are MLLMs Ready for Precise Spatial-Temporal World Understanding?
Yun Li1,2 , Yiming Zhang1,3 , Tao Lin1 , XiangRui Liu1,4 , Wenxiao Cai5 , Zheng Liu4 , Bo Zhao1
1
School of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
China University of Geosciences, 3 Nanyang Technological University, 4 BAAI, 5 Stanford University
Corresponding to <bo.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn>

Static
Understanding

The use of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
as an end-to-end solution for Embodied AI and Autonomous
Driving has become a prevailing trend. While MLLMs
have been extensively studied for visual semantic understanding tasks, their ability to perform precise and quantitative spatial-temporal understanding in real-world applications remains largely unexamined, leading to uncertain
prospects. To evaluate models’ Spatial-Temporal Intelligence, we introduce STI-Bench, a benchmark designed to
evaluate MLLMs’ spatial-temporal understanding through
challenging tasks such as estimating and predicting the appearance, pose, displacement, and motion of objects. Our
benchmark encompasses a wide range of robot and vehicle operations across outdoor, indoor, and desktop scenarios. The extensive experiments reveal that the state-of-theart MLLMs still struggle in real-world spatial-temporal understanding, especially in tasks requiring precise distance
estimation and motion analysis. Paper Page: https://mintsjtu.github.io/STI-Bench.io/

eo
Vid
3D nding
u
Gro

Dynamic
Understanding
Traj
e
Des ctory
crip
tion

Sp
Acc eed &
eler
atio
n

t
men
ace ngth
l
p
s
Di th Le
a
&P

Spa
Rel tial
atio
n

e
Pos tion
ma
Esti

Abstract

Ego
Ori -Centr
enta
ic
tion

al
ion
ens ent
Dim surem
a
Me
Gemini-2.5-Pro

InternVL2.5

GPT-4o

VideoLLaMA3

Gemini-2.0-Flash

Qwen2.5-VL

Claude3.7

Random

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We evaluate state-of-the-art MLLMs on STI-Bench
for precise and quantitative spatial-temporal understanding using
video inputs. Results indicate the significant challenge in all tasks.

Recent advances in Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) [1, 4, 12, 29, 35, 37–39, 44, 50] have positioned
them as powerful tools for numerous vision and multimodal
tasks. MLLMs achieve impressive performance in general Visual Question Answering tasks [3], which mainly
focus on 2D visual perception and semantic question answering [18, 19, 21, 25, 40, 41, 52]. Beyond 2D visual
perception, MLLMs are increasingly employed as end-toend solutions for Embodied AI [7–9, 15, 23, 26, 32, 46]
and Autonomous Driving [22, 42, 43, 48]. Such tasks require MLLMs to understand 3D space and time, and predict
optimal manipulation strategies for robotic and vehicular
systems. Despite these explorations, the question remains:
Are MLLMs ready for precise spatial-temporal world un-

derstanding?
To answer this question, we propose a Spatial-Temporal
Intelligence Benchmark (STI-Bench), designed to evaluate
MLLMs’ spatial-temporal world understanding capability.
We evaluate MLLMs using single video or multiple images
as input instead of 3D point clouds. The main reasons are:
1) the majority of state-of-the-art models, e.g., GPT-4o [33]
and Gemini [38], accept images or video as input rather than
3D point clouds; 2) Videos are more frequently used in daily
life and contain sufficient information to infer the spatialtemporal environment.
STI-Bench contains 300 videos and over 2,000 QA pairs,

5622

