This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAGD: Regional-Aware Diffusion Model for Text-to-Image Generation
Zhennan Chen1⋆ Yajie Li1⋆ Haofan Wang2,3 Zhibo Chen3 Zhengkai Jiang4
Jun Li1 Qian Wang5B Jian Yang1 Ying Tai1B
1
Nanjing University 2 InstantX Team 3 Liblib AI 4 HKUST 5 China Mobile
https://github.com/NJU-PCALab/RAG-Diffusion

Flux

Ours

RPG

On the left, Einstein is painting the Mona Lisa; in the center, Elon Reeve Musk is participating in the U.S. presidential election; on the right, Trump is
hosting a Tesla product launch.

Ours

Flux

Ours

RPG

Seven ceramic mugs in different colors are placed on a wooden table,
with numbers from 1 to 7 written on the cups, and a bunch of white
roses on the left.

Flux

RPG

A cylindrical glass, obscuring the right half of the apple behind it.

Figure 1. RAGD decouples a raw prompt into regional prompts, processes different regions separately and strengthens the interaction
between adjacent regions. It enables precise control over object relationship, action and attributes, achieving more harmonious and
consistent complex compositional generation compared to competing models like Flux and RPG.

Abstract
Regional prompting, or compositional generation, which
enables fine-grained spatial control, has gained increasing attention for its practicality in real-world applications. However, previous methods either introduce additional trainable modules, thus only applicable to specific models, or manipulate on score maps within attention layers using attention masks, resulting in limited control strength when the number of regions increases. To
handle these limitations, we present RAGD, a RegionalAware text-to-image Generation method conditioned on regional descriptions for precise layout composition. RAGD
decouples the multi-region generation into two sub-tasks,

the construction of individual region (Regional Hard Binding) that ensures the regional prompt is properly executed,
and the overall detail refinement (Regional Soft Refinement) over regions that dismiss the visual boundaries and
enhance adjacent interactions. Furthermore, RAGD novelly makes repainting feasible, where users can modify specific unsatisfied regions in the last generation while keeping all other regions unchanged, without relying on additional inpainting models. Our approach is tuning-free
and applicable to other frameworks as an enhancement to
the prompt following property. Quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that RAGD achieves superior
performance over attribute binding and object relationship
than previous methods.

19331

