This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAD-E2E: A Large-scale End-to-end Autonomous Driving Dataset
Chang Liu* Mingxu Zhu* Zheyuan Zhang* Linna Song Xiao Zhao
Qingliang Luo, Qi Wang, Chufan Guo, Kuifeng Su
ADLab, Tencent
{changeliu,mingxuzhu,lukezyzhang,linnaasong,shawzhao,
fineluo,kiwang,chufanguo,kuifengsu}@tencent.com

*

Figure 1. We introduce TAD-E2E, a large-scale dataset for end-to-end autonomous driving, featuring extensive sensor data and challenging
urban scenarios. Experiments with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on this dataset show notable performance drops, highlighting its
complexity. To address these challenges, we propose SparseFusion-E2E (SPF-E2E), a multimodal end-to-end neural network that serves
as a strong baseline to facilitate further research.

Abstract
End-to-end autonomous driving technology has recently
become a focal point of research and application in autonomous driving. State-of-the-art (SOTA) methods are often trained and evaluated on the nuScenes dataset. However, the nuScenes dataset, introduced in 2019 for 3D perception tasks, faces several limitations—such as insufficient scale, simple scenes, and homogeneous driving behaviors—that restrict the upper-bound development of end-toend autonomous driving algorithms. In light of these issues,
we propose a novel, large-scale real-world dataset specifically designed for end-to-end autonomous driving tasks,
named TAD-E2E, which is 25x larger, 1.7x scene complexity
over nuScenes, and features a highly diverse range of driving behaviors. We replicated SOTA methods on the TADE2E dataset and observed that these methods no longer performed well, as expected. Additionally, in response to the
challenging scenarios presented in the TAD-E2E dataset,

we devised a multimodal sparse end-to-end method that
significantly outperforms SOTA methods. Ablation studies
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, and we analyze the contributions of each module. The dataset will be
released in the near future.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.

In recent years, the technology of autonomous driving has
developed rapidly. As one of the forefront research directions, data-driven end-to-end (E2E) autonomous driving
has demonstrated excellent performance. Compared to traditional modular approaches that involve mapping, localization, perception, prediction, and decision-making, endto-end autonomous driving offers advantages in effectively
reducing information transfer loss by enabling joint learning and optimization among various modules at the feature
level. Due to the involvement of training and joint learning across various functional modules, end-to-end systems
also strongly demand high-quality, large-scale, full-chain

26600

