This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G2PDiffusion: Cross-Species Genotype-to-Phenotype Prediction via
Evolutionary Diffusion
Mengdi Liu1,2 , Zhangyang Gao3 , Hong Chang1,2∗ , Stan Z. Li3∗ , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China
3
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University

Sample

Ground Truth

{liumengdi23z,changhong,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, {gaozhangyang,Stan.ZQ.Li}@westlake.edu.cn

Figure 1. Ground truth images (top row) and generated images conditioning on DNA (bottom row).

the model’s understanding of phenotype variability across
species, thereby offering a valuable and promising exploration into advanced AI-assisted genomic analysis.

Abstract
Understanding how genes influence phenotype across
species is a fundamental challenge in genetic engineering,
which will facilitate advances in various fields such as crop
breeding, conservation biology, and personalized medicine.
However, current phenotype prediction models are limited
to individual species and expensive phenotype labeling process, making the genotype-to-phenotype prediction a highly
domain-dependent and data-scarce problem. To this end, we
suggest taking images as morphological proxies, facilitating
cross-species generalization through large-scale multimodal
pretraining. We propose the first genotype-to-phenotype
diffusion model (G2PDiffusion) that generates morphological images from DNA considering two critical evolutionary signals, i.e., multiple sequence alignments (MSA) and
environmental contexts. The model contains three novel
components: 1) a MSA retrieval engine that identifies conserved and co-evolutionary patterns; 2) an environmentaware MSA conditional encoder that effectively models complex genotype-environment interactions; and 3) an adaptive
phenomic alignment module to improve genotype-phenotype
consistency. Extensive experiments show that integrating
evolutionary signals with environmental context enriches

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author.

One of the fundamental biology challenges is understanding how genes interact with environmental factors to determine phenotype [28], which has profound implications for
crop breeding [3, 7], disease resistance [47], and personalized therapeutics [34]. Phenotypes can be physiological,
morphological, and behavioral, such as the resistance to toxins, wing shape, and foraging behavior. This paper focuses
on morphological phenotypes [10, 23], aiming to understand
how genes influence phenotypes, how species evolve under
natural selection, and how phenotypic diversity is formed.
Conventional genotype-to-phenotype prediction usually
relies on statistical methods such as genome-wide association studies (GWAS) [11, 15, 39, 41, 43] and quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping [20, 27, 33]. Recent works
[1, 8, 44, 50] apply deep learning models to decode the intricate genotype-phenotype interactions. However, the existing
approaches are limited to individual species due to the expensive phenotype labeling process. As the phenotypic features
are located in high-dimensional space and measured using
specified equipment, labeling large populations of individu-

20705

