This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Performing Defocus Deblurring by Modeling its Formation Process
Zhengbo Zhang1 Lin Geng Foo1 Hossein Rahmani2 Jun Liu2 * De Wen Soh1
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Lancaster University

Abstract
Single image defocus deblurring (SIDD) is a challenging
task that aims to recover an all-in-focus image from a defocused one. In this paper, we make the observation that
a defocused image can be viewed as a blend of illuminated
blobs based on fundamental imaging principles, and the defocus blur in the defocused image is caused by large illuminated blobs intermingling with each other. Thus, from a
novel perspective, we perform SIDD by adjusting the shape
and opacity of the illuminated blobs that compose the defocused image. With this aim, we adopt a novel 2D Gaussian blob representation for illuminated blobs and a differentiable rasterization method to obtain the parameters
of the 2D Gaussian blobs that compose the defocused image. Additionally, we propose a blob deblurrer to adjust
the parameters of the 2D Gaussian blobs corresponding
to the defocused image, thereby obtaining a sharp image.
We also explore incorporating prior depth information via
our depth-based regularization loss to regularize the size of
Gaussian blobs, further improving the performance of our
method. Extensive experiments on five widely-used datasets
validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Figure 1. Due to the varying distances between objects and the
lens, the sizes of the illuminated blobs formed on the film plane
differ, resulting in some objects appearing sharp while others appear blurred (i.e., with larger illuminated blobs).

ods [3, 12, 21] using the estimated defocus maps for defocus
deblurring. ii) Recently, end-to-end deep learning-based
approaches [2, 24, 36–38, 45, 49] have been introduced for
SIDD, where a deep neural network (DNN) is trained to
map defocused images to their sharp counterparts. Existing
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods [37–39] are mostly based
on deep learning, and typically focus on learning the defocus kernel or its inverse, employing intricately designed
networks that utilize the learned defocus kernels or inverse
kernels for SIDD. Despite recent progress in SIDD, the task
remains challenging, particularly in scenarios involving defocus blur with large blur areas [38, 49], severely blurred
regions [36], and irregularly shaped blurs [24, 45]. There
are also challenges in terms of the model’s ability to generalize across different datasets [37].
To better address the challenging SIDD task, it is crucial
to review how the phenomenon of defocus blur is formed
from fundamental imaging principles. As shown in Fig. 1,
defocus blur is a common “degradation” in optical systems
caused by variations in scene depth during image capture.
Within an optical system (e.g., camera), lenses are employed to refract incoming light, directing the light rays to
converge at the apex of a conical path. When an object is positioned such that the apex of this cone aligns precisely with
the film plane, the light rays form small illuminated blobs
on the film plane, rendering the object in sharp focus. This
specific distance where objects appear sharp and clear is
known as the focal plane. Objects positioned away from the

1. Introduction
Single image defocus deblurring (SIDD) aims to reconstruct an all-in-focus image from a single defocused and
blurry input. SIDD is essential for removing unwanted blur
from captured images, which often contain defocus blur
resulting from photographing scenes with varying depths.
Deblurring images through SIDD can also significantly
enhance the performance of downstream machine vision
tasks (e.g., object detection [6, 9] and semantic segmentation [34, 53]) for important practical applications. Existing SIDD works can be broadly divided into two approaches: i) Conventional SIDD approaches typically employ a two-step process involving defocus map estimation [8, 11, 16, 18, 28, 60] followed by deconvolution meth* Corresponding author

5791

