This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangled Clothed Avatar Generation with Layered Representation
Weitian Zhang1 Yichao Yan1† Sijing Wu1 Manwen Liao2 Xiaokang Yang1
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
The University of Hong Kong
1

{weitianzhang, yanyichao, wusijing, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

{manwen}@connect.hku.hk

(a) Disentangled Clothed Avatar Generation

(b) Animation

(d) Decomposition

(c) Camera View Control

(e) Component Transfer

Figure 1. We propose LayerAvatar to efficiently generate diverse clothed avatars with components fully disentangled. The generated
avatars can be animated and synthesized in novel views. They can also be decomposed into body, hair, and clothes for component transfer.

hancing details of generated avatars. Based on the welldesigned representation, we train a single-stage diffusion
model and introduce constrain terms to mitigate the severe
occlusion issue of the innermost human body layer. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performances
of our method in generating highly detailed and disentangled clothed avatars. In addition, we explore its applications in component transfer. The project page is available
at https://olivia23333.github.io/LayerAvatar.

Abstract
Clothed avatar generation has wide applications in virtual and augmented reality, filmmaking, and more. While
existing methods have made progress in creating animatable digital avatars, generating avatars with disentangled
components (e.g., body, hair, and clothes) has long been a
challenge. In this paper, we propose LayerAvatar, a novel
feed-forward diffusion-based method capable of generating high-quality component-disentangled clothed avatars
in seconds. We propose a layered UV feature plane representation, where components are distributed in different
layers of the Gaussian-based UV feature plane with corresponding semantic labels. This representation can be
effectively learned with current feed-forward generation
pipelines, facilitating component disentanglement and en-

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

The creation of digital avatars has various applications [2,
13] in virtual and augmented reality, filmmaking, and more.
Traditional graphics-based pipelines require extensive effort from 3D artists to construct a single digital avatar. To
reduce tedious manual labor and facilitate mass production,
learning-based methods aiming at generating digital avatars

11327

