This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On-Device Diffusion Transformer Policy for Efficient Robot Manipulation
Jianxin Pang4
Dong Xu1∗
Yiming Wu1
Huan Wang2 * Zhenghao Chen3
1
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University
3
School of Information and Physical Sciences, The University of Newcastle
4
UBTech Robotics Corp.
{yimingwu, dongxu}@hku.hk

wanghuan@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

zhenghao.chen@newcastle.edu.au

Diffusion Policies have significantly advanced robotic
manipulation tasks via imitation learning, but their application on resource-constrained mobile platforms remains
challenging due to computational inefficiency and extensive memory footprint. In this paper, we propose LightDP, a
novel framework specifically designed to accelerate Diffusion Policies for real-time deployment on mobile devices.
LightDP addresses the computational bottleneck through
two core strategies: network compression of the denoising
modules and reduction of the required sampling steps. We
first conduct an extensive computational analysis on existing Diffusion Policy architectures, identifying the denoising
network as the primary contributor to latency. To overcome performance degradation typically associated with
conventional pruning methods, we introduce a unified pruning and retraining pipeline, optimizing the model’s postpruning recoverability explicitly. Furthermore, we combine
pruning techniques with consistency distillation to effectively reduce sampling steps while maintaining action prediction accuracy. Experimental evaluations on the standard
datasets, i.e., PushT, Robomimic, CALVIN, and LIBERO,
demonstrate that LightDP achieves real-time action prediction on mobile devices with competitive performance,
marking an important step toward practical deployment of
diffusion-based policies in resource-limited environments.
Extensive real-world experiments also show the proposed
LightDP can achieve performance comparable to state-ofthe-art Diffusion Policies.

44, 46, 51, 53]. This success fuels the ambition to deploy general-purpose embodied agents in robots, particularly those with limited computation resources. However, this endeavor presents multifaceted challenges: 1)
Diffusion Policies require multiple denoising steps, which
slows down the generation process; 2) the standard architectures [8, 36, 37] involve billions of parameters, leading to high memory usage. These factors impede real-time
applications on resource-constrained platforms like mobile
robots and drones. To address these challenges, recent
work by DeeR-VLA [49] introduces a multi-exit architecture built on the Roboflamingo framework [26], enabling
dynamic termination of the computation process to accelerate action prediction. While this design achieves considerable computation reduction on GPU devices, its early exit
strategy remains suboptimally tuned for mobile platforms.

1. Introduction

In this work, we introduce a novel framework
named LightDP for Diffusion Policies that enables models to achieve real-time generation on mobile devices. To
achieve this, we mainly focus on two primary strategies:
compressing the denoising network to improve the inference speed and reducing the sampling steps. First, we provide an analysis of two Diffusion Policies named DiffusionPolicy Transformer (DP-T) [8] and MDT-V [36]. Through
the comprehensive component evaluation, we observe that
the denoiser is the major bottleneck for Diffusion Policies
(as shown in Table 1). In this work, we follow the conventional model pruning pipeline, in which the model is pruned
and re-trained to resist the performance drop. In previous pruning approaches based on importance metrics [31],
oracle design [23], or lottery hypothesis [13], the pruning
and retraining process is separated, which can lead to suboptimal performance. In contrast, we integrate the pruning and retraining process in a unified framework, which
can enhance the recoverability of the Diffusion Policies
and explicitly model and optimize the post-finetuning performance of pruned models. Second, reducing the sampling steps is another straightforward way to speed up diffu-

Diffusion Policies have demonstrated significant success in
robotic manipulation tasks through imitation learning, as
evidenced by various studies [1, 4, 8, 15, 24, 26, 36, 37,
* Corresponding authors: Huan Wang and Dong Xu.

14073

