This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Robust Image Watermarking with Lossless Cover Recovery
Jiale Chen1,2,3 , Wei Wang1,2,3,∗ , Chongyang Shi1 , Li Dong4,5,∗ , Xiping Hu1,2,3,∗
1 Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Shenzhen MSU-BIT University,
3 Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Emotional Intelligence and Pervasive Computing,
4 Ningbo University, 5 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing

Abstract
Watermarking as a traceable authentication technology has
been widely applied in image copyright protection. However, most existing watermarking methods embed watermarks by adding irremovable perturbations to the cover
image, causing permanent distortion. To address this issue, we propose a novel watermarking approach termed
Cover-Recoverable WaterMark (CRMark). CRMark can
losslessly recover the cover image and watermark in lossless channels and enables robust watermark extraction in
lossy channels. CRMark leverages an integer Invertible
Watermarking Network (iIWN) to achieve a lossless invertible mapping between the cover-image-watermark pair and
the stego image. During the training phase, CRMark employs an encoder-noise-layer-decoder architecture to enhance its robustness against distortions. In the inference
phase, CRMark first maps the cover-image-watermark pair
into an overflowed stego image and a latent variable. Subsequently, the overflowed pixels and the latent variable are
losslessly compressed into an auxiliary bitstream, which
is then embedded into the clipped stego image using reversible data hiding. During extraction, in lossy channels,
the noised stego image can directly undergo inverse mapping via iIWN to extract the watermark. In lossless channels, the latent variable and overflowed stego image are first
recovered using reversible data hiding, followed by watermark extraction through iIWN. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that CRMark can be perfectly recovered
in lossless channels while remaining robust to common distortions. Code is available at https://github.com/
chenoly/CRMark.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of digital content and internet technology, copyright protection issues have become increasingly significant. Digital watermarking embeds identifying
information into media to verify authenticity and ownership, supporting secure digital content transmission [28].
∗ Corresponding author.

Most robust image watermarking methods introduce
non-erasable perturbations to the cover image, resulting in
irreversible damage. To address this, robust reversible watermarking (RRW) was born. Unlike watermark removal
methods [41], RRW can perfectly recover the cover image in lossless channels and robustly watermark extraction
in lossy channels. This enables RRW to detect arbitrary
attacks, making it especially suitable for applications requiring both data integrity and copyright verification [31].
Currently, most RRW methods predominantly adopt a twostage embedding strategy. For the first stage, the watermark
bits are embedded into a cover image using a traditional robust watermarking method. For the second stage, to ensure
reversibility, the auxiliary bitstream required for recovery
of the cover image is embedded into the stego image using reversible data hiding [26]. This ensures the functional
integration between robustness and reversibility. However,
existing two-stage RRW methods often demand complex
designs and significant computational time to balance robustness, reversibility, and capacity effectively.
In recent years, invertible neural networks (INNs) have
emerged as a pivotal approach in robust image watermarking [11] and steganography [25], leveraging their unique
capacity for invertible mapping between the cover and
stego images, showing them highly effective for data hiding tasks. However, most INN-based methods are based
on real-valued flows [9]. This leads to a problem: despite
the cover image being discrete data. the stego image from
INNs is real-valued and requires quantization to match discrete pixel values for storage. This quantization process inevitably causes information loss that hampers the perfect
recovery of the original cover image upon inverse mapping.
Thus, quantization-induced irreversibility limits the practical utility of INNs in robust reversible watermarking.
To tackle this challenge, a key question arises: Can invertible neural networks be applied to achieve reversible
watermarking? The answer is affirmative. To establish
an invertible mapping between the cover-image-watermark
pair and stego image, we propose a novel two-stage watermarking method termed Cover-Recoverable WaterMark
(CRMark), as shown in Fig. 1. We develop an integer

15056

