This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Straighten Viscous Rectified Flow via Noise Optimization
Jimin Dai1 , Jiexi Yan2 , Jian Yang1 , Lei Luo1
1
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 Xidian University
{jimindai, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, {jxyan1995, luoleipitt}@gmail.com

Abstract
The Reflow operation aims to straighten the inference trajectories of the rectified flow during training by constructing
deterministic couplings between noises and images, thereby
improving the quality of generated images in single-step or
few-step generation. However, we identify critical limitations in Reflow, particularly its inability to rapidly generate
high-quality images due to a distribution gap between images in its constructed deterministic couplings and real images. To address these shortcomings, we propose a novel alternative called Straighten Viscous Rectified Flow via Noise
Optimization (VRFNO), which is a joint training framework integrating an encoder and a neural velocity field.
VRFNO introduces two key innovations: (1) a historical
velocity term that enhances trajectory distinction, enabling
the model to more accurately predict the velocity of the current trajectory, and (2) the noise optimization through reparameterization to form optimized couplings with real images which are then utilized for training, effectively mitigating errors caused by Reflow’s limitations. Comprehensive
experiments on synthetic data and real datasets with varying resolutions show that VRFNO significantly mitigates
the limitations of Reflow, achieving state-of-the-art performance in both one-step and few-step generation tasks.

ple inference steps. Currently, various forward noise-adding
schemes have been developed for DMs. Among them, the
most straightforward approach is the Rectified Flow (RF)
[14, 15, 22]. The core idea of RF is to add noise to the data
in a linear manner, constructing a deterministic PF from the
Gaussian distribution to the target distribution. The model
only needs to learn the velocity field of the straight-line interpolation trajectories between the noises and the samples,
Once trained, the model can efficiently generate samples
that approximate the target distribution.
Generating samples with DMs typically requires multiple inference steps that consume substantial computational
resources and time. RF constructs straight-line interpolation
trajectories between noises and samples as the reference,
and it theoretically learns a straight flow from the Gaussian
distribution to the target distribution. The straight flow implies that RF learns a constant velocity field, which enables
few-step or even single-step sampling in an ideal scenario.
However, during actual training, the RF struggles to learn
a constant velocity field, and the resulting PF trajectories
remain curved. Therefore, RF still relies on multiple steps
to generate the desired images. RF attributes the curvature
to the crossing of reference trajectories during training and
employs a Reflow operation to mitigate this issue.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we observe that during the actual training
process, the probability of crossing between the straightline interpolation trajectories of randomly matched noises
and images at a given time step t is P ∼ O(e−c(n×n) ),
which is very small in high-dimensional data space (Theorem 1). Therefore, we are more inclined to believe that the
curvature arises because the neural network model is not
an exact solver, intermediate states along different trajectories may become “approximately crossing” due to their high
similarity in statistical property, thereby interfering with the
model predictions. Furthermore, we conducted an in-depth
analysis of the factors that contribute to the success of Reflow, as well as its limitations, detailed in Section 2.2.

Diffusion models (DMs) [9, 23, 25] have attracted significant attention due to their remarkable generative capabilities and stable optimization process. DMs have outperformed traditional models such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1, 4] and Variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [30] in various generation tasks. DMs work by
designing a forward noise-adding scheme, which progressively transforms the target distribution into the initial distribution (usually a Gaussian distribution), thereby constructing a Probability Flow (PF) from complex to simple
distributions. DMs learn the inverse process of PF, and
then they can sample Gaussian noises and generate samples that approximate the target distribution through multi-

15005

To retain the advantages of Reflow while mitigating its
drawbacks, we propose a new method called Straighten
Viscous Rectified Flow via Noise Optimization (VRFNO).
VRFNO introduces a historical velocity term (HVT) as in-

