This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UPP: Unified Point-Level Prompting for Robust Point Cloud Analysis
Zixiang Ai, Zhenyu Cui, Yuxin Peng, Jiahuan Zhou*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
https://azx030512.github.io, https://zhoujiahuan1991.github.io

Abstract

(a) Ensemble Paradigm

Denoise 


Pre-trained point cloud analysis models have shown
promising advancements in various downstream tasks, yet
their effectiveness is typically suffering from low-quality
point cloud (i.e., noise and incompleteness), which is a common issue in real scenarios due to casual object occlusions
and unsatisfactory data collected by 3D sensors. To this
end, existing methods focus on enhancing point cloud quality by developing dedicated denoising and completion models. However, due to the isolation between the point cloud
enhancement and downstream tasks, these methods fail to
work in various real-world domains. In addition, the conflicting objectives between denoising and completing tasks
further limit the ensemble paradigm to preserve critical geometric features. To tackle the above challenges, we propose a unified point-level prompting method that reformulates point cloud denoising and completion as a prompting mechanism, enabling robust analysis in a parameterefficient manner. We start by introducing a Rectification
Prompter to adapt to noisy points through the predicted
rectification vector prompts, effectively filtering noise while
preserving intricate geometric features essential for accurate analysis. Sequentially, we further incorporate a Completion Prompter to generate auxiliary point prompts based
on the rectified point clouds, facilitating their robustness
and adaptability. Finally, a Shape-Aware Unit module is exploited to efficiently unify and capture the filtered geometric
features for the downstream point cloud analysis. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate the superiority and robustness of our method when handling noisy and
incomplete point cloud data against existing state-of-the-art
methods. Our code is released at https://github.com/

Analysis


Model

Model
Denoised Point Cloud

Composed Point Cloud
Noisy and Incomplete


Completion


Point Cloud

Model

e
air lan car
p
ch

d
be

Downstream Task

Completed Point Cloud

(b) UPP (Ours)
Completion


Completion


Prompter

Prompt

Robust

Unified Model
e
air lan car
p
ch

Noisy and Incomplete

Point Cloud

Prompted Point Cloud

d
be

Downstream Task

Rectification


Rectification


Prompter

Vector

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) the conventional ensemble
paradigm utilizing dedicated models and (b) our proposed unified point-level prompting framework. By reformulating denoising and completion tasks as prompting mechanisms tailored for
downstream tasks, our approach effectively preserves critical geometric features essential for robust point cloud analysis.

zhoujiahuan1991/ICCV2025-UPP.

tion [26, 41], segmentation [31], and detection [16]. Despite
some progress, real-world collected point cloud data typically suffer from substantial noise and incompleteness due
to challenges like self-occlusion, reflective surfaces, and the
limited sensor resolution [23, 38]. These low-quality data
critically suppress the performance and reliability of pretrained models in practical applications, raising an urgent
need for effective approaches to ensure real-world scalability and reliability.
To address these challenges, some recent advancements
exploited dedicated denoising [6, 24] and completion models [10, 17] and have shown promising results. Specifically,
as shown in Figure 1, denoising models aim to remove redundant point clouds, while completing models focus on
adding missing point clouds based on existing point clouds.
However, considering the isolation between the point cloud
enhancement task and downstream tasks, the performance
in downstream tasks typically suffers from the huge gap

1. Introduction
Pre-trained point cloud models have recently achieved significant progress in point cloud analysis, facilitating a wide
range of downstream tasks, including 3D object classifica* Corresponding author: jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn

27359

