This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Multimodal Learning via Imbalanced Learning
Shicai Wei1,2
Chunbo Luo1 *
Yang Luo1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
National and Local Joint Engineering Research Center for Cloud Operating System
shicaiwei@std.uestc.edu.cn, {c.luo, luoyang}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

and complementarities. According to recent research [9,
10, 21], the performance of existing multimodal methods
is sub-optimal since the performance of each modality encoder falls significantly short of their unimodal bound.
Existing methods attribute this under-optimized phenomenon to the ”modality imbalance” problem, where the
dominant modality suppresses the learning of weak modality, hindering the full utilization of multimodal data [9, 10,
18, 21, 28, 40]. They then propose several methods to address the problem. Some of them aid the training of the
weak modality with the help of additional unimodal classifiers [28, 34], pre-trained models [9] or modality resampling [35]. Since they will introduce additional neural modules and complicate the training procedure, other methods [10, 18, 21] try to modulate the gradient of different
modalities within the multimodal model. Moreover, recent
methods transform the conventional joint multimodal learning process into an alternating unimodal learning process to
minimize inter-modality interference directly [15, 36, 40].
While existing methods achieve good performance, they
simply attribute the inferior multimodal performance to the
imbalanced learning between modalities. This paper argues
that this assertion may be imperfect. According to the assertion, for the CREMA-D datasets where the audio branch
outperforms the visual branch (see Fig. 1 (a)), increasing the
gradient of the audio branch should exacerbate the imbalanced learning and decrease performance. However, when
we increase the gradient of the audio branch by 5 times,
the model performance does not decrease but increases (see
Fig. 1 (b)). This finding drives us to further explore the real
bottleneck that limits multimodal learning performance.
To this end, we reframe the conventional joint multimodal learning process by transforming it into the ensembling learning of multiple unimodal processes. From the
perspective of bias-variance, we prove that the optimal decision dependence ratio on each modality should obey the
inverse of their prediction variance. And conventional balanced learning is optimal only when the variances of the
different modalities are the same. Therefore, instead of balancing multimodal learning, we should modulate the gradi-

Multimodal learning often encounters the underoptimized problem and may perform worse than unimodal
learning. Existing approaches attribute this issue to imbalanced learning across modalities and tend to address it
through gradient balancing. However, this paper argues
that balanced learning is not the optimal setting for multimodal learning. With bias-variance analysis, we prove that
imbalanced dependency on each modality obeying the inverse ratio of their variances contributes to optimal performance. To this end, we propose the Asymmetric Representation Learning(ARL) strategy to assist multimodal
learning via imbalanced optimization. ARL introduces
auxiliary regularizers for each modality encoder to calculate their prediction variance. ARL then calculates coefficients via the unimodal variance to re-weight the optimization of each modality, forcing the modality dependence ratio to be inversely proportional to the modality
variance ratio. Moreover, to minimize the generalization
error, ARL further introduces the prediction bias of each
modality and jointly optimizes them with multimodal loss.
Notably, all auxiliary regularizers share parameters with
the multimodal model and rely only on the modality representation. Thus the proposed ARL strategy introduces
no extra parameters and is independent of the structures
and fusion methods of the multimodal model. Finally, extensive experiments on various datasets validate the effectiveness and versatility of ARL. Code is available at
https://github.com/shicaiwei123/ICCV2025-ARL

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning has gained considerable attention
across a wide range of applications, including action recognition [2, 31], object detection [16, 26], and audiovisual
speech recognition [1, 24]. While multimodal learning has
significant potentiality in improving the robustness and performance of models, the heterogeneity of multimodal data
raises the challenges to leverage multimodal correlations

2250

