This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DoppDrive: Doppler-Driven Temporal Aggregation
for Improved Radar Object Detection
Yuval Haitman* and Oded Bialer*
General Motors, Technical Center Israel
haitman@post.bgu.ac.il, oded.bialer8@gmail.com

1) No Aggregation

Abstract

0

Object
Detection

Radar-based object detection is essential for autonomous
driving due to radar’s long detection range. However, the
sparsity of radar point clouds, especially at long range,
poses challenges for accurate detection. Existing methods increase point density through temporal aggregation
with ego-motion compensation, but this approach introduces scatter from dynamic objects, degrading detection
performance. We propose DoppDrive, a novel DopplerDriven temporal aggregation method that enhances radar
point cloud density while minimizing scatter. Points from
previous frames are shifted radially according to their dynamic Doppler component to eliminate radial scatter, with
each point assigned a unique aggregation duration based
on its Doppler and angle to minimize tangential scatter.
DoppDrive is a point cloud density enhancement step applied before detection, compatible with any detector, and
we demonstrate that it significantly improves object detection performance across various detectors and datasets.Our
project page: https://yuvalhg.github.io/DoppDrive/

Detections

2) Ego-Motion Compensation Aggregation
2

1

0
0

Ego-Motion
Compensation
Aggregation

Object
Detection Detections

3) DoppDrive
2

1

0
0

Doppler-Driven
Aggregation
(DoppDrive)

Object
Detection Detections

Figure 1. Object detection with different input point clouds.
(1) single frame, highly sparse point cloud, (2) temporally aggregated with ego-motion compensation—scattered points from dynamic objects, (3) Doppler-driven aggregation—dense points with
minimal scatter, enhancing object detection.

sor spectrum [32]. This paper focuses on object detection
using radar point clouds, a method conceptually similar to
LIDAR-based detection but with critical distinctions.
One key difference between radar and LIDAR point
clouds is radar’s much lower density, due to its lower angular resolution and longer wavelength [15]. This sparsity
increases with distance, resulting in only a few reflections
from distant objects, making it challenging to distinguish
true objects from noise and accurately detect their shape,
orientation, and size. As objects’ reflection points vary with
changes in the relative position between objects and the
radar, a common approach to increasing point cloud density and improving object detection is to aggregate point
clouds from multiple frames over a short duration (about 0.5
seconds), applying ego-motion compensation and adding a
timestamp to each point [22, 28, 29, 33, 38, 42]. While this
method aligns reflections from static objects, the unknown
velocities of dynamic objects cause significant scatter in the

1. Introduction
Radar plays an important role in autonomous driving and
active safety systems due to its capability to provide detection at long range [17, 24, 43]. While some approaches use
neural networks to detect objects directly from the radar’s
reflection intensity tensor spectrum [11, 16, 19, 44, 45],
spanning spatial and Doppler domains, this low-level data
is not always accessible. When available, it requires substantial communication bandwidth, memory, and computational resources to process. A more efficient alternative is
object detection from radar point cloud data [14, 22, 27–
29, 31, 38], where the point cloud is generated by filtering high-probability reflection points from the intensity ten* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Both authors are with General Motors, Yuval Haitman is also with the
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering in Ben Gurion University
of the Negev.

26085

