This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quanta Neural Networks: From Photons to Perception
Varun Sundar†*

Tianyi Zhang‡

Sacha Jungerman†

Mohit Gupta†

vsundar4@wisc.edu

tz12@rice.edu

sjungerman@wisc.edu

mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

†

University of Wisconsin-Madison

‡

Rice University

wisionlab.com/project/quanta-neural-networks/

Abstract

making computer vision from photons an increasing possibility.
However, do we have the algorithms and models for performing
high-quality computer vision and perception from photons?
Quanta cameras capture photon detections as a series of
binary-valued frames. As seen in Fig. 1 (first row), a single
quanta frame is quite different from a conventional image; it is
heavily quantized and very noisy, making it incompatible with
off-the-shelf computer vision algorithms. Fortunately, quanta
cameras can run at very high speeds (∼100 kHz), so we can
aggregate multiple frames over time by aligning them and reconstruct images that are interpretable by existing vision models [6, 8, 51, 61]. Unfortunately, intensity reconstruction from
quanta frames can be an expensive undertaking that can severely
strain the compute, memory, and latency of an edge-computing
platform by around 2–3 orders of magnitude, precluding the
adoption of quanta sensors in resource-constrained applications.
In this work, we design quanta neural networks (QNNs) that
directly transform photon detections to downstream task objectives, eschewing intermediate image reconstruction. Our core
contribution is a learnable temporal layer, or QNN layer, that can
be incorporated throughout the design of many (feedforward)
deep neural networks, yielding their photon-level equivalents
(illustrated in Fig. 1 (second row)). QNNs can directly benefit
from the state-of-the-art techniques developed by the broader
computer vision community today, and possibly even in the future. As case studies, we provide quanta neural network designs
for one image-based and two video-based neural networks.
Central to our design philosophy is computational efficiency.
QNN layers produce outputs with reduced latency and constant
memory footprint, even when operating on long temporal durations, by employing streaming and recursive computations.
A second property of QNNs is their scene-adaptive resource
allocation: expending more computations when rapid motion is
involved, and suppressing computations otherwise. We achieve
this using two complementary inference modes. Eventful computations reduces floating-point operations by an order of magnitude by updating QNN feature maps incrementally, exploiting
temporal redundancy at the neuron granularity. Change-driven
inference automatically runs the entire network at slow or brisk
rates as per the scene dynamics, allowing QNN output rates to
vary across a spectrum of 20 Hz to 100 kHz.

Quanta image sensors record individual photons, enabling capabilities like imaging in near-complete darkness and ultrahigh-speed videography. Yet, most research on quanta sensors
is limited to recovering image intensities. Can we go beyond
just imaging, and develop algorithms that can extract high-level
scene information from quanta sensors? This could unlock new
possibilities in vision systems, offering reliable operation in extreme conditions. The challenge: raw photon streams captured
by quanta sensors have fundamentally different characteristics
than conventional images, making them incompatible with vision models. One approach is to first transform raw photon
streams to conventional-like images, but this is prohibitively
expensive in terms of compute, memory, and latency.
We propose quanta neural networks (QNNs) that directly
produce downstream task objectives from raw photon streams.
Our core proposal is a trainable QNN layer that can seamlessly
integrate with existing image- and video-based neural networks,
producing quanta counterparts. By avoiding image reconstruction and allocating computational resources on a scene-adaptive
basis, QNNs achieve 1–2 orders of magnitude improvements
across all efficiency metrics (compute, latency, readout bandwidth) as compared to reconstruction-based quanta vision, while
maintaining high task accuracy across a wide gamut of challenging scenarios including low light and rapid motion.

1. Vision Without the Image
Much of computer vision today begins with an image—the defacto representation of light, driven by the proliferation of digital
cameras. A nascent class of sensors, called quanta image sensors [5, 18, 19, 60] is challenging this status quo by providing
the ability to sense light at its fundamental level of discretization:
individual photons. Sensing raw photons facilitates imaging in
extreme scenarios spanning very low light [4, 52] to extremely
fast motion [6, 73]. Quanta sensor hardware has evolved tremendously in the past 5 years, going from single-pixel prototypes
to megapixel-resolution arrays sensors [19, 21, 47, 53, 54, 69],
* This research was supported in part by NSF CAREER award 1943149, and
Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation via a Research Forward Initiative.

5091

