This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Modality Prompt for Adapting Vision-Language Object Detectors
Heitor R. Medeiros∗
Atif Belal
Srikanth Muralidharan
Eric Granger
Marco Pedersoli
LIVIA, Dept. of Systems Engineering, ETS Montreal, Canada
International Laboratory on Learning Systems (ILLS)
(b) Zero-Shot

(c) Visual Prompt

(d) ModPrompt (Ours)

NYUv2

FLIR

LLVIP

(a) GT

Figure 1. YOLO-World detections of different approaches across modalities: LLVIP and FLIR datasets (infrared) and NYUv2 (depth).
Each column corresponds to a different approach: (a) Ground Truth (GT): Shows in yellow the GT bounding boxes for objects. (b)
Zero-Shot (ZS): Displays detections (in red) from a zero-shot model. It has missed several detections and some inaccurate boxes without
tuning. (c) Visual Prompt: Illustrates detections with a visual prompt added to the image. It shows improvements over ZS, with more
accurate detection in certain areas, but still misses some objects. (d) ModPrompt (Ours): Detections from our model. ModPrompt
generates artifacts on the image to enhance objects and suppress the background, facilitating detection.

Abstract

Prompt, a visual prompt strategy to adapt VLDs to new
modalities without degrading zero-shot performance. In
particular, an encoder-decoder visual prompt strategy is
proposed, further enhanced by the integration of inferencefriendly modality prompt decoupled residual, facilitating a
more robust adaptation. Empirical benchmarking results
show our method for modality adaptation on YOLO-World
and Grounding DINO for challenging infrared (LLVIP,
FLIR) and depth (NYUv2 ) datasets, achieving performance
comparable to full fine-tuning while preserving the model’s
zero-shot capability. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/heitorrapela/ModPrompt.

The zero-shot performance of object detectors degrades
when tested on different modalities, such as infrared and
depth. While recent work has explored image translation
techniques to adapt detectors to new modalities, these methods are limited to a single modality and traditional detectors. Recently, vision-language detectors (VLDs), such as
YOLO-World and Grounding DINO, have shown promising zero-shot capabilities; however, they have not yet been
adapted for other visual modalities. Traditional fine-tuning
approaches compromise the zero-shot capabilities of the detectors. The visual prompt strategies commonly used for
classification with vision-language models apply the same
linear prompt translation to each image, making them less
effective. To address these limitations, we propose Mod-

1. Introduction
Object detection (OD) is a key challenge in computer vision, aiming to localize and classify objects in images [57].

* Contact: heitor.rapela-medeiros.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

2172

