This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fish2Mesh Transformer: 3D Human Mesh Recovery from Egocentric Vision
Tianma Shen1

Aditya Puranik1
Julianna Dietrich1

James Vong1
Vrushabh Deogirikar1
Ryan Fell1
Maria Kyrarini1
Christopher Kitts1
1
David C. Jeong
1
Santa Clara University, 500 El Camino Real, Santa Clara, CA 95053

{tshen2, apuranik, jvong, vdeogirikar, rfell, jdietrich, mkyrarini, ckitts, dcjeong}@scu.edu

Figure 1. The Fish2Mesh pipeline enables accurate 3D mesh recovery from egocentric fisheye perspectives. From left to right: (1) Fisheye
Input with a wide field of view; (2) Third-person view (shown for context, not used as input); (3) Predicted (blue) vs. Ground Truth (red)
vertices demonstrating near-complete overlap; and (4) Reconstructed 3D human mesh model from the fisheye input.

Abstract

human body’s pose and shape from a first-person point of
view through wearable cameras [5, 16, 17, 25, 28], typically mounted on the head [28]. Egocentric estimation uses
captured images from this unique perspective, enabling applications in assistive robotics [12, 20, 30], augmented reality [3, 10, 27], and virtual reality [21].

Egocentric human body estimation allows for the inference
of user body pose and shape from a wearable camera’s firstperson perspective. Although pose estimation techniques
have been used to overcome self-occlusions and image distortions caused by head-mounted fisheye images, similar
advances in 3D human mesh recovery (HMR) techniques
have been limited. We address this gap with Fish2Mesh,
a fisheye-aware transformer-based model designed for 3D
egocentric human mesh recovery. We propose an egocentric position embedding block to generate an ego-specific
position table for the Swin Transformer to reduce fisheye
image distortion. Our model utilizes multi-task heads for
SMPL parametric regression and camera translations, estimating 3D and 2D joints as auxiliary loss to support
model training. Further, we augment egocentric camera
data with a training dataset by employing the pre-trained
4D-Human model and third-person cameras for weak supervision. Our experiments demonstrate that Fish2Mesh
outperforms state-of-the-art 3D HMR models. Code and
data are available on our website.

While forward-facing cameras [9, 13] excel at egocentric views ideal for third-person reconstruction but are
limited for head- and arm-level scenes for first-person
view, downward-facing cameras [17, 28] capture a broader,
ground-oriented perspective of the human body and surroundings. This downward-facing perspective enriches contextual detail and boosts the processing potential. Building
on these advantages, our work employs head-mounted cameras that capture downward views for human body estimation through key joint mapping, enabling accurate modeling
of the body’s structure and movements. These benefits motivate the exploration of advanced modeling techniques, offering promising avenues for capturing precise body structures from egocentric views.
Recent research in human body estimation has focused
on pose estimation, which involves predicting the positions
of key body joints [26]. In contrast, our current work employs human mesh recovery (HMR), or human mesh reconstruction, to enhance spatial precision by mapping egocentric image data onto humanoid 3D mesh models. In addition to meeting the precision demands of realistic simu-

1. Introduction
Egocentric human body estimation is an emerging subfield
of computer vision [2, 6, 7] that focuses on estimating the

6498

