This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimal Transport for Brain-Image Alignment: Unveiling Redundancy and
Synergy in Neural Information Processing
Yang Xiao1 * Wang Lu2† Jie Ji3 Ruimeng Ye1
Gen Li3 Xiaolong Ma4 Bo Hui1‡
1
University of Tulsa, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Clemson University, 4 The University of Arizona

Abstract
The design of artificial neural networks (ANNs) is inspired
by the structure of the human brain, and in turn, ANNs offer
a potential means to interpret and understand brain signals.
Existing methods primarily align brain signals with stimulus signals using Mean Squared Error (MSE), which focuses only on local point-wise alignment and ignores global
matching, leading to coarse interpretations and inaccuracies in brain signal decoding.
In this paper, we address these issues through optimal
transport (OT) and theoretically demonstrate why OT provides a more effective alignment strategy than MSE. Specifically, we construct a transport plan between brain voxel
embeddings and image embeddings, enabling more precise
matching. By controlling the amount of transport, we mitigate the influence of redundant information. We apply our
alignment model directly to the Brain Captioning task by
feeding brain signals into a large language model (LLM)
instead of images. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance across ten evaluation metrics, surpassing the
previous best method by an average of 6.11% in singlesubject training and 3.81% in cross-subject training. Additionally, we have uncovered several insightful conclusions
that align with existing brain research. We unveil the redundancy and synergy of brain information processing through
region masking and data dimensionality reduction visualization experiments. We believe our approach paves the way
for a more precise understanding of brain signals in the future. The code is available at https://github.com/
NKUShaw/OT-Alignment4brain-to-image.

1. Introduction
The structure of the human brain has inspired the development of neural networks [51], and in recent years, research
* First Author: yax3417@utulsa.edu
† Corresponding Author: newlw230630@gmail.com
‡ Corresponding Author: bo-hui@utulsa.edu

Figure 1. The left is MSE Heatmap and the right is OT Heatmap.

on brain-computer interfaces has gained increasing attention. Researchers have been exploring ways to leverage
neural networks to decode brain signals and better understand brain function. Among various neural recording techniques, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
provides an indirect measure of neural activity by capturing fluctuations in blood oxygen levels. With advances in
deep learning, researchers have attempted to align fMRI
signals with neural representations in pre-trained models to
enhance brain decoding capabilities [41, 57].
As the main approach to interpreting brain region signals, brain-image alignment combines artificial intelligence
and neuroscience, allowing us to decipher semantic information from neural activities in response to different types
of stimuli [2, 20, 35, 52, 57, 69–71, 75, 77]. By projecting
data in a shared embedding space, information from different modalities can be mapped to the same dimensional
space, ensuring semantic consistency [26, 30, 49, 68]. By
aligning fMRI with the image using deep learning methods, researchers implemented the aligned model for downstream tasks, such as Visual Description [71, 72], Image
Generation [35, 57, 72], Object Detection [71], Image Retrieval [72]. These advances open up new possibilities
for understanding human cognition and developing braincomputer interfaces.
Although brain-image alignment has made significant
progress, previous research methods have not considered

20445

