This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatio-Spectral Pattern Illumination for Direct and Indirect Separation
from a Single Hyperspectral Image
Shin Ishihara
Imari Sato
National Institute of Informatics
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{sishihara,imarik}@nii.ac.jp

1. Introduction

Abstract
Hyperspectral imaging has proven effective for appearance
inspection because it can identify material compositions
and reveal hidden features. Similarly, direct/indirect separation provides essential information about surface appearance and internal conditions, including layer structures and scattering behaviors. This paper presents a novel
illumination system incorporating dispersive optics to unify
both advantages for scene analysis. In general, achieving distinct direct/indirect separation requires multiple images with varying patterns. In a hyperspectral scenario,
using a hyperspectral camera or tunable filters extends exposure and measurement times, hindering practical application. Our proposed system enables the illumination of
a wavelength-dependent, spatially shifted pattern. With
proper consideration of reflectance differences, we demonstrate that robust separation of direct and indirect components for each wavelength can be achieved using a single hyperspectral image acquired under our single spatiospectral pattern illumination.

Hyperspectral imaging enables pixel-level analysis of objects and is widely used in fields such as medical imaging, food quality control, environmental monitoring, and
art conservation [7, 17, 31, 35]. Spectral rendering is gaining traction, with modern renderers adopting wavelengthdependent models [10], and reflection/scattering analysis
aiding in material editing [8]. Analyzing layer structures is
also essential for inspecting an object’s surface and internal
conditions. Techniques for separating a scene’s direct and
indirect reflection components are often employed to accurately capture surface reflection colors and shapes, as well
as to visualize an object’s internal structure. Nayar et al.
developed a groundbreaking fast separation technique [24]
by measuring the scene under spatially high-frequency illumination, assuming that the indirect reflection component
of a scene changes gradually in space, which means it is
predominantly low-frequency.
Unifying both advantages for scene analysis, spectral
layer structure analysis effectively separates surface and
internal details, offering notable benefits such as accurate

Figure 1. The proposed system captures a single hyperspectral image using a wavelength-dependent, spatially shifted illumination pattern
generated by a projector with a diffraction grating. The input shows the observed image under the proposed illumination system (displayed
as an RGB image) along with the separated direct and indirect reflectance components for each wavelength (”Direct/Indirect”). Rough
textures and specular reflections are observed in the direct component, while soft textures, such as internal scattering, are observed in the
indirect component. The leftmost plots show the comparison of our estimation with the reference at points p1 and p2 .

26827

