This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Addressing Representation Collapse in Vector Quantized Models with
One Linear Layer
Yongxin Zhu1,2 , Bocheng Li1,2 , Yifei Xin3 , Zhihua Xia4 , Linli Xu1,2 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, 3 Peking University, 4 Jinan University
zyx2016@mail.ustc.edu.cn,bcli@mail.ustc.edu.cn
xinyifei@stu.pku.edu.cn,xiazhihua@jnu.edu.cn,linlixu@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Vector Quantization (VQ) is essential for discretizing continuous representations in unsupervised learning but suffers
from representation collapse, causing low codebook utilization and limiting scalability. Existing solutions often rely
on complex optimizations or reduce latent dimensionality,
which compromises model capacity and fails to fully solve
the problem. We identify the root cause as disjoint codebook
optimization, where only a few code vectors are updated via
gradient descent. To fix this, we propose SimpleVQ, which
reparameterizes code vectors through a learnable linear
transformation layer over a latent basis, optimizing the entire linear space rather than nearest individual code vectors. Although the multiplication of two linear matrices is
equivalent to applying a single linear layer, this simple approach effectively prevents collapse. Extensive experiments
on image and audio tasks demonstrate that SimVQ improves
codebook usage, is easy to implement, and generalizes well
across modalities and architectures.

sequences for next token prediction training. However, attempts to integrate VQ models as multimodal tokenizers
to leverage the scaling laws of LLMs face significant challenges because of the difficulty of expanding the codebook.
For example, the Chameleon model [28] constrains its codebook size to 8k, which is significantly trailing behind the
vocabulary size of LLMs (e.g., LLaMA3’s vocabulary size
is 128k [8]).

1. Introduction

There is a broad agreement that increasing vocabulary
size can consistently improve the performance of LLMs
[27]. However, recent studies [42] indicate that traditional
VQ models often fail to utilize the additional parameters introduced by codebook expansion, leaving most codes inactive during training. The contradiction between codebook
expansion and low codebook utilization in VQ models is
known as the representation collapse problem [22], where
increasing the codebook size fails to improve the performance. To address these discrepancies, we conduct a theoretical analysis of the optimization procedure of VQ models
and identify that the disjoint optimization of the codebook
is the root cause of representation collapse. As illustrated
in Fig. 1(a), the core mechanism of VQ models involves a
nearest-neighbor replacement strategy, where the encoder’s
output features are replaced by the nearest vector in the
codebook to serve as input to the decoder. The indices of
the nearest vector are taken as the discrete representation
of the data. This nearest-selection operator results in only
a subset of codes being updated through gradient descent,
while the remaining codes remain unchanged.

In recent years, vector quantization (VQ) [19, 29] has
emerged as a foundational technique in unsupervised representation learning [2, 5] and latent generative models
[4, 21, 31, 33, 34, 44]. By converting continuous representations into discrete codes, VQ models can effectively identify the inherent structure of data and enable various discrete
modeling methods on continuous data, from high-quality
image generation [9] to audio synthesis [6]. The recent success of Large Language Models (LLMs) [1] has highlighted
the effectiveness of next-token prediction as a powerful and
versatile training objective. Consequently, VQ models are
taken as the direct method to transform data from various
modalities [25, 28, 37] or scientific domains [10] to discrete
* Corresponding author.

Some methods mitigate representation collapse by handdesigning complex optimization strategies, such as stochastic quantization [26], distribution penalty [30, 32], and
codebook reset [40] through sophisticated training strategies. Recently, some approaches [16, 33, 35] propose to reduce the dimension of the latent space to a very small scale
(e.g., 8 v.s. 128) to alleviate the curse of dimensionality,
thereby improving the overlap between the encoder’s fea-

22968

