This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Better Out-painting: Improving the Image Composition with
Initialization Policy Model
Xuan Han1
Yihao Zhao1
Yanhao Ge1,2
Mingyu You1 *
1
2
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
Future Imaging Area
{hanxuan, zhaoyihao, myyou}@tongji.edu.cn

{halege}@vivo.com

Abstract
With its extensive applications, Foreground Conditioned
Out-painting (FCO) has attracted considerable attention
in the research field. Through the utilization of textdriven FCO, users are enabled to generate diverse backgrounds for a given foreground by adjusting the text prompt,
which considerably enhances the efficiency in fields like ecommerce. Since the foreground is fixed in FCO, a key concern is whether the generated background can match the
foreground well to achieve a coherent composition. However, most existing methods are lacking in this regard. Artifacts and incorrect interactions are common defects in synthesized images. This issue is linked to the influence of the
initial noise in the sampling process. As the initial noise
is sampled independently, it’s highly likely that the implied
image composition will conflict with the given foreground.
In this paper, a novel Initialization Policy Model (IPM) is
proposed to address this problem. Its function is to replace
the early denoising steps and directly predict the intermediate state that is conducive to the reasonable image composition. Since the IPM is designed to take only the foreground image and the text prompt as inputs, it isolates the
impact of the initial noise. The subsequently proposed training paradigm that combines inversion-derived label supervision and diffusion reward supervision further ensures the
efficient training of the IPM. The evaluation is conducted
using the task-specific OpenImage-FCO dataset developed
by us. The results verify that the introduction of the IPM can
significantly improve the composition of the synthesized images and achieve advanced performance in the FCO task.

Figure 1. The illustrations concerning the flawed image composition in foreground conditioned out-painting task.

1. Introduction

niques is continuously revolutionizing the practices in related fields such as commercial art [7, 11] and fashion design [6, 33]. Among the various techniques available, Foreground Conditioned Out-painting (FCO) [2, 14, 26] has attracted significant attention. FCO focuses on a special use
case: The foreground of an image, usually containing the
main object, is fixed, and image generators like Stable Diffusion [26] are used to fill the background based on the
user’s prompt. This technology allows users to generate
diverse backgrounds for the given foreground simply by
changing the text prompt, which significantly enhances efficiency compared to standard workflows.
In this task, a crucial concern is the quality of image
composition. Take Fig. 1 as an example: the user wants
to display the mug in a fresh scene. The expected result is
that the synthesized background can be harmoniously integrated with the mug. However, existing methods demonstrate insufficient performance in this regard. In many results, background objects like the table fail to interact appropriately with the given mug, alongside artifacts generated in the process. Overall, the synthesized background
often exists independently of the given foreground rather
than forming a unified composition.
To identify the source of the problem, we revisit the
specificity of the FCO task. In diffusion-based FCO, images are gradually denoised from initial noise xT . According to existing literature [27, 35], variations in xT compre-

Nowadays, diffusion-based image editing has emerged as
a trending research topic. Its progress in numerous tech* Corresponding Author. M. You is with the College of Electronic and
Information Engineering, Tongji University, State Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems

16938

