This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-visual Controlled Video Diffusion with Masked Selective State Spaces
Modeling for Natural Talking Head Generation
Fa-Ting Hong1,2
Xiu Li3
1

HKUST

Zunnan Xu2,3 Zixiang Zhou2 Jun Zhou2
Qin Lin2 Qinglin Lu2 Dan Xu1,B
2

Tencent

3

Tsinghua University

Audio
Source

Generated
Results

Motion
Source

Generated
Results

Driven
Signal
Only Motion-driven Generation

Only Audio-driven Generation

Figure 1. In this work, we aim to develop a framework that not only generates videos driven by multiple signals without causing control
conflicts in the facial region (first three rows) but also supports video generation driven by a single signal (last two rows).

Abstract
Talking head synthesis is vital for virtual avatars and
human-computer interaction. However, most existing methods are typically limited to accepting control from a single primary modality, restricting their practical utility. To
this end, we introduce ACTalker, an end-to-end video diffusion framework that supports both multi-signals control
and single-signal control for talking head video generation. For multiple control, we design a parallel mamba
structure with multiple branches, each utilizing a separate
driving signal to control specific facial regions. A gate
mechanism is applied across all branches, providing flexible control over video generation. To ensure natural coordination of the controlled video both temporally and spa-

tially, we employ the mamba structure, which enables driving signals to manipulate feature tokens across both dimensions in each branch. Additionally, we introduce a maskdrop strategy that allows each driving signal to independently control its corresponding facial region within the
mamba structure, preventing control conflicts. Experimental results demonstrate that our method produces naturallooking facial videos driven by diverse signals and that the
mamba layer seamlessly integrates multiple driving modalities without conflict.

1. Introduction
Talking head generation [3, 20–22, 25, 26, 33, 50] aims to
create realistic portrait videos driven by specific input signals. Audio and facial motion are the two primary driving

12549

