This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceLift: Learning Generalizable Single Image 3D Face Reconstruction from
Synthetic Heads
Weijie Lyu1∗
1

Single Im age Input

Yi Zhou2

Ming-Hsuan Yang1

University of California, Merced

High-fidelity 3D Gaussian
Repr esentation

2

Zhixin Shu2

Adobe Research

Full Head NVS

High-quality Details

Figure 1. FaceLift transforms a single facial image into a high-fidelity 3D Gaussian head representation. Trained exclusively on synthetic
3D data, our pipeline first generates sparse, identity-preserving multiview images of the input head using a diffusion model. These sparse
generated views are then fed into a transformer-based 3D Gaussian splats reconstructor, producing complete and detailed 3D head representation that generalize remarkably well to real-world human images. Project page: https://weijielyu.github.io/FaceLift.

1. Introduction

Abstract
We present FaceLift, a novel feed-forward approach for
generalizable high-quality 360-degree 3D head reconstruction from a single image. Our pipeline first employs a multiview latent diffusion model to generate consistent side and
back views from a single facial input, which then feed into
a transformer-based reconstructor that produces a comprehensive 3D Gaussian splats representation. Previous
methods for monocular 3D face reconstruction often lack
full view coverage or view consistency due to insufficient
multi-view supervision. We address this by creating a highquality synthetic head dataset that enables consistent supervision across viewpoints. To bridge the domain gap between synthetic training data and real-world images, we
propose a simple yet effective technique that ensures the
view generation process maintains fidelity to the input by
learning to reconstruct the input image alongside the view
generation. Despite being trained exclusively on synthetic
data, our method demonstrates remarkable generalization
to real-world images. Through extensive qualitative and
quantitative evaluations, we show that FaceLift outperforms
state-of-the-art 3D face reconstruction methods on identity
preservation, detail recovery and rendering quality.

*Work was done when Weijie Lyu was an intern at Adobe Research.

3D face reconstruction has been a central focus in computer vision and graphics research for decades, driven by
its crucial applications in immersive virtual and augmented
realities, VFX and gaming, digital entertainment, and nextgeneration telepresence systems. However, achieving high
quality reconstruction from a single image remains very
challenging. On one hand, the monocular face reconstruction problem is highly ill-posed – a single 2D image can
be produced by countless different 3D face shapes, creating
fundamental ambiguity. On the other hand, the human visual system is highly attuned to facial details, making even
subtle artifacts and imperfections noticeable to the eye.
Traditional 3D head synthesis approaches typically use
parametric textured mesh models [32, 60] trained on 3D
scan datasets. While these models enable basic head generation, the rendered images frequently lack fine-scale geometric detail, realistic textures, and convincing hair, limiting their perceptual realism and expressiveness. Recent
breakthroughs in image generative models [19, 23] and
novel view synthesis techniques [27, 40] have opened new
possibilities for this research area. Leveraging these developments, recent works [1, 72] use neural 3D representations
to learn effective 3D head representation from unstructured
real face image datasets [25, 68]. While these datasets improve the realism and diversity of rendering results, they fail
to provide multi-view supervision for modeling 3D consis-

12691

