This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LD-RPS: Zero-Shot Unified Image Restoration via Latent Diffusion
Recurrent Posterior Sampling
Huaqiu Li1,2 *, Yong Wang2†‡, Tongwen Huang2 , Hailang Huang2 , Haoqian Wang1†, Xiangxiang Chu2
1
Tsinghua University 2 AMAP, Alibaba Group
lihq23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn
{wangyong.lz, huangtongwen.htw, huanghailang.hhl, chuxiangxiang.cxx}@alibaba-inc.com
Prompt

Input

Output

Prompt

Input

Output

Prompt

“A plush bear in
green clothing
sits on a table
and a blue
bottle nearby.”

“Traditional temple
with ornate, multitiered, circular
facade, red doors,
standing against a
clear sky.”

“Calm sea
breeze, white,
blue, yellow,
striped sails
billow, boats
race side by side.”

“an ATM
machine with
a blue and
yellow logo at
the top.”

“Classic red and
gold imperial
Chinese
architecture,
sharp under clear
blue skies.”

“Racing sailboats,
white sails, redhulled, blue and
red jacketed
individuals,
multiple masts.”

Low-light enhancement
Prompt

Input

Dehazing
Output

Input

Output

Denoising
Prompt

Input

Output

“Two striped angel
fish, golden and
black, with pointed
tails, swimming near
coral reef.”

“A white mushroom
with a brown center,
standing upright,
surrounded by moss.”

Colorizing

Colorizing and Denoising

Figure 1. LD-RPS has the capability to achieve high-quality zero-shot blind restoration in multiple tasks. Leveraging auxiliary text (keywords highlighted in blue) that describes image content or semantic information, our method achieves superior results in single degradation
tasks, including image dehazing, denoising, and colorization, as well as in mixed degradation tasks, including low-light enhancement with
denoising and image colorization with denoising.

Abstract
Unified image restoration is a significantly challenging task
in low-level vision. Existing methods either make tailored designs for specific tasks, limiting their generalizability across various types of degradation, or rely on training with paired datasets, thereby suffering from closedset constraints. To address these issues, we propose a
novel, dataset-free, and unified approach through recurrent posterior sampling utilizing a pretrained latent diffusion model. Our method incorporates the multimodal understanding model to provide sematic priors for the generative model under a task-blind condition. Furthermore,
it utilizes a lightweight module to align the degraded in-

put with the generated preference of the diffusion model,
and employs recurrent refinement for posterior sampling.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods, validating its effectiveness
and robustness. Our code and data will be available at
https://github.com/AMAP-ML/LD-RPS.

1. Introduction

* Work done during the internship at AMAP, Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author.

Image quality is crucial for downstream tasks, like object
detection [10, 66], and face recognition [21, 42]. During the processes of acquisition, storage, and transformation, images are vulnerable to various degradations, such
as noise, low light, and motion blur. Traditional studies [3, 5, 6, 15, 30, 34, 58, 63] focus on task-specific solutions, employing designed network architectures that are
optimized to address particular types of degradation using
the corresponding datasets. These methods demonstrate

‡ Project lead.

13684

