This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPD: Shallow Backdoor Protecting Deep Backdoor Against Backdoor Detection
Shunjie Yuan1 , Xinghua Li1 ,* Xuelin Cao1 , Haiyan Zhang1 , Mengyao Zhu1 , Robert H. Deng2
1
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, China
2
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
shunjiey@foxmail.com, xhli1@mail.xidian.edu.cn, caoxuelin@xidian.edu.cn
zhy@stu.xidian.edu.cn, zhumengyao@xidian.edu.cn, robertdeng@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

backdoor attacks [15]. In backdoor attacks, the adversary can
plant a backdoor into a DNN through data poisoning during
the training process, establishing the correlation between
the backdoor trigger and the target class designated by the
adversary. The poisoned DNN performs normally on clean
samples, but it behaves abnormally when presented with
backdoor samples containing the triggers. In several securitysensitive scenarios, such as autonomous driving, backdoor
attacks pose a significant security threat to the deployment
of DNNs, which further inspires researchers to develop more
secure deep learning systems.
Most existing backdoor attacks primarily leverage universal trigger patterns [2, 4, 15, 28, 29, 39] or transformation
functions [5, 14, 22, 38, 51] as triggers to activate the potential backdoors implanted in DNNs. However, existing
backdoor detection methods, such as trigger inversion techniques like Neural Cleanse [41], can reverse-engineer the
potential trigger patterns. The reverse-engineered triggers
can be overlaid onto clean samples along with their groundtruth labels to fine-tune the model, effectively enabling it
to unlearn the implanted backdoor. To cope with this issue,
recent studies propose the sample-specific backdoor attacks
[9, 23, 30, 33, 57] through an encoder-decoder network or
the techniques of adversarial perturbation. To some extent,
these backdoor attacks can circumvent several existing defense techniques. However, with the development of backdoor defenses, when faced with advanced trigger-inversion
methods [42, 44, 46, 52], the triggers of these backdoor attacks can still be successfully recovered, resulting in the
mitigation of the implanted backdoors through fine-tuning
with benign data. On the other hand, although these backdoor
attacks pursue visual stealthiness, the backdoor samples in
these attacks exhibit perceptible perturbations, making them
difficult to evade the detection by human visual inspection
systems.
To resist the existing backdoor detection techniques while
maintaining the stealthiness of backdoor attacks, in this paper, we propose a novel backdoor attack called SPD (Shallow Protecting Deep) against DNNs. The basic idea of SPD

Backdoor attacks have revealed the vulnerability of deep
neural networks (DNNs), which motivates the development
of secure deep learning systems. However, existing backdoor
attacks often fail to bypass backdoor detection and human
visual inspection, resulting in the exposure of the backdoor
implanted in DNNs, which can subsequently be significantly
mitigated through pruning or fine-tuning on benign data. To
address this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel backdoor
attack called SPD (Shallow Protecting Deep), which consists
of a deep backdoor in the frequency domain and a shallow
backdoor in the pixel domain, where the shallow backdoor
acts as a firewall to protect the deep backdoor from being detected. Specifically, the deep backdoor in SPD samples from
a specific Gaussian distribution, and encodes the sampled
results into the intensity of the image’s amplitude component in the frequency domain using an autoencoder, which
serves as the backdoor trigger, thereby ensuring the invisibility of the backdoor attack. The shallow backdoor leverages
traditional patch-based triggers, which covers all classes
and attracts the defender’s attention, thereby preserving the
deep backdoor’s resistance to existing backdoor detection
techniques. Experimental results demonstrate that SPD not
only can resist existing backdoor detection techniques, but
also, due to the minimal disturbance caused by the backdoor trigger on benign samples, remains invisible, allowing
the backdoor samples to pass through the human visual inspection. The source code of SPD is available at GitHub
https://github.com/YuanShunJie1/SPD.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely
applied in various fields, such as computer vision [18, 21,
36], language processing [8, 40] and autonomous driving [1,
31, 56], they still suffer from serious security threats, such as
* Corresponding author

4029

