This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RARE: Refine Any Registration of Pairwise Point Clouds via Zero-Shot Learning
Chengyu Zheng1,2 * Jin Huang1 * Honghua Chen3† Mingqiang Wei1,2†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
Shenzhen Research Institute, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
3
School of Data Science, Lingnan University, Hong Kong SAR, China
zhengcy@nuaa.edu.cn; jinhuang.nuaa@gmail.com; chenhonghuacn@gmail.com; mqwei@nuaa.edu.cn

RE: 4.99°
TE: 15.23cm
(a) Source point cloud

(b) Rotated Source Cloud

(c) Reference point cloud

(d) Initial registration result

RE: 1.37°
TE: 5.87cm
(e) Source view depth map

(f) Rotated source view depth map

(g) Reference view depth map

(h) Refined registration result

Figure 1. RARE refines arbitrary point cloud registration methods effectively in a zero-shot learning manner. (a) and (e) show the source
point cloud and its projected depth map from the source view. (b) and (f) depict the source point cloud rotated to the reference view
using the initial transformation Tinit and its corresponding projected depth map. (c) and (g) display the reference point cloud and its
projected depth map from the reference view. From (f) and (g), it is evident that the initial transformation allows us to extract high-quality
correspondences from the depth maps. (d) shows the registration result using the initial transformation by GeoTransformer [31], while (f)
presents the refined registration result by diffusion features.

Abstract
Recent research leveraging large-scale pretrained diffusion models has demonstrated the potential of using diffusion features to establish semantic correspondences in images. Inspired by advancements in diffusion-based techniques, we propose a novel zero-shot method for refining
point cloud registration algorithms. Our approach leverages correspondences derived from depth images to enhance point feature representations, eliminating the need
for a dedicated training dataset. Specifically, we first
project the point cloud into depth maps from multiple perspectives and extract implicit knowledge from a pretrained
diffusion network as depth diffusion features. These features are then integrated with geometric features obtained
from existing methods to establish more accurate corre-

spondences between point clouds. By leveraging these
refined correspondences, our approach achieves significantly improved registration accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method not only enhances
the performance of existing point cloud registration techniques but also exhibits robust generalization capabilities across diverse datasets. Codes are available at
https://github.com/zhengcy-lambo/RARE.git.

1. Introduction

* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Point cloud registration is a fundamental yet challenging
task in the field of 3D computer vision, with broad applications in localization [13], object detection [15], and scene
reconstruction [29]. The objective is to compute a rigid
transformation that aligns two partial point clouds captured
from different viewpoints of the same scene or object.
Point cloud registration typically comprises three key

26549

