This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VisRL: Intention-Driven Visual Perception via Reinforced Reasoning
Zhangquan Chen1 * Xufang Luo2† Dongsheng Li2
1
Tsinghua University, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, China

Abstract

Visual Reasoning Path
Question

Visual understanding is inherently intention-driven—humans
selectively focus on different regions of a scene based on
their goals. Recent advances in large multimodal models
(LMMs) enable flexible expression of such intentions through
natural language, allowing queries to guide visual reasoning processes. Frameworks like Visual Chain-of-Thought
have demonstrated the benefit of incorporating explicit reasoning steps, where the model predicts a focus region before answering a query. However, existing approaches rely
heavily on supervised training with annotated intermediate bounding boxes, which severely limits scalability due to
the combinatorial explosion of intention-region pairs. To
overcome this limitation, we propose VisRL, the first framework that applies reinforcement learning (RL) to the problem
of intention-driven visual perception. VisRL optimizes the
entire visual reasoning process using only reward signals.
By treating intermediate focus selection as an internal decision optimized through trial-and-error, our method eliminates the need for costly region annotations while aligning more closely with how humans learn to perceive the
world. Extensive experiments across multiple benchmarks
show that VisRL consistently outperforms strong baselines,
demonstrating both its effectiveness and its strong generalization across different LMMs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/zhangquanchen/VisRL.

Image

Bounding box
(bbox)

Sub-image

Reasoning

Response

Reasoning
Crop

Supervised Fine-Tuning
{(x,bbox,y)}

{(x,bbox,y)}

{(x,bbox,y)}

SFT Epochs

SFT Epochs

SFT Epochs

Wa

up
rm-

VisRL

Self-Evolution Data Generation

Step-level
DPO
Next RL Iteration

Figure 1. Illustration of using RL to optimize the visual reasoning
process. SFT trains with densely annotated training data for several epochs. VisRL leverages self-generated data and self-provided
rewards to iteratively update the model using step-level DPO. This
RL process removes the need for bounding box annotations, enabling a more human-like, intention-driven visual perception.

scan tables and couches, while someone checking the time
will look at the walls for a clock. This context-dependent approach to visual perception suggests that intelligent models
should also adapt their focus based on the task at hand. This
leads to the problem of intention-driven visual perception,
where the goal is to dynamically determine the most relevant
regions of an image based on a given query or task [51].
With the advent of large multimodal models, the intention in perception tasks can now be expressed in a highly
flexible way, which is natural language. Common LMMs,
such as LLaVA [34] and Qwen-VL [56], first encode visual
signals into tokens, and then both visual and text tokens are
jointly processed by the large language models to produce
final outputs. Despite showing powerful ability in many
tasks [12, 26, 32, 57, 68, 70], this kind of one-pass end-toend LMMs still suffer from hallucinations [20] and do not
explicitly address the intention-driven visual perception problem. Further extending this paradigm, instead of treating the
entire process as a single black-box inference, recent works
have proposed frameworks like Visual Chain-of-Thought
(Visual CoT [48]). These methods introduce an explicit reasoning step where the model first predicts a bounding box

1. Introduction
Visual understanding is a fundamental problem in computer vision, enabling machines to interpret and interact
with their surroundings [22, 41, 59]. Traditional methods of visual perception often process entire scenes uniformly [9, 11, 25, 47, 69], without considering the intent
behind a given task. However, human perception is inherently intention-driven — people focus on different aspects
of a scene depending on their goals. For example, when entering a room, a person searching for a television remote will
* The work was conducted during the internship of Zhangquan Chen
(czq23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn) at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author (xufluo@microsoft.com)

2545

