This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EEGMirror: Leveraging EEG data in the wild via Montage-Agnostic
Self-Supervision for EEG to Video Decoding
Xuan-Hao Liu, Bao-Liang Lu, Wei-Long Zheng*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{haogram sjtu, bllu, weilong}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generating high fidelity video from brain activity is an important milestone in brain decoding research. Previous
works were mostly based on functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), whose low temporal resolution confines the ability of faithfully reflecting rapid brain activity,
motivating us to turn to high temporal resolution brain signals like electroencephalography (EEG). However, EEGto-video is challenging due to the complexity and nonstationarity of EEG signals and the scarcity of annotated data.
Addressing these issues, we present EEGMirror. Firstly,
we adopt neural quantization to convert nonstationary signals into robust discrete representation. Afterwards, a
masked self-supervision method with montage-agnostic position embedding (MAPE) is introduced to acquire an effective EEG encoder. By MAPE, our model can flexibly leverage different EEG datasets with various montages (number and position of channels), mitigating the lack of wellannotated data. Next, multimodal contrastive learning is
applied to align the brain modality with dynamic changes
and semantic information. Lastly, a fine-tuned inflated Stable Diffusion model is adopted to reconstruct video stimuli
guided by visual and semantic information decoded from
EEG signals. We show that EEGMirror outperforms the
state-of-the-art performance in both semantic (82.1% vs
79.8%) and pixel (0.261 vs 0.256) levels. An exhaustive
ablation study is also conducted to analyze our framework.
Code: https://github.com/XuanhaoLiu/EEGMirror.

cess of the above sensing process which aims to reconstruct
these dynamic visual perceptions from recorded brain activity, attracting the research interests of scientists from neuroscience and computer vision for decades [19, 38].
Previous brain decoding studies primarily captured brain
activity by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
[56] However, fMRI lacks the ability to record rapid brain
activity, motivating us to turn to electroencephalography
(EEG). Despite the high temporal resolution, decoding
video from EEG signals is still non-trivial for three reasons:
1) Data Scarcity Since the high cost of developing brain decoding dataset, there is not enough EEG-video pair data. 2)
Complexity and Nonstationarity EEG is inherently noisy,
as it contains not only the specific responses elicited by visual stimuli but also additional noise caused by various environmental factors. 3) Montage Variability EEG data can
vary significantly in montage, i.e., the position and number
of channels on the scalp, resulting in difficulties of leveraging in-the-wild EEG data.
To tackle the data scarcity, pre-training on various large
datasets has been adopted for obtaining powerful brain encoders. However, existing fMRI-based works only takes
fMRI signals as an 1-D sequence without considering temporal relations and different voxel numbers among subjects
[6, 46, 47], thus cannot be adapted to EEG modality. Meanwhile, EEG-based works either pre-train on constant montage dataset [11, 18], or pad EEG data to constant number channels by simply replicating the nearest channels [2].
These methods all suffered in dealing with EEG signals’
heterogeneity, resulting in poor efficacy in capturing spatial relations and learning transferable features from various
datasets with diverse montages.
In this paper, we propose EEGMirror, a framework for
reconstructing video from EEG signals, compassing a twophase pre-training method and a multimodal alignment. In
phase 1, applying a vector quantization [49] training strategy, we convert the nonstationary raw EEG signals into
more robust discrete representation. In phase 2, by introducing montage-agnostic position embedding (MAPE),
EEGMirror is able to leverage large amounts of EEG data

1. Introduction
Our visual perceptions are composed of continuously evolving scenes caused by the movement of objects and viewing perspective. The human brain, a complex network with
more than 500 billion neurons [35], makes sense of such dynamic visual scenes and enables us to experience the everchanging visual world. Brain decoding is the reverse pro* Corresponding author.

18273

