This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Counterfactually Decoupled Attention for Open-World
Model Attribution
Yu Zheng* Boyang Gong* Fanye Kong Yueqi Duan Bingyao Yu
Jiwen Lu Jie Zhou
Tsinghua University, China

Lei Chen†

Wenzhao Zheng

{yu-zheng, duanyueqi, yuby, leichenthu, lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn;
wenzhao.zheng@outlook.com; boyanggong429@gmail.com; kongfy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Labeled Set

Abstract

Identity Swap

Model

In this paper, we propose a Counterfactually Decoupled Attention Learning (CDAL) method for open-world model attribution. Existing methods rely on handcrafted design of
region partitioning or feature space, which could be confounded by the spurious statistical correlations and struggle with novel attacks in open-world scenarios. To address
this, CDAL explicitly models the causal relationships between the attentional visual traces and source model attribution, and counterfactually decouples the discriminative
model-specific artifacts from confounding source biases for
comparison. In this way, the resulting causal effect provides
a quantification on the quality of learned attention maps,
thus encouraging the network to capture essential generation patterns that generalize to unseen source models by
maximizing the effect. Extensive experiments on existing
open-world model attribution benchmarks show that with
minimal computational overhead, our method consistently
improves state-of-the-art models by large margins, particularly for unseen novel attacks. Source code: https:
//github.com/yzheng97/CDAL.

Unlabeled Set

ArcFace

Attribution

CPL

FSGAN

FaceShifter

Expression Transfer

FOMM

ATVG-Net

Attribute Manipulation

EntireFace Syncthesis

StarGAN2

SiT-XL/2

SC-FEGAN

VQGAN

Known
Attacks

Novel
Attacks

Our CDAL
ID 1
Attack 1

ID 2
Attack 1

ID 1
Attack 2

Figure 1. Upper: Problem Setup. Bottom: Exemplified sample
in feature space. Bottom left: ArcFace [9] distances show that
forgery images of the same source identity are clustered together
regardless of their attacking models. Bottom middle: Feature differences learned by existing methods [52] are still influenced by
source bias (i.e., identity) from the novel attack rather than modelspecific artifacts. Bottom right: Our approach effectively isolates
model-specific artifacts from source content bias, thus enabling
accurate attribution even for unseen generative models.

generated images [4, 16, 30, 36, 39, 61, 63, 65]. However, their closed-set assumption becomes impractical as
new generative models emerge rapidly and challenge their
generalizability. To this end, researchers have built benchmarks on open-world model attribution and accordingly devised techniques aimed to attribute known attacks to their
source models while identifying unseen novel attacks in real
world scenarios (Figure 1 upper). For example, [52] designs
a Contrastive Pseudo Learning framework for open-world
deepfake attribution, which is later extended with multiscale learning and frequency information [53]. [64] simulates a feature space spanning mechanism specifically designed for GANs. To exploit the subtle artifacts from various generative models, these approaches design handcrafted
region partitions to search for useful local patterns [52, 53],
or simulate the progressive feature space spanning via man-

1. Introduction
The rapid development of visual generative models [11, 12,
15, 22, 26, 28, 47, 50, 51, 55, 56] has raised increasing concerns about their potential misuse for personal reputation
damage and public misinformation. Although deepfake detectors can effectively distinguish real from synthetic content [32, 35, 42, 54, 62, 69], such capability alone does not
address the need to identify source generative models for
further legal measures, referred to as model attribution.
Pioneering works on model attribution actively root fingerprints during training [27, 65–67] or parse the given AI* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

122

