This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unraveling the Effects of Synthetic Data on End-to-End Autonomous Driving
Junhao Ge1 * Zuhong Liu1,5 * Longteng Fan1 * Yifan Jiang1 *
Jiaqi Su1 Yiming Li2 Zhejun Zhang3 Siheng Chen1,4
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 New York University 3 ETH Zurich
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 5 SJTU Paris Elite Insitute of Technology
1

{cancaries, albert liu, michaelfan, fiona.jiang, sjq2022, sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Side Left

{yimingli}@nyu.edu

Front Left

3

{zhejun.zhang}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Front

Front Right

Side Right

Sim Traffic Flow

Simulation

Original
Ego
Agent
Static

Simulation

Original
Ego
Agent
Static

Figure 1. SceneCrafter is a high-fidelity simulator capable of generating realistic synthetic driving data and providing an effective closedloop evaluation for end-to-end autonomous driving models. Given real-world datasets, SceneCrafter can reconstruct dynamic driving
scenes and incorporate interactive traffic flows to generate novel, realistic, and consistent scenarios.

Abstract
End-to-end (E2E) autonomous driving (AD) models require
diverse, high-quality data to perform well across various
driving scenarios. However, collecting large-scale realworld data is expensive and time-consuming, making highfidelity synthetic data essential for enhancing data diversity and model robustness. Existing driving simulators have
significant limitations for synthetic data generation: gameengine-based simulators struggle to produce realistic sensor data, while NeRF-based and diffusion-based methods
face efficiency challenges. Additionally, recent simulators
designed for closed-loop evaluation provide limited interaction with other vehicles, failing to simulate complex realworld traffic dynamics. To address these issues, we introduce SceneCrafter, a realistic, interactive, and efficient
AD simulator based on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS).
SceneCrafter not only efficiently generates realistic driving
logs across diverse traffic scenarios but also enables robust
closed-loop evaluation of end-to-end models. Experimental results demonstrate that SceneCrafter serves as both a

reliable evaluation platform and a efficient data generator that significantly improves end-to-end model generalization. Our code will be released at https://github.
com/cancaries/SceneCrafter.

1. Introduction

28859

Recently, autonomous driving (AD) has gradually progressed from modular paradigms [7, 16, 22, 42] to end-toend models [5, 6, 9, 10, 19–21, 36, 37, 51], which learn from
sensor data and ego status to plan future motion. Most endto-end models are fundamentally data-driven[52], where
scenario diversity and vehicle trajectory distributions plays
a decisive role in model effectiveness. However, gathering
extensive, high quality and wide-coverage real data for driving scenarios is not only time-consuming but also costly.
Given these constraints, generating high-fidelity, diverse
synthetic data is essential for complementing real-world
datasets, improving the robustness of end-to-end models.
Nonetheless, current closed-loop simulators struggle to balance realism, efficiency, and interaction modeling, limiting

