This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Adaptation: Environment-Conditional Parameter Generation for
Object Detection in Dynamic Scenarios
Deng Li1 *, Aming Wu2 *, Yang Li1 , Yaowei Wang3 , Yahong Han1†
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
1

lideng@tju.edu.cn, amwu@hfut.edu.cn, liyang1389@tju.edu.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, yahong@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
In practice, environments constantly change over time
and space, posing significant challenges for object detectors trained based on a closed-set assumption, i.e., training and test data share the same distribution. To this end,
continual test-time adaptation has attracted much attention, aiming to improve detectors’ generalization by finetuning a few specific parameters, e.g., BatchNorm layers. However, based on a small number of test images,
fine-tuning certain parameters may affect the representation ability of other fixed parameters, leading to performance degradation. Instead, we explore a new mechanism, i.e., converting the fine-tuning process to a specificparameter generation. Particularly, we first design a dualpath LoRA-based domain-aware adapter that disentangles
features into domain-invariant and domain-specific components, enabling efficient adaptation. Additionally, a conditional diffusion-based parameter generation mechanism is
presented to synthesize the adapter’s parameters based on
the current environment, preventing the optimization from
getting stuck in local optima. Finally, we propose a classcentered optimal transport alignment method to mitigate
catastrophic forgetting. Extensive experiments conducted
on various continuous domain adaptive object detection
tasks demonstrate the effectiveness. Meanwhile, visualization results show that the representation extracted by the
generated parameters can capture more object-related information and strengthen the generalization ability.

Figure 1. Illustration of proposed parameter generation
method for object detector in continually changing scenarios.
The conditional parameter generator generates robust parameters
for the detector with the target scene conditions to improve the
detector’s generalization performance.

However, this assumption often fails to hold in real-world
scenarios. In practical scenarios, there is a distribution difference between the training data (source domain) and the
test data (target domain), which is commonly referred to as
domain shift [37].
Domain shift leads to a performance degradation of the
model directly tested on the target domains. It is crucial
to address this domain shift issue to ensure the robustness and generalization of deep learning models in target
domains. To mitigate the effects of domain shift, some
domain adaptation methods have been proposed, such as
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [8, 27, 34, 43],
Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) [16], Domain
Generalization (DG) [3, 10, 26], and Test-Time Adaptation
(TTA) [25, 39, 46]. Unlike traditional domain adaptation
methods that can access the target domain during training,
TTA focuses on adapting the model to the target domain

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various
computer vision tasks [12, 17, 19–21, 32, 47]. Most deep
learning models are learning under the assumption that the
training data and testing data follow the same distribution.
* Equal contributions
† Corresponding author

4434

