This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ESSENTIAL: Episodic and Semantic Memory Integration
for Video Class-Incremental Learning
Jongseo Lee1* Kyungho Bae2* Kyle Min3 Gyeong-Moon Park4† Jinwoo Choi1†
1 Kyung Hee University
2 Danggeun Market Inc.
3 Intel Labs
4 Korea University
{jong980812, kyungho.bae, jinwoochoi}@khu.ac.kr, kyle.min@intel.com, gm-park@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
With advances in deep learning, action recognition models
trained on large annotated datasets have achieved remarkable performance [2, 4, 7, 15, 26, 29, 34, 48, 60, 64]. However, in more realistic scenarios such as class-incremental
learning (CIL), action recognition models face significant
challenges. In the CIL setting, data for new action classes
of interest is incrementally introduced, while data for previously learned classes is not available. Deep learning models tend to overfit to the currently available data, leading
to performance degradation on previously learned classes, a
phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [18, 31].
* Equally contributed first authors.
† Corresponding authors.

Average Incremental Accuracy (%)

95

In this work, we tackle the problem of video classincremental learning (VCIL). Many existing VCIL methods
mitigate catastrophic forgetting by rehearsal training with
a few temporally dense samples stored in episodic memory,
which is memory-inefficient. Alternatively, some methods
store temporally sparse samples, sacrificing essential temporal information and thereby resulting in inferior performance. To address this trade-off between memory-efficiency
and performance, we propose EpiSodic and SEmaNTIc
memory integrAtion for video class-incremental Learning
(ESSENTIAL). ESSENTIAL consists of episodic memory
for storing temporally sparse features and semantic memory for storing general knowledge represented by learnable
prompts. We introduce a novel memory retrieval (MR) module that integrates episodic memory and semantic prompts
through cross-attention, enabling the retrieval of temporally
dense features from temporally sparse features. We rigorously validate ESSENTIAL on diverse datasets: UCF-101,
HMDB51, and Something-Something-V2 from the TCD
benchmark and UCF-101, ActivityNet, and Kinetics-400
from the vCLIMB benchmark. Remarkably, with significantly reduced memory, ESSENTIAL achieves favorable
performance on the benchmarks.

90
ESSENTIALViT
ST-PromptCLIP [39]

85

ST-PromptViT [39]
STSP [8]
HCE [29]

80

FrameMakerTSM [38]
FrameMakerViT [38]
TCDTSM [36]
TCDViT [36]

75

L2P [61]

10
100
1000
Memory Consumption (MiB) in Log-Scale

Figure 1. Performance-memory plot on the UCF-101 [46]
dataset from the TCD benchmark [35]. ESSENTIAL consistently outperforms existing methods across various memory sizes,
achieving a superior performance-memory-efficiency trade-off.

We can mitigate catastrophic forgetting by rehearsal
training with a few video samples or feature vectors stored
in episodic memory. As shown in Figure 2 (a), many prior
methods store temporally dense samples, e.g. 16 frames
per sample, in episodic memory to preserve temporal information of previous tasks [35, 38, 52, 53]. However, storing such temporally dense samples is memory-inefficient.
Memory-efficiency is crucial in real-world settings as we
should consider the scalability, privacy, and legal concerns,
as well as the performance of the methods. A potential solution to improve memory-efficiency is to store temporally
sparse samples, e.g. 1 or 2 frames per sample, in episodic
memory [1, 37]. However, as shown in Figure 2 (b), this approach can lead to performance degradation as temporally
sparse samples may lack temporal details essential for recognizing actions. We desire a VCIL method that optimally
balances high temporal resolution with memory-efficiency,
achieving a better trade-off between memory-efficiency and
performance.
To achieve a better trade-off between memory-efficiency

17546

