This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial-Temporal Aware Visuomotor Diffusion Policy Learning

1

Zhenyang Liu1,2 , Yikai Wang3 , Kuanning Wang1 , Longfei Liang4
Xiangyang Xue1†, Yanwei Fu1,2†
Fudan University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 Nanyang Technological University 4 NeuHelium Co., Ltd
liuzy24@m.fudan.edu.cn, yikai.wang@ntu.edu.sg, knwang24@m.fudan.edu.cn
longfei.liang@neuhelium.com, {xyxue,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Project Page: ZhenyangLiu.github.io/DP4
Abstract

Previous Methods
Environment

Visual imitation learning is effective for robots to learn versatile tasks. However, many existing methods rely on behavior cloning with supervised historical trajectories, limiting their 3D spatial and 4D spatiotemporal awareness.
Consequently, these methods struggle to capture the 3D
structures and 4D spatiotemporal relationships necessary
for real-world deployment. In this work, we propose 4D
Diffusion Policy (DP4), a novel visual imitation learning
method that incorporates spatiotemporal awareness into
diffusion-based policies. Unlike traditional approaches that
rely on trajectory cloning, DP4 leverages a dynamic Gaussian world model to guide the learning of 3D spatial and
4D spatiotemporal perceptions from interactive environments. Our method constructs the current 3D scene from a
single-view RGB-D observation and predicts the future 3D
scene, optimizing trajectory generation by explicitly modeling both spatial and temporal dependencies. Extensive experiments across 17 simulation tasks with 173 variants and
3 real-world robotic tasks demonstrate that the 4D Diffusion Policy (DP4) outperforms baseline methods, improving
the average simulation task success rate by 16.4% (Adroit),
14% (DexArt), and 6.45% (RLBench), and the average realworld robotic task success rate by 8.6%.

Trajectories

Single-view RGB-D
Observation

Perception

Decision

Environment
Spatial-Temporal Awareness
(Training Only)
Single-view RGB-D
Observation

Trajectory
Generation

3D Spatial
Supervision
Render

Trajectories

3D Spatial Awareness
of Current Scene

Decision

Perception
Render
4D Spatiotemptoal
Supervision
4D Spatiotemporal
Awareness of Future Scene

Single-view Observation
at Next Time Step

4D Diffusion Policy (Ours)

Figure 1. Spatial-temporal awareness in the 4D Diffusion
Policy (DP4). Previous methods train perception and decisionmaking with trajectory supervision, but trajectory cloning fails to
capture the 3D spatial and 4D spatiotemporal relationships. In
contrast, DP4 constructs the current 3D scene with 3D spatial supervision from a single RGB-D view and predicts future 3D scene
candidates using 4D spatiotemporal supervision, optimizing trajectory generation by effectively capturing both 3D structures and
4D dependencies.

1. Introduction
Visual Imitation learning has emerged as an effective
method for training robots to perform complex tasks, such
as object grasping [18, 35, 38], legged locomotion [28, 45],
dexterous manipulation [12, 29], and mobile manipulation [6, 34]. Recent advances in computer vision have further enhanced visual imitation learning, enabling impres-

sive performance across various applications [3, 13, 33, 35].
Progress in computer vision has enabled sophisticated visual imitation learning methods that demonstrate excellent
performance across various applications [3, 13, 33, 35].
However, real-world robotic deployment demands robust
generalization to unseen scenarios, necessitating a deeper
understanding of the spatiotemporal physical rules that govern dynamic environments.
Despite their success, existing visual imitation learning

† Corresponding authors.
‡ Prof. Yanwei Fu is also with Institute of Trustworthy Embodied Al,
and the School of Data Science, Fudan University.

7122

