This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Text-to-Image Diffusion Models for Point Cloud
Self-Supervised Learning
Yiyang Chen1

Shanshan Zhao2† Lunhao Duan2 Changxing Ding1,3† Dacheng Tao4
1
South China University of Technology
2
Alibaba International Digital Commerce Group 3 Pazhou Lab 4 Nanyang Technological University
{eeyiyangchen, sshan.zhao00, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com, lhduan@whu.edu.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion-based models, widely used in text-to-image generation, have proven effective in 2D representation learning. Recently, this framework has been extended to 3D
self-supervised learning by constructing a conditional point
generator for enhancing 3D representations. However,
its performance remains constrained by the 3D diffusion
model, which is trained on the available 3D datasets with
limited size. We hypothesize that the robust capabilities
of text-to-image diffusion models, particularly Stable Diffusion (SD), which is trained on large-scale datasets, can
help overcome these limitations. To investigate this hypothesis, we propose PointSD, a framework that leverages the
SD model for 3D self-supervised learning. By replacing
the SD model’s text encoder with a 3D encoder, we train
a point-to-image diffusion model that allows point clouds
to guide the denoising of rendered noisy images. With
the trained point-to-image diffusion model, we use noisefree images as the input and point clouds as the condition to extract SD features. Next, we train a 3D backbone by aligning its features with these SD features, thereby
facilitating direct semantic learning. Comprehensive experiments on downstream point cloud tasks and ablation
studies demonstrate that the SD model can enhance point
cloud self-supervised learning. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/wdttt/PointSD.

1. Introduction
The paradigm of pre-training models through selfsupervised learning has been extensively studied in both the
vision [8, 15] and language [3, 12] domains. Models pretrained on large amounts of unlabeled data can acquire valuable prior knowledge, resulting in superior performance on
downstream tasks compared to training from scratch alone.
Numerous effective strategies [4, 19, 38] have been devel† Correspondence author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the forward process and the reverse process of diffusion models. (a) With the increase of noise, the image
first loses low-level texture information and then loses high-level
shape information. (b) Denoising at low time step t1 , recovering
texture information. (c) Denoising at high time step t4 , recovering texture and shape information. From this figure, we can see
that learning via image denoising inevitably introduces low-level
information, failing to sufficiently focus on high-level information
related to semantics.

oped to enhance models’ representation capability for pretraining on image or text data. The success in 2D image and
natural language processing has also spurred advancements
of self-supervised learning on 3D point cloud data, promoting research in 3D understanding [29, 33, 34, 43, 47].
Current self-supervised learning methods for point
clouds can be broadly categorized into two groups:
contrastive-based [1, 52, 64] and generative-based [31, 50,
59, 67]. The core of contrastive methods [1, 52, 64] lies
in constructing positive and negative samples, minimizing
the distance between positive sample pairs in the embedding space while maximizing the distance between negative
pairs. Building on the success of generative-based methods such as BERT [12] for natural language processing and
MAE [19] for 2D image modeling, Point-BERT [59] and
Point-MAE [31] integrate these concepts into point cloud
self-supervised learning. Subsequent studies investigate ad-

26156

