This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flow4Agent: Long-form Video Understanding via Motion Prior
from Optical Flow
Ruyang Liu

Shangkun Sun

Haoran Tang

Wei Gao

Ge Li

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
{ruyang@stu., sunshk@stu., hrtang@stu., gaowei262@, geli@}pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-form video understanding has always been a challenging problem due to the significant redundancy in both
temporal and spatial contents. This challenge is further exacerbated by the limited context length of Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs). To address this issue, many
previous works have attempted to extract key video information, where the “key” is typically semantic-aware and
heavily dependent on the CLIP model as prior. In this paper,
we propose Flow4Agent, a novel framework that pioneeringly incorporates motion priors from optical flow to facilitate LLM-based long video understanding. Flow4Agent
mitigates the redundancy in long videos at both temporal
and spatial levels through two core modules: Temporal
Granularity Optimization (TGO) adaptively refines framelevel hierarchies, which first leverages coarse flow priors
to group similar visual contents and then applies semantic
priors to filter out highly irrelevant scene information. Motion Token Pruning (MTP) further refines the intra-frame
visual representations, pruning high-redundancy video tokens using fine-grained optical flow information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our Flow4Agent outperforms existing methods across a wide range of video MLLM
benchmarks, especially for hour-level video understanding
tasks, achieving 64.7% on Video-MME, 71.4% on MLVU
and 60.4% on LongVideoBench.

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have made
significant strides recently. Thanks to the advancements in
LLM [9, 14, 50] and multimodal [5, 16, 40] pretraining,
current MLLMs can effectively interpret visual sequences
in images and videos. These models typically support video
sequences with hundreds of frames, which is sufficient to
cover all contents in short videos, using uniform sampling
with whether fixed frame numbers or fixed fps. However,
for hour-long videos, this implies that at least one-minute

23817

video is distributed to only one frame, leading to substantial
information loss, as shown in the first line of Fig. 1.
To enable MLLMs to process more video content, one
approach is to resample and compress the video tokens
[15, 21, 27, 48]. However, dense resampling inevitably
causes the loss of visual information, while frames that can
be accommodated by the MLLM remain constrained by a
clear upper limit. Another approach is to use memory structures [38, 53] or context extension [24, 54], enabling the
LLM to process densely sampled video frames. However,
this method overlooks the widespread information redundancy in long videos. As shown in the second line of Fig.
1, the significant redundancy in both time (irrelevant video
frames) and space (repetitive content within the same scene)
can overwhelm the LLM, resulting in mistakes during long
video understanding.
To address the ubiquitous redundancy in videos, an intuitive solution is to extract key video information. This
typically requires additional priors, with the most common
being semantic information, such as using the CLIP model
to retrieve relevant video content [12, 32, 43, 48] or feeding
the video’s dense captions into the LLM for further reasoning and judgment [42, 43, 45]. However, this reliance on
semantic priors has two major drawbacks. First, it heavily
depends on the information provided in the user’s instructions; when the query offers limited details, much of the
effectiveness is lost. Second, the method’s performance is
constrained by the prior model, such as CLIP models or
captioning models, meaning that errors in these models can
significantly distort subsequent understanding.
In this paper, we introduce a previously overlooked prior,
the motion information from optical flow, to assist in extracting key video content, and propose a novel method,
Flow4Agent. Flow4Agent refines the key content in two
aspects: inter-frame and intra-frame, which are addressed
by the Temporal Granularity Optimization (TGO) module
and the Motion Token Pruning (MTP) module, respectively.
Specifically, the TGO module utilizes efficient coarse optical flow to accurately cluster video scenes, and on this basis, it leverages semantic priors to obtain a sufficiently dis-

