This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoAuteur: Towards Long Narrative Video Generation
Junfei Xiao1 , Feng Cheng2 , Lu Qi2 , Liangke Gui2 , Yang Zhao2 , Shanchuan Lin2
Jiepeng Cen2 , Zhibei Ma2 Alan Yuille1 , Lu Jiang2
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

ByteDance

Project Page: https://videoauteur.github.io
How to cook
buffalo
chicken dip?
Action: Explain
something related to
food in the bow …

Action: Pour creamy
white sauce, use a
spoon to spread …

Action: Use a spoon
to spread the cheese
evenly across …

Action: Pour sour
cream over the baked
dish …

Action: Hold a
spatula and is seen
stirring or mixing …

Action: Use a
spatula to serve a
baked dish …

Action: Hold a
spatula and prepare
food on a plate …

Action: Arrange the
chicken on top of the
vegetable…

a modern kitchen…

Caption: A person is
pouring a creamy
white sauce from …

Caption: A person is
preparing a dish in a
black pan …

Caption: A person is
pouring a generous
amount of sour cream.

Caption: A man in a
black t-shirt stand in
a kitchen …

Caption: A man in a
black t-shirt stand in
a kitchen …

Caption: A man in a
black t-shirt stand in
a kitchen …

Caption: A man in a
black t-shirt is
preparing a dish in …

Action: Mix
ingredients in a large
glass bowl …

Action: Pour liquid
ingredient and mix …

Action: Mix batter
with honey with …

Action: Mix batter
with blueberries …

Action: Transfer
batter into muffin
cups with a tray …

Action: Place muffins
in oven …

Action: Check muffin
doneness with a
toothpick …

Action: Display
muffins on a cooling
rack

Caption: A woman
wearing a pink and
white striped shirt …

Caption: A woman
wearing a pink and
white striped apron …

Caption: A woman…
mixes a batter with
honey …

Caption: A woman…
mixes a batter with
blueberries…

Caption: A woman …
filling cups with batter
and evenly pressing…

Caption: A woman ...
places a tray of
blueberry muffins …

Caption: A woman
uses a toothpick to
check the doneness…

Caption: A batch of
freshly baked
blueberry muffins …

Narrative Caption: A man in a
Director black t-shirt stand in

How to cook
blueberry
muffins?

Figure 1. Long Narrative Video Generation. We curate a large-scale cooking video dataset to develop an interleaved auto-regressive
model – VideoAuteur, which acts as a narrative director, sequentially generating actions, captions, and keyframes (two generated examples
here). These elements condition a video generation model to create long narrative videos.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Recent video generation models have shown promising results in producing high-quality video clips lasting several
seconds. However, these models face challenges in generating long sequences that convey clear and informative
events, limiting their ability to support coherent narrations. In this paper, we present a large-scale cooking video
dataset designed to advance long-form narrative generation
in the cooking domain. We validate the quality of our proposed dataset in terms of visual fidelity and textual caption
accuracy using state-of-the-art Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) and video generation models, respectively. We further introduce a Long Narrative Video Director to enhance
both visual and semantic coherence in generated videos and
emphasize the role of aligning visual embeddings to achieve
improved overall video quality. Our method demonstrates
substantial improvements in generating visually detailed
and semantically aligned keyframes, supported by finetuning techniques that integrate text and image embeddings
within the video generation process.

Video generation [5, 6, 19, 20, 41, 51, 62] has witnessed remarkable advancements with diffusion [2, 21, 34, 57] and
auto-regressive models [25, 43, 44, 53]. A primary objective is to generate video clips from text prompts and supports various downstream applications, such as image animation [8, 54], video editing [4, 11], video stylization [23].
With the maturity of generating high-fidelity short video
clips, researchers begin setting their sights on the next
north-star: creating videos capable of conveying a complete narrative which captures an account of events unfolding over time. The importance of narratives has been highlighted in the literature. For example, Bruner argues that
narratives are essential tools for organizing experiences and
memories [3]. The book Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind emphasizes that the ability to share narratives (stories) has been pivotal in human development, setting humans apart from other animals [15].
Long Narrative Video Generation (NVG) introduces
several challenges. One particularly challenge is the
scarcity of video data suitable for learning coherent narra-

19163

