This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards More Diverse and Challenging Pre-training for Point Cloud Learning:
Self-Supervised Cross Reconstruction with Decoupled Views
Xiangdong Zhang∗ , Shaofeng Zhang∗ , Junchi Yan‡
School of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhangxiangdong, sherrylone, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud learning, especially in a self-supervised way
without manual labels, has gained growing attention in both
vision and learning communities due to its potential utility in a wide range of applications. Most existing generative approaches for point cloud self-supervised learning focus on recovering masked points from visible ones within
a single view. Recognizing that a two-view pre-training
paradigm inherently introduces greater diversity and variance, it may thus enable more challenging and informative
pre-training. Inspired by this, we explore the potential of
two-view learning in this domain. In this paper, we propose
Point-PQAE, a cross-reconstruction generative paradigm
that first generates two decoupled point clouds/views and
then reconstructs one from the other. To achieve this goal,
we develop a crop mechanism for point cloud view generation for the first time and further propose a novel positional
encoding to represent the 3D relative position between the
two decoupled views. The cross-reconstruction significantly
increases the difficulty of pre-training compared to selfreconstruction, which enables our method to surpass previous single-modal self-reconstruction methods in 3D selfsupervised learning. Specifically, it outperforms the selfreconstruction baseline (Point-MAE) by 6.5%, 7.0%, and
6.7% in three variants of ScanObjectNN with the M LP L INEAR evaluation protocol. The code is available at
https://github.com/aHapBean/Point-PQAE .

1. Introduction
3D vision is gaining increasing attention for its wide applications such as autonomous driving [38] and robotics [11,
40], owing to its ability to understand the human world. The
point cloud is the most popular representation form of data
in 3D vision and many analyses based on point cloud are
∗ Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author. This paper is in part
supported by Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project,
China, under grant No. 2021SHZDZX0102.

Decoder

Decoder

Encoder

Cross-View
Information
Interaction

Shared
Weight

Decoder

Encoder

Encoder
Views
Generation

Self-Reconstruction

Cross-Reconstruction (Ours)

Figure 1.
Comparison between self-reconstruction (PointMAE [33] and other methods based on it) and cross-reconstruction
(Ours) paradigms. In the self-reconstruction paradigm, part of the
input data is masked, and the autoencoder is trained to recover the
missing patches. In contrast, the cross-reconstruction paradigm
generates decoupled views first, with one view leveraging crossview information to reconstruct the other, using an autoencoder
backbone.

explored to solve various tasks such as object classification [15, 24, 34, 35, 54, 62], object detection [30, 36, 76]
and segmentation [15, 24, 34, 54, 58], they typically necessitate fully-supervised training from scratch. Compared to
2D data, point cloud generally requires more expensive and
labor-intensive efforts to collect and annotate, which hinders the development of the fully supervised 3D representation learning method. Self-supervised learning is one of the
predominant approaches to address this issue and has been
proven to be effective in 2D vision [5, 8, 14, 18, 19, 68–
71, 75]. Inspired by this, self-supervised learning has been
widely studied in the 3D field in recent years.
Self-supervised learning in 3D can be mainly divided
into two categories, i.e., generative methods [1, 7, 23, 25,
33, 52, 66, 73] and contrastive methods [2, 9, 10, 20, 37,
39, 60]. Similar to 2D, contrastive methods in 3D aim to
learn global-discriminative information by maximizing the
mutual information across views [2, 9, 60] with intra-/intermodal information [43–49, 56, 57]. PointContrast [60] is
the first to learn transformation invariance across views
through the extension of InfoNCE objective [31, 60]. Dif-

28696

