This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRIMAL: Physically Reactive and Interactive Motor Model for Avatar Learning
Yan Zhang1 , Yao Feng1,3 , Alpár Cseke1 , Nitin Saini1 ,
Nathan Bajandas1 , Nicolas Heron1 , Michael J. Black2
1
2
Meshcapade, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 3 Stanford University

Figure 1. PRIMAL is a novel generative real-time 3D character animation system that works in Unreal Engine. The avatar reacts to
induced impulses promptly and naturally (top). After efﬁcient adaptation, the avatar can be pulled to chase a “magnet” (middle). We also
personalize the avatar’s movements based on a tiny mocap dataset, captured by Mocapade3.0 [19] from cellphone videos (bottom). As a
result, we can control the avatar with discrete commands and continuous signals. Without any control signal, or external perturbations, the
avatar moves autonomously in the 3D space without end. PRIMAL is purely data driven; no physical simulation is used.

Abstract
We formulate the motor system of an interactive avatar
as a generative motion model that can drive the body to
move through 3D space in a perpetual, realistic, controllable, and responsive manner. Although human motion generation has been extensively studied, many existing methods
lack the responsiveness and realism of real human movements. Inspired by recent advances in foundation models,
we propose PRIMAL, which is learned with a two-stage
paradigm. In the pretraining stage, the model learns body
movements from a large number of sub-second motion segments, providing a generative foundation from which more
complex motions are built. This training is fully unsupervised without annotations. Given a single-frame initial state
during inference, the pretrained model not only generates
unbounded, realistic, and controllable motion, but also enables the avatar to be responsive to induced impulses in
real time. In the adaptation phase, we employ a novel
ControlNet-like adaptor to ﬁne-tune the base model efﬁ-

ciently, adapting it to new tasks such as few-shot personalized action generation and spatial target reaching. Evaluations show that our proposed method outperforms stateof-the-art baselines. We leverage the model to create a realtime character animation system in Unreal Engine that feels
highly responsive and natural. 1

1. Introduction
There has been rapid progress in 3D human motion generation conditioned on text or existing motion sequences
[32, 34, 39, 41, 42, 44, 68, 70, 73, 84, 88]. Despite the realism of such approaches, they are not good models of how
real humans behave, in that they are not interactive. Autonomous characters need to respond in real-time to commands and environmental inputs such as external forces. To
feel “alive”, such an agent must be continuously on-line and

12725

1 Code, models, and more results are available at:
https://yz-cnsdqz.github.io/eigenmotion/PRIMAL

