This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MPBR: Multimodal Progressive Bidirectional Reasoning for Open-Set
Fine-Grained Recognition
Junfu Tan
Tianjin University

Peiguang Jing
Tianjin University

Yu Zhu
Fudan University

Yu Liu
Tianjin University

junfutan@tju.edu.cn

pgjing@tju.edu.cn

yuzhu23@m.fudan.edu.cn

liuyu1@tju.edu.cn

Figure 1. (a) The previous open set recognition paradigm mainly refined visual representations through several backbone layers. (b) Visualization of the distribution of visual representations in forward reasoning. (c) In contrast, the proposed MPBR constructs a bidirectional
inference paradigm supplemented by multimodal information. (d) Visualization of the distribution of visual representations in MPBR. The
colored dots represent samples of known categories, while the black dots represent samples of unknown categories.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Open-Set Recognition (OSR) is a critical task in machine
learning, which aims not only to classify samples belonging to known classes, but also to reject samples of unknown
classes that have not been seen during training [7, 21]. As
shown in Fig. 1 (b), common visual backbone networks
(such as ResNet/ViT) can effectively distinguish known categories, but unknown categories may be misclassified into
known categories.
Most existing OSR methods [2, 3, 15–18, 26, 32] primarily tackle coarse-grained tasks, where the semantic differences between classes are relatively pronounced, and the
classification boundaries are easier to fit. We call these
semantic differences between classes inter-class semantic
shifts. While these methods perform well in coarse-grained
OSR scenarios, their performance degrades in fine-grained
settings [23]. This is because fine-grained categories exhibit smaller inter-class semantic shifts (e.g., Apple vs. Cat
distinction is trivial while Seal vs. Sea Lion differentiation proves difficult), with this phenomenon intensifying as
granularity refines. Several approaches [12, 14, 25] attempt

Open-set fine-grained recognition (OSFGR) is the core
exploration of building open-world intelligent systems. The
challenge lies in the gradual semantic drift during the transition from coarse-grained to fine-grained categories. However, although existing methods leverage hierarchical representations to assist progressive reasoning, they neglect
semantic consistency across hierarchies. To address this,
we propose a multimodal progressive bidirectional reasoning framework: (1) In forward reasoning, the model progressively refines visual features to capture hierarchical
structural representations, while (2) in backward reasoning,
variational inference integrates multimodal information to
constrain consistency in category-aware latent spaces. This
mechanism mitigates semantic drift through bidirectional
information flow and cross-hierarchical feature consistency
constraints. Extensive experiments on the iNat2021-OSR
dataset demonstrate that our proposed method achieves superior performance.

1282

