This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LangScene-X: Reconstruct Generalizable 3D Language-Embedded Scenes
with TriMap Video Diffusion
Fangfu Liu1 , Hao Li2 , Jiawei Chi1 , Hanyang Wang1 , Minghui Yang3 , Fudong Wang3 , Yueqi Duan1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 NTU, 3 Ant Group

Kitchen

Teatime
🔍🔍“paper towel roll”

🔍🔍“red mug”

🔍🔍“ paper bag”

🔍🔍“ stuffed bear”

Figure 1. LangScene-X: Given sparse views as input (e.g., as few as two images), we design a generative paradigm to build the 3D
generalizable language-embedded surface fields with TriMap video diffusion and language quantized compressor (LQC), which supports
open-ended language queries in any 3D scenes. For example, given a prompt like “stuffed bear” in the Teatime scene, a relevancy map can
be rendered focusing on the location with maximum relevancy activation.

Abstract
Recovering 3D structures with open-vocabulary scene understanding from 2D images is a fundamental but daunting
task. Recent developments have achieved this by performing per-scene optimization with embedded language information. However, they heavily rely on the calibrated denseview reconstruction paradigm, thereby suffering from severe rendering artifacts and implausible semantic synthesis
when limited views are available. In this paper, we introduce a novel generative framework, coined LangScene-X,
to unify and generate 3D consistent multi-modality information for reconstruction and understanding. Powered by
the generative capability of creating more consistent novel

observations, we can build generalizable 3D languageembedded scenes from only sparse views. Specifically, we
first train a TriMap video diffusion model that can generate appearance (RGBs), geometry (normals), and semantics (segmentation maps) from sparse inputs through progressive knowledge integration. Furthermore, we propose a
Language Quantized Compressor (LQC), trained on largescale image datasets, to efficiently encode language embeddings, enabling cross-scene generalization without perscene retraining. Finally, we reconstruct the language surface fields by aligning language information onto the surface of 3D scenes, enabling open-ended language queries.
Extensive experiments on real-world data demonstrate the
superiority of our LangScene-X over state-of-the-art methods in terms of quality and generalizability. Project Page:

† The corresponding author.

29010

