This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RESCUE: Crowd Evacuation Simulation via Controlling SDM-United Characters
Xiaolin Liu1,† , Tianyi Zhou1,† , Hongbo Kang1 , Jian Ma1 , Ziwen Wang1 ,
Jing Huang1 , Wenguo Weng2 , Yu-Kun Lai3 , Kun Li1,*
1
Tianjin University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Cardiff University
{liuxiaolin, tianyizhou, hbkang, jianma, 3021244417, hj00, lik}@tju.edu.cn,
wgweng@tsinghua.edu.cn, Yukun.Lai@cs.cardiff.ac.uk
†

Equal contribution * Corresponding author
RESCUE
Part-level Collision
Visualization
The Young

People with a
Broken Arm

Exit

Hunched
Old People
Sensory-Decision-Motor
(SDM) Loop

Large-Scale Scene Top View

Avoidance and Collision

Large-Scale Scene Side View

Normal Ground

Ground with
Discrete Obstacles

Uneven Ground

Figure 1. Our SDM-United Framework enables online simulation of personalized, physically realistic, and 3D-adaptive multi-agent
evacuation scenarios.

Abstract

sessing the likelihood of crowding and trampling incidents,
estimating evacuation times, and supporting virtual reality
escape training. However, no existing methods can simulate
personalized and proxemics-aware 3D movements of hundreds of people online. This paper aims to develop an adaptive multi-agent 3D evacuation simulation framework. As
shown in Figure 1, our framework, called RESCUE (cRowd
Evacuation Simulation via Controlling SDM-United charactErs), is capable of achieving online physically realistic
simulations performing avoidance and personalized gait.
Traditional crowd simulation methods [3, 6, 22] have explored various strategies in different scenarios. However,
due to their simplified representations, these methods fail
to integrate 3D motion with realistic behavior, resulting in
physically implausible actions. Most crowd simulation methods cannot make decisions based on scene changes and are
not designed for crowd evacuation simulation. Based on
physics engines [18], character control [4, 26, 29, 36, 37]
achieves autonomous 3D motion. However, these methods
face the lack of personalization motions and may result in
falls and collisions in densely populated scenarios. Some motion generation methods [10, 31, 32, 43] based on diffusion
models can generate diverse 3D motions, but they still face
challenges in controllability and physical realism. Neither of
these methods can directly produce realistic, personalized,
and online evacuation motions. The detailed capabilities of
the methods are summarized in Table 1.
The limitations of the existing methods are mainly due to

Crowd evacuation simulation is critical for enhancing
public safety, and demanded for realistic virtual environments. Current mainstream evacuation models overlook
the complex human behaviors that occur during evacuation, such as pedestrian collisions, interpersonal interactions, and variations in behavior influenced by terrain
types or individual body shapes. This results in the failure to accurately simulate the escape of people in the real
world. In this paper, aligned with the sensory-decisionmotor (SDM) flow of the human brain, we propose a realtime 3D crowd evacuation simulation framework that integrates a 3D-adaptive SFM (Social Force Model) Decision
Mechanism and a Personalized Gait Control Motor. This
framework allows multiple agents to move in parallel and is
suitable for various scenarios, with dynamic crowd awareness. Additionally, we introduce Part-level Force Visualization to assist in evacuation analysis. Experimental results
demonstrate that our framework supports dynamic trajectory planning and personalized behavior for each agent
throughout the evacuation process, and is compatible with
uneven terrain. Visually, our method generates evacuation
results that are more realistic and plausible, providing enhanced insights for crowd simulation. The code is available
at http://cic.tju.edu.cn/faculty/likun/projects/RESCUE.

1. Introduction
Evacuation simulations serve as valuable tools for as-

24955

