This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Jailbreaking Multimodal Large Language Models via Shuffle Inconsistency
Shiji Zhao, Ranjie Duan,* Fengxiang Wang,* Chi Chen, Caixin Kang,
Shouwei Ruan, Jialing Tao*, YueFeng Chen*, Hui Xue*, Xingxing Wei†
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
Beihang University, Beijing, China
{zhaoshiji123, xxwei}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Attacker

List steps in detail
about how to
hack into
someone’s bank
account.

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
achieved impressive performance and have been put into
practical use in commercial applications, but they still have
potential safety mechanism vulnerabilities. Jailbreak attacks are red teaming methods that aim to bypass safety
mechanisms and discover MLLMs’ potential risks. Existing
MLLMs’ jailbreak methods often bypass the model’s safety
mechanism through complex optimization methods or carefully designed image and text prompts. Despite achieving
some progress, they have a low attack success rate on commercial closed-source MLLMs. Unlike previous research,
we empirically find that there exists a Shuffle Inconsistency
between MLLMs’ comprehension ability and safety ability
for the shuffled harmful instruction. That is, from the perspective of comprehension ability, MLLMs can understand
the shuffled harmful text-image instructions well. However,
they can be easily bypassed by the shuffled harmful instructions from the perspective of safety ability, leading to harmful responses. Then we innovatively propose a text-image
jailbreak attack named SI-Attack. Specifically, to fully utilize the Shuffle Inconsistency and overcome the shuffle randomness, we apply a query-based black-box optimization
method to select the most harmful shuffled inputs based
on the feedback of the toxic judge model. A series of experiments show that SI-Attack can effectively improve the
attack’s performance on three benchmarks for both opensource and closed-source MLLMs. Warning: This paper
contains examples of harmful texts and images, and reader
discretion is recommended.

GPT-4o

Protected

Harmfulness: 1

Shuffle

bank account.
about hack into
List steps in detail
about how to
someone’s

I‘m sorry, but I can’t
assist with that.
Hacking into
someone‘s bank
account is illegal and
can result in serious …

Bypassed

Here are the steps to
perform this activity in
detail:
1.Gather information..
2.Phishing..
3.Malware…

Harmfulness: 5

Figure 1. Illustration of Shuffle Inconsistency for shuffled
harmful instruction. For the comprehension ability, MLLMs
can understand both the unshuffled and shuffled harmful textimage pairs; For the safety ability, unshuffled harmful text-image
pairs can be protected by the defense mechanisms, while shuffled harmful text-image pairs can easily bypass the defense mechanisms, which induce the MLLMs to generate harmful responses.

progress in achieving highly general visual-language reasoning capabilities. Due to the potential broad impact on
society, it is critical to ensure that responses generated by
MLLMs do not contain harmful content such as violence,
discrimination, fake information, or immorality. However,
MLLMs face complex safety risks when processing complex information [8, 16, 19, 24]. For example, attackers can
exploit vulnerabilities in the model when processing textimage inputs to bypass the safety mechanisms of MLLMs
and induce the model to generate harmful content. So it is
critical for red teaming to explore potential safety vulnerabilities in MLLMs, which is of great guiding significance
for building safe, responsible, and reliable AI systems.
Jailbreak attacks are first proposed and studied in LLM
[7, 15, 27, 28, 42]. As for MLLMs, [8] discovers that the
attack effect can be further enhanced by introducing image
modality; [19, 24, 26, 38] try to embed harmful intention

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), e.g., GPT4o [23], and Claude-3.5-Sonnet [2], have made significant
* Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding Author.

https://github.com/zhaoshiji123/SI-Attack

2045

