This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Adversarial Augmentation for Improving Palmprint Recognition
Jianlong Jin1 ,* Chenglong Zhao2 ,* Ruixin Zhang2 , Sheng Shang1 , Yang Zhao1 ,
Jun Wang3 , Jingyun Zhang3 , Shouhong Ding2 , Wei Jia1†, Yunsheng Wu2†
1
Hefei University of Technology, 2 Tencent YouTu Lab, 3 Tencent WeChat Pay Lab33
jianlong@mail.hfut.edu.cn, lornezhao@tencent.com

Figure 1. Illustrations of challenging cases presented in palmprint datasets and the proposed method. (a) Failed genuine sample pairs
selected from the tested public palmprint datasets. We identify the primary issues as geometric distortions (indicated by blue boxes) and
textural degradations (indicated by orange boxes). Images with geometric distortions often exhibit clear palmar creases but are challenging
to match with those that have normal patterns. Images with textural degradations are difficult to recognize due to the loss of identity
characteristics or the presence of additional noise. (b) Qualitative comparison of our method with other current data augmentation methods.

Abstract

performance of our method on both challenging and constrained palmprint datasets.

Current palmprint recognition models achieve strong performance on constrained datasets, yet exhibit significant
limitations in handling challenging palmprint samples with
geometric distortions and textural degradations. Data augmentation is widely adopted to improve model generalization. However, existing augmentation methods struggle
to generate palmprint-specific variations while preserving
identity consistency, leading to suboptimal performance. To
address these problems, we propose a Unified Adversarial
Augmentation framework (UAA). It first utilizes an adversarial training paradigm for palmprint recognition, optimizing for challenging augmented samples by incorporating the feedback from the recognition network. We enhance palmprint images with both geometric and textual
variations. Specifically, it adopts a spatial transformation
module and a new identity-preserving module, which synthesizes palmprints with diverse textural variations while
maintaining consistent identity. For more effective adversarial augmentation, a dynamic sampling strategy is proposed. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

Palmprint recognition has garnered widespread attention
from academia and industry due to its advantages in convenience, privacy, and security [10]. Compared to fingerprint recognition [55], contactless palmprint recognition offers increased convenience. In contrast to facial recognition [52], palmprint recognition provides better privacy and
security, as collecting palmprint data without consent is
more difficult. These benefits have led to the rapid development of palmprint-based e-payment [14].
Recently, some deep learning-based recognition methods [7, 56] have been proposed and achieved notable success on constrained public palmprint datasets [51, 61, 63].
However, when faced with more complex and challenging
datasets [2, 48, 66], they suffer from poor recognition performance. This discrepancy motivates us to investigate the
challenging cases in these datasets
We have summarized two primary factors that undermine recognition accuracy: geometric distortions and textural degradations, as illustrated in Figure 1. Geometric dis-

This work was done during an internship at Tencent YouTu Lab. Code
is available at https://github.com/Ukuer/UAA.

14141

