This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LIRA: Inferring Segmentation in Large Multi-modal Models with Local
Interleaved Region Assistance
Zhang Li1 , Biao Yang1 , Qiang Liu2 , Shuo Zhang1 , Zhiyin Ma1 ,
Liang Yin1 , Linger Deng1 , Yabo Sun2 , Yuliang Liu1∗ , Xiang Bai1
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Kingsoft Office
{zhangli123, ylliu}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

LIRA-8B

Segmentation Performance

While large multi-modal models (LMMs) demonstrate
promising capabilities in segmentation and comprehension,
they still struggle with two limitations: inaccurate segmentation and hallucinated comprehension. These challenges
stem primarily from constraints in weak visual comprehension and a lack of fine-grained perception. To alleviate
these limitations, we propose LIRA, a framework that capitalizes on the complementary relationship between visual
comprehension and segmentation via two key components:
(1) Semantic-Enhanced Feature Extractor (SEFE) improves
object attribute inference by fusing semantic and pixel-level
features, leading to more accurate segmentation; (2) Interleaved Local Visual Coupling (ILVC) autoregressively
generates local descriptions after extracting local features
based on segmentation masks, offering fine-grained supervision to mitigate hallucinations. Furthermore, we find
that the precision of object segmentation is positively correlated with the latent related semantics of the <seg> token. To quantify this relationship and the model’s potential semantic inferring ability, we introduce the Attributes
Evaluation (AttrEval) dataset. Our experiments show that
LIRA achieves state-of-the-art performance in both segmentation and comprehension tasks. Code will be available at
https://github.com/echo840/LIRA.

75%

⭐
LIRA-2B

PixelLM-13B
LISA-7B

⭐

OMG-LLaVA-8B

50%
MiniCPM-V-2-2.4B
Mini-Gemini-2B LLaVA-1.5-7B
InternVL2-2B
LLaVA-Phi-2.7B

0

75%
50%
Comprehension Performance

Figure 1. The performance of LIRA on comprehension and segmentation tasks compared with existing models. The x-axis represents the scores obtained by normalizing MME [9] to a percentage scale. The y-axis represents the average performance on the
RefCOCO [66], RefCOCO+ [66], and RefCOCOg [39] datasets.
LIRA achieves excellent performance on both tasks.

segmentation masks based on implicit text queries. Recently, OMG-LLaVA [69] used a universal segmentation
method as a visual encoder, integrating image information
and perception priors into visual tokens provided to large
language models (LLM), thus better supporting both segmentation and comprehension.
Despite significant advancements, previous methods often failed to accurately segment objects when meeting complex scenarios. As shown in Fig. 2, OMG-LLaVA failed to
segment “the red bus closest to the white car”. To investigate the causes of segmentation errors, we extracted the
embedding of the <seg> token from LMM using the image in the first column and applied it to segment the images
in the second and third columns without further interaction

1. Introduction
With the development of large multi-modal models, their
capabilities have expanded from visual comprehension to
pixel-wise segmentation by integrating LMMs with segmentation modules. The pioneering work LISA [19] first
introduced the embedding-as-mask paradigm to unlock segmentation capabilities and proposed the task of reasoning
segmentation, which requires models to generate binary
∗

PSALM-1.3B

Corresponding author

24056

