This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Plug-and-Play Physical Motion Restoration Approach
for In-the-Wild High-Difficulty Motions
Youliang Zhang1∗ Ronghui Li1∗ Yachao Zhang2 Liang Pan3
Jingbo Wang4 Yebin Liu1 Xiu Li1†
1
2
Tsinghua University.
Xiamen University.
3
4
The University of Hong Kong.
Shanghai AI Laboratory.

Figure 1. Illustration of motivation and two main challenges. (a) Our method effectively enhances the physical plausibility of videocaptured motions, successfully handling high-difficulty motions like backflips. (b) highlights the challenging movements in the original
video lead to flawed motion estimated by current video motion capture algorithms, where the current motion imitation model fails to restore
overly degraded flawed motions. (c) demonstrates that even when video motion capture provides reasonable reference motions without
flawed motion, existing motion imitation techniques still fail to track high-difficulty motions due to their complex dynamics.

Abstract
Extracting physically plausible 3D human motion from
videos is a critical task. Although existing simulation-based
motion imitation methods can enhance the physical quality of daily motions estimated from monocular video capture, extending this capability to high-difficulty motions remains an open challenge. This can be attributed to some
flawed motion clips in video-based motion capture results
and the inherent complexity in modeling high-difficulty motions. Therefore, sensing the advantage of segmentation
in localizing human body, we introduce a mask-based motion correction module (MCM) that leverages motion context and video mask to repair flawed motions; and propose a physics-based motion transfer module (PTM), which
employs a prior injected pretrain and adapt approach for
motion imitation, improving physical plausibility with the
ability to handle in-the-wild and challenging motions. Our
approach is designed as a plug-and-play module to physically refine the video motion capture, which also excels
in motion generation tasks. Finally, we collected a chal-

lenging in-the-wild test set to establish a benchmark, and
our method has demonstrated effectiveness on both the new
benchmark and existing public datasets. Our project page
is : https://physicalmotionrestoration.github.io/

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution

Physical plausible 3D human motion is in high demand
across various fields, including virtual reality, game, animation industries, and academic research on virtual humans
and robotics [6, 13, 28–31, 33, 69, 76, 76, 84]. With technological advancements, monocular video motion capture
algorithms provide a convenient pipeline for obtaining 3D
motions closely aligned with video. However, these methods [44, 52, 56, 59, 72] inherently lack dynamic modeling,
resulting in significant physical unrealisms such as floating, foot sliding, self-intersections, and ground penetration.
Things get worse when facing high-difficulty motions.
To enhance physical realism, some methods use dynamic
equations and train a network to predict physical parameters [10, 26, 65, 75]. However, these methods often struggle to improve motion plausibility due to oversimplified
dynamic equations. Other methods [4, 9, 12, 38, 57, 79]
use physical-simulation-based motion imitation as a postprocessing module, learning motion control policy to imi-

† Corresponding author

13281

