This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FairHuman: Boosting Hand and Face Quality in Human Image Generation
with Minimum Potential Delay Fairness in Diffusion Models

1

Yuxuan Wang1

Tianwei Cao1†

Huayu Zhang2

wangyuxuan2019@bupt.edu.cn

caotianwei@bupt.edu.cn

zhanghy56@chinatelecom.cn

Zhongjiang He2

Kongming Liang1†

Zhanyu Ma1

hezhongj 1@163.com

liangkongming@bupt.edu.cn

mazhanyu@bupt.edu.cn

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, China Telecom

Figure 1. Compare with existing methods under two scenarios: 1) General T2I Generation (in the left part): from left to right are
SDXL-base[31], MoLE[49] and Ours. 2) Controllable Generation (in the right part): from left to right are input condition, ControlNetSDXL[47] and Ours. Zoom in for a better view of details.

Abstract
Image generation has achieved remarkable progress with
the development of large-scale text-to-image models, especially diffusion-based models. However, generating human
images with plausible details, such as faces or hands, remains challenging due to insufficient supervision of local
regions during training. To address this issue, we propose FairHuman, a multi-objective fine-tuning approach
designed to enhance both global and local generation quality fairly. Specifically, we first construct three learning objectives: a global objective derived from the default diffusion objective function and two local objectives for hands
and faces based on pre-annotated positional priors. Subse-

quently, we derive the optimal parameter updating strategy
under the guidance of the Minimum Potential Delay (MPD)
criterion, thereby attaining fairness-aware optimization for
this multi-objective problem. Based on this, our proposed
method can achieve significant improvements in generating
challenging local details while maintaining overall quality. Extensive experiments showcase the effectiveness of our
method in improving the performance of human image generation under different scenarios. Our code is available at
https://github.com/PRIS-CV/FairHuman.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based models have revolutionized image generation by achieving unprecedented high quality and realism

† Corresponding Author

17046

