This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid Layout Control for Diffusion Transformer:
Fewer Annotations, Superior Aesthetics
Keming Wu1
1

∗

Junwen Chen3

Tsinghua University,

2

∗

∗

Zhanhao Liang2

Yinuo Wang1

The Australian National University,
4

Peking University,

5

∗

3

Ji Li5

Chao Zhang4

Bin Wang1

Yuhui Yuan6

∗

The University of Electro-Communications Tokyo,

Microsoft,

6

Canva

https://hybrid-layout-msra.github.io

Figure 1. Illustrating the layout control results with our approach. Our approach not only ensures accurate adherence to the layout but
also maintains the aesthetics of modern text-to-image models like FLUX.1-[dev]. Refer to the appendix for the regional prompts for each
annotated bounding box.

Abstract
Text-to-image generation models often struggle to interpret spatially aware text prompts effectively. To overcome
this, existing approaches typically require millions of highquality semantic layout annotations consisting of bounding
boxes and regional prompts. This paper shows that the large
amounts of regional prompts are non-necessary for the latest
diffusion transformers like SD3 or FLUX.
In this paper, we propose an efficient hybrid layout
control framework for diffusion transformers. Our approach drastically reduces need for extensive layout annotations and minimizes reliance on regional prompt annotations—incurring only minimal additional computational
cost during inference—while maintaining high-quality layout adherence. Our key insight is to break the layout-control
task into three sequential stages: first, generating the target
objects within the designated regions specified by an anonymous layout [35]; second, refining these outputs to ensure
they strictly adhere to the regional prompts in the semantic layout; and last, improving the aesthetics. Building on
this insight, we propose a hybrid layout control scheme that

first fine-tunes the DiTs (e.g., SD3) to follow an anonymous
layout, then continues fine-tuning the DiTs to follow the semantic layout, and finally includes a quality-tuning stage to
enhance visual aesthetics. We show that this hybrid design
is highly data-efficient, as we find only using a small amount
of semantic layout annotations is sufficient, thereby significantly reducing dependency on regional prompts. In addition, we propose an efficient regional diffusion transformer
to encode the spatial layout information using just a set of
lower-resolution regional tokens instead of various carefully
designed layout tokens. The region-wise diffusion loss over
these regional tokens can guide the diffusion transformer
learn to follow the given layout implicitly. We empirically
validate the effectiveness of our approach by comparing it
with the latest version of SiamLayout and show that our
method achieves better results while being more than 10×
more data efficient and ensuring superior aesthetics. Project
Page: https://hybrid-layout-msra.github.io

1. Introduction
When humans create graphic designs [20, 32, 49] or photorealistic images [27, 36], 3D generation [29, 30], they typically

∗ Work done at Microsoft Research Asia. Corresponding author:
researcher.yuanyuhui@gmail.com

17930

