This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object-centric Video Question Answering with Visual Grounding and Referring
Haochen Wang1* , Qirui Chen2* , Cilin Yan3 , Jiayin Cai3 ,
Xiaolong Jiang3 , Yao Hu3 , Weidi Xie2† , Stratis Gavves1
1
2
3
University of Amsterdam
SAI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Xiaohongshu Inc.

Abstract
Video Large Language Models (VideoLLMs) have recently
demonstrated remarkable progress in general video understanding. However, existing models primarily focus on
high-level comprehension and are limited to text-only responses, restricting the flexibility for object-centric, multiround interactions. In this paper, we make three contributions: (i) we address these limitations by introducing a
VideoLLM model, capable of performing both object referring for input and grounding for output in video reasoning tasks, i.e., allowing users to interact with videos
using both textual and visual prompts; (ii) we propose
STOM (Spatial-Temporal Overlay Module), a novel approach that propagates arbitrary visual prompts input at
any single timestamp to the remaining frames within a
video; (iii) we present VideoInfer, a manually curated
object-centric video instruction dataset featuring questionanswering pairs that require reasoning. We conduct comprehensive experiments on VideoInfer and other existing
benchmarks across video question answering and referring object segmentation. The results on 12 benchmarks
of 6 tasks show that our proposed model consistently outperforms baselines in both video question answering and
segmentation, underscoring its robustness in multimodal,
object-centric video and image understanding. Project
page: https://qirui-chen.github.io/RGA3-release/.

1. Introduction
Video question answering (VideoQA) refers to the task
that enables machines to understand and reason about
videos. As a natural way for both humans and embodied agents (e.g., robots or virtual assistants) to perceive
the world, videos capture rich, continuous streams of data
with complex spatial-temporal information, such as dynamic scenes, evolving interactions, and object behaviors.
Despite the tremendous progress, existing Video Large Lan* Both authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

What is he about to do?
From the fact that he has packed his things into his backpack and has
already put on his coat, it can be inferred that he is about to go out.
Can you ground the man he is talking to at last?
Sure, [SEG].
What does the food that he is eating taste like?
During his meal, he frequently made a motion as if fanning his
mouth, which suggests that the food he was eating was …

Figure 1. RGA3 enables both referring and grounding capabilities for object-centric video understanding. In contrast to previous
VideoLLMs, which are limited to text-only responses with mask
reference, RGA3 can process arbitrary visual prompts and generate both textual answers and segmentation masks.

guage Models (VideoLLMs) [8, 11, 12, 28, 31, 55, 63] have
primarily focused on holistic scene comprehension, such as
answering high-level questions about videos, rather than addressing fine-grained spatial-temporal queries on objects,
limiting their ability to resolve detailed object-centric reasoning in complex, dynamic video content.
This paper proposes to advance the task of multimodal, object-centric video understanding by introducing
RGA3 (Refer and Ground Anything Anytime at Any Granularity), a unified framework designed to ground objects
of interest and answer detailed questions about them in
videos. In detail, the resulting model enables: (i) integrating arbitrary visual prompts—such as masks, bounding boxes, arrows, points, or scribbles—with textual inputs
to perform complex reasoning tasks about specific objects
in videos, and (ii) processing video and textual queries to
generate segmentation masks for objects referred to in the
query. By combining these capabilities, RGA3 facilitates
object-centric reasoning, enabling more precise and interactive video understanding.

22274

