This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic-guided Camera Ray Regression for Visual Localization
Yesheng Zhang, Xu Zhao→
School of Automation and Intelligent Sensing, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{preacher, zhaoxu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This work presents a novel framework for Visual Localization (VL), that is, regressing camera rays from query images
to derive camera poses. As an overparameterized representation of the camera pose, camera rays possess superior
robustness in optimization. Of particular importance, Camera Ray Regression (CRR) is privacy-preserving, rendering
it a viable VL approach for real-world applications. Thus,
we introduce DINO-based Multi-Mappers, coined DIMM,
to achieve VL by CRR. DIMM utilizes DINO as a sceneagnostic encoder to obtain powerful features from images.
To mitigate ambiguity, the features integrate both local and
global perception, as well as potential geometric constraint.
Then, a scene-specific mapper head regresses camera rays
from these features. It incorporates a semantic attention
module for soft fusion of multiple mappers, utilizing the rich
semantic information in DINO features. In extensive experiments on both indoor and outdoor datasets, our methods
showcase impressive performance, revealing a promising
direction for advancements in VL.

1. Introduction
Visual Localization (VL) involves estimating 6-degree-offreedom camera pose of an image taken from a known scene,
which is also known as camera relocalization. VL plays a
vital role in many vision, robotic and graphic applications,
such as augment reality, virtual reality and autonomous driving. Despite extensive research, achieving precise, robust,
and privacy-preserving VL [28, 38] continues to present a
significant challenge.
Current VL methods can be categorized into explicit and
implicit methods based on their mapping approaches. Traditional explicit methods [2, 30, 31] involve an explicit 3D
map, e.g., point clouds. They establish 2D-3D (image-tomap) correspondences by Feature Matching, and then estimate camera pose via PnP and RANSAC [10, 12]. While
advanced methods [11, 39] leads to high accuracy, the stor→ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The ambiguity challenge in Camera Ray Regression
(CRR) for VL. Effective global and local disambiguations are critical for CRR. Global ambiguity arises from rays of different patches
(cf. r21 and r22 in the figure), while local ambiguity occurs within
the same patch but from different viewing angles (cf. r11 and r22 ).
Semantic information, e.g., the table in the figure to differentiate
between chairs, along with geometry constraints (geometry properties of rays {r1i }i ) are essential for the disambiguations.

age demands of explicit maps are troublesome especially in
large-scale scenes. Additionally, explicit maps raise privacy
concerns, restricting their applications in real-world settings.
Implicit methods, on the other hand, leverage learning
models as implicit and light-weight maps, which mainly include two frameworks: Absolute Pose Regression (APR)
and Scene Coordinate Regression (SCR). APR directly utilizes networks to regress camera poses (rotations and translations) from images [6, 15], offering enhanced privacy protection. However, the compact nature of absolute pose makes it
vulnerable to noise, thereby leading to accuracy issue [6].
To improve precision, employing an overparameterized
representation for the camera pose is crucial [35]. Thus,
SCR framework [22, 41] is proposed, relying on 2D-3D
matches as an indirect yet robust camera pose representation, akin to its explicit counterparts. ACE [4] is a milestone
within this framework, utilizing simple networks to regress
pixel-aligned scene coordinates. It introduces a scene-centric
patch-level training strategy, i.e., Gradient Decorrelation
Training (GDT), enabling both efficient and precise mapping. Nevertheless, the unbounded 3D point error is unstable
in training, necessitating manual hyperparameter tuning or
additional outlier rejection modules [5, 20]. Besides, SCR
methods still run the risk of 3D privacy breaches, as they

25639

