This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Who Controls the Authorization? Invertible Networks for Copyright Protection
in Text-to-Image Synthesis
Baoyue Hu1, 3, Yang Wei2, 3, B, Junhao Xiao1, 3, Wendong Huang1, 3, Xiuli Bi2, 3, B, and Bin Xiao2, 3, 4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
3
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
4
Jinan Inspur Data Technology Co., Ltd., Jinan, China
d230201013@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, weiyang@cqupt.edu.cn, d230201040@stu.cqupt.edu.cn
d220201013@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, bixl@cqupt.edu.cn, xiaobin@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Algorithms
Stegastamp [31] (CVPR 20’)
RoSteALS [3] (CVPR 23’)
AdvDM [20] (ICML 23’)
MetaCloak [22] (CVPR 24’)
Wm-AdvDM [40] (CVPR 24’)
Ours

To defend against personalized generation, a new form of
infringement that is more concealed and destructive, the
existing copyright protection methods is to add adversarial perturbations in images. However, these methods focus solely on countering illegal personalization, neglecting the requirement for legitimate personalization. Moreover, none of these methods are capable of directly verifying and tracing the copyright from adversarial examples.
In response to these limitations, we propose a traceable
and authorizable copyright traceability method that embeds
the copyright watermark into images through a series of invertible compound coupling modules. We introduce a novel
information exchange mechanism for invertible neural network and design a contrastive learning-based optimization
strategy tailored to address personalized infringement issues. Our method effectively mitigates the malicious use
of unauthorized personalized generation models by inducing watermark-like artifacts and obscuring privacy details
in generated images. Additionally, it facilitates copyright
traceability and supports authorized legitimate personalization, thereby offering broader practical applicability.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method can almost losslessly restore original image and extract copyright
watermark, achieving FID exceeding 300 and causing visually noticeable artifacts in unauthorized personalized images. Furthermore, it exhibits consistent robustness against
adversarial purification and text prompt modifications.

➀ UP

➁ AP

➂ CT

✗
✗
✓
✓
✓
✓

✗
✗
✗
✓

✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓

Table 1. Comparison of the functions of representative copyright
protection methods. ➀, ➁ and ➂ represent Unauthorized Personalization Resistance, Authorized Personalization Support and Copyright Traceability, respectively.

to-image generation models [26, 28] like Stable Diffusion
can produce highly realistic and diverse images according
to textual descriptions. However, the widespread adoption
of AI-generated tools and the inherent lack of traceability in
their outputs have introduced new security challenges. The
rapid advancement of text-to-image diffusion models has
revolutionized the field of image generation [8, 13], surpassing the boundaries of traditional copyright protection
techniques [24, 36]. In this context, users can easily generate infringing images, including artworks that mimic the
style of specific artists and deepfake images containing sensitive personal information. To address this emerging form
of infringement, researchers are actively exploring effective
copyright protection methods.

1. Introduction

Existing copyright protection methods include traditional watermarking techniques and adversarial approaches
specifically designed to defend against diffusion models.
Watermarking is a common proactive defense mechanism
for traditional copyright infringement, embedding traceable
watermarks into copyrighted images to verify their origin
and assert ownership. However, these conventional watermarking techniques [3, 24, 31] that support copyright track-

Diffusion models (DM) have achieved remarkable success
due to their exceptional generative abilities. Notably, textB Corresponding author.

15832

