This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causality-guided Prompt Learning for Vision-language Models via Visual
Granulation
Mengyu Gao12
Qiulei Dong12 *
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

gaomengyu2021@ia.ac.cn

qldong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn.

Abstract

Nonindividualized
attributes

Prompt learning has recently attracted much attention for
adapting pre-trained vision-language models (e.g., CLIP)
to downstream recognition tasks. However, most of the existing CLIP-based prompt learning methods only show a
limited ability for handling fine-grained datasets. To address this issue, we propose a causality-guided text prompt
learning method via visual granulation for CLIP, called
CaPL, where the explored visual granulation technique
could construct sets of visual granules for the text prompt to
capture subtle discrepancies among different fine-grained
classes through casual inference. The CaPL method contains the following two modules: (1) An attribute disentanglement module is proposed to decompose visual features
into non-individualized attributes (shared by some classes)
and individualized attributes (specific to single classes) using a Brownian Bridge Diffusion Model; (2) A granule
learning module is proposed to construct visual granules
by integrating the aforementioned attributes for recognition under two causal inference strategies. Thanks to the
learned visual granules, more discriminative text prompt is
expected to be learned. Extensive experimental results on
15 datasets demonstrate that our CaPL method significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art prompt learning methods,
especially on fine-grained datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/GaoMY-521/CaPL_Code.

Individualized
attributes

Image
visual feature
(a) Attribute disentanglement graph

Nonindividualized
attributes

Individualized
attributes

Image
visual feature

Prompted
textual feature

(b) Attribute-driven prompt learning graph

Figure 1. Causal graphs of (a) attribute disentanglement and (b)
attribute-driven prompt learning for recognition.

In general, the existing prompt learning methods refine
the inputs of CLIP[39] with learnable prompts[14, 20, 26,
42], so that the visual and textual features outputted from
CLIP are aligned more effectively. The early global prompt
learning methods[52, 54, 55, 62] process the features holistically during prompt learning. Despite achieving improvements on coarse-grained recognition, they fall short in finegrained recognition, since the subtle discrepancies among
fine-grained classes cannot be captured by global features
as indicated in [21, 58]. Recently, local prompt learning
methods are proposed to focus on specific attributes, either identifying the most discriminative attributes while discarding others[28, 30, 48], or treating all attributes equally
to encode attribute-specific representations[57–59]. However, these methods cannot allocate dynamic attention to
all attributes as indicated in [11, 63], still leading to a
limited performance on challenging fine-grained datasets
(e.g., Flowers102[34] for flower recognition and FGVC
Aircraft[33] for airplane recognition).
Unlike the existing methods that either discard nondiscriminative attributes or handle all attributes uniformly,
our goal is to disentangle visual features into individualized attributes (exclusive to single classes) and nonindividualized attributes (shared by some classes), and perceive all attributes according to their discrimination ability,
assuming that all attributes contribute to prompt leaning but
to varying degrees. This idea is supported by the following
fact: In the fine-grained dataset Flowers102[34], petal color

1. Introduction
CLIP[39], a typical vision-language model pre-trained on
large-scale image-text pairs, has shown its zero-shot recognition ability in many existing works[12, 38, 41, 64]. Recently, prompt learning methods have attracted growing interests for further enhancing CLIP’s performance on downstream recognition tasks[13, 31, 36, 61].
* Corresponding author

1141

