This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GestureLSM: Latent Shortcut based Co-Speech Gesture Generation with
Spatial-Temporal Modeling
Pinxin Liu1 , Luchuan Song1 *, Junhua Huang1 , Haiyang Liu2 , Chenliang Xu1
1
University of Rochester, 2 University of Tokyo

The police shot and people crossed the street. I was so scared! The main reason was that you have no place to hide.

39ms

Figure 1. GestureLSM. We present Gesture Latent Shortcut Model, a method that generates full-body human gestures from speech and
text scripts with high quality and real-time speed. It explicitly models the body regions interactions, e.g., the interactions between body
and hands, to achieve coherent gesture motions. Besides, it is also capable of real-time generation based on shortcut sampling.

Abstract
Generating full-body human gestures based on speech signals remains challenges on quality and speed. Existing approaches model different body regions such as body, legs
and hands separately, which fail to capture the spatial interactions between them and result in unnatural and disjointed
movements. Additionally, their autoregressive/diffusionbased pipelines show slow generation speed due to dozens
of inference steps. To address these two challenges, we
propose GestureLSM, a flow-matching-based approach for
Co-Speech Gesture Generation with spatial-temporal modeling. Our method i) explicitly model the interaction of tokenized body regions through spatial and temporal attention, for generating coherent full-body gestures. ii) introduce the flow matching to enable more efficient sampling
by explicitly modeling the latent velocity space. To overcome the suboptimal performance of flow matching baseline, we propose latent shortcut learning and beta distribution time stamp sampling during training to enhance
gesture synthesis quality and accelerate inference. Combining the spatial-temporal modeling and improved flow

matching-based framework, GestureLSM achieves state-ofthe-art performance on BEAT2 while significantly reducing
inference time compared to existing methods, highlighting
its potential for enhancing digital humans and embodied
agents in real-world applications.
Project Page: https://andypinxinliu.github.
io/GestureLSM

1. Introduction

* corresponding author.

Speech is often accompanied by gestures that serve to convey emotions and enhance comprehension [7, 47] within
daily conversations. These non-verbal cues play a crucial
role in effective communication [2], with gesture generation
serving as a fundamental component of human-computer
interaction. As artificial intelligence continues to advance,
endowing virtual avatars with realistic gestural capabilities
will be essential for fostering immersive interactive experiences and digital avatar construction [19, 45, 48–50, 52].
Many recent works [28, 32, 58, 59] have conducted preliminary studies on full-body co-speech gesture generation.
These methods typically treat different body regions as separated motion features, represented using either continu-

10929

