This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KinMo: Kinematic-aware Human Motion Understanding and Generation
Pengfei Zhang1 * Pinxin Liu2 * Pablo Garrido4
1

Bindita Chaudhuri4†

University of California, Irvine, 2 University of Rochester, 3 Imperial College, London, 4 Flawless AI
1

3

Hyeongwoo Kim3

pengfz5@uci.edu, 2 pliu23@u.rochester.edu,

hyeongwoo.kim@imperial.ac.uk, 4 {pablo.garrido, bindita.chaudhuri}@flawlessai.com

A person walks forward in a straight line
His legs moves in fast pace.
His hands swing back and forth

Rank 1

A person takes a couple of steps, then pivots
on left leg to turn around and walks back

A person takes a couple of steps, then pivots on
right leg to turn around and walks back

(b) Text-to-motion Generation

(c) Text-Motion Editing

Rank 2

(a) Text-to-motion Retrieval

(d) Motion Trajectory Control

Figure 1. We present KinMo, a method that achieves fine-grained motion understanding for (a) effective text-motion retrieval, and textaligned motion (b) generation, (c) editing, and (d) trajectory control on local kinematic body parts.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Controlling human motion through natural language is a
rapidly expanding area within computer vision, enabling interactive systems to generate or modify 3D human motions
based on textual input. This technology has a wide range
of applications, including robotics[16], digital avatar[13,
18, 45], and automatic animation [20, 44, 50, 62, 63],
where human-like motion is crucial for user interaction
and immersion. Despite efforts to generate general motion [9, 38, 42, 47, 52, 60], fine-grained control over individual body parts remains largely an unsolved challenge.
Current models are proficient in producing coherent wholebody movements from global action descriptions but struggle when tasked with controlling local body parts independently. This limitation prevents them from achieving precision and adaptability for real-world applications.
Recent advances [14, 36] have introduced more refined
approaches by incorporating controllability into motion
generation. However, these models are limited to processing simple instructions and lack the compatibility required
for scenarios where multiple body parts must coordinate to
perform complex actions. Similarly, generative models for
motion synthesis [9, 38] present innovative methods but do
not directly address the issue of controlling specific body
parts with specific textual descriptions.
This challenge stems from the inherent ambiguity of motion text descriptions in existing datasets. For example,
multiple phrases (such as pick up an object from the ground
and bend down to reach something) can describe the same
motion. In contrast, a single term (such as running) can en-

Current human motion synthesis frameworks rely on global
action descriptions, creating a modality gap that limits both
motion understanding and generation capabilities. A single
coarse description, such as “run”, fails to capture details
such as variations in speed, limb positioning, and kinematic
dynamics, leading to ambiguities between text and motion
modalities. To address this challenge, we introduce KinMo,
a unified framework built on a hierarchical describable motion representation that extends beyond global actions by
incorporating kinematic group movements and their interactions. We design an automated annotation pipeline to
generate high-quality, fine-grained descriptions for this decomposition, resulting in the KinMo dataset and offering
a scalable and cost-efficient solution for dataset enrichment. To leverage these structured descriptions, we propose Hierarchical Text-Motion Alignment that progressively
integrates additional motion details, thereby improving semantic motion understanding. Furthermore, we introduce
a coarse-to-fine motion generation procedure to leverage
enhanced spatial understanding to improve motion synthesis. Experimental results show that KinMo significantly improves motion understanding, demonstrated by enhanced
text-motion retrieval performance and enabling more finegrained motion generation and editing capabilities. Project
Page: https://andypinxinliu.github.io/KinMo
1 * Work done as interns at Flawless AI. These authors contributed
equally to this work. † Corresponding Author.

11187

