This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion Synthesis with Sparse and Flexible Keyjoint Control
Inwoo Hwang1

Jinseok Bae1

Donggeun Lim1

Young Min Kim1,2†

1

2

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University

Dense Right Wrist

Sparse Pelvis

“a person walks in a curved line”

“a person walks forward a limp”

Goal-Reaching
Scenario

Time-Agnostic Control
Target

“a person is walking
on a treadmill slowly”

Output

“a person takes a huge leap forward”

Contact-Driven
Sitting

Hand-Head Touching

“a person walked in a clockwise circle”

Dense Pelvis, Wrist

Sparse, Multiple Joints

(a) Dense Signal

(b) Sparse Signal

(c) Goal-Driven

(d) Implicit Control

Figure 1. We enable a wide range of practical and controllable motion generation with high quality and precision. Our approach synthesizes
natural human motion from explicit signals, including (a) dense signals with multiple joints, (b) sparse signals, and (c) goal-driven scenarios.
Additionally, we generate motion from (d) implicit control signals defined via objective functions, including time-agnostic control.

Abstract
Creating expressive character animations is laborintensive, requiring intricate manual adjustment of animators across space and time. Previous works on controllable
motion generation often rely on a predefined set of dense
spatio-temporal specifications (e.g., dense pelvis trajectories with exact per-frame timing), limiting practicality for
animators. To process high-level intent and intuitive control
in diverse scenarios, we propose a practical controllable
motions synthesis framework that respects sparse and flexible keyjoint signals. Our approach employs a decomposed
diffusion-based motion synthesis framework that first synthesizes keyjoint movements from sparse input control signals

and then synthesizes full-body motion based on the completed keyjoint trajectories. The low-dimensional keyjoint
movements can easily adapt to various control signal types,
such as end-effector position for diverse goal-driven motion
synthesis, or incorporate functional constraints on a subset of keyjoints. Additionally, we introduce a time-agnostic
control formulation, eliminating the need for frame-specific
timing annotations and enhancing control flexibility. Then,
the shared second stage can synthesize a natural whole-body
motion that precisely satisfies the task requirement from
dense keyjoint movements. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of sparse and flexible keyjoint control through comprehensive experiments on diverse datasets and scenarios. Project
page: http://inwoohwang.me/SFControl

† Corresponding author

13203

