This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlearning the Noisy Correspondence Makes CLIP More Robust
Haochen Han1 , Alex Jinpeng Wang12† , Peijun Ye1 , Fangming Liu1†
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory 2 Central South University
Abstract

False Positive
‫ݒ‬௜

The data appetite for Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
has continuously scaled up from the early millions to billions today, which faces an untenable trade-off with data
quality and inevitably introduces Noisy Correspondence
(NC) samples. Undoubtedly, such semantically unrelated
data signiﬁcantly impairs the performance of VLMs. Previous efforts mainly address this challenge by estimating reﬁned alignment for more precise guidance. However, such
resource-intensive pipelines that train VLMs from scratch
struggle to meet realistic data demands. In this paper,
we present a brand new perspective that seeks to directly
eliminate the harmful effects of NC in pre-trained VLMs.
Speciﬁcally, we propose NCU, a Noisy Correspondence
Unlearning ﬁne-tuning framework that efﬁciently enhances
VLMs’ robustness by forgetting learned noisy knowledge.
The key to NCU is learning the hardest negative information, which can provide explicit unlearning direction for
both false positives and false negatives. Such twin goals
unlearning process can be formalized into one uniﬁed optimal transport objective for fast ﬁne-tuning. We validate
our approach with the prevailing CLIP model over various downstream tasks. Remarkably, NCU surpasses the
robust pre-trained method on zero-shot transfer while with
lower computational overhead. The code is available at
https://github.com/hhc1997/NCU .

False Negative

Fighter jet is
‫ݐ‬௞ᇱ on display at
the air show
A bird is

ே௘௚

‫ݐ‬௜ nesting high

‫ݐ‬௜

in the tree

[Not] A bird is
nesting high
in the tree

Negative
Negative

False Positive

Negative

‫ݐ‬௞

‫ݒ‬௝

A motorcycle
racer speeds
around a track

A person in

[Not] A person

a motorcycle

a motorcycle

ே௘௚
‫ݐ‬௝ r
orange rides ‫ݐ‬௝
in orange rides

Positive

Negative
Negative

False Negative

Negative

Negative
Negative

Negative
Negative

Negative

Hardest Negative

Image

Negative

Text

Hardest Negative

Hardest Negative Text

Figure 1. Illustration on the core concept of NCU. The twin
goals unlearning process is guided by the learned hardest negative
eg
information. For the FP, tN
directly pulls vi away from the misi
eg
matched ti . While for the FN, tN
acts as a distance upper bound
i
to facilitate modeling many-to-many relations.

difﬁcult trade-off between quantity and quality, which inevitably introduces noisy correspondence into the training
set. Taking the CC3M dataset [39] as an example, despite
being ﬁltered from 500 million images, it still contains at
least 3% [20] unrelated image-text pairs, i.e., false positive.
To make matters worse, training on massive data necessitates larger batch sizes (32K used in CLIP), which increases
the likelihood of unpaired samples sharing semantic similarities, i.e., false negative. Undoubtedly, such two-aspects
noisy correspondence can signiﬁcantly impair the performance of vision-language models.
To endow robustness against NC, one natural direction
is to revise the pre-training paradigm [1, 3, 11, 12, 21] that
supervises VLMs with reﬁned alignment. However, existing methods require training from scratch and may rely on
guidance from external large models [3, 11]. Such resourceintensive pipelines obviously struggle to face the realistic
demand, especially with today’s billion-scale datasets [38].
Hence, it is necessary to address the NC problem in visionlanguage training with a cost-effective method.
In this paper, we think outside the box of robust pretraining and pose an important question: Can we directly

1. Introduction
The pursuit of general intelligence has driven progress in
multimodal learning, which seeks to integrate and understand multiple sensory modalities like humans. Large-scale
vision-language training, exempliﬁed by CLIP [37], is seen
as a key milestone in multimodal learning due to its remarkable transfer capabilities in real-world applications, such as
image-text retrieval [13, 22, 34] and robotics control [41].
However, much of their success can be attributed to
scaling laws enabled by massive training data. As every
coin has two sides, the insatiable demand for data forces a
† Co-corresponding authors.

4518

