This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ATCTrack: Aligning Target-Context Cues with Dynamic Target States
for Robust Vision-Language Tracking
Xiaokun Feng1,2 * Shiyu Hu3 * Xuchen Li1,2,4 Dailing Zhang1,2
Meiqi Wu2 Jing Zhang2 Xiaotang Chen1,2 Kaiqi Huang1,2 †
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
2
The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, CASIA
3
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, NTU 4 ZGCA

Abstract

(a)

Intractable

Initial prompts（static）

Tracking sequence (dynamic)

Template patch

Vision-language tracking aims to locate the target object
in the video sequence using a template patch and a language description provided in the initial frame. To achieve
robust tracking, especially in complex long-term scenarios
that reflect real-world conditions as recently highlighted by
MGIT, it is essential not only to characterize the target features but also to utilize the context features related to the
target. However, the visual and textual target-context cues
derived from the initial prompts generally align only with
the initial target state. Due to their dynamic nature, target states are constantly changing, particularly in complex
long-term sequences. It is intractable for these cues to continuously guide Vision-Language Trackers (VLTs). Furthermore, for the text prompts with diverse expressions, our
experiments reveal that existing VLTs struggle to discern
which words pertain to the target or the context, complicating the utilization of textual cues. In this work, we
present a novel tracker named ATCTrack, which can obtain multimodal cues Aligned with the dynamic target states
through comprehensive Target-Context feature modeling,
thereby achieving robust tracking. Specifically, (1) for the
visual modality, we propose an effective temporal visual
target-context modeling approach that provides the tracker
with timely visual cues. (2) For the textual modality, we
achieve precise target words identification solely based on
textual content, and design an innovative context words
calibration method to adaptively utilize auxiliary context
words. (3) We conduct extensive experiments on mainstream benchmarks and ATCTrack achieves a new SOTA
performance. The code and models will be released at:
https://github.com/XiaokunFeng/ATCTrack.

Time
Target

Context

The basketball player in yellow who is holding the red ball.
Target-related text
Context-related text

Language description

The basketball
player in yellow

Ambiguous

who is holding
the red ball

(b)

The basketball
player in yellow
who is holding the
red ball.

Aligned

Time
Timely visual target-context feature

Dedicated textual targetcontext words

Target state

Figure 1. (a) Limitations of initially given prompts (i.e., the template patch and language description). Despite containing certain
multimodal target-context cues, these static initial prompts are intractable for continuously guiding the tracker in dynamic tracking
sequences. Particularly, the objects corresponding to the targetrelated text and context-related text can be ambiguous, which may
mislead the tracker. (b) Our key insights lie in providing multimodal target-context cues aligned with the dynamic target
states. For the visual modality, we model timely visual targetcontext features to adapt to dynamic changes. For the textual
modality, we achieve precise awareness of target words and mitigate the potential misleading effects of context words.

1. Introduction

* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding authors

Given a template patch and a language description in the initial frame, Vision-Language Tracking (VLT) task [49] aims
to locate a user-defined object in a video sequence. Harnessing the complementary advantages of multiple modalities [40], recent studies, exemplified by MGIT [33], seek
to explore the performance of Vision-Language Trackers
(VLTs) in complex long-term sequences. These scenarios, encompassing multifaceted spatiotemporal and causal

19850

