This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PARTE: Part-Guided Texturing for 3D Human Reconstruction
from a Single Image
Hyeongjin Nam∗1
1

Donghwan Kim∗1

Gyeongsik Moon†2

Dept. of ECE&ASRI, Seoul National University

2

Kyoung Mu Lee1

Dept. of CSE, Korea University

{namhjsnu28, dh971106, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr, mks0601@korea.ac.kr
https://hygenie1228.github.io/PARTE/

Abstract
The misaligned human texture across different human parts
is one of the main limitations of existing 3D human reconstruction methods. Each human part, such as a jacket or
pants, should maintain a distinct texture without blending
into others. The structural coherence of human parts serves
as a crucial cue to infer human textures in the invisible regions of a single image. However, most existing 3D human
reconstruction methods do not explicitly exploit such part
segmentation priors, leading to misaligned textures in their
reconstructions. In this regard, we present PARTE, which
utilizes 3D human part information as a key guide to reconstruct 3D human textures. Our framework comprises two
core components. First, to infer 3D human part information from a single image, we propose a 3D part segmentation module (PartSegmenter) that initially reconstructs a
textureless human surface and predicts human part labels
based on the textureless surface. Second, to incorporate
part information into texture reconstruction, we introduce
a part-guided texturing module (PartTexturer), which acquires prior knowledge from a pre-trained image generation network on texture alignment of human parts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework achieves
state-of-the-art quality in 3D human reconstruction.

Input image

3D textureless
human

3D part-segmented
human

3D textured
human

(a) Overview of PARTE

Input image

TeCH

PARTE (Ours)

Input image

TeCH PARTE (Ours)

(b) Importance of part alignment

Figure 1. Overview of PARTE. Our framework reconstructs a
realistic 3D textured human from a single image by effectively
improving part alignment with 3D human part information.

1. Introduction
Despite remarkable advances in 3D reconstruction of human geometry [20, 48, 62, 73, 74], reconstructing highfidelity textures has been relatively unexplored. Most existing methods [6, 10, 22, 24, 31, 61, 77, 84, 88] train their
networks on 3D human scan datasets [8, 23, 47, 58, 79] to
directly predict the colors corresponding to 3D points on the
human surface. More recently, several works [2, 30, 37, 80,
82, 85] have leveraged a pre-trained diffusion model [60]
that contains rich image prior knowledge to reconstruct realistic human textures. However, a critical challenge remains

3D human reconstruction aims to recover both the geometry
and texture of a human from a single image. This task is essential for various applications, such as filmmaking, game
development, and AR/VR. The key challenge in 3D human
reconstruction is inferring human textures for invisible regions by extracting appearance cues, such as cloth coverage
and hair color, from the limited front-view image.
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

‡ This work was done while Hyeongjin Nam was in KRAFTON.

8547

