This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniFuse: A Unified All-in-One Framework for Multi-Modal Medical Image
Fusion Under Diverse Degradations and Misalignments

1

Dayong Su1 , Yafei Zhang1 , Huafeng Li1 *, Jinxing Li2 , Yu Liu3
Faculty of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
dayongsu@outlook.com, {zyfeimail, hfchina99}@163.com,
lijinxing158@hit.edu.cn, yuliu@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Current multimodal medical image fusion typically assumes
that source images are of high quality and perfectly aligned
at the pixel level. Its effectiveness heavily relies on these
conditions and often deteriorates when handling misaligned
or degraded medical images. To address this, we propose UniFuse, a general fusion framework. By embedding
a degradation-aware prompt learning module, UniFuse
seamlessly integrates multi-directional information from
input images and correlates cross-modal alignment with
restoration, enabling joint optimization of both tasks within
a unified framework. Additionally, we design an Omni Unified Feature Representation scheme, which leverages Spatial Mamba to encode multi-directional features and mitigate modality differences in feature alignment. To enable
simultaneous restoration and fusion within an All-in-One
configuration, we propose a Universal Feature Restoration
& Fusion module, incorporating the Adaptive LoRA Synergistic Network (ALSN) based on LoRA principles. By
leveraging ALSN’s adaptive feature representation along
with degradation-type guidance, we enable joint restoration
and fusion within a single-stage framework. Compared to
staged approaches, UniFuse unifies alignment, restoration,
and fusion within a single framework. Experimental results
across multiple datasets demonstrate the method’s effectiveness and significant advantages over existing approaches.
code is available at https://github.com/slrl123/UniFuse.

Figure 1. Difference in processing paradigms between the proposed method and existing methods. (a) Processing paradigm
of existing methods, (b) Processing paradigm of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction

[25], and FusionMamba [30] have made progress, they assume high-quality, perfectly aligned source images. In reality, image quality often degrades due to noise, motion,
or equipment limitations, and spatial misalignment is common in dynamic scanning or multi-device imaging, making
direct fusion challenging.
Traditional solutions to this problem mostly rely on a
staged processing framework, typically separating the tasks
of restoration, alignment, and fusion. Although this approach can be effective, it often involves combining independent models for each task, as shown in Figure 1(a).
These models are usually trained separately, leading to a
lack of effective collaboration and mutual reinforcement
among the tasks. Consequently, the trained models may not
necessarily perform optimally when applied to downstream
tasks. Additionally, this paradigm faces challenges such
as high computational complexity and difficulties in efficiently managing multiple tasks simultaneously. Therefore,
addressing the multimodal medical image fusion, which in-

With advancements in medical imaging, multimodal image fusion enhances diagnosis and treatment by integrating modality-specific strengths to improve image quality.
While methods like AMMNet [2], F-DARTS [34], MATR
* Corresponding author: Huafeng Li (hfchina99@163.com).

14238

