This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G ARF: Learning Generalizable 3D Reassembly for Real-World Fractures
Sihang Li1, ,* Zeyu Jiang1, ,* Grace Chen1,†, Chenyang Xu1,†, Siqi Tan1 , Xue Wang1 , Irving Fang1 ,
Kristof Zyskowski2 , Shannon P. McPherron3 , Radu Iovita1 , Chen Feng1,u , Jing Zhang1,u
1

New York University

FRACTURA (Real fracture)

2

Yale University

3

Max Planck Institute

FRACTURA (Synthetic fracture)

Breaking Bad

Figure 1. We curate F RACTURA, a unique dataset presenting real-world fracture assembly challenges across scientiﬁc domains, including
ceramics, bones, eggshells, and lithics. To tackle these challenges, we introduce G ARF, a generalizable 3D reassembly framework designed
to handle varying object shapes, diverse fracture types, and the presence of missing or extraneous fragments.

Abstract

part accuracy on the Breaking Bad Everyday dataset. This
sheds light on training on synthetic data to advance realworld 3D puzzle solving, demonstrating its strong generalization across unseen object shapes and diverse fracture types. G ARF’s code, data and demo are available at
https://ai4ce.github.io/GARF/.

3D reassembly is a challenging spatial intelligence
task with broad applications across scientiﬁc domains.
While large-scale synthetic datasets have fueled promising learning-based approaches, their generalizability to different domains is limited. Critically, it remains uncertain
whether models trained on synthetic datasets can generalize to real-world fractures where breakage patterns are
more complex. To bridge this gap, we propose G ARF,
a generalizable 3D reassembly framework for real-world
fractures. G ARF leverages fracture-aware pretraining to
learn fracture features from individual fragments, with ﬂow
matching enabling precise 6-DoF alignments. At inference time, we introduce two-session ﬂow matching, improving robustness to unseen objects and varying numbers of fractures. In collaboration with archaeologists, paleoanthropologists, and ornithologists, we curate F RAC TURA , a diverse dataset for vision and learning communities, featuring real-world fracture types across ceramics,
bones, eggshells, and lithics. Comprehensive experiments
have shown our approach consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on both synthetic and real-world datasets,
achieving 82.87% lower rotation error and 25.15% higher

1. Introduction
We have long been captivated by questions of human origins [51]: What are we? Where do we come from? The answers to these fundamental questions lie in archaeological
materials such as bones [6], ceramics [49], and lithics [34].
However, these artifacts are often highly fragmented and incomplete [6, 19]. Reassembling them requires placing each
fragment in its correct position and orientation to restore
a complete or functional entity [41]. This process is not
only time-consuming but also challenges the limits of human spatial intelligence [10, 41, 47]. For instance, an experimental study on lithic reﬁtting reported a success rate
of only 30%, with experts performing only marginally better than novices [20]. Consequently, museum storerooms
around the world remain ﬁlled with thousands of unassembled fragments, waiting to be pieced back together [47].
Recently, the emergence of the large-scale dataset Breaking Bad [42] has brought new hope to this domain, fueling the development of data-intensive reassembly meth-

* , † Equal contribution.

u Corresponding authors {z.jing, cfeng}@nyu.edu.

5711

