This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Representing 3D Shapes with 64 Latent Vectors for 3D Diffusion Models
In Cho

Youngbeom Yoo Subin Jeon
Yonsei University

Seon Joo Kim

{join, youngbeom.yoo, subinjeon, seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning a compressed latent space through a variational
autoencoder [19] (VAE) has become a crucial component
of recent diffusion models. Due to their iterative inference
procedures, generating contents directly in the observation
space (e.g., pixels) is computationally intractable. To address this challenge, most state-of-the-art generative models
adopt a latent diffusion framework: a VAE first compresses
the input data into a lower-dimensional latent space, and
diffusion models are trained within this latent space.
Constructing a compact, well-structured latent space is
even more crucial in the 3D domain. 3D objects are inherently irregular, sparse and continuous, which makes direct
generation in the 3D domain more challenging. Previous
research has explored various explicit 3D representations,
e.g., points [43], voxels [37], and octrees [44]. These ex-

VecSet
(M=64)

𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐. 𝟖𝟖 ×
speedup

Ours
(M=64)

Constructing a compressed latent space through a variational autoencoder (VAE) is the key for efficient 3D diffusion models. This paper introduces COD-VAE that encodes
3D shapes into a COmpact set of 1D latent vectors without sacrificing quality. COD-VAE introduces a two-stage
autoencoder scheme to improve compression and decoding efficiency. First, our encoder block progressively compresses point clouds into compact latent vectors via intermediate point patches. Second, our triplane-based decoder
reconstructs dense triplanes from latent vectors instead of
directly decoding neural fields, significantly reducing computational overhead of neural fields decoding. Finally, we
propose uncertainty-guided token pruning, which allocates
resources adaptively by skipping computations in simpler
regions and improves the decoder efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate that COD-VAE achieves 16× compression compared to the baseline while maintaining quality. This enables 20.8× speedup in generation, highlighting
that a large number of latent vectors is not a prerequisite
for high-quality reconstruction and generation. The code is
available at https://github.com/join16/COD-VAE.

Figure 1. (top) Reconstruction IoU (left) and Rendering-FID of
the generation results (right) with varying numbers of latent vectors (M ). Our COD-VAE outperforms VecSet using 16× fewer labottom
50,
top 1 20.8× generation speedup. (bottom) Vectent
vectors,
achieving
Set with M = 64 struggles to capture details, while our model accurately reconstructs detailed and complex shapes of the objects.

plicit representations typically demand larger latent sizes
and specifically designed networks to process, making the
training and the scaling of generative models difficult.
Recently, 3DShape2VecSet [50] (VecSet) established a
foundational framework for encoding 3D shapes into a set
of 1D latent vectors. These 1D vectors provide a more compact latent space than the explicit representations, and are
highly compatible with modern transformer implementations (e.g., FlashAttention [8]). Due to their simplicity and
effectiveness, 1D latent vectors have been actively extended
in subsequent research [2, 6, 10, 33, 48, 52–54].
The core component of VecSet is the cross-attention
layer, which directly projects an input point cloud into 1D
latent vectors and maps them back to continuous neural
fields. These direct mappings, operating as learnable downsampling and interpolation, leads to the latent vectors only
with a moderate compression ratio. Due to the limited compression ratio, VecSet still requires sufficiently many latent

28556

