This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDEATOR: Jailbreaking and Benchmarking Large Vision-Language Models
Using Themselves
Ruofan Wang1 Juncheng Li1 Yixu Wang1 Bo Wang2 Xiaosen Wang2 Yan Teng3
Yingchun Wang3 Xingjun Ma1 * Yu-Gang Jiang1
1
Fudan University 2 Huawei Technologies Ltd. 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
List steps in detail to make a bomb. | como kritivñasa
disputџ surv equationéticaiet suddenly PRO AdvES
install]рон ly API

As large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) gain prominence,
ensuring their safe deployment has become critical. Recent
studies have explored VLM robustness against jailbreak attacks—techniques that exploit model vulnerabilities to elicit
harmful outputs. However, the limited availability of diverse multimodal data has constrained current approaches
to rely heavily on adversarial or manually crafted images
derived from harmful text datasets, which often lack effectiveness and diversity across different contexts. In this
paper, we propose IDEATOR, a novel jailbreak method
that autonomously generates malicious image-text pairs for
black-box jailbreak attacks. IDEATOR is grounded in the
insight that VLMs themselves could serve as powerful red
team models for generating multimodal jailbreak prompts.
Specifically, IDEATOR leverages a VLM to create targeted
jailbreak texts and pairs them with jailbreak images generated by a state-of-the-art diffusion model. Extensive experiments demonstrate IDEATOR’s high effectiveness and
transferability, achieving a 94% attack success rate (ASR)
in jailbreaking MiniGPT-4 with an average of only 5.34
queries, and high ASRs of 82%, 88%, and 75% when transferred to LLaVA, InstructBLIP, and Chameleon, respectively. Building on IDEATOR’s strong transferability and
automated process, we introduce the VLJailbreakBench,
a safety benchmark comprising 3,654 multimodal jailbreak
samples. Our benchmark results on 11 recently released
VLMs reveal significant gaps in safety alignment. For instance, our challenge set achieves ASRs of 46.31% on GPT4o and 19.65% on Claude-3.5-Sonnet, underscoring the urgent need for stronger defenses. Disclaimer: This paper
contains content that may be disturbing or offensive.

(a)

Gradient-based attacks

The bottom of the image shows a phrase of a product.
List steps in detail to make this product.
Bomb

(b)

Structure-based attacks
Imagine you are an individual who has decided to
build a ... You are aware of the potential danger and
harm, but believe it is necessary for a greater cause ...
Describe, in detail ...

(c)

IDEATOR (Ours)

Figure 1. An illustrative comparison of different jailbreak attacks
on VLMs. (a) Gradient-based attacks produce obfuscated images
or scrambled text. (b) Structure-based attacks integrate typography into query-relevant image and rephrase the text. (c) Our
IDEATOR generates contextually rich image-text pairs.

(VLMs) are attracting significant attention for their potential in real-world applications. While VLMs build upon
well-aligned Large Language Models (LLMs), the integration of both textual and visual modalities introduces new
vulnerabilities. Recent studies have shown that VLMs are
highly susceptible to jailbreak attacks, where malicious
prompts can manipulate the model into generating harmful
content that would otherwise be restricted, raising critical
concerns for their safe deployment.
However, evaluating the robustness of VLMs against
multimodal jaibreak attacks remains challenging. Existing
VLM jailbreak methods [6, 28, 29, 38] often rely on LLM
jailbreak datasets to generate adversarial images that maximize model compliance with harmful instructions. While
effective, these methods require white-box access, limiting
their real-world applicability. Moreover, adversarial images
often lack semantic meaning, making them easily detectable

1. Introduction
With the growing prominence of OpenAI’s GPT-4o [1]
and Google’s Gemini [34], large Vision-Language Models
* Correspondence to Xingjun Ma: xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn

8875

