This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamLayer: Simultaneous Multi-Layer Generation via Diffusion Model
Junjia Huang1,2 * Pengxiang Yan3∗ Jinhang Cai3 Jiyang Liu3
Zhao Wang3 Yitong Wang3 Xinglong Wu3 Guanbin Li1,2,4†
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 ByteDance Intelligent Creation
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
huangjj77@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wantong1017@163.com, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{yanpengxiang.ai, caijinhang, liujiyang.liu, zhaoxu.bit, wuxinglong}@bytedance.com

https://ll3rd.github.io/DreamLayer/

Abstract

A butterfly on a mushroom
in a lush forest
(a) Text to Layer

Text-driven image generation using diffusion models has recently gained significant attention. To enable more flexible
image manipulation and editing, recent research has expanded from single image generation to transparent layer
generation and multi-layer compositions. However, existing approaches often fail to provide a thorough exploration
of multi-layer structures, leading to inconsistent inter-layer
interactions, such as occlusion relationships, spatial layout, and shadowing. In this paper, we introduce DreamLayer, a novel framework that enables coherent text-driven
generation of multiple image layers, by explicitly modeling the relationship between transparent foreground and
background layers. DreamLayer incorporates three key
components, i.e., Context-Aware Cross-Attention (CACA)
for global-local information exchange, Layer-Shared SelfAttention (LSSA) for establishing robust inter-layer connections, and Information Retained Harmonization (IRH) for
refining fusion details at the latent level. By leveraging a
coherent full-image context, DreamLayer builds inter-layer
connections through attention mechanisms and applies a
harmonization step to achieve seamless layer fusion. To
facilitate research in multi-layer generation, we construct
a high-quality, diverse multi-layer dataset including 400k
samples. Extensive experiments and user studies demonstrate that DreamLayer generates more coherent and wellaligned layers, with broad applicability, including latentspace image editing and image-to-layer decomposition.

GPT-4

Inversion

bg: lush forest
fg1: a mushroom
fg2: butterfly

DreamLayer

(b) Image to Layer

Multi-Layer Image
(c) Edit Operation
e.g. Resize mushroom to 0.6

Base pipeline
Optional

Edited Image

Figure 1. DreamLayer can handle multiple tasks: (a) Text-tolayer: Given a text input, we use GPT-4 to decompose foreground
and background elements, feeding them into DreamLayer to generate a multi-layered image. (b) Image-to-layer: By using inversion to initialize starting latent, DreamLayer can decompose an
image based on text prompts. (c) Latent-space editing: During
denoising, DreamLayer can respond to editing instructions, producing more harmonious and consistent edited images.

capabilities to create high-quality, detail-rich images from
text prompts. However, most methods focus on generating
a single, complete image, significantly limiting their potential in applications like content editing and graphic design,
which rely heavily on layered compositions. Layered structures are particularly advantageous for images containing
multiple objects, as they allow for more flexible editing and
creative modifications. This paper investigates the application of diffusion models to generate coherent, multi-layered
images through a simple text-driven process.
Recent methods have started to explore the simultaneous generation of layered image structures to better support
AI-driven image editing workflows. Most existing methods [42, 45] are limited to the generation of two-layer structures, i.e., foreground and background layers. While certain approaches [11, 42] attempt to model the multi-layer
generation task, they lack consideration for the relationship

1. Introduction
In recent years, text-to-image generation based on diffusion
models [1, 3, 4, 22, 24, 27] has demonstrated impressive
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

3357

