This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Performance Consistency in Multi-Level Model Collaboration
Qi Li, Runpeng Yu, Xinchao Wang*
National Univerisity of Singapore
{liqi, r.yu}@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

at the parameter-level using task vectors [15] to create a unified multi-task model. It enables the seamless integration of
specialized knowledge from each single-task model, resulting in enhanced efficiency and adaptability across tasks.

Parameter-level model merging is an emerging paradigm
in multi-task learning with significant promise. Previous
research has explored its connections with prediction-level
model ensembling—commonly viewed as the upper bound
for merging—to reveal the potential of achieving performance consistency between the two. However, this observation relies on certain preconditions, such as being limited to two models, using ViT-based models, and all models are fine-tuned from the same pre-trained checkpoint. To
further understand the intrinsic connections between these
two paradigms, this paper explores an interesting possibility: If these restrictions are removed, can performance
consistency still be achieved between merging and ensembling? To answer this question, we first theoretically establish a performance correlation between merging and ensembling. We find that even when previous restrictions are
not met, there is still a way for model merging to attain a
near-identical and superior performance similar to that of
ensembling. To verify whether our findings are practical,
we introduce a validation framework termed Neural Ligand
(NeuLig). The learning process of NeuLig is meticulously
designed with a specialized loss function supported by theoretical foundations. Experimental results demonstrate the
robust resilience of NeuLig in terms of both model scale and
the number of collaborating models. For instance, for the
case involving 5 CLIP-ViT-B/32 models, parameter-level
merging achieves the same performance as prediction-level
ensembling (merging: 95.44% vs. ensembling: 95.46%).
Code is available here.

Besides model merging, another widely-used paradigm
in multi-task learning is model ensembling [3, 26, 29, 42,
45, 46], which enhances performance by aggregating outputs from multiple models rather than merging their parameters. Recent studies [6, 16, 36, 37] have started to explore
the connections between these two paradigms. For example, results in [36] suggest that when two models collaborate, parameter-level merging and prediction-level ensembling can yield nearly comparable performance at the data
level. Despite the promising results, prior works primarily
focuses on collaborations that (1) center around ViT-based
models, (2) are fine-tuned from the same pre-trained checkpoint, and (3) are limited to only two models.
We argue that a deeper investigation into this phenomenon is both necessary and valuable, as current model
merging methods—typically relying on task vectors or their
variations—often yield performance that falls short of standalone models [15, 17, 38, 39] and ensembling is often considered an upper bound on merging performance [33]. An
open question remains as to whether it is theoretically feasible for merging to match the performance of ensembling
in cases involving multiple models (more than two, which is
the primary focus of merging) and, if so, under what specific
conditions such consistency could be achieved. Achieving
this can greatly liberate the potential of multi-model collaboration, especially when multiple entities collaborate while
privacy constraints vary across stages—sometimes allowing model parameter sharing, while at other times only permitting model output sharing [7, 32, 40]. Grounded in this
significance, we take an initial step toward exploring the
following intriguing question: When multiple models collaborate, can we find an inherent link between parameterlevel merging and prediction-level ensembling that could
still enable performance consistency for both sides? We
first theoretically demonstrate that merging and ensembling
can yield a performance difference of the second order of
smallness under certain conditions. This holds regardless

1. Introduction
Exploring the intrinsic connections between multiple models to enable efficient reuse and collaboration has long been
a core issue in multi-task learning [2, 20, 21, 44]. Recently,
a new paradigm named model merging [17, 18, 34, 36, 38,
39] has emerged. This paradigm merges single-task models
* Corresponding author.

2567

