This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WAVE: Warp-Based View Guidance for Consistent Novel View Synthesis
Using a Single Image
Jiwoo Park

Tae Eun Choi

Youngjun Jun

Seong Jae Hwang*

Yonsei University
{wldn1677, teunchoi, youngjun, seongjae}@yonsei.ac.kr
Input View

LPIPS-next (↓): 0.221

WAVE

Inference: 67.31s

LPIPS-next (↓): 0.359

MegaScenes

Inference: 50.58s

LPIPS-next (↓): 0.234

VistaDream

Inference: 851.13s

Figure 1. Teaser. We present WAVE, a training-free approach that enhances view consistency both among generated images and between
the generated images and the input view. This approach is designed for novel view synthesis diffusion models using a input view. WAVE
generates consistent images (lowest LPIPS-next) across views without extra modules, enabling roughly 67s of inference time for 19 images.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Generating high-quality novel views of a scene from
a single image requires maintaining structural coherence
across different views, referred to as view consistency. While
diffusion models have driven advancements in novel view
synthesis, they still struggle to preserve spatial continuity
across views. Diffusion models have been combined with 3D
models to address the issue, but such approaches lack efficiency due to their complex multi-step pipelines. This paper
proposes a novel view-consistent image generation method
which utilizes diffusion models without additional modules.
Our key idea is to enhance diffusion models with a trainingfree method that enables adaptive attention manipulation
and noise reinitialization by leveraging view-guided warping to ensure view consistency. Through our comprehensive
metric framework suitable for novel-view datasets, we show
that our method improves view consistency across various
diffusion models, demonstrating its broader applicability 1

Scene-level novel view synthesis from a single image has
received significant interest for its potential to generate unseen views from only one image [5, 13, 35, 38]. In singleimage scenarios where multi-view information is unavailable, generative models have become a key component in
novel view synthesis compared to rendering-based models
[10, 19]. Specifically, diffusion models with strong generative capabilities have been adopted to generate novel views
by utilizing view prior knowledge [6, 30]. Such approaches
have led studies to explore diffusion models trained on
large-scale datasets of images and camera parameters to
generate novel views from a single image [25, 32]. Leveraging their generative power, diffusion models can synthesize
unseen scenes with zero-shot capability.

1 Project page: jwoo-park0.github.io/wave

While diffusion-based models such as ZeroNVS [25]
and MegaScenes [32] have demonstrated strong performance, a key limitation of these models is that they cannot maintain view consistency among generated images

11906

