This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMoLoRA: Exploring and Defying Dual Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual
Visual Instruction Tuning
Ziqi Wang1 *, Chang Che1 *, Qi Wang2†, Yangyang Li3 , Zenglin Shi1†, Meng Wang1
1
Hefei University of Technology 2 Tsinghua University 3 Academy of Cyber

Abstract

Continual Visual Instruction Tuning Tasks
Classification

Visual instruction tuning (VIT) enables multimodal large
language models (MLLMs) to effectively handle a wide
range of vision tasks by framing them as language-based
instructions. Building on this, continual visual instruction
tuning (CVIT) extends the capability of MLLMs to incrementally learn new tasks, accommodating evolving functionalities. While prior work has advanced CVIT through
the development of new benchmarks and approaches to mitigate catastrophic forgetting, these efforts largely follow
traditional continual learning paradigms, neglecting the
unique challenges specific to CVIT. We identify a dual form
of catastrophic forgetting in CVIT, where MLLMs not only
forget previously learned visual understanding but also experience a decline in instruction following abilities as they
acquire new tasks. To address this, we introduce the Separable Mixture of Low-Rank Adaptation (SMoLoRA) framework, which employs separable routing through two distinct
modules—one for visual understanding and another for instruction following. This dual-routing design enables specialized adaptation in both domains, preventing forgetting
while improving performance. Furthermore, we propose a
new CVIT benchmark that goes beyond existing benchmarks
by additionally evaluating a model’s ability to generalize to
unseen tasks and handle diverse instructions across various
tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SMoLoRA
outperforms existing methods in mitigating dual forgetting,
improving generalization to unseen tasks, and ensuring robustness in following diverse instructions. Code is available
at https://github.com/Minato-Zackie/SMoLoRA.

MLLM

…

What is
the object
in the
image…

Caption

VQA

What is
happening
in the
presented…

What kind
of fast food
is it…

…

(a) Visual Understanding Forgetting

(b) Instruction Following Forgetting

User: What is the object?
Answer the question using
a single word or phrase.

User: Select the fish below.
A. Clownfish
B. Alligator
Choose the given choices directly.

Truth Response : crane
Task-trained Response: crane
Final Response : chicken

Truth Response :
A
Task-trained Response : A
Final Response : Clownfish

Figure 1. Dual Catastrophic Forgetting. In CVIT, both visual
understanding ability (a) and instruction following ability (b) are
subject to forgetting. Task-trained Response refers to the output
after fine-tuning on the specific task, while Final Response refers
to the output after fine-tuning on the last task.

tion answering (VQA) [4, 46], image captioning [1, 22],
and visual reasoning [15, 38]. MLLMs are typically trained
through a multi-stage process [22, 47]. In the pre-training
stage, the model acquires general knowledge across multiple modalities, while the visual instruction tuning stage enables it to learn and address various vision-related tasks by
framing these tasks as language instructions. This approach
transforms the model into a versatile, general-purpose multimodal system capable of following a wide range of userdefined instructions to solve specific tasks.
Visual instruction tuning for MLLMs is typically performed within a static multitask learning framework [5, 22],
where a unified image-instruction-output data format is
used. However, in real-world applications, MLLMs need to
learn new vision-language tasks to accommodate evolving
requirements. This practical necessity has sparked a growing interest in continual visual instruction tuning (CVIT),
which allows MLLMs to incrementally learn new tasks,

1. Introduction
Building on the foundation of Large Language Models (LLMs) [18, 36], Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), e.g., [5, 22, 47], have demonstrated strong
performance across a range of tasks, such as visual ques* Equal contributions
† Corresponding authors: zenglin.shi@hfut.edu.cn

177

