This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoopTrack: Exploring End-to-End Learning for Efficient Cooperative
Sequential Perception
Jiaru Zhong1,2 Jiahao Wang1 Jiahui Xu3 Xiaofan Li4 Zaiqing Nie1 * Haibao Yu3,1 *
1
Tsinghua University 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Baidu Inc.
zhong.jiaru@outlook.com, zaiqing@air.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuhaibao94@gmail.com

Abstract

Cooperative Detection

Cooperative perception aims to address the inherent limitations of single-vehicle autonomous driving systems through
information exchange among multiple agents. Previous
research has primarily focused on single-frame perception tasks. However, the more challenging cooperative sequential perception tasks, such as cooperative 3D multiobject tracking, have not been thoroughly investigated.
Therefore, we propose CoopTrack, a fully instance-level
end-to-end framework for cooperative tracking, featuring
learnable instance association, which fundamentally differs from existing approaches. CoopTrack transmits sparse
instance-level features that significantly enhance perception capabilities while maintaining low transmission costs.
Furthermore, the framework comprises two key components: Multi-Dimensional Feature Extraction, and CrossAgent Association and Aggregation, which collectively enable comprehensive instance representation with semantic and motion features, and adaptive cross-agent association and fusion based on a feature graph. Experiments on both the V2X-Seq and Griffin datasets demonstrate
that CoopTrack achieves excellent performance. Specifically, it attains state-of-the-art results on V2X-Seq, with
39.0% mAP and 32.8% AMOTA. The project is available
at https://github.com/zhongjiaru/CoopTrack.

(a) Cooperative Single-Frame Perception
Cooperative Detection

Veh. Data

Learning-based Method

Inf. Data

Rule-based Method

Veh. Query

Fused Query

Inf. Query

Detected/Tracked Boxes

Post-process Tracking

(b) Tracking by Cooperative Detection
Update

Update

Transformer
Decoder

Association
Veh. Features

Association

Transformer
Decoder
Veh. Features

(c.1) Vanilla Pipeline

(c.2) Our Proposed Pipeline

(c) End-to-End Cooperative Tracking

Figure 1. Comparison with Current Cooperative Perception. (a) Most research focuses on single-frame perception tasks.
(b) Non end-to-end solutions adopt a tracking-by-cooperativedetection approach. (c) End-to-end cooperative tracking methods
enable joint detection and tracking: (c.1) A previous method [67]
applies rule-based query association. (c.2) Our proposed CoopTrack introduces a fully end-to-end framework with learnable instance association and a novel fusion-after-decoding pipeline.

1. Introduction

tention. Currently, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), cooperative
single-frame perception tasks, such as 3D object detection
[13, 21, 54], have seen significant advancements. However,
cooperative sequential perception tasks, such as cooperative
3D multi-object tracking (3D MOT), remain underexplored.
The cooperative sequential perception problem can be
conceptualized as the fusion of multi-agent perceptual information under constrained communication conditions,
aiming to enhance perception over a continuous time horizon while minimizing transmitted data. Additionally, the
challenge lies in seamlessly integrating the cooperative
module into the sequential perception framework to establish an efficient pipeline. As shown in Fig. 1(b), traditional approaches [5, 40–42, 57, 66] follow the trackingby-cooperative-detection pipeline, where cooperative detec-

Accurate and comprehensive perception of the surrounding
environment is a fundamental task for autonomous driving.
Despite numerous efforts having been made [11, 26, 76],
single-vehicle perception still faces significant challenges
due to the limited information from a single observation
perspective. With the assistance of vehicle-to-everything
(V2X) communication, cooperative perception offers a
promising solution and has thus garnered widespread at* Corresponding authors.

26954

