This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProbMED: A Probabilistic Framework for Medical Multimodal Binding
Yuan Gao1,2,3,5,6 * Sangwook Kim1,3,4,5,6 * Jianzhong You1,2,3,5,6
1

Chris McIntosh1,2,3,4,5,6

Peter Munk Cardiac Centre 2 Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research 3 University Health Network
4
Joint Department of Medical Imaging 5 University of Toronto 6 Vector Institute
{yuan.gao, sangwook.kim, jianzhong.you, chris.mcintosh}@uhn.ca

Abstract
Medical decision-making requires integrating diverse medical information, from imaging to clinical narratives. These
medical modalities are often acquired in a many-to-many
manner. However, current medical vision-language pretraining models (Med-VLPMs) fail to directly account for
this many-to-many mapping in their model training and
embeddings. To address this, we present Probabilistic
Modality-Enhanced Diagnosis (ProbMED), a multimodal
Med-VLPM that employs probabilistic contrastive learning to model distributions over embeddings rather than
deterministic estimates. ProbMED aligns four distinct
modalities—chest X-rays, electrocardiograms, echocardiograms, and clinical text—into a unified probabilistic embedding space. We use InfoNCE loss with Hellinger distance to integrate inter-modality distributions. We introduce a probabilistic synthetic sampling loss that captures modality-specific mean and variance to improve intramodality binding. Extensive experiments across 13 medical datasets demonstrate that our model outperforms current Med-VLPMs in cross-modality retrieval, zero-shot, and
few-shot classification. We also demonstrate the robust integration of multiple modalities for prognostication, showing
improved intra- and inter-medical modality binding. Code
is available: https://github.com/mcintoshML/probMED.

key limitations: 1) Deterministic models may struggle to
capture the inherent variability and complex many-to-many
relationships in medical data, 2) Majority of existing models focus exclusively on CXR-text alignment, overlooking
broader multimodal nature of medical care.
Regarding the first problem, there are many medical
cases where many-to-many relationships exist. For example, a CXR of a patient in respiratory distress can have
multiple valid interpretations: "A cloudy patch in
the lower lung" or "CXR has pneumonia". Although phrased differently, these examples inherently convey the same meaning, where one describes pneumonia
and the other states the disease. Thus, these two examples
should both relate to a pneumonia CXR, but not all cloudy
patches are pneumonia (e.g., cloudy patches could be lung
cancer). Next, consider a patient visit; they may require
multiple electrocardiograms (ECGs) and CXRs to confirm
prognosis–the relationships between ECGs and CXRs are
inherently many-to-many. These examples highlight the
limitations of deterministic methods that force embeddings
into discrete positive/negative labels, making them ill-suited
to modeling the ambiguity in the pairings. Recent advances in contrastive learning have highlighted the importance of capturing these relationships in learned representations [10]. Probabilistic contrastive learning extends traditional methods by modeling distributions over embeddings
rather than single-point estimates [11, 30]; thus, each instance is represented as a distribution, which can enable better semantic overlap and resolve ambiguity during training.
For the second problem, real-world diagnostics integrate
multiple modalities, for a more comprehensive clinical picture [16, 51]. However, as modalities multiply, cross-modal
pairings grow quadratically, requiring a probabilistic contrastive approach. Thus, our approach unifies multiple medical data pairs through probabilistic contrastive learning by
randomly sampling one modality pair per gradient update.
In this work, we introduce Probabilistic ModalityEnhanced Diagnosis (P ROB MED), a probabilistic multimodal Med-VLPM that bridges the gap between multiple
medical modalities. This is the first study to leverage prob-

1. Introduction
Medical decision-making is inherently multimodal and requires integrating diverse information ranging from imaging modalities to clinical reports. Despite the growing success of medical vision language pretraining models (MedVLPM) in extracting embeddings from paired modalities,
typically chest radiographs (CXR) with corresponding reports, these approaches operate primarily under a deterministic embedding framework that enforces one-to-one mappings [8, 16, 22, 50, 61, 62]. Existing approaches face two
* Equal contribution to this work.

20157

