This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MCID: Multi-aspect Copyright Infringement Detection for Generated Images
Chuanwei Huang1 , Zexi Jia* 1,2 , Hongyan Fei1 , Yeshuang Zhu2 , Zhiqiang Yuan2 , Ying Deng2 , Jiapei
Zhang2 , Xiaoyue Duan2 , Jinchao Zhang2 , Jie Zhou2
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China

Abstract
With the rapid advancement of generative models, we
can now create highly realistic images. This represents
a significant technical breakthrough but also introduces
new challenges for copyright protection. Previous methods for detecting copyright infringement in AI-generated
images mainly depend on global similarity. However, realworld infringement often occurs only on certain attributes
rather than being a global infringement. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel Multi-aspect Copyright Infringement Detection (MCID) task, which encompasses various types of infringement, including content, style, structure, and intellectual property infringement. We further develop the Hybrid Infringement Detection Model (HIDM) to
address the MCID task. By combining feature-based methods with VLMs, it enables the detection of various infringement types and provides interpretable results. To ensure the
MCID task meets actual legal requirements, we construct
a Large-Scale Copyright Dataset (LSCD) with clear author
copyright ownership. Based on LSCD, we provide a benchmark annotated by legal experts for performance evaluation. Experimental results show that HIDM effectively detects various types of image copyright infringement and offers a more interpretable and superior solution compared
to previous methods.

v.s. Stability AI case exposes critical copyright violations
in generative AI by training models like Stable Diffusion
on 12 million unlicensed images. These models generate
a large amount of images similar to these copyrighted images, severely infringing upon the copyrights of the creators. More cases can be found in the Appendix.
These legal disputes have highlighted new challenges in
copyright protection for AI generated images. Traditional
copyright infringement detection mainly relies on copy detection methods [34]. These methods [42, 43] primarily focus on the overall similarity between images to identify infringement with images in the training dataset. However,
these methods have two major limitations in practical applications. First, they depend on global similarity to detect infringement, whereas real-world copyright infringement often involves only copying specific attributes, such as their
style or structure; Second, these methods focus on detecting whether the generated images copy the training dataset.
Although there may be clear copying between these images, this is not sufficient to constitute legal infringement.
Legally, only unauthorized imitation of images from any
evaluation aspect that are protected by copyright is considered infringement, while prior work focused on detecting
mimicry of images that are not copyrighted.
To address these limitations, we propose Multi-aspect
Copyright Infringement Detection (MCID), a novel task
designed to systematically detect whether AI-generated images infringe copyrighted works across any evaluative aspect. Building upon research insights from image editing
tasks [22], which establish that most image attributes can
be classified into three main categories: content, style, and
structural attributes, we believe that generated images also
predominantly infringe upon these visual attributes. Notably, intellectual property (IP) infringement typically manifests as unauthorized replication of copyrighted characters
(e.g., Spider-Man, Mario) rather than specific image attributes, thus warranting separate categorization. Therefore,
our proposed MCID explicitly includes four infringement
types: content, style, structure and IP infringement, as illus-

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence technology, generative models have achieved revolutionary
breakthroughs in the field of image synthesis. However,
the advancement of AIGC has also brought new challenges
in copyright protection. In recent years, there has been
a surge in legal disputes over generated images infringing on others’ copyrights, increasing the demand for copyright infringement detection methods. The Getty Images
* Corresponding author.

16154

