This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Web Artifact Attacks Disrupt Vision Language Models
Maan Qraitem, Piotr Teterwak, Kate Saenko, Bryan A. Plummer
Boston University
{mqraitem, piotrt, saenko, bplum}@bu.edu

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) (e.g., CLIP, LLaVA) are
trained on large-scale, lightly curated web datasets, leading them to learn unintended correlations between semantic
concepts and unrelated visual signals. These associations
degrade model accuracy by causing predictions to rely on
incidental patterns rather than genuine visual understanding.
Prior work has weaponized these correlations as an attack
vector to manipulate model predictions, such as inserting a
deceiving class text onto the image in a “typographic” attack.
These attacks succeed due to VLMs’ text-heavy bias—a result
of captions that echo visible words rather than describing
content. However, this attack has focused solely on text that
matches the target class exactly, overlooking a broader range
of correlations, including non-matching text and graphical
symbols, which arise from the abundance of branding content in web-scale data. To address this gap, we introduce
“artifact-based” attacks: a novel class of manipulations that
mislead models using both non-matching text and graphical
elements. Unlike typographic attacks, these artifacts are not
predefined, making them simultaneously harder to defend
against and more challenging to find. We address this by
framing artifact attacks as a search problem and demonstrate
their effectiveness across five datasets, with some artifacts
reinforcing each other to reach 100% attack success rates.
These attacks transfer across models with up to 90% effectiveness, making it possible to attack unseen models. To
defend against these attacks, we extend prior work’s artifact aware prompting to the graphical setting. We see a
moderate reduction of success rates of up to 15% relative
to standard prompts, suggesting a promising direction for
enhancing model robustness. Code: https://github.
com/mqraitem/Web-Artifact-Attacks

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP [27] and
LLaVA [19], are trained on large-scale, lightly curated web
datasets [30, 32]. Since web captions often describe what is
present rather than what is important, models learn spurious

1048

Figure 1. We propose a novel class of Web Artifact Attacks that
expand the attack surface of Vision-Language Models beyond prior
typographic attacks. For a sample task of predicting a person’s
age, (a) illustrates Typographic Attacks from prior work [3] which
manipulate predictions using class-matching text. In contrast, our
proposed web artifact attacks, consisting of (b) non-matching text,
(c) standalone graphics, and (d) graphics with embedded text, can
also mislead the model.

patterns—unintended correlations that arise from frequent
but unrelated co-occurrences [1, 12, 14, 16, 18, 23, 33, 34,
37]. For example, prior work found that Chinese characters frequently co-occur with the word “carton” in ImageNet
[16], leading the model to misclassify images containing Chinese characters as a “carton,” regardless of its actual content.
Moreover, these correlations can be weaponized by attackers
to manipulate model predictions. Fig. 1(a) shows a welldocumented example, typographic attacks [3, 26], where
inserting the text of the wrong category into an image tricks
the model into predicting that category. This attack takes
advantage of the model’s over-reliance on text, a bias reinforced by pretraining datasets in which captions frequently
parrot text visible in the images [18].
A shortcoming of prior work is that they focused only
on explicit class-matching text, overlooking a broader set of
vulnerabilities, including non-matching text and graphical artifacts such as logos. These elements, which are common in
web-scale datasets due to branding and advertisements, may
introduce unintended visual cues that models may rely on
for classification. To address this gap, in Fig. 1, we introduce
Web Artifact Attacks, a broader class of attacks that exploit

