This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VRM: Knowledge Distillation via Virtual Relation Matching
Weijia Zhang1
Fei Xie1
Weidong Cai2
Chao Ma1, *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 The University of Sydney
{weijia.zhang, feixie, chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn

tom.cai@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) aims to transfer the knowledge of a more capable yet cumbersome teacher model to
a lightweight student model. In recent years, relation-based
KD methods have fallen behind, as their instance-matching
counterparts dominate in performance. In this paper, we
revive relational KD by identifying and tackling several key
issues in relation-based methods, including their susceptibility to overfitting and spurious responses. Specifically, we
transfer novelly constructed affinity graphs that compactly
encapsulate a wealth of beneficial inter-sample, inter-class,
and inter-view correlations by exploiting virtual views and
relations as a new kind of knowledge. As a result, the student has access to richer guidance signals and stronger regularisation throughout the distillation process. To further
mitigate the adverse impact of spurious responses, we prune
the affinity graphs by dynamically detaching redundant and
unreliable edges. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-100,
ImageNet, and MS-COCO datasets demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed virtual relation matching
(VRM) method, where it consistently sets new state-of-theart records over a range of models, architectures, tasks, and
set-ups. For instance, VRM for the first time hits 74.0%
accuracy for ResNet50→MobileNetV2 distillation on ImageNet, and improves DeiT-T by 14.44% on CIFAR-100 with
a ResNet56 teacher. The code and models are released at
https://github.com/VISION-SJTU/VRM .

(a) Instance Matching

(b) Relation Matching

(c) VRM (Dense)

(d) VRM (Pruned)

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of VRM compared to existing
KD methods based on instance matching and relation matching.

tance between compact representations of knowledge extracted from the teacher and student models. It has found
widespread application across a spectrum of downstream
tasks [18, 22, 30, 34, 62, 64, 67, 70, 75, 77, 83].
According to the type of knowledge representations to
be transferred, KD methods can be broadly categorised into
feature-based [56], logit-based [27], and relation-based [52]
approaches. The former two directly match the feature
maps or logit vectors produced by the teacher and student
models for each training sample, which is essentially instance matching (IM). By contrast, relation matching (RM)
methods construct and match structured relations extracted
within a batch of model responses. A conceptual illustration
is presented in Figs. 1a and 1b.
Instance matching has been the prevailing distillation approach in recent years. Popular KD benchmarks see a dominance by IM methods such as FCFD [45], NORM [47],
and CRLD [76], with different downstream tasks successfully tackled by directly adopting IM-based distillation [6, 14, 62, 69]. Yet, recent studies discovered that relational knowledge is more robust to variations in neural architectures, data modalities, and tasks [52, 61]. Meanwhile,
methods transferring relations have also achieved promising

1. Introduction
Deep learning is achieving incredible performance at the
cost of increasing model complexity and overheads. As a
consequence, large and cumbersome neural models struggle to work in resource-constrained environments. Knowledge distillation (KD) [27] has been proposed to address
this issue by transferring the knowledge of larger and
more capable models to smaller and lightweight ones that
are resource-friendly. KD works by minimising the dis* Corresponding author.

2707

