This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Tumor Segmentation:
Best Lessons from Real and Synthetic Data
Qi Chen1,2 Xinze Zhou1 Chen Liu1,3 Hao Chen4 Wenxuan Li1 Zekun Jiang5
Ziyan Huang6,7 Yuxuan Zhao8 Dexin Yu8 Junjun He7 Yefeng Zheng9 Ling Shao2
Alan Yuille1 Zongwei Zhou1, *
1

Johns Hopkins University
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 4 University of Cambridge
5
Sichuan University 6 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
7
Shanghai AI Laboratory 8 Qilu Hospital of Shandong University 9 Westlake University
2

Code, Model & Data: https://github.com/BodyMaps/AndomenAtlas2.0

Abstract
AI for tumor segmentation is limited by the lack of large,
voxel-wise annotated datasets, which are hard to create and
require medical experts. In our proprietary JHH dataset
of 3,000 annotated pancreatic tumor scans, we found that
AI performance stopped improving after 1,500 scans. With
synthetic data, we reached the same performance using only
500 real scans. This finding suggests that synthetic data can
steepen data scaling laws, enabling more efficient model
training than real data alone. Motivated by these lessons,
we created AbdomenAtlas 2.0—a dataset of 10,134 CT
scans with a total of 13,223 tumor instances per-voxel manually annotated in six organs (pancreas, liver, kidney, colon,
esophagus, and uterus) and 6,511 control scans. Annotated
by 23 expert radiologists, it is several orders of magnitude
larger than existing public tumor datasets. While we continue expanding the dataset, the current version of AbdomenAtlas 2.0 already provides a strong foundation—based on
lessons from the JHH dataset—for training AI to segment
tumors in six organs. It achieves notable improvements over
public datasets, with a +7% DSC gain on in-distribution
tests and +16% on out-of-distribution tests.

Figure 1. Data scaling laws study. Experimental results on the
proprietary dataset demonstrate that increasing the scale of real
data improve the segmentation (gray curve). Notably, supplementing the dataset with an additional 3→ synthetic data (red curve) can
further enhance the results, revealing the potential of a larger public dataset to advance tumor research.

1. Introduction

by scaling laws [20, 51, 78, 85], to estimate the impact
of data scale on tumor segmentation performance, we first
leveraged a proprietary dataset of 3,000 pancreatic tumor
scans, per-voxel annotated over five years by expert radiologists and verified by pathology reports. Our previous
work [61, 96] showed that this dataset enabled AI to reach
radiologist-level detection accuracy. However, as shown
in Figure 1, performance gains plateaued after 1,500 scans,
suggesting diminishing returns from adding more real data.
Recognizing that annotating 1,500 scans is still a considerable undertaking for a single tumor type, we explored the
potential of synthetic data [13, 28, 40, 58, 63, 73] to further
advance this plateau. By adding synthetic tumors—three
times the number of real tumors—we achieved similar or

Developing AI models for tumor segmentation is fundamentally challenged by the scarcity of large, annotated
datasets—owing to the immense time and expertise required for per-voxel annotation [70, 103, 107]. Inspired
* Correspondence to Zongwei Zhou ( ZZHOU 82@ JH . EDU )

24001

