This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LINR-PCGC: Lossless Implicit Neural Representations for Point Cloud
Geometry Compression
Wenjie Huang1 Qi Yang2 Shuting Xia1 He Huang1 Yiling Xu1† Zhu Li2
1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Missouri-Kansas City
1 {huangwenjie2023,

xiashuting, huanghe0429, yl.xu}@sjtu.edu.cn , 2 {qiyang, lizhu}@umkc.edu

Abstract

Previous AI-based method

train

encoder

decoder

overfit
encoder

Slow

decode

decoder

pc-encoder
pc-decoder

pc-encoder
pc-decoder

Quick

† Corresponding Author.

encode

Middle speed

Point clouds have become a pivotal data format for representing and interacting with 3D environments. Their ability to capture complex spatial structures with high fidelity
makes them indispensable for many real-world applications,
such as applications in the metaverse and autonomous driving [6, 27]. However, the large data volume of point clouds,
specifically for the point cloud sequence that can capture
dynamic content, poses significant challenges for storage,

Huge network

Tiny network

Middle speed

1. Introduction

pretrain

Huge dataset for
universality

Existing AI-based point cloud compression methods struggle with dependence on specific training data distributions,
which limits their real-world deployment. Implicit Neural
Representation (INR) methods solve the above problem by
encoding overfitted network parameters to the bitstream, resulting in more distribution-agnostic results. However, due
to the limitation of encoding time and decoder size, current
INR based methods only consider lossy geometry compression. In this paper, we propose the first INR based lossless
point cloud geometry compression method called Lossless
Implicit Neural Representations for Point Cloud Geometry
Compression (LINR-PCGC). To accelerate encoding speed,
we design a group of point clouds level coding framework
with an effective network initialization strategy, which can
reduce around 60% encoding time. A lightweight coding
network based on multiscale SparseConv, consisting of scale
context extraction, child node prediction, and model compression modules, is proposed to realize fast inference and
compact decoder size. Experimental results show that our
method consistently outperforms traditional and AI-based
methods: for example, with the convergence time in the
MVUB dataset, our method reduces the bitstream by approximately 21.21% compared to G-PCC TMC13v23 and
21.95% compared to SparsePCGC. Our project can be seen
on https://huangwenjie2023.github.io/LINR-PCGC/.

INR method

Model
Compress
Model
Decompress
pc-decoder

Figure 1. Previous AI-based method typically employs large-scale
datasets to train a high-capacity neural network for universality,
which operates in inference mode with fixed parameters during
both encoding and decoding. INR method overfits the network
with target point cloud to be compressed. Both the point cloud and
the network parameters will be encoded into bitstream.

transmission, and real-time processing, necessitating the
development of efficient compression techniques. In this
paper, we focus on the Point Cloud sequence Geometry
Lossless Compression (PCGLC) study.
Current PCGLC methods can be mainly categorized into
traditional approaches and AI-driven approaches. Traditional methods, such as Geometry-based Point Cloud Compression (G-PCC) [2, 7] and Video-based Point Cloud Compression (V-PCC) [1, 13, 29], have been standardized by the
Coding of 3D Graphics and Haptics (WG7) of the Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG). These methods have
demonstrated strong adaptability, interpretable operations,
and impressive compression ratios. Despite these advantages, these methods rely on manually designed tools and
parameters, which limit their ability to fully exploit geometry spatial, leading to suboptimal performance [6]. AIdriven methods, based on 3D regular voxels [10, 23, 33]
or tree structures [5, 11, 17, 30], address these limitations
using neural networks to model spatial correlation from

28577

