This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffuMatch: Category-Agnostic Spectral Diffusion Priors for
Robust Non-rigid Shape Matching
Emery Pierson1
Lei Li2
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique1

Angela Dai2
Maks Ovsjanikov1
Technical University of Munich2

Spectral domain learning
Zero-shot shape matching
on new categories

Convert

Knowledge
Large functional
maps collection

transfer
Humanoids

Train

Large registered
human shape collection

Functional maps
diffusion model

Diffusion time

Animals

Figure 1. We learn diffusion priors in the spectral domain from a large collection of functional maps computed on registered human shapes.
The learned spectral diffusion priors are category-agnostic and generalize robustly to unseen shape categories, enabling accurate zero-shot
non-rigid shape matching.

els are category-agnostic, and can fully replace commonly
used strategies such as enforcing Laplacian commutativity
or orthogonality of functional maps. Our key technical contribution is a novel distillation strategy from diffusion models in the spectral domain. Experiments demonstrate that
our learned regularization leads to better results than axiomatic approaches for zero-shot non-rigid shape matching. Our code is available at: https://github.com/
daidedou/diffumatch/

Abstract
Deep functional maps have recently emerged as a powerful tool for solving non-rigid shape correspondence tasks.
Methods that use this approach combine the power and flexibility of the functional map framework, with data-driven
learning for improved accuracy and generality. However,
most existing methods in this area restrict the learning aspect only to the feature functions and still rely on axiomatic
modeling for formulating the training loss or for functional
map regularization inside the networks. This limits both the
accuracy and the applicability of the resulting approaches
only to scenarios where assumptions of the axiomatic models hold. In this work, we show, for the first time, that both
in-network regularization and functional map training can
be replaced with data-driven methods. For this, we first
train a generative model of functional maps in the spectral domain using score-based generative modeling, built
from a large collection of high-quality maps. We then exploit the resulting model to promote the structural properties of ground truth functional maps on new shape collections. Remarkably, we demonstrate that the learned mod-

1. Introduction
Shape matching is a fundamental problem in geometry processing, as it is a necessary step for many applications such
as shape interpolation [2], texture transfer [19], and statistical shape analysis [8, 9].
A particularly appealing approach to non-rigid shape
matching is the recent deep functional maps framework [20,
42]. It consists of two main blocks: (1) a deep feature
extractor that computes descriptor functions approximately
preserved across a pair of input shapes, and (2) a differentiable functional map solver that computes the matching in
the spectral domain under axiomatic regularizations. Func-

5745

