This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FastVAR: Linear Visual Autoregressive Modeling via Cached Token Pruning
Hang Guo1 Yawei Li2,∗,† Taolin Zhang1 Jiangshan Wang1
Tao Dai3,∗ Shu-Tao Xia1,4 Luca Benini2
1
Tsinghua University 2 ETH Zürich 3 Shenzhen University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Figure 1. Our FastVAR can generate one 2K image using one NVIDIA 3090 GPU, while existing baseline fails due to out of memory.

Abstract
Visual Autoregressive (VAR) modeling has gained popularity for its shift towards next-scale prediction. However, existing VAR paradigms process the entire token map
at each scale step, leading to the complexity and runtime
scaling dramatically with image resolution. To address this
challenge, we propose FastVAR, a post-training acceleration method for efficient resolution scaling with VARs. Our
key finding is that the majority of latency arises from the
large-scale step where most tokens have already converged.
Leveraging this observation, we develop the cached token
pruning strategy that only forwards pivotal tokens for scalespecific modeling while using cached tokens from previous
scale steps to restore the pruned slots. This significantly
reduces the number of forwarded tokens and improves
the efficiency at larger resolutions. Experiments show
the proposed FastVAR can further speedup FlashAttentionaccelerated VAR by 2.7× with negligible performance drop
of <1%. We further extend FastVAR to zero-shot generation of higher resolution images. In particular, FastVAR
can generate one 2K image with 15GB memory footprints
in 1.5s on a single NVIDIA 3090 GPU. Code is available at
https://github.com/csguoh/FastVAR.

petitive with diffusion models for visual generation [47]
as well as the potential for unified vision understanding
and generation [55–57, 59]. However, this token-by-token
paradigm suffers from numerous decoding steps. Recently,
Visual Autoregressive (VAR) modeling [50] has shifted the
paradigm to next-scale prediction, enabling image generation in fewer steps. Under this new paradigm, some
works [22, 48] have developed VAR-based models for textto-image generation and obtained promising results.
Despite their potential, existing VAR-based methods [22,
48, 50] face a critical challenge: the computational complexity and runtime latency scale dramatically with image
resolution. Specifically, unlike next-token prediction which
processes only one token per step, the next-scale prediction
of VAR requires processing the entire token map at each
decoding step. As a result, the number of tokens increases
in O(n2 ) with the image resolution n × n, and even leads
to O(n4 ) complexity in the attention [53] layer. Empirically, as shown in Fig. 2(a), even when FlashAttention [13]
is enabled, VAR models still exhibit super-linear runtime
latency. Consequently, this significant computational complexity prevents existing VAR-based models from scaling
to higher resolutions, such as 2K.
In this work, we aim to address the resolution scaling
challenge of VARs by pruning forwarded tokens. Through
an in-depth analysis of the pre-trained VAR models, we
identify the following key findings. 1) Large-scale steps are
speed bottleneck but appear robustness. Runtime profiling
in Fig. 2(a) finds that the last two large-scale steps account

1. Introduction
The next-token prediction of Autoregressive (AR) models [31, 33, 47, 55, 59] has demonstrated performance com* Corresponding Authors, †Project Lead.

19011

