This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynImg: Key Frames with Visual Prompts are Good Representation for
Multi-Modal Video Understanding
Xiaoyi Bao1,2,3 , Chenwei Xie3 , Hao Tang3,4 , Tingyu Weng3 ,
Xiaofeng Wang1,2 , Yun Zheng3 , Xingang Wang1,5 *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group 4 Peking University 5 Luoyang Institute for Robot and Intelligent Equipment

Figure 1. Comparison between the previous methods for video understanding and DynImg. As for the structure comparison in the left (1),
previous models use processed visual features for subsequent spatial and temporal merging modules, either in parallel (a) or in sequence
(b). However, in rapidly moving scenarios like the example on the right, where the little girl quickly turns back and moves in the last frame,
these models fail to capture the crucial details of her motion. Factors such as motion blur lead to these important temporal details being
overlooked during the visual feature extraction process, resulting in these areas not receiving the necessary attention. Spatio-temporal
interaction based on such inaccurate features or tokens is ineffective. In contrast, our proposed DynImg (c) advances the spatio-temporal
interaction process via temporal prompts. This enables the model to focus on those rapidly moving regions that are difficult to capture
during the feature extraction phase. The right part shows its effectiveness and efficiency (2). “Accuracy” is the average accuracy on MSVD,
MSRVTT, Activitynet, and TGIF. “Token Efficiency” is negatively correlated with the number of visual tokens used to represent the video.

Abstract
In recent years, the introduction of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) into video understanding tasks has
become increasingly prevalent. However, how to effectively
integrate temporal information remains a critical research
focus. Traditional approaches treat spatial and temporal
information separately. Due to issues like motion blur, it
is challenging to accurately represent the spatial information of rapidly moving objects. This can lead to temporally

important regions being underemphasized during spatial
feature extraction, which in turn hinders accurate spatiotemporal interaction and video understanding. To address
this limitation, we propose an innovative video representation method called Dynamic-Image (DynImg). Specifically,
we introduce a set of non-key frames as temporal prompts
to highlight the spatial areas containing fast-moving objects. During the process of visual feature extraction, these
prompts guide the model to pay additional attention to
the fine-grained spatial features corresponding to these re-

23678

