This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FA: Forced Prompt Learning of Vision-Language Models for
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Xinhua Lu1,2,4 , Runhe Lai1,2,4 , Yanqi Wu1,2,4 , Kanghao Chen3† , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,4 , Ruixuan Wang1,2,4†
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing
{luxh55, lairh5, wuyq268}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, kchen879@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
wszheng@ieee.org, wangruix5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Forced prompt leArning
[Context]A photo of a cat.

[reference]

TE

A photo of a cat.

Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) have advanced out-of-distribution (OOD) detection recently. However, existing CLIP-based methods often focus on learning
OOD-related knowledge to improve OOD detection, showing limited generalization or reliance on external largescale auxiliary datasets. In this study, instead of delving into the intricate OOD-related knowledge, we propose an innovative CLIP-based framework based on Forced
prompt leArning (FA), designed to make full use of the InDistribution (ID) knowledge and ultimately boost the effectiveness of OOD detection. Our key insight is to learn
a prompt (i.e. forced prompt) that contains more diversified and richer descriptions of the ID classes beyond the
textual semantics of class labels. Specifically, it promotes
better discernment for ID images, by forcing more notable
semantic similarity between ID images and the learnable
forced prompt. Moreover, we introduce a forced coefficient, encouraging the forced prompt to learn more comprehensive and nuanced descriptions of the ID classes. In
this way, FA is capable of achieving notable improvements
in OOD detection, even when trained without any external auxiliary datasets, while maintaining an identical number of trainable parameters as CoOp. Extensive empirical evaluations confirm our method consistently outperforms current state-of-the-art methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/0xFAFA/FA.

OOD feature for training
Text feature
OOD feature
ID feature

IE: Image encoder
TE: Text encoder

[Context]A cat can be
with slender, softfurred and small-eared.

(b) Previous work

TE

Frozen
Learnable

cat.

IE

A photo of a

[prompt]

cat.

External OOD datasets

ID-irrelated regions

…

OOD-related knowledge

Figure 1. Comparison of CLIP-based OOD detection methods.
Existing methods focus on OOD-related knowledge to learn a
complex ID/OOD decision boundary as shown in the orange area
in (b). In contrast, our FA aims to fully exploit ID knowledge
by forcing the model to learn richer descriptions of the ID classes
beyond the textual semantics of class labels. These richer descriptions of the ID classes compared to the reference text allow better
discernment of ID/OOD samples (orange vs. blue area in (a)).

Detecting OOD data is vital for the reliability of AI systems.
This problem becomes harder in fields like intelligent diagnosis, where only a small amount of labeled data is available, motivating the problem of few-shot OOD detection.
To tackle the OOD detection problem, previous singlemodal post-hoc methods [14, 16, 24, 27, 41] achieve notable
success based on a model pre-trained on the ID dataset.
However, they come with limitations, such as requiring substantial computational resources and annotation costs for
training, which hinder the performance of few-shot OOD
detection. With the development of large pre-trained visionlanguage models (VLMs) like CLIP [37], few-shot OOD
detection has achieved remarkable performance. Most of
the CLIP-based OOD detection methods [30, 32] focus on

1. Introduction
AI models often encounter Out-of-Distribution (OOD) samples [14, 25, 28, 38], which differ from the distribution of
the training data, when deployed in real-world applications.
† Corresponding author.

1152

