This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POMATO: Marrying Pointmap Matching with Temporal Motions
for Dynamic 3D Reconstruction
Songyan Zhang1∗ Yongtao Ge2,3∗ Jinyuan Tian2∗ Guangkai Xu2
Hao Chen2 Chen Lv1 Chunhua Shen2
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Zhejiang University, China
3
The University of Adelaide, Australia

   



  

  

      

 

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction from an arbitrary dynamic video with POMATO. Without relying on external modules, POMATO can
directly perform 3D reconstruction along with temporal 3D point tracking and dynamic mask estimation.

Abstract

performance in such scenarios. In this work, we present
POMATO, a uniﬁed framework for dynamic 3D reconstruction by marrying POintmap MAtching with Temporal
mOtion. Speciﬁcally, our method ﬁrst learns an explicit
matching relationship by mapping RGB pixels across different views to 3D pointmaps within a uniﬁed coordinate system. Furthermore, we introduce a temporal motion module
for dynamic motions that ensures scale consistency across
different frames and enhances performance in 3D reconstruction tasks requiring both precise geometry and reliable
matching, most notably 3D point tracking. We show the effectiveness of our proposed POMATO by demonstrating the
remarkable performance across multiple downstream tasks,
including video depth estimation, 3D point tracking, and
pose estimation. Code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/wyddmw/POMATO.

Recent approaches to 3D reconstruction in dynamic scenes
primarily rely on the integration of separate geometry estimation and matching modules, where the latter plays a
critical role in distinguishing dynamic regions and mitigating the interference caused by moving objects. Furthermore, the matching module explicitly models object motion, enabling the tracking of speciﬁc targets and advancing
motion understanding in complex scenarios. Recently, the
proposed representation of pointmap in DUSt3R suggests
a potential solution to unify both geometry estimation and
matching in 3D space, effectively reducing computational
overhead by eliminating the need for redundant auxiliary
modules. However, it still struggles with ambiguous correspondences in dynamic regions, which limits reconstruction
* Equal contribution.  Corresponding author.

5680

