This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instruction-Grounded Visual Projectors for
Continual Learning of Generative Vision-Language Models

1

Hyundong Jin1
Hyung Jin Chang2
Eunwoo Kim1, *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Chung-Ang University
2
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
{jude0316, eunwoo}@cau.ac.kr

h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk

Classification Task
Pre-trained
VLM

Abstract

đ

Continual learning enables pre-trained generative visionlanguage models (VLMs) to incorporate knowledge from
new tasks without retraining data from previous ones. Recent methods update a visual projector to translate visual
information for new tasks, connecting pre-trained vision
encoders with large language models. However, such adjustments may cause the models to prioritize visual inputs
over language instructions, particularly learning tasks with
repetitive types of textual instructions. To address the neglect of language instructions, we propose a novel framework that grounds the translation of visual information on
instructions for language models. We introduce a mixture
of visual projectors, each serving as a specialized visual-tolanguage translation expert based on the given instruction
context to adapt to new tasks. To avoid using experts for
irrelevant instruction contexts, we propose an expert recommendation strategy that reuses experts for tasks similar
to those previously learned. Additionally, we introduce expert pruning to alleviate interference from the use of experts
that cumulatively activated in previous tasks. Extensive
experiments on diverse vision-language tasks demonstrate
that our method outperforms existing continual learning approaches by generating instruction-following responses.

Captioning Task

đ

Question Answering Task

đ

đ

Time
step

Classification

Captioning

Inst.) Give a detailed category of image.

Inst.) Describe the image with a short sentence.

A shark

10

EProj

A blue fish

picture

GMM

This is a photo of a great white shark
Train

The photo shows a man playing a guitar Ours
in front of a baby in a hospital bed.
Evaluation

(a) Visualization of generated responses

(b) Performance of continual learning methods

Figure 1. (a) Generated responses for classiﬁcation and captioning
tasks from continual learning methods for VLM after training on a
question answering task. Existing methods, EProj [16] and GMM
[4], neglect text instruction. (b) Performance gap between the pretrained model and models trained on sequential tasks using various
continual learning methods. The proposed method outperforms
others in preventing knowledge forgetting.

challenges in adapting to newly emerging tasks. Retraining these models with pre-trained and newly acquired data
imposes considerable computational costs due to the large
volume of pre-trained data [26] and its limited public accessibility [40]. Furthermore, training models solely on new
tasks leads to overwriting previously acquired knowledge,
resulting in catastrophic forgetting [25, 37].
Continual learning methods [22, 23, 25, 31, 41, 48] aim
to address these challenges by allowing models to incorporate new tasks while preserving old knowledge with access
only to the data of newly emerging tasks. Existing continual learning methods rely on storing a small set of previous
data and training it jointly with the new data [13, 41] or on
regularizing parameter updates that are important for previous tasks [25]. Other methods [31, 44, 48] incorporate
a small set of learnable parameters into pre-trained knowl-

1. Introduction
Generative Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [4, 33, 35,
55] have demonstrated remarkable performance in a variety of tasks, such as caption generation [24], visual question answering [42], and creative applications [1, 55]. Their
impressive performance is attributable to the robust capabilities of large language models in conjunction with a translation module that enables these models to comprehend visual information from a visual encoder. Despite their remarkable performance, generative VLMs face signiﬁcant
* Corresponding author.

3466

