This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CA-I2P: Channel-Adaptive Registration Network with Global Optimal Selection
Zhixin Cheng1,2 Jiacheng Deng1,2 Xinjun Li1,2 Xiaotian Yin3
Bohao Liao1,2 Baoqun Yin1,2 Wenfei Yang1,2 * Tianzhu Zhang1,2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratoray of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
3
Institute of Advanced Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{chengzhixin, dengjc, lxj3017, xiaotianyin, liaobh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{bqyin, yangwf, tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Detection-free methods typically follow a coarse-to-fine
pipeline, extracting image and point cloud features for
patch-level matching and refining dense pixel-to-point correspondences. However, differences in feature channel attention between images and point clouds may lead to degraded matching results, ultimately impairing registration
accuracy. Furthermore, similar structures in the scene
could lead to redundant correspondences in cross-modal
matching. To address these issues, we propose Channel
Adaptive Adjustment Module (CAA) and Global Optimal
Selection Module (GOS). CAA enhances intra-modal features and suppresses cross-modal sensitivity, while GOS
replaces local selection with global optimization. Experiments on RGB-D Scenes V2 and 7-Scenes demonstrate the
superiority of our method, achieving state-of-the-art performance in image-to-point cloud registration.

Image:

(a)

Base

+ IME

+ IME
CMCF

Point:
P
0.9

I

0.74

1. Introduction

0.68
0.52

Image-to-point cloud registration (I2P) estimates the rigid
transformation from the point cloud reference frame to
the camera reference frame by matching pixels and points
across modalities and computing the rotation and translation matrices. It is crucial for various computer vision tasks,
such as 3D reconstruction [4, 35, 56], SLAM [5, 13, 15, 58],
and visual localization [14, 20, 53, 59, 62]. However, images are 2D data represented as regular, dense grids, while
point clouds are unordered, sparse, and irregular 3D data.
The domain gap between image features from a 2D encoder
and point cloud features from a 3D encoder often manifests
in feature channels, posing a significant challenge.
To address the challenges in image-to-point cloud registration, methods can be broadly categorized into two types.

Image patch
Top-k point patches

(b)

Correct match

Redundant match

Figure 1. (a) Visualization of feature variations across channels.
Intra-Modal Enhancement stage (IME) and Cross-Modal Channel
Filtering stage (CMCF) align feature distributions, reducing modal
differences and enhancing matching accuracy and robustness, as
reflected in the colors becoming more uniform. (b) Visualization
of patch-level selection process: top-k causes redundant matches,
while we minimizes many-to-one errors through targeted design.

* Corresponding author.

The first type is the detect-then-match method [16, 42, 52],
which involves detecting 2D and 3D keypoints separately in
the image and point cloud, and then matching them based
on their associated descriptors. However, this approach encounters two main issues: firstly, it is difficult to detect con-

27739

