This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoboTron-Drive: All-in-One Large Multimodal Model for Autonomous Driving
Zhijian Huang1,†

Chengjian Feng2,† Feng Yan2 Baihui Xiao2 Zequn Jie2
Yujie Zhong2 Xiaodan Liang1,‡ Lin Ma2,‡
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Meituan
https://zhijian11.github.io/RoboTron-Drive

Figure 1. RoboTron-Drive achieves SOTA in both general capabilities and generalization ability. Left: RoboTron-Drive outperforms
all specific SOTA models and other general large multimodal models across all 6 datasets comprising 13 tasks; Right: In zero-shot learning
on unseen datasets [18, 32, 54], RoboTron-Drive shows stronger generalization ability compared to models trained on individual datasets.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have demonstrated
exceptional comprehension and interpretation capabilities
in Autonomous Driving (AD) by incorporating large language models. Despite the advancements, current datadriven AD approaches tend to concentrate on a single
dataset and specific tasks, neglecting their overall capabilities and ability to generalize. To bridge these gaps,
we propose RoboTron-Drive, a general large multimodal
model designed to process diverse data inputs, such as images and multi-view videos, while performing a broad spectrum of AD tasks, including perception, prediction, and
planning. Initially, the model undergoes curriculum pretraining to process varied visual signals and perform basic
visual comprehension and perception tasks. Subsequently,
we augment and standardize various AD datasets to finetune the model, resulting in an all-in-one LMM for autonomous driving. To assess the general capabilities and
generalization ability, we conduct evaluations on six public
benchmarks and undertake zero-shot transfer on three unseen datasets, where RoboTron-Drive achieves state-of-theart performance across all tasks. We hope RoboTron-Drive
as a promising solution for AD in the real world.

Recently, vision-language driving datasets and models have
garnered significant attention in the field of autonomous
driving [5, 58, 62]. Numerous datasets [4, 11, 18, 23, 36, 47,
51] have been meticulously developed and curated to finetune Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), enabling them to
better understand and generate multimodal content, as well
as adapt to specific domains and applications. Meanwhile,
several methods [9, 14, 22, 34, 35, 40, 44, 49, 52, 53, 56]
have attempted to incorporate the extensive world knowledge and strong logical reasoning capabilities of Large Language Model (LLM) into AD systems, demonstrating significant improvements in interpretability and overall system
performance. Typically, these methods utilize a pre-training
and fine-tuning approach[27], where LMMs are fine-tuned
on certain datasets and evaluated on the tasks within.
Due to the complexity and diversity of driving
scenarios[10, 28, 61] and driver behaviors[8, 38], existing LMMs and AD datasets often focus on specific scenes
and tasks[13, 21], as shown in Tab. 1. We observe that
the methodologies employed in the collection of various
datasets are tailored to the specific tasks they are designed
to address. For instance, the CODA-LM dataset [23],
which is centered on corner case perception, necessitates

† Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author.

8011

