This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perspective-Aware Reasoning in Vision-Language Models
via Mental Imagery Simulation
Phillip Y. Lee1

Jihyeon Je2
Chanho Park1
Mikaela Angelina Uy3
2
Leonidas Guibas
Minhyuk Sung1
1
2
KAIST
Stanford University 3 NVIDIA

Q : If you are the man
in the black vest, is the
bicycle visible?

Q : If you are the black
pickup truck, is the dog
located on the left or
right side of you?

A : No. The
y
bicycle is not
visible.

A : The dog is
located on the
right.

Q : From the
perspective of h
the
man with a
backpack, is the
woman to the
right of the silver
car?

Q : If you are
the man with a
cowboy hat,
can you see the
sheep?
A : The man
with a cowboy
hat sees no
sheep.

A : The woman is
to the right of the
silver car.

Q : Can you determine which is
closer from the woman’s
perspective: the man with a
backpack or the wooden table?

A : The wooden table is
located closer than the
man with a backpack.

Q : From the perspective
of the dog, is h
the man
with a cowboy hat closer
than the sheep?

A : The man with a
cowboy hat is
closer than the
sheep.

Figure 1. We introduce Abstract Perspective Change (APC), a framework that empowers VLMs to adopt arbitrary perspectives for
spatial reasoning. As demonstrated by the examples above, APC signiﬁcantly enhances VLM’s ability to imagine a scene from alternative
viewpoints, overcoming the inherent egocentric bias that constrains the spatial reasoning of existing VLMs to the camera’s viewpoint.

Abstract

named Abstract Perspective Change (APC), that effectively
leverages vision foundation models, such as object detection, segmentation, and orientation estimation, to construct
scene abstractions and enable perspective changes. Our
experiments on synthetic and real-image benchmarks, compared with various VLMs, demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements in perspective-aware reasoning with our framework,
further outperforming ﬁne-tuned spatial reasoning models
and novel-view-synthesis-based approaches. Our project
page is at https://apc-vlm.github.io/.

We present a framework for perspective-aware reasoning
in vision-language models (VLMs) through mental imagery
simulation. Perspective-taking—the ability to perceive an
environment or situation from an alternative viewpoint—is
a key benchmark for human-level visual understanding, essential for environmental interaction and collaboration with
autonomous agents. Despite advancements in spatial reasoning within VLMs, recent research has shown that modern VLMs signiﬁcantly lack perspective-aware reasoning
capabilities and exhibit a strong bias toward egocentric interpretations. To bridge the gap between VLMs and human
perception, we focus on the role of mental imagery, where
humans perceive the world through abstracted representations that facilitate perspective shifts. Motivated by this,
we propose a framework for perspective-aware reasoning,

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) have made remarkable
progress, positioning themselves as a crucial backbone
for general-purpose physical AI agents. The growing research efforts to improve VLMs’ spatial reasoning capabilities [8, 10, 45, 64] reﬂect this potential. Early VLMs
were limited to basic tasks such as visual question answering (VQA) and image captioning [1, 34, 35]. How-

1 Correspondence: Phillip Y. Lee (phillip0701@kaist.ac.kr)
and Minhyuk Sung (mhsung@kaist.ac.kr)

9241

