This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometric Alignment and Prior Modulation for View-Guided Point Cloud
Completion on Unseen Categories

Abstract
View-Guided Point Cloud Completion (VG-PCC) aims to
reconstruct complete point clouds from partial inputs by referencing single-view images. While existing VG-PCC models perform well on in-class predictions, they exhibit significant performance drops when generalizing to unseen categories. We identify two key limitations underlying this challenge: (1) Current encoders struggle to bridge the substantial modality gap between images and point clouds. Consequently, their learned representations often lack robust
cross-modal alignment and over-rely on superficial classspecific patterns. (2) Current decoders refine global structures holistically, overlooking local geometric patterns that
are class-agnostic and transferable across categories. To
address these issues, we present a novel generalizable VGPCC framework for unseen categories based on Geometric Alignment and Prior Modulation (GAPM). First, we introduce a Geometry Aligned Encoder that lifts reference
images into 3D space via depth maps for natural alignment with partial point clouds. This reduces dependency
on class-specific RGB patterns that hinder generalization
to unseen classes. Second, we propose a Prior Modulated
Decoder that incorporates class-agnostic local priors to reconstruct shapes on a regional basis. This allows the adaptive reuse of learned geometric patterns that promote generalization to unseen classes. Extensive experiments validate
that GAPM outperforms existing models on both seen and,
notably, unseen categories, establishing a new benchmark
for unseen-category generalization in VG-PCC.

Chamfer Distance (CD)

2.67
2.35
2

1.2

Seen
Unseen
CD Drop

1.1

60

1
XMFnet

100

1.68
0.6

EGIInet

Drop = Unseenseen Seen (%)

Jingqiao Xiu1 Yicong Li1 * Na Zhao2 Han Fang1 Xiang Wang3 Angela Yao1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
University of Science and Technology of China

Ours

(a) The Chamfer Distance (CD) of VG-PCC methods on seen categories, and their performance drop on unseen categories.

Points 3D Backbone
Image 2D Backbone

Cross-Modal
Encoding

Encoder
Points 3D Backbone
Image Depth Lifting

Global
Decoding
Decoder

Unified
Encoding

Local Prior
Decoding

(b) Comparison of the encoder and decoder architecture between
existing VG-PCC methods (top) and our method (bottom).

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods suffer from severe performance
drop on unseen categories. (b) Existing methods encode 2D and
3D cross-modal data and decode the global structure in a holistic
manner. In contrast, our approach lifts 2D data into 3D space using
depth information for purely 3D encoding and performs regionwise decoding through the modulation of local priors.

1. Introduction

VG-PCC particularly suitable for handling scenarios with
heavy occlusion, where a significant number of points are
missing. Such a setting has practical applications in tasks
like robotic grasping [12], where 3D and image sensors may
be positioned at different vantage points.
Existing VG-PCC models [2, 43, 50, 53] follow a common encoder-decoder paradigm, as illustrated in Figure 1b.
The encoder integrates geometric and pose information
from the input partial points with global structure extracted
from the image, forming a unified representation. Subsequently, the decoder exploits structural cues embedded in
this unified representation to complete the 3D shape. How-

View-Guided Point Cloud Completion (VG-PCC) reconstructs partial point clouds into complete ones by referencing a corresponding image. Unlike classic point cloud completion, which is unconstrained in predicting the missing regions [48], VG-PCC has a reference image that constrains
the target solution [50]. This additional constraint makes
* Corresponding author.

27435

