This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bootstrap3D: Improving Multi-view Diffusion Model with Synthetic Data
Zeyi Sun1,2

Tong Wu3B Pan Zhang2 Yuhang Zang2 Xiaoyi Dong2,5
Yuanjun Xiong4 Dahua Lin2,5,6 Jiaqi Wang2B
1
Shanghai Jiaotong University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Stanford University 4 Adobe 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 6 CPII under InnoHK
https://github.com/SunzeY/Bootstrap3D

Cartoon Style

PhotoRealistic

CAD

Low Poly

A pocket-sized sorceress with a book of spells, casting enchantments

A cluster of tents pitched near a forest, campfire smoke curling into the
evening sky

A delicate porcelain teacup, painted with intricate flowers, rests on a saucer

A chibi mermaid with a shimmering tail, sitting on a coral throne

An oversized, porous, sphere-shaped birdcage, made of woven golden wires, with
a matte finish, housing a small, mechanical, singing bird that flutters in a lifelike
manner.

Figure 1. Bootstrap3D can generate multi-view images with precise long text control and style customization with high view consistency.

Abstract

2D diffusion prior. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
Bootstrap3D can generate high-quality multi-view images
with superior aesthetic quality, image-text alignment and
view consistency.

Recent years
haveteapot,
witnessed
remarkable
progress in multiA floating
pouring
a stream of endless,
steaming
jasmine tea
view diffusion models
for 3D
content creation. However, there remains a significant gap in image quality and
prompt-following ability compared to 2D diffusion models.
A critical bottleneck is the scarcity of high-quality 3D data
1. Introduction
with detailed captions. To address this challenge, we propose Bootstrap3D, a novel framework that automatically
3D
contentvintage
creation
is amill,
keywith
challenge
generative
tasks,
A compact,
cylindrical,
pepper
a polished,inornate
brass body,
slightly worn
from use,
placed in
beside a
porcelain plate
on a
checkered
tablecloth.
generates filtered multi-view images to assist in training
with
applications
augmented
reality
(AR)
and game
modmulti-view diffusion models. Specifically, we introduce a
eling. Unlike 2D image generation, the lack of highdata generation pipeline
that employs (1) 2D and video difquality 3D models remains a significant barrier. While
A flaming candle
fusion models to generate multi-view images based on conlarge-scale image-text pair training has proven crucial for
structed text prompts, and (2) our fine-tuned 3D-aware MV2D generation [69], 3D content often relies on 2D difLLaVA for filtering data and rewriting inaccurate captions.
fusion priors due to the scarcity of 3D data. The prisymmetrical, smooth
stone in
fountain,
waterinclude:
cascading over
into a clear,
Leveraging this pipeline, we have generated large scale syn-A solid, mary
approaches
thiswith
area
1) its edges
optimizing
neucircular pond surrounded by blooming lilies, in the center of a sunlit courtyard
thetic multi-view images with dense descriptive captions.
ral representations from 2D models via Score Distillation
Furthermore, we present a Training Timestep ReschedSampling (SDS) [53, 54, 63, 71, 72, 85], which are timeule (TTR) strategy that leverages the denoising process to
consuming, lack diversity, and suffer from low robustness,
learn multi-view consistency while maintaining the original
but produce high-quality 3D objects; and 2) fine-tuning

15714

