This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not All Frame Features Are Equal: Video-to-4D Generation via Decoupling
Dynamic-Static Features
Liying Yang1 , Chen Liu2 , Zhenwei Zhu1 , Ajian Liu3 , Hui Ma1 , Jian Nong1 , Yanyan Liang1†
1
2
Macau University of Science and Technology
The University of Queensland
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
†
Corresponding Author
(a)

Abstract
Recently, the generation of dynamic 3D objects from a video
has shown impressive results. Existing methods directly optimize Gaussians using whole information in frames. However, when dynamic regions are interwoven with static regions within frames, particularly if the static regions account for a large proportion, existing methods often overlook information in dynamic regions and are prone to overfitting on static regions. This leads to producing results with
blurry textures. We consider that decoupling dynamic-static
features to enhance dynamic representations can alleviate
this issue. Thus, we propose a dynamic-static feature decoupling module (DSFD). Along temporal axes, it regards
the regions of current frame features that possess significant differences relative to reference frame features as dynamic features. Conversely, the remaining parts are the
static features. Then, we acquire decoupled features driven
by dynamic features and current frame features. Moreover,
to further enhance the dynamic representation of decoupled features from different viewpoints and ensure accurate motion prediction, we design a temporal-spatial similarity fusion module (TSSF). Along spatial axes, it adaptively selects similar information of dynamic regions. Hinging on the above, we construct a novel approach, DS4D.
Experimental results verify our method achieves state-ofthe-art (SOTA) results in video-to-4D. In addition, the experiments on a real-world scenario dataset demonstrate
its effectiveness on the 4D scene. Project page: https:
//github.com/LiyingCV/DS4D.

(b)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the issues caused by different proportions of dynamic and static regions. Previous work [51] generates the 4D content with obviously blurry textures in the dynamic regions with B-type video input. In contrast, our methods
with decoupling dynamic-static features generates high-quality results with clear textures. (b) The visualization of dynamic features in our method. The red region highlights the primary region
of interest in the dynamic features in B-type videos. This part is
also the dynamic region between frames R and C. It demonstrates
our method can successfully decouple dynamic-static features.

Generating dynamic 3D (4D) content [7, 11–13, 26, 28, 32,
39] from video is an essential research topic involving the
field of computer vision and computer graphics. However,
it is rather formidable to predict accurate motion from a few
viewpoints while ensuring high-quality generation.

There are two main streams in current approaches to
improving generation quality. Inference-based methods
[15, 30, 43, 52] can generate high-quality 4D content

7494

