This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

METEOR: Multi-Encoder Collaborative Token Pruning for Efficient
Vision Language Models
Yuchen Liu1 , Yaoming Wang3† , Bowen Shi1 , Xiaopeng Zhang2† , Wenrui Dai1†, Chenglin Li1 ,
Hongkai Xiong1 and Qi Tian2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Huawei Inc., China 3 Meituan Inc., China
{liuyuchen6666, sjtu shibowen, daiwenrui, lcl1985, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn
wangyaoming03@meituan.com, zxphistory@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Vision encoders serve as the cornerstone of multimodal understanding. Single-encoder architectures like CLIP exhibit
inherent constraints in generalizing across diverse multimodal tasks, while recent multi-encoder fusion methods introduce prohibitive computational overhead to achieve superior performance using complementary visual representations from multiple vision encoders. To address this, we
propose a progressive pruning framework, namely MultiEncoder CollaboraTivE tOken pRuning (METEOR), that
eliminates redundant visual tokens across the encoding, fusion, and decoding stages for multi-encoder MLLMs. For
multi-vision encoding, we discard redundant tokens within
each encoder via a rank guided collaborative token assignment strategy. Subsequently, for multi-vision fusion, we
combine the visual features from different encoders while
reducing cross-encoder redundancy with cooperative pruning. Finally, we propose an adaptive token pruning method
in the LLM decoding stage to further discard irrelevant tokens based on the text prompts with dynamically adjusting
pruning ratios for specific task demands. To our best knowledge, this is the first successful attempt that achieves an
efficient multi-encoder based vision language model with
multi-stage pruning strategies. Extensive experiments on 11
benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach. Compared with EAGLE, a typical multi-encoder
MLLMs, METEOR reduces 76% visual tokens with only
0.3% performance drop in average. The code is available
at https://github.com/YuchenLiu98/METEOR.

Figure 1. Overview of METEOR, which collaboratively prune redundant visual tokens across the encoding, fusion and decoding
process of Muti-encoder MLLMs. Comparison with existing efficient methods based on EAGLE-X4 [58] regarding accuracy and
flops. Other two results of EAGLE are with one and two encoders.

1. Introduction

multi-modal LLMs (MLLMs), enabling promising applications that bring artificial intelligence into daily life [3, 9,
35, 40, 82]. Typical MLLMs transform images into sequences of visual tokens, and then concatenate them with
text tokens for LLMs. Subsequent works further enhance
performance through high-resolution inputs [16, 36] and innovative transformer architectures [3, 61]. However, due to
the inherently sparse nature of visual information compared
to textual information, directly concatenating visual tokens
causes significant computational inefficiency. To mitigate
this inefficiency, prompt-agnostic methods reduce the number of visual tokens before feeding into LLMs for singleencoder MLLMs like LLaVA [40]. Visual tokens are compressed by visual attention mechanisms [25, 57, 75], local
pooling [5, 13, 35, 69], and resamplers [16]. However, these
methods overlook the context provided by text prompts, resulting in redundant visual tokens irrelevant to user instructions. As a remedy, prompt-aware methods [20, 67, 71, 74]
such as FastV [7], Pdrop [67] and SparseVLM [78] employ
text prompts to guide the visual token pruning in LLMs.

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) [2,
4, 12, 63] have significantly propelled the development of
† Corresponding author: Yaoming Wang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wenrui Dai.
This work was done when Yuchen Liu interned at Huawei Inc.

21492

