This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ouroboros: Single-step Diffusion Models for
Cycle-consistent Forward and Inverse Rendering
Shanlin Sun1 * Yifan Wang2 * Hanwen Zhang3 * Yifeng Xiong1
Ruogu Fang4† Xiaohui Xie1† Chenyu You2†

Qin Ren2

1

3
Original RGB

University of California, Irvine 2 Stony Brook University
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 4 University of Florida
Albedo

Normal

Irradiance

X→ RGB

A = Albedo
N = Normal
R = Roughness
M = Metallicity
RGB = X→RGB

Roughness

Metallicity
Prompt:
“An Office”

Input Video

Output Albedo

Output Normal

Figure 1. Single-step Diffusion Models for Forward and Inverse Rendering in Cycle Consistency. Left Upper: Ouroboros decomposes input images into intrinsic maps (albedo, normal, roughness, metallicity, and irradiance). Given these generated intrinsic maps and
textual prompts, our neural forward rendering model synthesizes images closely matching the originals. Right Upper: We extend an
end-to-end finetuning technique [47] to diffusion-based neural rendering, outperforming state-of-the-art RGB↔X [79] in both speed and
accuracy. The radar plot illustrates numerical comparisons on the InteriorVerse dataset [85]. Bottom: Our method achieves temporally
consistent video inverse rendering without specific finetuning on video data.

Abstract
While multi-step diffusion models have advanced both forward and inverse rendering, existing approaches often treat
these problems independently, leading to cycle inconsistency and slow inference speed. In this work, we present
Ouroboros, a framework composed of two single-step diffusion models that handle forward and inverse rendering
with mutual reinforcement. Our approach extends intrinsic decomposition to both indoor and outdoor scenes and
introduces a cycle consistency mechanism that ensures coherence between forward and inverse rendering outputs.
Experimental results demonstrate state-of-the-art performance across diverse scenes while achieving substantially
faster inference speed compared to other diffusion-based
methods. We also demonstrate that Ouroboros can transfer

to video decomposition in a training-free manner, reducing
temporal inconsistency in video sequences while maintaining high-quality per-frame inverse rendering.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

The interdependent processes of forward and inverse rendering are fundamental to computer graphics and vision.
Inverse rendering [1, 2, 57] is the problem of estimating
geometric, shading, and lighting information from images
— a capability essential for applications such as relighting
and object insertion. This problem remains challenging due
to its inherently under-constrained nature when limited to a
single image under single illumination [19]. On the other
hand, forward rendering is to simulate the light transport
to render images given the scene’s geometry, material, and
lighting information. Traditional Physically Based Rendering (PBR) [51] requires precise geometry and lighting information, which is often difficult to reconstruct accurately
through inverse rendering methods.

10386

