This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-AVSR: Zero-Shot Audio-Visual Speech Recognition with LLMs
by Learning Language-Agnostic Speech Representations
Jeong Hun Yeo1, * Minsu Kim1,∗ Chae Won Kim1 Stavros Petridis2
1
KAIST, 2 Imperial College London

Yong Man Ro1,†

{sedne246, ms.k, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

studies [1–14] have explored Audio-Visual Speech Recognition (AVSR) using deep learning techniques. AVSR can
be viewed as a multi-modal fusion of two uni-modal systems; Auditory Speech Recognition (ASR) [15–17] and Visual Speech Recognition (VSR) [18–24]. Prior works have
demonstrated that jointly modeling both audio and visual
speech representations can significantly improve the speech
recognition performance of each uni-modal system, particularly in challenging noisy environments.
Despite significant advancements, AVSR has primarily
been developed and evaluated on English language corpora.
To extend its capabilities to a wider range of languages, recent efforts have proposed multilingual audio-visual speech
datasets [25, 26], and have developed and evaluated multilingual AVSR methods [27–29] on such databases. However, despite these performance improvements, existing approaches still face limitations in language expansion. This
is because current multilingual AVSR datasets [25, 26] contain only nine languages, and it remains challenging to obtain a sufficient amount of labeled audio-visual data with
transcriptions for diverse languages. To address this limitation, our main explorations include: 1) learning languageagnostic audio-visual speech representations to facilitate
language expansion and 2) proposing a multilingual audiovisual database encompassing 82 languages, significantly
expanding the linguistic diversity of existing datasets.
In this paper, we present a novel AVSR method that
exhibits zero-shot language recognition ability1 , i.e., a
scenario in which no speech data in the target language
is used at training. To achieve this, we aim to represent all languages in Roman text, converting languagespecific graphemes into language-agnostic pronunciations.
Here, we note that pre-trained Large Language Models
(LLMs) [30–32] already possess knowledge of modeling

We explore a novel zero-shot Audio-Visual Speech Recognition (AVSR) framework, dubbed Zero-AVSR, which enables
speech recognition in target languages without requiring
any audio-visual speech data in those languages. Specifically, we introduce the Audio-Visual Speech Romanizer (AVRomanizer), which learns language-agnostic speech representations by predicting Roman text. Then, by leveraging
the strong multilingual modeling capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs), we propose converting the predicted
Roman text into language-specific graphemes, forming the
proposed Cascaded Zero-AVSR. Taking it a step further, we
explore a unified Zero-AVSR approach by directly integrating the audio-visual speech representations encoded by the
AV-Romanizer into the LLM. This is achieved through finetuning the adapter and the LLM using our proposed multitask learning scheme. To capture the wide spectrum of phonetic and linguistic diversity, we also introduce a Multilingual Audio-Visual Romanized Corpus (MARC) consisting
of 2,916 hours of audio-visual speech data across 82 languages, along with transcriptions in both language-specific
graphemes and Roman text. Extensive analysis and experiments confirm that the proposed Zero-AVSR framework has
the potential to expand language support beyond the languages seen during the training of the AV-Romanizer. Code
is available at https://bit.ly/zero-avsr.

1. Introduction
Humans rely on multi-modal information for effective communication, combining verbal cues (e.g., spoken words),
nonverbal signals (e.g., facial expressions, gestures), and
paralinguistic auditory cues (e.g., tone of voice) to convey
meaning effectively. Notably, the correlation between auditory speech and visual speech (i.e., lip movements) can
significantly enhance speech comprehension, particularly in
noisy environments. Leveraging this advantage, numerous

1 The ‘zero-shot’ capability defined in this paper is limited to the speech
modeling component. We assume that text data is available for all languages, whereas speech data is not accessible for some of them. Therefore,
a ‘seen language’ refers to a language that has been encountered during
speech encoder training, whereas an ‘unseen language’ refers to a language
that is only available through text data, without any corresponding speech.

* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

6693

