This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Isolated Words: Diffusion Brush for Handwritten Text-Line Generation
Gang Dai1 ,* Yifan Zhang2,3∗ , Yutao Qin1∗ , Qiangya Guo1 , Shuangping Huang1,4†, Shuicheng Yan3
1
South China University of Technology
2
3
MiroMind AI National University of Singapore 4 Pazhou Laboratory
eedaigang@mail.scut.edu.cn, yifan.zhang@miromind.ai, eehsp@scut.edu.cn
9HUWLFDO
YLHZ

Abstract
Existing handwritten text generation methods primarily focus on isolated words. However, realistic handwritten text
demands attention not only to individual words but also
to the relationships between them, such as vertical alignment and horizontal spacing. Therefore, generating entire text line emerges as a more promising and comprehensive task. However, this task poses signiﬁcant challenges, including the accurate modeling of complex style
patterns—encompassing both intra- and inter-word relationships—and maintaining content accuracy across numerous characters. To address these challenges, we propose DiffBrush, a novel diffusion-based model for handwritten text-line generation. Unlike existing methods, DiffBrush excels in both style imitation and content accuracy
through two key strategies: (1) content-decoupled style
learning, which disentangles style from content to better
capture intra-word and inter-word style patterns by using
column- and row-wise masking; and (2) multi-scale content
learning, which employs line and word discriminators to
ensure global coherence and local accuracy of textual content. Extensive experiments show that DiffBrush excels in
generating high-quality text-lines, particularly in style reproduction and content preservation. Code is available at
https://github.com/dailenson/DiffBrush

1. Introduction
Handwritten text generation aims to automatically synthesize realistic handwritten text images that visually convey a
user’s personal writing style (e.g., text slant, stroke width,
ligatures) while ensuring the content readability. This task
has broad applications, including assisting individuals with
writing difﬁculties, accelerating handwritten font design,
and enriching data for text recognizer. Most existing methods [1, 3, 7, 11, 12, 35, 44] focus on generating handwritten
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author

+RUL]RQWDO
YLHZ

'LVWLQFW

D 5HDOWH[WOLQHV

6DPH

E $VVHPEOHGZLWKJHQHUDWHGZRUGV

Figure 1. Comparison of handwritten text-lines (a) written by real
writers, and (b) assembled with isolated words generated from
One-DM [7]. The latter one applies ﬁxed inter-word spacing due
to the lack of spacing information in generated words. Red lines
indicate the baseline (i.e., the reference line at the bottom of the
characters), while blue lines highlight word spacing.

images at the word level, with few efforts [9, 23] exploring
the generation of complete text lines. To bridge this gap,
our work focuses on high-quality handwritten text-line generation with better control over both style and content.
Most previous state-of-the-art methods [7, 12, 40, 44]
focus on handwritten word generation by using reference
images from writers as style inputs and conditioning on
character-wise labels or images for content. This allows for
the synthesis of handwritten words with controllable styles
and speciﬁc content. However, as shown in Figure 1, generating text at the word level cannot effectively capture the
cohesive style of a complete text line: (1) Humans generally
maintain consistent vertical alignment across words, while
synthesized words often exhibit arbitrary vertical positioning. (2) Different writers have unique word spacing characteristics that are often lost in isolated word generation.
Direct approaches for text-line generation are relatively
limited, with two notable GAN-based methods proposed.
TS-GAN [9] optimizes a global content recognition loss
based on the entire generated text-line image, primarily
guiding content learning while implicitly inﬂuencing style
learning. CSA-GAN [23], in contrast, leverages both a content recognition loss and a writer classiﬁcation loss computed from the generated text-line image, thus better modeling style through writer identity supervision. However,
both methods suffer from two key limitations: 1) Ineffective style extraction: Since both methods jointly optimize
content and style from the same model output, the two aspects interfere with each other, preventing effective learn-

19054

