This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Typography: Bringing Text to Life via Video Diffusion Prior
Zichen Liu♡,1,2 , Yihao Meng♡,1,2 , Hao Ouyang†,2 , Yue Yu1,2 , Bolin Zhao1 ,
Daniel Cohen-Or†,3 , Huamin Qu†,1
1

HKUST, 2 Ant Group, 3 Tel-Aviv University

“A camel walks
+ steadily across
the desert.”

“A hand holding
a monocular
+ telescope turns
towards the
camera.”

Figure 1. Given a letter and a text prompt that briefly describes the animation, our method automatically semantically reshapes a letter and
animates it in vector format while maintaining legibility. Our approach allows for a variety of creative interpretations that can dynamically
bring words to life. We strongly recommend watching the video results on the https://animate-your-word.github.io/demo/.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Text animation is the art of bringing text to life through
motion. By animating text to convey emotion, emphasize
meaning, and create a dynamic narrative, text animation
transforms static messages into vivid, interactive experiences [23, 24]. The fusion of motion and text, not only
captivates viewers, but also deepens the message’s impact,
making text animation prevail in movies, advertisements,
website widgets, and online memes [53].
This paper introduces a novel specialized text animation
scheme that focuses on animating individual letters within
words. Unlike previous methods that apply simple and fixed
motion patterns to text [52, 53], the letters are deformed and
brought to life with vivid movements based on the user’s
semantic prompt. We refer to it as “Dynamic Typography”.
For example, the letter “M” in “CAMEL” can be animated
with the prompt “A camel walks steadily across the desert”
in Fig. 1. This animation scheme opens up a new dimension
of textual animation that enriches the reading experience.
However, manually crafting such detailed and promptaware animations using traditional graphics methods is
challenging and demands considerable expertise in graphic
design and animation [24], making them less accessible to
non-experts. Our methodology aims to automate the text
animation process to make it more accessible and efficient.
Recent advancements in video diffusion models have
demonstrated significant potential in automatically generate
temporal consistent animations. However, current video

Text animation serves as an expressive medium, transforming static communication into dynamic experiences by
infusing words with motion to evoke emotions, emphasize
meanings, and construct compelling narratives. Crafting
animations that are semantically aware poses significant
challenges, demanding expertise in graphic design and
animation. We present an automated text animation scheme,
termed “Dynamic Typography”, which deforms letters to
convey semantic meaning and infuses them with vibrant
movements based on user prompts. The animation is represented by a canonical field that aggregates the semantic
content in a canonical shape and a deformation field that
applies per-frame motion to deform the canonical shape.
Two fields are jointly optimized by the priors from textto-video diffusion model using score-distillation loss with
designed regularization, encouraging the video coherence
with the intended textual concept while maintaining legibility and structural integrity throughout the animation.
We demonstrate the generalizability of our approach across
various text-to-video models and highlight the superiority
of our methodology over baselines. Through comprehensive
evaluations, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework in generating coherent text animations that faithfully
interpret user prompts while maintaining readability.

♡ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

14787

