This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scheduling Weight Transitions for Quantization-Aware Training
Junghyup Lee1, *
1

Dohyung Kim4

Jeimin Jeon2,3, *

Bumsub Ham2,†

2
3
4
Samsung Research
Yonsei University
Articron Inc.
Samsung AI center
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/TRS/

Abstract
Quantization-aware training (QAT) simulates a quantization process during training to lower bit-precision of
weights/activations. It learns quantized weights indirectly
by updating latent weights, i.e., full-precision inputs to a
quantizer, using gradient-based optimizers. We claim that
coupling a user-defined learning rate (LR) with these optimizers is sub-optimal for QAT. Quantized weights transit
discrete levels of a quantizer, only if corresponding latent
weights pass transition points, where the quantizer changes
discrete states. This suggests that the changes of quantized
weights are affected by both the LR for latent weights and
their distributions. It is thus difficult to control the degree of
changes for quantized weights by scheduling the LR manually. We conjecture that the degree of parameter changes
in QAT is related to the number of quantized weights transiting discrete levels. Based on this, we introduce a transition rate (TR) scheduling technique that controls the number of transitions of quantized weights explicitly. Instead
of scheduling a LR for latent weights, we schedule a target
TR of quantized weights, and update the latent weights with
a novel transition-adaptive LR (TALR), enabling considering the degree of changes for the quantized weights during
QAT. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on standard benchmarks.

quantized weights using gradient-based optimizers (e.g.,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD)) with continuous gradients. QAT instead exploits full-precision latent weights and
a quantizer involving a discretization function (e.g., a round
function) to update the quantized weights indirectly.
QAT mainly consists of three steps: (1) In a forward
propagation step, full-precision latent weights are converted
to quantized weights using a quantizer, and the quantized weights are used to compute an output; (2) Gradients w.r.t an objective function are then back-propagated to
the latent weights in a backward propagation step; (3) In
an optimization step, the latent weights are updated with
the gradients. Previous works mostly focus on the forward and backward propagation steps by designing quantizers [4, 5, 9, 20, 26, 36, 45, 47, 48] and addressing a vanishing gradient problem, caused by the discretization function in a quantizer [1, 10, 21, 25, 46], respectively. They do
not pay attention to the optimization step, and simply exploit gradient-based optimizers with a user-defined learning
rate (LR), such as SGD or Adam [22], to update the latent
weights. This optimization strategy is, however, designed
for training full-precision models, and does not consider
how quantized weights are changed, which is sub-optimal
for QAT.
When training a full-precision model with a gradientbased optimizer, we typically decay a LR progressively to
update full-precision weights in a coarse-to-fine manner,
which guarantees the convergence of the model [17, 23].
That is, we can control the degree of weight changes manually by scheduling the LR, since the magnitude of a single
parameter change, so-called an effective step size [22], is
highly correlated with the LR (Fig. 1a vs. Fig. 1b). For
example, an average effective step size, which quantifies
the degree of changes in weights, for a small LR is lower
than that for a large one. We have found that this does not
hold, when the optimizers coupled with a LR are applied
to a quantized model in QAT. Since QAT updates quantized
weights indirectly from latent weights and a quantizer, an
average effective step size for quantized weights is less correlated with a LR for latent weights (Fig. 1a vs. the blue
curve in Fig. 1c). To be more specific, different from full-

1. Introduction
Recent neural networks use wide and deep architectures [11, 16, 18, 41, 44] requiring millions of parameters and computations. Network quantization converts
full-precision weights and/or activations into low-bit ones.
This reduces storage usage and computational overheads
drastically, but the low-bit models perform worse than the
full-precision ones. To alleviate this problem, many approaches [5, 9, 20, 31, 36] adopt quantization-aware training (QAT) that simulates a quantization process during
training. It is not straightforward to optimize discrete
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

23466

