This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoMo: Robust Motion Segmentation Improves Structure from Motion
Lily Goli* 1,2

Sara Sabour* 1,2

Dmitry Lagun1

Mark Matthews1

Alec Jacobson2,3

Marcus A. Brubaker1
Saurabh Saxena† 1

David J. Fleet1,2

Andrea Tagliasacchi† 1,2,4
1

Google DeepMind

2

University of Toronto

3

Adobe Research

4

Simon Fraser University

Abstract
There has been extensive progress in the reconstruction and generation of 4D scenes from monocular casuallycaptured video. Estimating accurate camera poses from
videos through structure-from-motion (SfM) relies on robustly separating static and dynamic parts of a video. We
propose a novel approach to video-based motion segmentation to identify the components of a scene that are moving
w.r.t. a fixed world frame. Our simple but effective iterative
method, RoMo, combines optical flow and epipolar cues
with a pre-trained video segmentation model. It outperforms
unsupervised baselines for motion segmentation as well as
supervised baselines trained from synthetic data. More importantly, the combination of an off-the-shelf SfM pipeline
with our segmentation masks establishes a new state-of-theart on camera calibration for scenes with dynamic content,
outperforming existing methods by a substantial margin.

Figure 1. We introduce a zero-shot motion segmentation method
for video based on cues from epipolar geometry (top right) and
optical flow. Our predicted masks (bottom left) help improve SfM
camera calibration on highly dynamic scenes (bottom right).

1. Introduction

notated data, most such techniques rely heavily on synthetic training data. There are unsupervised motion segmentation methods [13, 22, 23, 51, 52], but these do not
exploit 3D geometric constraints, and tend to under-perform
supervised methods. Robust SfM pipelines for dynamic
scenes [5, 54, 55] exploit 3D geometric cues to identify
problematic correspondences on dynamic objects but provide sparse masks for moving objects rather than densely
segmenting entire objects.
This paper introduces a simple yet remarkably effective
iterative approach to motion segmentation (see Fig. 1). It
combines optical flow and 3D geometric cues, along with a
rich feature space from an off-the-shelf segmentation foundation model to facilitate the inference of coherent moving
object masks. In particular, given camera pose estimates,
epipolar constraints can be used to predict which flow correspondences are inconsistent with the estimated camera
poses [5, 19, 54]. These sparse outliers then anchor the
inference of segmentation masks for moving objects as a

The segmentation of moving objects in a video, i.e. disentangling object motion from camera-induced motion, is
a natural precursor to myriad downstream tasks and applications, including augmented reality [9], autonomous navigation [12, 29], action recognition [47] and 4D scene reconstruction [43]. In this paper, we are particularly interested in motion segmentation as a means of improving the
robustness of structure-from-motion (SfM) methods (e.g.,
COLMAP [35, 36]). Moving objects are problematic, as
they violate the SfM rigidity assumption, greatly limiting the
videos to which SfM can be successfully applied.
Despite its potential application, the motion segmentation task has been somewhat under-explored compared to
image and video segmentation. There exist supervised methods [14, 50, 53], but given the scarcity of real-world an∗ Equal contribution
† Equal advising

6155

