This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging the Gap between Brain and Machine in Interpreting Visual Semantics:
Towards Self-adaptive Brain-to-Text Decoding
Jiaxuan Chen1, 3 Yu Qi2, 3, 1 † Yueming Wang1, 3 Gang Pan1, 3 †
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University
3
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
1

{jiaxuan chen, qiyu, ymingwang, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural decoding has recently made significant progress in
reconstructing images and text from brain activity, yet seeking biologically valid semantic alignment between artificial models and the brain remains challenging. Large pretrained foundation models such as CLIP excel at capturing
rich semantic details in complex visual scenes. In contrast,
due to selective attention, only part of the visual semantics
in the stimulus may be preferentially represented in the neural patterns when subjects view images. Past studies have
generally assumed that stimulus images and their evoked
brain recordings are strictly semantically equivalent, potentially leading to semantic misalignment between supervision signals and neural recordings. In order to address
this, we propose a novel self-adaptive semantic decoding
method (Mind-SA), designed to dynamically detect the regions within stimulus images that the brain actually focuses
on and use them as supervision to guide brain-to-text reconstruction. We find that the proposed Mind-SA can be used to
reduce the semantic gap between supervision signals (i.e.,
stimulus images) and neural representations, thus enabling
the reconstruction model to focus on the parts that the brain
actually perceives. Experiments demonstrate that Mind-SA
improves the quality of neural representations and achieves
the SOTA brain-to-text performance. Our code is available
at https://github.com/JxuanC/MindSA.

1. Introduction
One of the long-term goals of neuroscience is to reveal the
complex computational mechanisms of the brain [18, 50].
Neural decoding provides a promising approach to understanding the intelligent behaviors underlying perception and
cognition. In the era of artificial intelligence, the crossfertilization of computational neuroscience and deep learning has led to success in neural decoding based on non† Corresponding authors: Yu Qi and Gang Pan.

Figure 1. Top: Discrepancies in information processing mechanisms between models and brains lead to semantic biases among
representations. Bottom: The proposed self-adaptive semantic decoding strategy for addressing the problem of semantic biases.

invasive brain recordings such as functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). Despite this progress, researchers
still face significant challenges, as little is known about how
the brain infers and connects different semantic concepts.
Recently, large foundation models, represented by Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [34], have

21938

