This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Aware Prompt Gradient Projection for Parameter-Efficient Tuning
Federated Class-Incremental Learning
∗

Hualong Ke1 , Jiangming Shi1, 2 , Yachao Zhang1 , Fangyong Wang3 , Yuan Xie2, 4 , Yanyun Qu1*
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University,
2
Shanghai Innovation Institute, 3 Hanjiang National Laboratory, 4 East China Normal University
hualongke@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jiangming.shi@outlook.com, yachaozhang@xmu.edu.cn
hzwfy@163.com, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

(b) Prompt Pool

(a) DFKT

Abstract

Synthetic-Data

𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡−1

Real-Data

𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡

Distillation

Federated Continual Learning (FCL) has recently garnered
significant attention due to its ability to continuously learn
new tasks while protecting user privacy. However, existing Data-Free Knowledge Transfer (DFKT) methods require training the entire model, leading to high training
and communication costs, while prompt pool-based methods with access to other task-specific prompts in the pool
may pose a privacy leakage risk. To address these challenges, we propose a novel method: Task-aware Prompt
gradient Projection and Replay (TPPR), which leverages visual prompts to build a parameter-efficient tuning architecture. Specifically, we propose the Task-Aware Prompt Gradient Projection (TAPGP) mechanism to balance the learning of task-agnostic and task-specific knowledge. In practice, we make the gradient of the deep prompts orthogonal
to the virtual data and prompts of preceding tasks, which
prevents the erosion of old task knowledge while allowing
the model to learn new information. Additionally, we introduce Dual-Level Prompt Replay (DLPR) based on the
exponential moving average to facilitate knowledge review
at both inter-task and intra-task levels, effectively inheriting
learned knowledge. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method effectively reduces model communication overhead and alleviates forgetting while fully protecting privacy. With only 1% of the training parameters,
we achieve more than 5% accuracy improvements in all settings than SOTA with the same backbone.

𝑦

Model

e.g. ResNet18(11.5M)
(c) TPPR
Synthetic-Data

𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡−1
Distillation

Real-Data
𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡

Prompt

𝑅 𝑈×𝑟×𝑑 (0.1M)

Query

Prompts

Data

𝑦

𝑅𝑇×𝑈×𝑟×𝑑

Task Quantities 𝑇

Pre-trained
Model

Prompts Pool

𝑦
Frozen
Tuned
Privacy Leakage
Storage Overhead
Communication Costs

Figure 1. The brief overview of classic methods DFKT (a), prompt
pool (b), and ours (c).

by model transmission instead of directly sharing data
[1, 19, 21, 53]. In recent years, federated learning has
garnered significant attention in fields such as healthcare
[1, 50], IoT [22, 34] and autonomous driving [10, 11, 26],
all of which prioritize data decentralization and information
privacy. Traditional federated learning research often assumes that data categories and distributions are static, which
means that the categories and domains of the training data
remain unchanged throughout the entire process. In realworld applications, data categories and domains evolve over
time [27, 36, 42, 58], while client devices have limited storage, hindering the handling of large datasets. These factors
pose challenges for continuous learning in the FL context.
Recent research has integrated continual learning into
the federated learning framework to adapt to evolving
data streams. A prominent setting is Federated ClassIncremental Learning (FCIL) [9, 14, 56], which aims to
continuously learn new categories in the federated learning scenario. However, catastrophic forgetting remains a
significant challenge for FCIL. The heterogeneity of data
across different clients in federated learning complicates
the extraction of robust features in a distributed environment, exacerbating knowledge forgetting when new tasks

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized, privacy-focused
technology that enables multiple entities to collaborate
* Corresponding author.

2631

