This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse-Dense Side-Tuner for efficient Video Temporal Grounding
David Pujol-Perich, Sergio Escalera, Albert Clapés
Universitat de Barcelona and Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
{david.pujolperich, sescalera, aclapes}@ub.edu

Abstract
Video Temporal Grounding (VTG) involves Moment Retrieval (MR) and Highlight Detection (HD) based on textual queries. For this, most methods rely solely on finallayer features of frozen large pre-trained backbones, limiting their adaptability to new domains. While full finetuning is often impractical, parameter-efficient fine-tuning –
and particularly side-tuning (ST)– has emerged as an effective alternative. However, prior ST approaches this problem
from a frame-level refinement perspective, overlooking the
inherent sparse nature of MR. To address this, we propose
the Sparse-Dense Side-Tuner (SDST), the first anchor-free
ST architecture for VTG. We also introduce the Referencebased Deformable Self-Attention, a novel mechanism that
enhances the context modeling of the deformable attention
–a key limitation of existing anchor-free methods. Additionally, we present the first effective integration of InternVideo2
backbone into an ST framework, showing its profound implications in performance. Overall, our method significantly improves existing ST methods, achieving highly competitive or SOTA results on QVHighlights, TACoS, and
Charades-STA, while reducing up to a 73% the parameter
count w.r.t. the existing SOTA methods. The code is publicly
accessible at https://github.com/davidpujol/
SDST.

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed method and the main
MR (left) and HD (right) baselines. These are all evaluated on
QVHighlights val split and use InternVideo2-1B features. These
results show that our method improves existing side-tuning works
and attains SOTA results while significantly reducing the number
of trainable parameters.

1. Introduction

dataset suitable for this multi-task setup. Since then, various
works have been proposed following anchor-based [2, 17,
21, 22], anchor-free [7, 15, 25] and even LLM-based [23,
24] approaches. All of these, however, incur in a common
critical limitation, which is relying on the final-layer features of frozen backbones. This is especially limiting when
facing large distribution shifts between the pre-training distribution and that of the downstream task [29]. This issue
is particularly pronounced in VTG, where an image-domain
backbone [31] is transferred to the video domain.
A typical solution is fine-tuning; however, full finetuning is impractical due to its high computational cost.
Doing this more efficiently has thus become critical,
motivating the interest in parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) [9] methods –e.g., Prompting or Adapters– which
optimize only a small subset of parameters. Unfortunately,
these still require full back-propagation through the backbone, making it still memory-intensive. To address this,
[34] introduced side-tuning (ST), an effective PEFT, and
memory-efficient fine-tuning (MEFT) method. ST creates a
parallel pathway to refine intermediate features, thus backpropagating over a minimal set of parameters only. In this
regard, we highlight the work of R2 -Tuning [21], the first
ST approach for VTG, which recursively fuses multi-modal
intermediate CLIP [31] embeddings. [21] also proposes
adapting these frame-level embeddings for MR by generating a dense set of anchors. As shown in Fig. 1, this

Recently the field of Video Understanding has gained attention due to its potential in applications like search engines or recommendation systems. A key task in this field
is Video Temporal Grounding (VTG), which localizes moments within videos based on textual descriptions. Typically, this involves doing both Moment Retrieval (MR) [2,
5, 7, 11, 15] and Highlight Detection (HD) [1, 8, 10, 33, 40].
More specifically, MR predicts moment boundaries w.r.t.
textual queries, while HD offers a more interpretable perspective, predicting frame-level saliency scores.
In the past, existing works focused on either MR or
HD, given the lack of datasets that combined both tasks.
QVHighlights [15] shifted this paradigm, proposing the first

21515

