This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Efﬁcient Hybrid Vision Transformer for TinyML Applications
Fanhong Zeng1,2 Huanan Li1,2 Juntao Guan1,3 *
Rui Fan1,2 Tong Wu1,2 Xilong Wang1,2 Rui Lai1,2 *
1

Key Laboratory of Analog Integrated Circuits and Systems (Ministry of Education)
2
Faculty of Integrated Circuit, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
To enable the deployment of Vision Transformers on
resource-constrained mobile and edge devices, the development of efﬁcient ViT models has attracted signiﬁcant attention. Researchers achieved remarkable improvements
in accuracy and speed by optimizing attention mechanisms and integrating lightweight CNN modules. However, existing designs often overlook runtime overhead from
memory-bound operations and the shift in feature characteristics from spatial-dominant to semantic-dominant as
networks deepen. This work introduces TinyNeXt, a family of efﬁcient hybrid ViTs for TinyML, featuring Lean
Single-Head Self-Attention to minimize memory-bound operations, and a macro design tailored to feature characteristics at different stages. TinyNeXt strikes a better accuracyspeed trade-off across diverse tasks and hardware platforms, outperforming state-of-the-art models of comparable scale. For instance, our TinyNeXt-T achieves a remarkable 71.5% top-1 accuracy with only 1.0M parameters
on ImageNet-1K. Furthermore, compared to recent efﬁcient
models like MobileViT-XXS and MobileViT-XS, TinyNeXt-S
and TinyNeXt-M achieve 3.7%/0.5% higher accuracy, respectively, while running 2.1×/2.6× faster on Nvidia Jetson Nano. The code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/yuffeenn/TinyNeXt.

1. Introduction
Recently, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [11] have demonstrated superior performance across diverse computer vision tasks, including classiﬁcation[44], detection [2, 59],
and segmentation [5, 54, 61]. As a key component of
ViT, Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) captures interrelations between any two spatial locations, signiﬁcantly enhancing global information comprehension. Nonetheless,
the quadratic complexity and substantial memory demands
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Throughput vs Accuracy Comparison.

of MHSA pose signiﬁcant challenges for deploying ViTs on
edge devices.
To tackle the above challenges, researchers have introduced a range of lightweight design strategies. One approach integrates Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
with ViTs, such as employing lightweight convolutions in
early stages [25, 26, 53] to reduce computations. Another
approach focuses on optimizing self-attention mechanisms
to reduce the number of visual tokens, thereby decreasing computational costs. This includes restricting attention to speciﬁc regions [10, 30, 45, 63] and dynamically
pruning redundant tokens [15, 40, 57]. Leveraging CNNTransformer hybrids and innovative attention modules, current lightweight ViT [26, 60] models have progressively
surpassed lightweight CNN models[41, 43] in terms of accuracy and speed.
However, prior works have overlooked several critical
aspects in the design of efﬁcient ViTs, both at micro and
macro architectural levels. At the micro level, dense matrix multiplication operations are commonly regarded as the
throughput bottleneck in attention module inference. Many

19914

