This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AR-VRM: Imitating Human Motions for Visual Robot Manipulation with
Analogical Reasoning
Dejie Yang1 , Zijing Zhao1 , Yang Liu1,2 *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{ydj,zijingzhao}@stu.pku.edu.cn, yangliu@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract

Human
Video

Visual Robot Manipulation (VRM) aims to enable a robot to
follow natural language instructions based on robot states
and visual observations, and therefore requires costly multimodal data. To compensate for the deficiency of robot data,
existing approaches have employed vision-language pretraining with large-scale data. However, they either utilize
web data that differs from robotic tasks, or train the model
in an implicit way (e.g., predicting future frames at the pixel
level), thus showing limited generalization ability under insufficient robot data. In this paper, we propose to learn from
large-scale human action video datasets in an explicit way
(i.e., imitating human actions from hand keypoints), introducing Visual Robot Manipulation with Analogical Reasoning
(AR-VRM). To acquire action knowledge explicitly from human action videos, we propose a keypoint Vision-Language
Model (VLM) pretraining scheme, enabling the VLM to learn
human action knowledge and directly predict human hand
keypoints. During fine-tuning on robot data, to facilitate
the robotic arm in imitating the action patterns of human
motions, we first retrieve human action videos that perform
similar manipulation tasks and have similar historical observations , and then learn the Analogical Reasoning (AR) map
between human hand keypoints and robot components. Taking advantage of focusing on action keypoints instead of irrelevant visual cues, our method achieves leading performance
on the CALVIN benchmark and real-world experiments. In
few-shot scenarios, our AR-VRM outperforms previous methods by large margins , underscoring the effectiveness of
explicitly imitating human actions under data scarcity. Code
available at https://github.com/idejie/ar.

General
Image

Textual
Description

VLM

Task
Robot
Observation Instruction

VLM

Frame
Contrastive
Prediction or Learning or

…

Pretraining

Next Timestamp
Robotic Action Prediction
Robot Fine-tuning

(a) Previous methods: learning from large-scale data implicitly.
Human
Observation

Hand
Keypoint

Task
Instruction

VLM
Next Timestamp
Keypoint Prediction
Keypoint VLM Pretraining

Robot
Human
Task
Observation Observation Instruction

VLM
Next Timestamp
Robotic Action Prediction
Robot Fine-tuning with Analogical Reasoning

(b) Our AR-VRM: explicitly learn from human action by hand keypoints.

Figure 1. Demonstration of the differences between our framework and previous methods: we propose to learn from human
actions explicitly by hand keypoints with analogical reasoning.

sual inputs, the robot is required to execute some actions
according to human natural language instructions, including tasks such as object grasping, placement, and assembly [1, 2, 23, 31]. Training such task requires multi-modal
data, including paired images, natural language instructions,
and robot action states under specific scenarios where robots
work, which is costly and requires time-consuming human
demonstrations to manipulate robots. Therefore, the performance of VRM is often limited by the scarcity of robot
trajectories and annotations for training [1, 31].
To compensate for the deficiency of robot data, existing
approaches utilize large-scale vision-language data pretraining and fine-tune the model under robot scenarios. But,

1. Introduction
Visual robot manipulation (VRM) is an essential task in
the robotics field [3, 5, 11]. Based on current state and vi* Corresponding author

6818

