This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SignRep: Enhancing Self-Supervised Sign Representations
Ryan Wong1 , Necati Cihan Camgoz2 , Richard Bowden1
1
University of Surrey, 2 Meta Reality Labs
{r.wong, r.bowden}@surrey.ac.uk, neccam@meta.com
Abstract

that generalize across diverse datasets is challenging, yet
essential for scalable sign language modeling.

Sign language representation learning presents unique
challenges due to the complex spatio-temporal nature of
signs and the scarcity of labeled datasets. Existing methods
often rely either on models pre-trained on general visual
tasks, that lack sign-specific features, or use complex multimodal and multi-branch architectures. To bridge this gap,
we introduce a scalable, self-supervised framework for sign
representation learning. We leverage important inductive
(sign) priors during the training of our RGB model. To do
this, we leverage simple but important cues based on skeletons while pretraining a masked autoencoder. These sign
specific priors alongside feature regularization and an adversarial style agnostic loss provide a powerful backbone.
Notably, our model does not require skeletal keypoints during inference, avoiding the limitations of keypoint-based
models during downstream tasks. When finetuned, we
achieve state-of-the-art performance for sign recognition
on the WLASL, ASL-Citizen and NMFs-CSL datasets, using a simpler architecture and with only a single-modality.
Beyond recognition, our frozen model excels in sign dictionary retrieval and sign translation, surpassing standard
MAE pretraining and skeletal-based representations in retrieval. It also reduces computational costs for training existing sign translation models while maintaining strong performance on Phoenix2014T, CSL-Daily and How2Sign.

Most existing methods for sign recognition rely on multimodal or an ensemble of specialized models to achieve
state-of-the-art recognition results. These models often require multi-channel inputs (e.g. RGB, depth and skeleton
data) or specialized architectures to capture the complex interactions of hand, body or facial expressions [17, 20, 22,
23, 52, 57]. With each country having its own sign language and linguistic study expensive, currently available labeled datasets are sparse with typically under 2000 unique
signs [1, 19, 26, 28, 41]. Collecting annotated sign language
data is costly and time-consuming, making it infeasible to
rely solely on labeled datasets for sign representation learning. This highlights the need for methods that can learn sign
language representations from large-scale, unlabeled data.

1. Introduction

Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We propose
a scalable self-supervised Masked Autoencoding (MAE)
framework which leverages sign priors, adversarial loss and
feature regularizations for sign representation learning. (2)
We introduce a method for analyzing sign class similarities in unseen datasets, introducing an auxiliary class probability distribution loss, which enhances recognition performance. (3) Our single pretrained model achieves stateof-the-art sign recognition, surpassing complex architecture and multimodal models. (4) We demonstrate the effectiveness of our sign representations for sign dictionary
retrieval, achieving strong performance without any downstream training. (5) We demonstrate that using our pre-

Sign language is an important means of communication
for millions of people worldwide. Sign languages have
complex visual characteristics, which include intricate hand
shapes, motions, body poses and facial expressions that
models need to accurately interpret and process [5]. Furthermore, the computational demands of processing long
video sequences add considerable challenges, making it difficult to scale these systems effectively. As a result, current
approaches to sign recognition and translation often rely on
general pretrained vision models [1, 7, 19, 22, 28, 49, 57].
Creating robust, label-free sign language representations

Newer methods for pretraining sign language translation models often require sentence-aligned annotations
[25, 37, 49, 53, 55]. While these prior approaches jointly
learn individual sign representations and inter-sign relationships, they are not scalable to unlabeled datasets as they require sentence-aligned annotations. We therefore focus on
building a scalable and generalizable individual sign representation framework using self-supervised learning. A
strong foundation in individual sign embeddings is an important step before building effective inter-sign models, as it
ensures robust feature representations before incorporating
complex long range temporal information.

22804

