This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NGD: Neural Gradient Based Deformation for Monocular Garment
Reconstruction
Soham Dasgupta

Shanthika Naik Preet Savalia Sujay Kumar Ingle
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Avinash Sharma

{sohamd, shanthikanaik, b22ai036, d23csa003, avinashsharma}@iitj.ac.in

Figure 1. Our method reconstructs high-fidelity garment geometry and appearance from input monocular video.

Abstract
Dynamic garment reconstruction from monocular video is
an important yet challenging task due to the complex dynamics and unconstrained nature of the garments. Recent advancements in neural rendering have enabled highquality geometric reconstruction with image/video supervision. However, implicit representation methods that use
volume rendering often provide smooth geometry and fail
to model high-frequency details. While template reconstruction methods model explicit geometry, they use vertex displacement for deformation which results in artifacts.
Addressing these limitations, we propose NGD, a Neural
Gradient-based Deformation method to reconstruct dynamically evolving textured garments from monocular videos.
Additionally, we propose a novel adaptive remeshing strategy for modeling dynamically evolving surfaces like wrinkles and pleats of the skirt, leading to high-quality reconstruction. Finally, we learn dynamic texture maps to capture per-frame lighting and shadow effects. We provide extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations to demonstrate significant improvements over existing SOTA methods
and provide high-quality garment reconstructions.

platforms, revolutionizing Social Media, E-Commerce,
Gaming, and Entertainment industries. The sheer diversity, complex dynamics, and intricate articulations make
garment digitization and modeling significantly challenging. Unlike conventional digital garment creation methods
involving artists, which demanded expertise, time, and labor, deep learning has enabled garment digitization from
images and videos [29, 34, 35, 38, 48]. Multi-view video
inputs are used to obtain high-quality garment digitization,
but they often require expensive calibrated multi-camera setups [19, 28, 35, 48, 51], and hence difficult to scale. In
comparison, monocular video inputs are easy to acquire and
scalable with an abundance of “in the wild” videos available. Nevertheless, garment digitization from monocular
video needs to reconstruct the dynamically evolving garment geometry and appearance while addressing the classical challenges like modeling varying garment sizes, nonrigid deformations due to body shapes and poses, and the
diverse topology of garments.
Advancements in differentiable rendering have made it
possible to achieve high-quality geometry reconstruction
from monocular videos. [4, 9, 14, 27, 34, 35]. The existing approaches for garment reconstruction can be divided
into implicit surface deformation methods [9, 34] and explicit template deformation methods [4, 27]. SCARF [9]
is one of the first works to use implicit surface representation using Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)[31]; nevertheless, the geometric quality is limited by constraints inherent
to volume rendering approaches. REC-MV [34] addresses

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer vision have enabled largescale digitization of 3D garments for immersive AR/VR

25485

