This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CL-Splats: Continual Learning of Gaussian Splatting with Local Optimization
Jan Ackermann1,2 Jonas Kulhanek1,3 Shengqu Cai2 Haofei Xu1
Marc Pollefeys1 Gordon Wetzstein2 Leonidas J. Guibas2,4 Songyou Peng4
1

2

ETH Zürich

T0

Stanford University

3

CTU Prague

CL-NeRF (0.001 FPS)
Train: 45min, PSNR: 27.71

4

Google DeepMind

CL-NeRF

CL-NeRF

Add Pillow
Ours (81 FPS)
Train: 11min, PSNR: 32.44

Time

T1

Ours

CL-NeRF (0.001 FPS)
Train: 45min, PSNR: 28.13

Remove Seat

Ours
CL-NeRF

CL-NeRF

T2

Ours (82 FPS)
Train: 11min, PSNR: 31.97

(a) Training Images

Ours

Ours

(c) Close-up

(b) Continual Updates

Figure 1. We introduce CL-Splats, a simple yet effective approach for continual learning of Gaussian Splats. Our method efficiently updates
scenes using a small, incremental set of views focused on changed regions. It achieves high-quality reconstructions while significantly
outperforming existing continual learning methods for novel view synthesis in both reconstruction accuracy and optimization speed.

Abstract

mixed reality, autonomous navigation, and embodied AI.
Many tasks within these fields, such as object interaction
or localization, benefit from a continually evolving understanding of the environment [35]. As scenes change over
time, efficiently incorporating updates from new observations is essential for maintaining accurate and up-to-date
reconstructions. These new updates can provide insights
into object movements and transformations, enhancing our
understanding of dynamic environments.
While real-time scene reconstruction has garnered substantial attention, techniques that address long-term scene
evolution are less developed [31]. Updating 3D representations from intermittent, sparse captures—rather than continuous video—introduces unique challenges that have to be
addressed to improve dynamic scene understanding. To this
end, recent approaches have explored updating point clouds
by matching and registering objects over time [54], but they
lack photorealism and only reconstruct objects. Other works
introduce novel view synthesis techniques to update the reconstruction iteratively [4, 42], but they face issues with
catastrophic forgetting and recovering of previous states,
making them less versatile. This highlights the need for a
unified approach that effectively integrates update mechanisms while preserving the visual fidelity and efficiency of
modern 3D scene representations such as Gaussian Splatting.
Our method, namely CL-Splats, combines the strengths

In dynamic 3D environments, accurately updating scene representations over time is crucial for applications in robotics,
mixed reality, and embodied AI. As scenes evolve, efficient
methods to incorporate changes are needed to maintain upto-date, high-quality reconstructions without the computational overhead of re-optimizing the entire scene. This paper
introduces CL-Splats, which incrementally updates Gaussian splatting-based 3D representations from sparse scene
captures. CL-Splats integrates a robust change-detection
module that segments updated and static components within
the scene, enabling focused, local optimization that avoids
unnecessary re-computation. Moreover, CL-Splats supports storing and recovering previous scene states, facilitating temporal segmentation and new scene-analysis applications. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that
CL-Splats achieves efficient updates with improved reconstruction quality over the state-of-the-art. This establishes
a robust foundation for future real-time adaptation in 3D
scene reconstruction tasks. We will release our source code
and the synthetic and real-world datasets we created at
https://cl-splats.github.io/ .

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction is a fundamental challenge in computer vision and robotics [27], with applications across

7808

