This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Time-Aware Auto White Balance in Mobile Photography
Mahmoud Afifi*
Luxi Zhao*
Abhijith Punnappurath
Mohammed A. Abdelsalam
Ran Zhang
Michael S. Brown
AI Center–Toronto, Samsung Electronics
{m.afifi1, lucy.zhao, abhijith.p, m.abdelsalam, ran.zhang, michael.b1}@samsung.com
3.779°

Colors

0.420°

0°

3.612°

Colors, time &
capture info.

Ground truth

1.370°

0°

1.792°

0.665°

0°

7.212°

1.908°

0°

Figure 1. The time of day influences scene illumination, making it a valuable cue for improving illuminant estimation. Shown are
white-balanced results (gamma-corrected for visualization) using our method with (1) colors only, (2) colors plus contextual (timestamp
and geolocation) and capture data, and (3) ground truth (from a color chart). Angular errors show improvements when time-capture
information is used.

Abstract
Cameras rely on auto white balance (AWB) to correct undesirable color casts caused by scene illumination and the
camera’s spectral sensitivity. This is typically achieved using an illuminant estimator that determines the global color
cast solely from the color information in the camera’s raw
sensor image. Mobile devices provide valuable additional
metadata—such as capture timestamp and geolocation—
that offers strong contextual clues to help narrow down
the possible illumination solutions. This paper proposes a
lightweight illuminant estimation method that incorporates
such contextual metadata, along with additional capture information and image colors, into a lightweight model (∼5K
parameters), achieving promising results, matching or surpassing larger models. To validate our method, we introduce a dataset of 3,224 smartphone images with contextual metadata collected at various times of day and under
diverse lighting conditions. The dataset includes groundtruth illuminant colors, determined using a color chart, and
user-preferred illuminants validated through a user study,
providing a comprehensive benchmark for AWB evaluation.

1. Introduction and related work
Color constancy refers to the ability of the human visual
system to maintain stable object colors despite variations
in lighting conditions by leveraging contextual cues within
the scene [27, 33, 51]. Cameras approximate this effect using auto white balance (AWB) correction, which aims to
partially neutralize color casts introduced by scene illumination and the camera’s spectral sensitivity [3]. AWB first
estimates the illumination color as an RGB vector in the
camera’s raw color space. The raw image is then corrected
by scaling its color channels according to the estimated illumination, typically under the assumption of a single global
light source [8, 31].
Conventional illuminant estimation methods primarily
rely on image colors, either by directly processing the raw
image (e.g., [13, 32, 41, 49, 53, 58, 62, 66]) or by analyzing color histograms (e.g., [2, 6, 7, 10]). These methods
can be broadly categorized into two groups: (1) classical
statistical-based methods (e.g., [15, 26, 32, 56, 57, 62]),

* Equal contribution.

5038

