This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S4 M: Boosting Semi-Supervised Instance Segmentation with SAM
Heeji Yoon1→
Heeseong Shin1→
Eunbeen Hong1
Hyunwook Choi2
Hansang Cho3
Daun Jeong3
Seungryong Kim1†
1

KAIST AI

2

Korea University

3

Samsung Electro-Mechanics

https://cvlab-kaist.github.io/S4M
Abstract

CA, Classification Accuracy
SQ, Segmentation Quality

Semi-supervised instance segmentation poses challenges
due to limited labeled data, causing difficulties in accurately localizing distinct object instances. Current teacherstudent frameworks still suffer from performance constraints due to unreliable pseudo-label quality stemming
from limited labeled data. While the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) offers robust segmentation capabilities at various granularities, directly applying SAM to this task introduces challenges such as class-agnostic predictions and
potential over-segmentation. To address these complexities, we carefully integrate SAM into the semi-supervised instance segmentation framework, developing a novel distillation method that effectively captures the precise localization
capabilities of SAM without compromising semantic recognition. Furthermore, we incorporate pseudo-label refinement as well as a specialized data augmentation with the refined pseudo-labels, resulting in superior performance. We
establish state-of-the-art performance, and provide comprehensive experiments and ablation studies to validate the
effectiveness of our proposed approach.

100

96.9

75
50

Class: Person, 99.8 %

47.7

25
0
CA
SQ
(a) Bottleneck analysis

Class : Person, 99.4%
(b) Failure case

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Analysis on pseudo-labels by the teacher in a teacherstudent framework for semi-supervised instance segmentation. (a) Bottleneck analysis revealing that the primary limitation
lies in mask quality rather than classification. Note that class accuracy (CA) is computed on matched pairs with IoU > 0.5, and
segmentation quality (SQ) is measured by the standard segmentation quality metric from panoptic quality [32]. (b) Example failure
cases with correct, confident class prediction but inaccurate masks.

training of a student network. However, the restricted
availability of labeled data renders the pseudo-labels errorprone, thereby reducing the benefits of incorporating unlabeled images in the teacher-student framework.
To address this, recent studies have proposed several
strategies, including noise filtering [54], the use of auxiliary
information (e.g., depth maps [5]), and dedicated training
stages to stabilize the teacher–student framework [3, 16].
Despite these advances, the inherent limitations imposed
by the small-scale labeled data continue to produce pseudolabels with significant errors, ultimately impeding the performance of the student network.
Recently, large-scale vision foundation models [20, 40,
42, 55], pretrained on web-scale datasets, have demon-

Instance segmentation—simultaneously detecting objects
and delineating their pixel-level boundaries—is fundamental to applications such as autonomous driving and medical imaging [62, 64]. Although fully-supervised methods [6, 7, 19, 24] have achieved impressive accuracy, their
dependence on extensive annotated datasets limits scalability due to the labor-intensive nature of pixel-level labeling.
Consequently, recent work [3, 5, 16, 28, 54] has explored
semi-supervised learning (SSL) approaches that additionally leverage unlabeled images. Typically, these methods
generate pseudo-labels using a teacher network trained on
a limited labeled dataset, which subsequently guides the
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

20226

