This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bilateral Collaboration with Large Vision-Language Models for
Open Vocabulary Human-Object Interaction Detection
Yupeng Hu1 Changxing Ding1† Chang Sun1 Shaoli Huang2 Xiangmin Xu1,3
1
South China University of Technology 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Foshan University
{ee202320111334, eesunchang2024}@mail.scut.edu.cn, shaol.huang@gmail.com
{chxding, xmxu}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

VLM Visual
Encoder

Interaction
Decoder

HOI
Embeddings

Frozen
Supervision

(a) Existing One-stage Framework

Element-wise
Addition

Distillation

Captions

VLM
Queries

Token-level
Supervision

Attention
Bias

Interaction Decoder

HOI
Embeddings

Fusion
Adapter

(b) Our Bilateral Collaboration Framework

Figure 1. Comparisons between one-stage open vocabulary HOI
detection frameworks. (a) Existing works [1, 14] usually utilize
HOI queries to extract interaction features from the CNN backbone and VLM, respectively. Then, they fuse these features via
element-wise addition. (b) Our approach establishes bilateral collaboration between the VLM and HOI detector. The HOI detector
provides attention bias to the VLM, enabling the VLM to extract
ﬁne-grained interaction features. The VLM provides ﬁne-grained
token-level supervision to the HOI detector, enabling the latter to
generate high-quality attention bias.

training set. This is mainly because labeling all interacting
<human, verb, object> triplets in an image is extremely
time-consuming, affecting the training set’s size and diversity. These facts motivate the study of open vocabulary HOI
detection methods.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

Interaction
Decoder

Queries

Open vocabulary Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a challenging task that detects all <human, verb,
object> triplets of interest in an image, even those that are
not pre-deﬁned in the training set. Existing approaches typically rely on output features generated by large VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) to enhance the generalization
ability of interaction representations. However, the visual
features produced by VLMs are holistic and coarse-grained,
which contradicts the nature of detection tasks. To address this issue, we propose a novel Bilateral Collaboration
framework for open vocabulary HOI detection (BC-HOI).
This framework includes an Attention Bias Guidance (ABG)
component, which guides the VLM to produce ﬁne-grained
instance-level interaction features according to the attention bias provided by the HOI detector. It also includes
a Large Language Model (LLM)-based Supervision Guidance (LSG) component, which provides ﬁne-grained tokenlevel supervision for the HOI detector by the LLM component of the VLM. LSG enhances the ability of ABG to generate high-quality attention bias. We conduct extensive experiments on two popular benchmarks: HICO-DET and VCOCO, consistently achieving superior performance in the
open vocabulary and closed settings. Code is available at
https://github.com/MPI-Lab/BC-HOI.

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection [17] is a humancentric scene understanding task that localizes all the interacting human-object pairs and recognizes the interactions
between each pair in an image. It has been widely applied
in scene graph generation [44, 45], visual question answering [42, 43], and action understanding [46, 47]. Despite signiﬁcant advancements in recent years, most existing works
are restricted to predicting pre-deﬁned HOI categories in the

CNN

Since large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [31, 35,
36] have a strong generalization ability, recent works [1, 2,
4, 6, 14–16] have resorted to VLMs to facilitate open vocabulary HOI detection. They typically rely on the output
cls token embedding [4, 6, 16, 73] or the feature maps by
the visual encoder of VLMs [1, 2, 14, 15]. For example,
GEN-VLKT [4] transfers the knowledge of a VLM to the
HOI detector via knowledge distillation according to the
cls token embedding. MP-HOI [16] fuses the cls token

20126

