This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CityGS-X : A Scalable Architecture for Efficient and Geometrically Accurate
Large-Scale Scene Reconstruction
Yuanyuan Gao* 1,2 , Hao Li* 1 , Jiaqi Chen* 1 , Zhengyu Zou1 ,
Zhihang Zhong† 2 , Dingwen Zhang† 1 , Xiao Sun2 , Junwei Han1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Ours

Ours

Ours

Circle Aera: time consumption

PSNR
26.5

26.14

26
CityGS-v2

CityGS-v2

25.15

25
24.5

Our Mesh

24.1

24

Rubble
Texture
Ours

26.32

25.13

25.2

24.25

24.23

4

8

23.5

Ours

Ours

1

2

Ours
VastGS
CityGSv2

25.58

25.5
CityGS-v2

Method

GPUs

Resolution : 4K Scene: Rubble Device: RTX 4090

CityGS-v2

CityGS-v2

CityGS-v2

Out of Memory
Matrix City

Ours

CityGSv2

Figure 1. We propose CityGS-X , a scalable architecture for efficient and geometrically accurate large-scale scene reconstruction (left).
The middle column shows qualitative results of rendered depth between our method and CityGS-v2 [26], demonstrating CityGS-X ’s
superior geometric representation with smoother object surfaces. The top-right PSNR chart highlights CityGS-X ’s superior reconstruction
quality across various GPU configurations while significantly reducing time consumption. The bottom-right section highlights the memory
efficiency of CityGS-X , successfully handling high-resolution 4K rendering, while CityGS-v2 encounters out-of-memory issues.

Abstract
Despite its significant achievements in large-scale scene reconstruction, 3D Gaussian Splatting still faces substantial
challenges, including slow processing, high computational
costs, and limited geometric accuracy. These core issues
arise from its inherently unstructured design and the absence of efficient parallelization. To overcome these challenges simultaneously, we introduce CityGS-X , a scalable
architecture built on a novel parallelized hybrid hierarchical 3D representation (PH2 -3D). As an early attempt,
CityGS-X abandons the cumbersome merge-and-partition
process and instead adopts a newly-designed batch-level
multi-task rendering process. This architecture enables
efficient multi-GPU rendering through dynamic Level-ofDetail voxel allocations, significantly improving scalability
and performance. To further enhance both overall qual-

ity and geometric accuracy, CityGS-X presents a progressive RGB-Depth-Normal training strategy. This approach
enhances 3D consistency by jointly optimizing appearance
and geometry representation through multi-view constraints
and off-the-shelf depth priors within batch-level training.
Through extensive experiments, CityGS-X consistently outperforms existing methods in terms of faster training times,
larger rendering capacities, and more accurate geometric
details in large-scale scenes. Notably, CityGS-X can train
and render a scene with 5,000+ images in just 5 hours
using only 4×4090 GPUs, a task that would make other
alternative methods encounter Out-Of-Memory (OOM) issues and fail completely. This implies that CityGS-X is
far beyond the capacity of other existing methods. Project
Page: https://lifuguan.github.io/CityGS-X/.

* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.

Work was done during internship at Shanghai AI Lab

27187

