This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAA∗ : Deep Angular A Star for Image-based Path Planning
Zhiwei Xu†
The University of Melbourne, Australia
danny.xu@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Path smoothness is often overlooked in path imitation learning from expert demonstrations. In this paper, we introduce
a novel learning method, termed deep angular A∗ (DAA∗ ),
by incorporating the proposed path angular freedom (PAF)
into A∗ to improve path similarity through adaptive path
smoothness. The PAF aims to explore the effect of move
angles on path node expansion by finding the trade-off between their minimum and maximum values, allowing for
high adaptiveness for imitation learning. DAA∗ improves
path optimality by closely aligning with the reference path
through joint optimization of path shortening and smoothing, which correspond to heuristic distance and PAF, respectively. Throughout comprehensive evaluations on 7
datasets, including 4 maze datasets, 2 video-game datasets,
and a real-world drone-view dataset containing 2 scenarios, we demonstrate remarkable improvements of our
DAA∗ over neural A∗ in path similarity between the predicted and reference paths with a shorter path length when
the shortest path is plausible, improving by 9.0% SPR, 6.9%
ASIM, and 3.9% PSIM. Furthermore, when jointly learning pathfinding with both path loss and path probability
map loss, DAA∗ significantly outperforms the state-of-theart TransPath by 6.3% SPR, 6.0% PSIM, and 3.7% ASIM.
We also discuss the minor trade-off between path optimality
and search efficiency where applicable.

1. Introduction
Path planning [23, 48] is a fundamental technique in various fields, including robotics and computer vision for video
game [9, 14, 38], visual navigation [52, 53], geodesic distance measurement [41], autonomous driving [59, 60], unmanned aerial vehicle routing [35, 36, 49], and smart agriculture [16, 39]. It finds the optimal route between the
source and destination in 2D and 3D environments [20, 56]
with spatial obstacles or impenetrable areas.
Traditional pathfinding algorithms, such as depth-first
search [47], breadth-first search [42], and Dijkstra’s algorithm [18], use greedy search strategies across all active
† Parts of this work were done at The Australian National University.

nodes, often resulting in high computational complexity.
To mitigate this, heuristic path planning methods, including A∗ [24] and Theta∗ [15], leverage heuristic guidance to
efficiently find optimal paths while significantly reducing
search space. Nevertheless, selecting an admissible heuristic remains challenging due to complex and unknown environments, large search space, and coarse cost map initialization. In contrast, deep heuristic learning approaches
[1, 29, 46, 57] estimate state priors and cost-to-go values
from the current state to the target given expert demonstrations, reducing the search space and enhancing its generalization and adaptability to unseen environments.
Recent advancements have demonstrated significant advantages of using convolutional neural network (CNN) [31,
44, 57] and Transformer [8, 29, 50] to learn high-confidence
and readily accessible heuristics. They use the pathfinding algorithm as a post-processing step or in end-to-end
supervised learning to learn the heuristic probability map.
However, the post-processing approach heavily relies on
an accurate path probability map (PPM) predicted by a
neural network, requiring computationally expensive highconfidence PPMs as reference [29]. In contrast, end-to-end
learning uses only binary labelling to obtain reference path,
which is more accessible than obtaining reference PPM.
Among end-to-end differentiable path planning techniques [2, 8, 34, 51, 58], neural A∗ [57] uses A∗ [24] to learn
cost map and discretized activation [13] to prevent gradient
accumulation in path search. Nevertheless, the balance between state and progressive priors is often imperfect and
adaptive edge-wise interactions are rarely exploited, giving
inferior path imitation ability. While these methods aim to
find the shortest path with few search steps, they are also inferior in achieving high path similarity to particularly handcrafted trajectories that are not necessarily the shortest for
empirical motions in the real world.
To address these challenges, we propose DAA∗ by incorporating distance heuristic and PAF into A∗ for path
imitation learning through path shortening and smoothing.
Specifically, PAF is designed to find the best trade-off between the minimum and maximum path angles, acknowledging that the reference path can be arbitrarily smooth and

25284

