This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bokehlicious: Photorealistic Bokeh Rendering with Controllable Apertures
Florin-Alexandru Vasluianu Marcos V. Conde Zongwei Wu* Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS, University of Würzburg, Germany

After

Before

Tim Seizinger

Figure 1. Our proposed Bokehlicious architecture trained on our new RealBokeh dataset can create highly photorealistic Bokeh effects
of varying intensity, without depth maps or other auxiliary inputs. Our method is able to maintain intricate foreground details like hair
and excels at rendering highly complex Bokeh phenomena while maintaining low computational complexity. Human images from [51].

Abstract

1. Introduction

Bokeh rendering methods play a key role in creating the
visually appealing, softly blurred backgrounds seen in
professional photography. While recent learning-based
approaches show promising results, generating realistic
Bokeh remains challenging. Existing methods require additional inputs and suffer from unrealistic Bokeh reproduction due to reliance on synthetic data. In this work, we propose Bokehlicious, a highly efficient network that provides
intuitive control over Bokeh strength through an ApertureAware Attention mechanism, mimicking the physical lens
aperture. To further address the lack of high-quality realworld data, we present RealBokeh, a novel dataset featuring 23,000 high-resolution (24-MP) images captured by
professional photographers, covering diverse scenes with
varied aperture and focal length settings. Evaluations on
both our new RealBokeh and established Bokeh rendering benchmarks show that Bokehlicious consistently outperforms SOTA methods while significantly reducing computational cost and exhibiting strong zero-shot generalization.
Our method and dataset further extend to defocus deblurring, achieving competitive results on the RealDOF benchmark. www.github.com/ TimSeizinger/ Bokehlicious

Bokeh, a term derived from the Japanese word boke, is a
key aesthetic element in professional photography. It emphasizes the subject by transforming potential distractions
in the background of the image into a visually pleasing effect, as shown in Fig. 1. Bokeh typically manifests itself
as a smooth blur, although in high-contrast areas, a more
intricate effect featuring circular shapes may appear [22].
Controlling the aperture to adjust the size of Bokeh is an
essential factor in the photographic process [32]. A small
f -stop number such as f/2.0 indicates an open aperture and
results in a strong Bokeh effect. For a weaker Bokeh effect, the mechanism is gradually closed down, indicated by
increasingly larger f -stop numbers like f/4.0 or f/8.0.
Although Bokeh is a natural phenomenon, it is barely
noticeable in smartphone cameras as a result of their small
sensors and lenses. This led to an increasing interest
in Bokeh rendering methods [5, 6, 17, 20, 55]. Many
approaches implement multistep frameworks that require
depth maps [20, 35]. Therefore, these methods require
specialized camera hardware or additional computation, increasing their complexity. Other works [12, 17, 33] attempt
*Corresponding

8908

