This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2D Gaussian Splatting-based Sparse-view Transparent Object
Depth Reconstruction via Physics Simulation for Scene Update
Jeongyun Kim∗
Seoul National University

Seunghoon Jeong∗
Seoul National University

Giseop Kim
DGIST

jeongyunkim@snu.ac.kr

shoon0602@snu.ac.kr

gsk@dgist.ac.kr

Myung-Hwan Jeon
Kumoh National Institute of Technology

Eunji Jun
Hyundai Motor Group

Ayoung Kim
Seoul National University

mhjeon@kumoh.ac.kr

ejjun@hyundai.com

ayoungk@snu.ac.kr

InstantSplat

Abstract
t=0 (6 views)

Understanding the 3D geometry of transparent objects from
RGB images is challenging due to their inherent physical
properties, such as reflection and refraction. To address
these difficulties, especially in scenarios with sparse views
and dynamic environments, we introduce TRAN-D, a novel
2D Gaussian Splatting-based depth reconstruction method
for transparent objects. Our key insight lies in separating
transparent objects from the background, enabling focused
optimization of Gaussians corresponding to the object. We
mitigate artifacts with an object-aware loss that places
Gaussians in obscured regions, ensuring coverage of invisible surfaces while reducing overfitting. Furthermore, we incorporate a physics-based simulation that refines the reconstruction in just a few seconds, effectively handling object
removal and chain-reaction movement of remaining objects
without the need for rescanning. TRAN-D is evaluated on
both synthetic and real-world sequences, and it consistently
demonstrated robust improvements over existing GS-based
state-of-the-art methods. In comparison with baselines,
TRAN-D reduces the mean absolute error by over 39% for
the synthetic TRansPose sequences. Furthermore, despite
being updated using only one image, TRAN-D reaches a
δ < 2.5 cm accuracy of 48.46%, over 1.5 times that of
baselines, which uses six images. Code and more results are
available at https://jeongyun0609.github.io/TRAN-D/.

View depth

3D GS
Initialized w/
3D Foundation Model
Rescan / Retrain

t=1 (6 views)

3D GS
Initialized w/
3D Foundation Model

Ours
t=0 (6 views)

Object depth

2D GS
Optimized w/
Object-aware 3D loss
Scene update

t=1 (1 view)

Physics simulation

: Training

: Depth rendering

Figure 1. TRAN-D optimizes 2D Gaussians with object-aware 3D
loss in sparse-view settings and refines their placement through
physics simulation. Compared to baselines such as InstantSplat
[6], our approach achieves more accurate depth reconstruction.

1. Introduction

lems of segmentation [23, 40] and detection [13, 22]. In
particular, reliable depth reconstruction for transparent objects remains an ill-posed problem, posing challenges for
both conventional Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensors and recent
neural rendering methods. With the recent advent of volumetric neural rendering techniques like Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [24] and Gaussian Splatting (GS) [14], researchers have started exploring 3D dense depth reconstruction for transparent objects.
To address the depth reconstruction problem for transparent objects, methods leveraging NeRF [5, 12, 15, 36]

Transparent objects present unique challenges in computer
vision due to their complex transmission, reflection, and
refraction properties. Due to this difficulty, the 3D geometry of transparent objects has been underexplored, while
most existing works on transparent objects handle 2D prob* These authors contributed equally to this work

27927

