This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoDistill: Geometry-Guided Self-Distillation for Weakly Supervised
Cross-View Localization

1

Shaowen Tong1
Zimin Xia2
Alexandre Alahi2
Xuming He1
Yujiao Shi1 *
2
ShanghaiTech University, China
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
{tongshw2024,hexm,shiyj2}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, {zimin.xia,alexandre.alahi}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Cross-view localization, the task of estimating a camera’s
3-degrees-of-freedom (3-DoF) pose by aligning groundlevel images with aerial images, is crucial for large-scale
outdoor applications like autonomous navigation and augmented reality. Existing methods often rely on fully supervised learning, which requires costly ground-truth pose annotations. In this work, we propose GeoDistill, a Geometry
guided weakly supervised self Distillation framework that
uses teacher-student learning with Field-of-View (FoV)based masking to enhance local feature learning for robust
cross-view localization. In GeoDistill, the teacher model
localizes a full view image, while the student model predicts
locations from a limited FoV counterpart created by FoVbased masking. By aligning the student’s predictions with
those of the teacher, the student focuses on key features like
lane lines and ignores textureless regions, such as roads.
This results in more accurate predictions and reduced uncertainty. Our experiments show that GeoDistill significantly improves localization performance across different
frameworks. Additionally, we introduce a novel orientation
estimation network that predicts relative orientation without requiring precise planar position ground truth. GeoDistill provides a scalable and efficient solution for real-world
cross-view localization challenges. Code and model can be
found at https://github.com/tongshw/GeoDistill.

Figure 1. Our GeoDistill encourages the student model to extract
discriminative local features from FoV-based masked inputs, resulting in more accurate localization (top right) and reduced uncertainty (bottom right). In contrast, the teacher model (middle),
pre-trained on panoramas, lacks explicit enforcement for learning
local features, leading to more uncertainty and wrong localization.

1. Introduction

ing autonomous navigation and augmented reality.
State-of-the-art cross-view localization methods primarily follow a fully supervised paradigm [19, 31, 36–38], relying on precisely annotated ground camera poses for training. However, obtaining such annotations at scale is costly,
often requiring fleets of mobile mapping vehicles equipped
with expensive sensor kits to traverse the environment. Furthermore, these methods often suffer significant performance degradation in the cross-area setting [19, 31, 36–38],
where test images originate from regions different from the
training areas. This limitation significantly hinders the scalability of cross-view localization deployment.
To address this challenge, we propose leveraging weakly
supervised learning. While obtaining precise ground truth
data is costly, collecting noisy ground truth remains accessible. For example, images with coarse localization can be
obtained using a mobile phone’s GPS. Using this coarse
location, we can retrieve aerial images covering the local
surroundings, allowing us to pair these images with the
ground-level query image.

Visual localization estimates a camera’s pose by matching
its image to a known environment. Cross-view localization,
specifically, determines the 3-degrees-of-freedom (3-DoF)
camera pose, i.e., planar position and yaw orientation, by
aligning a ground-level query image with a aerial image that
covers its surroundings. Leveraging the widespread availability of aerial images, this approach has attracted significant attention for large-scale outdoor applications, includ* Corresponding author.

25357

