This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SegAnyPET: Universal Promptable Segmentation from Positron Emission
Tomography Images
Yichi Zhang1,2 Le Xue1,2 Wenbo Zhang1,2 Lanlan Li1 Yuchen Liu1,2 Chen Jiang2
Yuan Cheng1,2 Yuan Qi1,2
1

Fudan University 2 Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science

Abstract
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) is a powerful molecular imaging tool that plays a crucial role in modern medical diagnostics by visualizing radio-tracer distribution to
reveal physiological processes. Accurate organ segmentation from PET images is essential for comprehensive multisystemic analysis of interactions between different organs
and pathologies. Existing segmentation methods are limited by insufficient annotation data and varying levels of
annotation, resulting in weak generalization ability and difficulty in clinical application. Recent developments in segmentation foundation models have shown superior versatility across diverse segmentation tasks. Despite the efforts of
medical adaptations, these works primarily focus on structural medical images with detailed physiological structural
information and exhibit limited generalization performance
on molecular PET imaging. In this paper, we collect and
construct PETS-5k, the largest PET segmentation dataset to
date, comprising 5,731 three-dimensional whole-body PET
images and encompassing over 1.3M 2D images. Based on
the established dataset, we develop SegAnyPET, a modalityspecific 3D foundation model for universal promptable segmentation from PET images. To issue the challenge of
discrepant annotation quality, we adopt a cross prompting confident learning (CPCL) strategy with an uncertaintyguided self-rectification process to robustly learn segmentation from high-quality labeled data and low-quality noisy
labeled data for promptable segmentation. Experimental
results demonstrate that SegAnyPET can segment seen and
unseen target organs using only one or a few prompt points,
outperforming state-of-the-art foundation models and taskspecific fully supervised models with higher accuracy and
strong generalization ability for universal segmentation. As
the first foundation model for PET images, we believe that
SegAnyPET will advance the applications to various downstream tasks for molecular imaging. 1

Figure 1. Visual comparison of an example case between molecular PET image and structural CT image.

1. Introduction

1 The model and code will be publicly available at the project page.

Medical imaging technology has become an indispensable
tool in modern clinical diagnosis [13, 18]. The steady development of increasingly sophisticated imaging techniques
has led to a dramatic increase in patient treatment outcomes, especially when diseases can only be observed internally within the patient’s body [17]. In addition to commonly used medical modalities such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which
can provide detailed physiological structural information,
positron emission tomography (PET) has also been widely
applied in medical examinations as an emerging molecular imaging modality [29]. The purpose of PET imaging is
to reveal the ongoing metabolic processes within the body
of a patient. The radioactive decay of injected tracer emits
positrons, leading to gamma photons, which are produced
by annihilation and captured by detectors surrounding the
patient to create a 3D map of metabolic activity. As the most
widely used tracer, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is used to assess local glucose uptake and evaluate organ metabolism
[27] and presence of tumor metastasis [4], so as to monitor progress during the treatment process. Accurate organ
segmentation from PET images is essential for comprehen-

21107

