This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DMQ: Dissecting Outliers of Diffusion Models for Post-Training Quantization
Dongyeun Lee

Jiwan Hur

Hyounguk Shon
KAIST

Jae Young Lee

Junmo Kim

{ledoye, jiwan.hur, hyounguk.shon, mcneato, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Images generated by Stable Diffusion [46] in full precision (top row) and in W4A8-quantization using our method (bottom row).

Abstract

1. Introduction

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in
image generation but come with significant computational costs, posing challenges for deployment in resourceconstrained environments. Recent post-training quantization (PTQ) methods have attempted to mitigate this issue by
focusing on the iterative nature of diffusion models. However, these approaches often overlook outliers, leading to
degraded performance at low bit-widths. In this paper, we
propose a DMQ which combines Learned Equivalent Scaling (LES) and channel-wise Power-of-Two Scaling (PTS)
to effectively address these challenges. Learned Equivalent Scaling optimizes channel-wise scaling factors to redistribute quantization difficulty between weights and activations, reducing overall quantization error. Recognizing that early denoising steps, despite having small quantization errors, crucially impact the final output due to
error accumulation, we incorporate an adaptive timestep
weighting scheme to prioritize these critical steps during
learning. Furthermore, identifying that layers such as skip
connections exhibit high inter-channel variance, we introduce channel-wise Power-of-Two Scaling for activations.
To ensure robust selection of PTS factors even with small
calibration set, we introduce a voting algorithm that enhances reliability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method significantly outperforms existing works, especially at low bit-widths such as W4A6 (4-bit weight, 6bit activation) and W4A8, maintaining high image generation quality and model stability. The code is available at
https://github.com/LeeDongYeun/dmq.

Diffusion models [16, 41, 43, 46] have recently shown remarkable success in synthesizing high-fidelity images, enabling various applications such as image editing [19, 26,
36, 47, 50, 69], 3D generation [31, 44, 47, 68], and video
[3, 17, 20, 51] generation. However, despite their impressive generative capabilities, diffusion models face significant computational challenges due to the iterative nature of
the denoising process, which can require hundreds or even
thousands of steps. Consequently, accelerating this process
while preserving output quality is essential for practical applications and has become a key research focus in the field.
Quantization [11, 21, 39] reduces computational and
memory demands by lowering the bit-precision of neural networks. However, quantization of diffusion models
presents unique challenges due to their iterative nature. The
iterative nature results in highly varying activation distributions across multiple timesteps and quantization error accumulation as denoising progresses, hindering accurate quantization. To overcome this, several methods have explored
Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) for diffusion models, focusing on composition of calibration data considering multiple timesteps [28, 35, 49, 57], adapting quantization parameters across timesteps [18, 52] or correcting noise within
the diffusion process [13, 62]. However, they often overlook
channel-wise outliers which stretch the quantization range,
hindering effective quantization of non-outlier channels. As
a result, existing methods often exhibit large performance
degradation in low-bit settings (e.g. W4A6).
In this work, we address the challenge of outliers in dif-

18510

