This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TR-PTS: Task-Relevant Parameter and Token Selection for Efficient Tuning
Siqi Luo1 *, Haoran Yang1 *, Yi Xin2 *, Mingyang Yi3 , Guangyang Wu1 ,
Guangtao Zhai1 , Xiaohong Liu1,4†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Innovation Institute 3 Renmin University of China
4

Suzhou Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence

{siqiluo647, yhr-73, wu.guang.young, zhaiguangtao, xiaohongliu}@sjtu.edu.cn
xinyi@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

yimingyang@ruc.edu.cn

Task-Driven Fine-Tuning

Large pre-trained models achieve remarkable performance
in vision tasks but are impractical for fine-tuning due to
high computational and storage costs. Parameter-Efficient
Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods mitigate this issue by updating only a subset of parameters; however, most existing
approaches are task-agnostic, failing to fully exploit taskspecific adaptations, which leads to suboptimal efficiency
and performance. To address this limitation, we propose
Task-Relevant Parameter and Token Selection (TR-PTS),
a task-driven framework that enhances both computational
efficiency and accuracy. Specifically, we introduce TaskRelevant Parameter Selection, which utilizes the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) to identify and fine-tune only the
most informative parameters in a layer-wise manner, while
keeping the remaining parameters frozen. Simultaneously,
Task-Relevant Token Selection dynamically preserves the
most informative tokens and merges redundant ones, reducing computational overhead. By jointly optimizing parameters and tokens, TR-PTS enables the model to concentrate
on task-discriminative information. We evaluate TR-PTS on
benchmark, including FGVC and VTAB-1k, where it achieves
state-of-the-art performance, surpassing full fine-tuning by
3.40% and 10.35%, respectively. The code are available at
https://github.com/synbol/TR-PTS.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained on large-scale datasets and subsequently finetuned for downstream tasks, this paradigm has become the
standard framework across various domains, including Natural Language Processing (NLP) [2, 5], Computer Vision
(CV) [8, 20, 24, 33, 35], and others [19, 32]. Traditionally,
fine-tuning a pre-trained model to a specific task involves adjusting all parameters, a method known as full fine-tuning.
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

4360

Total Parameters

Original Tokens

Relevant

Task

Reduce
Computational Cost

Relevant
Tunable Parameters

Filtered Tokens

TR-PTS

Reduce
Training Parameters

Figure 1. Overview of Our TR-PTS. TR-PTS selectively retains
task-relevant tokens and parameters for efficient fine-tuning.

However, with state-of-the-art models now comprising billions or even trillions of parameters [22, 27], this conventional approach has become increasingly impractical due to
its exorbitant computational and storage requirements.
Mitigating the inefficiencies of full fine-tuning has led researchers in the CV domain to explore Parameter-Efficient
Fine-Tuning (PEFT) techniques [18, 31, 36, 39], which
update only a subset of model parameters or introduce
lightweight adaptation modules [11, 13, 14]. However, as
summarized in Table 1, existing methods still face several
challenges: (1) Inference Overhead: Some methods, such
as VPT [14], introduce additional learnable modules that increase computational cost during inference. Others, such
as LoRA [13], use reparameterization techniques that can
be merged into the backbone at inference time and therefore avoid extra cost. (2) Limited Task-Aware Adaptation:
While some methods have begun to incorporate task-specific
adaptation, such as GPS [39], many still use uniform tuning strategies that overlook the varying importance of model
components across tasks. (3) Disjoint Optimization: Most

