This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoVAE+: Large Motion Video Autoencoding with Cross-modal Video VAE
Yazhou Xing* Yang Fei∗ Yingqing He∗† Jingye Chen Jiaxin Xie
Xiaowei Chi Qifeng Chen†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Learning a robust video Variational Autoencoder (VAE) is
essential for reducing video redundancy and facilitating efficient video generation. Directly applying image VAEs to
individual frames in isolation results in temporal inconsistencies and fails to compress temporal redundancy effectively. Existing works on Video VAEs compress temporal
redundancy but struggle to handle videos with large motion
effectively. They suffer from issues such as severe image
blur and loss of detail in scenarios with large motion. In this
paper, we present a powerful video VAE named VideoVAE+
that effectively reconstructs videos with large motion. First,
we investigate two architecture choices and propose our
simple yet effective architecture with better spatiotemporal
joint modeling performance. Second, we propose to leverage the textual information in existing text-to-video datasets
and incorporate text guidance during training. The textural
guidance is optional during inference. We find that this design enhances the reconstruction quality and preservation
of detail. Finally, our models achieve strong performance
compared with various baseline approaches in both general
videos and large motion videos, demonstrating its effectiveness on the challenging large motion scenarios.

of video diffusion models while improving the final quality of the generated videos. Initially, a series of studies
adopted the image VAE from Stable Diffusion [21] for
video generation tasks, such as AnimateDiff [13], MagicVideo [37], VideoCrafter1 [7], VideoCrafter2 [8], and
Align-Your-Latents [5]. However, directly adopting an image VAE and compressing video on a frame-by-frame basis leads to temporal flickering due to the lack of temporal correlation. Additionally, the information redundancy
along the temporal dimension is not reduced, leading to
low training efficiency for subsequent latent video diffusion
models. From the introduction of Sora, which compresses
videos both temporally and spatially through a Video VAE,
a series of studies have emerged that aim to replicate Sora
and train their own Video VAEs, including Open Sora [36],
Open Sora Plan [17], CV-VAE [35], CogVideo X [31], Easy
Animate [30], and Cosmos Tokenizer [20]. Despite their
progress in temporal compression, current video VAEs still
struggle to handle videos with large motion. They suffer
from many problems in large motion scenarios, including
motion ghost, low-level temporal flickering, blurring (faces,
hands, edges, texts), and motion stuttering (lack of correct
temporal transition).

1. Introduction

In this work, we investigate the architecture of Video
VAE and propose simple yet effective Video VAE models
that have robust reconstruction performance on both general videos and videos with large motion. First, we examine
two designs for spatial and temporal compression, including simultaneous spatial-temporal (ST) compression and sequential ST compression. We observed that simultaneous
ST compression achieves better low-level temporal smoothness and texture stability, while sequential ST compression
achieves better motion recovery, particularly in scenarios of
large motion. Thus, we propose our architecture that integrates the advantages of both methods and enables effective
video detail and motion reconstruction.

Given the significant attention in the field of video generation, Latent Video Diffusion Models (LVDMs) [4, 5, 14, 37]
have emerged as a popular framework. They have been successfully applied to powerful text-to-video models such as
VideoCrafter [7, 8], Sora [6], CogVideoX [31] and Hunyuan Video [27]. Different from directly generating video
pixels, LVDMs generate latent representations of videos in
a compact latent space. This is achieved by first training a Video VAE to encode videos into this latent space.
Thus, Video VAE, as a key and fundamental component
of LVDMs, has attracted great attention recently. An effective Video VAE can help to reduce the training costs
* equal contribution
† corresponding authors

Second, we integrate extra information from another
modality, e.g., text, into the Video VAE models, and propose the first text-guided Video VAE. The motivation is as
follows: (1) We observed that the normally used datasets
for text-to-video generation contain text-video pairs, thus

17951

