This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PCR-GS: COLMAP-Free 3D Gaussian Splatting via Pose Co-Regularizations
Yu Wei1
1

Jiahui Zhang1

Xiaoqin Zhang2

Ling Shao3

Shijian Lu1

Nanyang Technological University 2 Zhejiang University of Technology
3
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Figure 1. The proposed PCR-GS can model scenes with complex camera trajectories without using any camera pose priors. It achieves
more accurate camera pose estimation and more realistic novel view synthesis as compared with the state-of-the-art method CF-3DGS [6].
The graphs in (a) and (b) show the Rendered Images and the Estimated Poses by CF-3DGS and our proposed PCR-GS, respectively.

Abstract
COLMAP-free 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) has recently attracted increasing attention due to its remarkable
performance in reconstructing high-quality 3D scenes from
unposed images or videos. However, it often struggles to
handle scenes with complex camera trajectories as featured by drastic rotation and translation across adjacent
camera views, leading to degraded estimation of camera
poses and further local minima in joint optimization of camera poses and 3D-GS. We propose PCR-GS, an innovative
COLMAP-free 3DGS technique that achieves superior 3D
scene modeling and camera pose estimation via camera
pose co-regularization. PCR-GS achieves regularization
from two perspectives. The first is feature reprojection regularization which extracts view-robust DINO features from
adjacent camera views and aligns their semantic information for camera pose regularization. The second is wavelet-

based frequency regularization which exploits discrepancy
in high-frequency details to further optimize the rotation
matrix in camera poses. Extensive experiments over multiple real-world scenes show that the proposed PCR-GS
achieves superior pose-free 3D-GS scene modeling under
dramatic changes of camera trajectories.

1. Introduction

26499

Photo-realistic 3D scene reconstruction and rendering has
attracted increasing attention due to a wide range of applications in embodied artificial intelligence, virtual reality, etc.
With the advent of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [13],
3D reconstruction has made great progress by leveraging
learnable 3D Gaussians to explicitly model scenes. Given a
sequence of RGB images and corresponding camera poses,
3D-GS and its variants [37, 46] have demonstrated supe-

