This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Foundational Models for Single-Chip Radar
Tianshu Huang12
Akarsh Prabhakara3
Chuhan Chen1
Jay Karhade1
Deva Ramanan1
Matthew O’Toole1
Anthony Rowe12
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Research
University of Wisconsin–Madison

Elevation
Range

4D Radar Cube Input

{tianshu2, chuhanc, jkarhade, deva, motoole2, agr}@andrew.cmu.edu, akarsh@cs.wisc.edu

Doppler
Azimuth

Azimuth

Depth

Semantic Segmentation

Model Output

Bird's Eye View Occupancy

sky

structure

nature
vehicle
flat
Lidar Depth

Camera

Ground Truth

Lidar Occupancy

Figure 1. Using only 4D range-Doppler-azimuth-elevation data from a radar with a 3x4 antenna array – equivalent to a 0.26megapixel camera, we trained (separate) radar transformers on 24 hours (1M radar-lidar-camera samples) of data to predict Bird’s Eye
View 2D occupancy (left), 3D occupancy (center), semantic segmetation (right), and Ego-Motion.

Abstract
mmWave radars are compact, inexpensive, and durable sensors that are robust to occlusions and work regardless of
environmental conditions, such as weather and darkness.
However, this comes at the cost of poor angular resolution,
especially for inexpensive single-chip radars, which are typically used in automotive and indoor sensing applications.
Although many have proposed learning-based methods to
mitigate this weakness, no standardized foundational models or large datasets for the mmWave radar have emerged,
and practitioners have largely trained task-specific models
from scratch using relatively small datasets.
In this paper, we collect (to our knowledge) the largest
available raw radar dataset with 1M samples (29 hours)
and train a foundational model for 4D single-chip radar,
which can predict 3D occupancy and semantic segmenta-

tion with quality that is typically only possible with much
higher resolution sensors. We demonstrate that our Generalizable Radar Transformer (GRT) generalizes across diverse settings, can be fine-tuned for different tasks, and
shows logarithmic data scaling of 20% per 10× data. We
also run extensive ablations on common design decisions,
and find that using raw radar data significantly outperforms
widely-used lossy representations, equivalent to a 10× increase in training data. Finally, we roughly estimate that
≈100M samples (3000 hours) of data are required to fully
exploit the potential of GRT.

1. Introduction

24655

As a compact, inexpensive [27], and robust solid-state sensor, mmWave radars are ideal for sensing applications ranging from simple automatic door openers [58] to autonomous

