This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CityNav: A Large-Scale Dataset for Real-World Aerial Navigation
Jungdae Lee1 * Taiki Miyanishi2,3 * Shuhei Kurita4,1 Koya Sakamoto2
Yutaka Matsuo2 Nakamasa Inoue1
1

Institute of Science Tokyo 2 The University of Tokyo
4
National Institute of Informatics

3

Daichi Azuma2
ATR

https://water-cookie.github.io/city-nav-proj/

Abstract
Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) aims to develop
agents capable of navigating in realistic environments.
While recent cross-modal training approaches have significantly improved navigation performance in both indoor and
outdoor scenarios, aerial navigation over real-world cities
remains underexplored primarily due to limited datasets
and the difficulty of integrating visual and geographic information. To fill this gap, we introduce CityNav, the first
large-scale real-world dataset for aerial VLN. Our dataset
consists of 32,637 human demonstration trajectories, each
paired with a natural language description, covering 4.65
km2 across two real cities: Cambridge and Birmingham. In
contrast to existing datasets composed of synthetic scenes
such as AerialVLN, our dataset presents a unique challenge
because agents must interpret spatial relationships between
real-world landmarks and the navigation destination, making CityNav an essential benchmark for advancing aerial
VLN. Furthermore, as an initial step toward addressing
this challenge, we provide a methodology of creating geographic semantic maps that can be used as an auxiliary
modality input during navigation. In our experiments, we
compare performance of three representative aerial VLN
agents (Seq2seq, CMA and AerialVLN models) and demonstrate that the semantic map representation significantly improves their navigation performance.

Figure 1. CityNav is a new aerial navigation dataset consisting of
32,637 human demonstration trajectories across real-world cities.

veloping VLN datasets and models across diverse environments, ranging from indoor house scenes [21, 25, 27, 37,
49, 59] to outdoor urban scenes [8, 17, 33, 45, 50, 52], with
applications in robotics [3, 10, 30, 31, 42, 55].

1. Introduction

To further broaden the scope of VLN, several recent
studies have introduced aerial VLN datasets, which aim to
facilitate autonomous navigation with unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). For example, Fan et al. [13] constructed
the AVDN dataset, which provides 3k trajectories over 2D
satellite images with human-human dialog. Liu et al. [29]
introduced the AerialVLN dataset, containing 9k trajecto-

Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) has emerged as a
pivotal task in embodied artificial intelligence, in which an
agent learns to navigate complex environments by following natural language description [2, 23, 36, 57, 58]. Over
the past decade, significant progress has been made in de* Equal contribution

5912

