This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Adversarial Patch Defenses on Object Detectors:
Unified Evaluation, Large-Scale Dataset, and New Insights
Junhao Zheng1 Jiahao Sun1 Chenhao Lin1† Zhengyu Zhao1† Chen Ma1
Chong Zhang1 Cong Wang2 Qian Wang3 Chao Shen1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 City University of Hong Kong 3 Wuhan University

Abstract
Developing reliable defenses against patch attacks on object detectors has attracted increasing interest. However,
we identify that existing defense evaluations lack a unified and comprehensive framework, resulting in inconsistent
and incomplete assessments of current methods. To address
this issue, we revisit 11 representative defenses and present
the first patch defense benchmark, involving 2 attack goals,
13 patch attacks, 11 object detectors, and 4 diverse metrics.
This leads to the large-scale adversarial patch dataset with
94 types of patches and 94,000 images. Our comprehensive
analyses reveal new insights: (1) The difficulty in defending against naturalistic patches lies in the data distribution,
rather than the commonly believed high frequencies. Our
new dataset with diverse patch distributions can be used to
improve existing defenses by 15.09% AP@0.5. (2) The average precision of the attacked object, rather than the commonly pursued patch detection accuracy, shows high consistency with defense performance. (3) Adaptive attacks can
substantially bypass existing defenses, and defenses with
complex/stochastic models or universal patch properties
are relatively robust. We hope that our analyses will serve
as guidance on properly evaluating patch attacks/defenses
and advancing their design. Code and dataset are available at https://github.com/Gandolfczjh/APDE, where we
will keep integrating new attacks/defenses.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied
across various real-world domains, including pedestrian
object detection [4, 33], depth estimation [9], and autonomous driving [5]. Despite their outstanding performance, DNNs are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which severely limits their reliability [53, 54].
These attacks manipulate input data, causing DNNs to produce incorrect predictions, potentially leading to severe in† Corresponding authors.

cidents. Adversarial attacks can be realized in different
forms, including adversarial perturbations [51] and adversarial patches [29, 30, 56]. Among these, adversarial patch
attacks, which are feasible in the physical world, pose a significant threat to DNNs in real-world applications.
In recent years, substantial efforts have been made to defend against adversarial patches [17, 26, 27, 31, 37, 44].
For instance, LGS [31] assumes that adversarial patches exhibit more intense pixel variations than clean images, aiming to detect and then smooth regions with significant texture changes to eliminate patches. Defense methods like
PAD [16] and NAPGuard [44] utilize additional segmentation [36] or detection [32, 33] models to eliminate adversarial patches. Approaches like DIFFender [17] and
NutNet [26] leverage differences in data distribution between adversarial and clean images, using generative models [19, 35] to analyze and locate adversarial patches.
However, so far, there still lacks a unified framework
for defense evaluation, and as a result, the effectiveness
of various defenses may not be assessed consistently and
comprehensively. Specifically, we identify the main limitations of existing evaluations and address them through the
following four aspects: (1) Unified framework. Existing
studies suffer from inconsistent parameters, attack methods,
and patch placement strategies, which impede fair comparisons. To address this, we unify the evaluation paradigm
around pedestrian detection, standardizing parameters, and
patch deployment. (2) Suitable metrics. Some works use
only patch detection accuracy to assess defenses [15, 44],
thereby raising fairness concerns because high detection accuracy does not necessarily reflect superior defense performance. To address this, we adopt average precision (AP)
and attack success rate (ASR) as comprehensive evaluation
metrics and experimentally demonstrate that patch detection accuracy is unsuitable for objectively comparing the
defense performance. (3) Comprehensive analyses. Existing studies frequently overlook critical factors such as realtime performance, defense against patches of varying sizes
and types, and real-world applicability. To address this, we
systematically analyze defense efficiency and performance

23476

