This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FOLDER: Accelerating Multi-modal Large Language Models with Enhanced
Performance
Haicheng Wang1,2,4∗ , Zhemeng Yu1,2∗ , Gabriele Spadaro2,3 , Chen Ju4 , Victor Quétu2 ,
Shuai Xiao4B , Enzo Tartaglione2B
1
Paris Elite Institute of Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 University of Turin
2
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris 4 Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba
anakin skywalker@sjtu.edu.cn, shuai.xsh@alibaba-inc.com, enzo.tartaglione@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
+2.5

Recently, Multi-modal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) have shown remarkable effectiveness for
multi-modal tasks due to their ability of cross-modal
understanding.
However, processing long sequences
of visual tokens extracted from visual backbones poses
challenges for deployment in real-time applications. To
address this issue, we introduce FOLDER, a simple yet
effective plug-and-play module designed to reduce the
length of the visual token sequence, mitigating computational and memory demands during both training and
inference. Through a comprehensive analysis of the token
reduction process in the vision encoder, we analyze the
information loss introduced by different reduction strategies
and develop FOLDER to preserve key information while
removing visual redundancy. We show the effectiveness
of FOLDER by integrating it into the visual backbone of
various MLLMs, significantly accelerating the inference
phase. Furthermore, we evaluate its utility as a training
accelerator or even performance booster for MLLMs.
FOLDER achieves comparable or even better performance
than the original models, while dramatically reducing
complexity by removing up to 70% of visual tokens. Our
code is available at FOLDER Repository.

+1.6
1×
+7.5

+1.2

1.51×
Train
LLaVA1.5

+3

LLaVA1.5
+FOLDER

+0.5
+1.9
+2.7

1×

1.6×

Inference

Performance Enhancement

Acceleration

Large Language Model

Tokenizer
&
Embedding
What breed is
the dog in this
image?

Vision-Language Connector
Vision Backbone

Block n
Block n-1

Block 1
Vision Backbone
With Token Reduction

Figure 1. FOLDER as Accelerator & Booster. As a plug-andplay module, FOLDER can be used in both training and inference,
with considerable acceleration and even a performance boost.

age tokens through their visual backbones. In some application scenarios, this problem becomes even more evident: recent advancements in high-resolution-supporting
MLLMs [11, 71] might involve over 2000 visual tokens.
Similarly, challenges also occur in multi-visual-expert architectures [32, 66, 70] that leverage multiple visual encoders. These issues are even more severe in video understanding [30, 40, 45] due to the extra temporal complexity.
The resulting token explosion hinders real-time deployment
because of the quadratic cost of the attention mechanism.
Several studies have been conducted to address this issue. Existing approaches can be roughly divided into two

1. Introduction
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) excel in
tasks like image captioning [12] and visual question answering [33] by learning joint visual-text representations. Stateof-the-art models such as GPT-4V [1] and Claude 3 [2]
show strong multimodal understanding ability. However,
these models face concrete challenges in terms of computational efficiency, particularly when processing visual inputs.
Modern MLLMs typically generate long sequences of im*: Equal contribution,

+22.3

B : Corresponding author.

23614

