This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sat2City: 3D City Generation from A Single Satellite Image with Cascaded
Latent Diffusion
Tongyan Hua1

Lutao Jiang 1 Ying-Cong Chen 1,2
1
HKUST(GZ) 2 HKUST

Wufan Zhao1 *

{thua388, ljiang553}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, yingcongchen@ust.hk, wufanzhao@hkust-gz.edu.cn
Project Page: https://ai4city-hkust.github.io/Sat2City/

Abstract

Geo

Recent advancements in generative models have enabled
3D urban scene generation from satellite imagery, unlocking promising applications in gaming, digital twins, and
beyond. However, most existing methods rely heavily on
neural rendering techniques, which hinder their ability to
produce detailed 3D structures on a broader scale, largely
due to the inherent structural ambiguity derived from relatively limited 2D observations. To address this challenge,
we propose Sat2City, a novel framework that synergizes
the representational capacity of sparse voxel grids with latent diffusion models, tailored specifically for our novel 3D
city dataset. Our approach is enabled by three key components: (1) A cascaded latent diffusion framework that
progressively recovers 3D city structures from satellite imagery, (2) a Re-Hash operation at its Variational Autoencoder (VAE) bottleneck to compute multi-scale feature grids
for stable appearance optimization, and (3) an inverse sampling strategy enabling implicit supervision for smooth appearance transitioning. To overcome the challenge of collecting real-world city-scale 3D models with high-quality
geometry and appearance, we introduce a dataset of synthesized large-scale 3D cities paired with satellite-view height
maps. Validated on this dataset, our framework generates
detailed 3D structures from a single satellite image, achieving superior fidelity compared to existing city generation
models.

t2C
Sa

try
me

ity

A

e
pp

e
nc
ara

Figure 1. We present Sat2City, a novel framework for generating
high-fidelity 3D city models with detailed geometry and appearance from a single satellite observation, in → 1 minute, using cascaded latent diffusion. This process is achieved even without the
need for auxiliary inputs like a segmentation map.

1. Introduction

within urban environments. These methods are restricted to
rendering cities from a highly limited set of viewpoints and
trajectories, and the generated images or videos often lead
to poor results when explicitly reconstructing a 3D scene.
Recent methods have evolved to integrate more reliable
priors, such as segmentation and height maps from satellite
imagery, enabling a more salient abstraction of urban environments and extending novel view synthesis to broader
scales. Early on, InfiniCity [31] directly uses lifted voxels
from satellite imagery as feature volumes of neural radiance
fields (NeRFs), training a generative adversarial network
(GAN) to transform ray-sampled features into rendered
pixels. Building upon this framework, CityDreamer [55]
and its Gaussian variants [56] achieve more realistic rendering effects by implementing feature-voxel partitioning
through per-pixel semantic annotation. However, these 2D

Generating realistic 3D urban scenes [30, 31, 55, 56] has
gained significant attention in recent years, driven by applications in gaming, urban planning, and digital twin systems. With advancements in neural rendering techniques,
most prior works have focused on generating novel streetview images or videos [10, 27–29, 33, 34, 38, 44, 59, 64]
* Corresponding author.

27978

