This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapt Foundational Segmentation Models with Heterogeneous Searching Space
Li Yi1,2 , Jie Hu3 , Songan Zhang* 1 , and Guannan Jiang∗2
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Contemporary Amperex Technology Co., Limited
University of Singapore

Abstract
Foundation Segmentation Models (FSMs) show suboptimal
performance on unconventional image domains like camouﬂage objects. Fine-tuning is often impractical due to
data preparation challenges, time limits, and optimization
issues. To boost segmentation performance while keeping zero-shot features, one approach is pre-augmenting images for the segmentation model. However, existing image augmentations mainly depend on rule-based methods,
restricting augmentation effectiveness. Though learningbased methods can diversify augmentation, rule-based ones
are degree-describable (e.g., slight/intense brightening),
while learning-based methods usually predict non-degreedescribable ground truths (e.g., depth estimation), creating a heterogeneous search space when combined. To this
end, we propose an “Augmenting-to-Adapt” paradigm, replacing traditional rule-based augmentation with an optimal heterogeneous augmentation policy to enhance segmentation. Our method uses 32 augmentation techniques
(22 rule-based, 10 learning-based) to ease parameter misalignment, forming a robust, multi-discrete heterogeneous
search space. To apply the optimal policy in real-world scenarios, we distill the augmentation process to speed up the
preprocess. Extensive evaluations across diverse datasets
and domains show our method signiﬁcantly improves model
adaptation with a domain-speciﬁc augmentation strategy.
We will release our code to support further research.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation plays a crucial role in tasks like object detection, classiﬁcation, tracking, scene understanding,
and enhancement. It is foundational in various computer
vision applications, including autonomous driving for ve* This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 52402504, 62473250 (Corresponding author: Songan Zhang, email: songanz@sjtu.edu.cn; Guannan Jiang, email:
jianggn@catl.com).

3

National

hicle tracking [5], and tumor detection in medical imaging [21, 22]. A foundational segmentation model must exhibit strong generalization across diverse domains to be effective in these scenarios.
The Segment Anything Model (SAM) [17] is one of the
most advanced models for image segmentation, offering
zero-shot capability and strong performance in typical environments. However, it underperforms in challenging conditions, such as low-light and camouﬂaged settings[11, 15].
While ﬁne-tuning SAM for speciﬁc domains can improve
performance, it is time-consuming, costly, and not always effective due to the lack of labeled data. Some
studies have attempted to adapt SAM by augmenting images [6, 11, 30], but most of these methods only adopt
rule-based methods, which limits the effect of eventual augmentation. Using learning-based methods for augmentation brings signiﬁcant improvement, but rule-based methods tend to have a certain degree (e.g., slight or intense
brightening), while learning-based methods usually predict
non-degree-describable ground truths (e.g., depth estimation). These two kinds of augmentation methods are heterogeneous and may bring deterioration to training if they
are not well organized.
This paper proposes a novel adaptation paradigm, shifting
from a “training-to-adapt” to an“augmenting-to-adapt” approach [11]. Our method involves processing images before
they enter SAM, such as by using normal surface estimation to expose camouﬂaged objects (e.g., ﬂatﬁsh) as shown
in Fig. 1 (d). This approach enhances SAM’s domain adaptability. The core of our method is a reinforcement learning
environment using a multi-discrete heterogeneous searching space, as illustrated in Fig. 2. It selects augmentation
strategies from both rule-based and learning-based methods, with rewards based on the mean intersection over union
(IoU) between the SAM prediction on the augmented image
and the ground truth mask. The optimal policy is determined by validation performance and then distilled into a
pre-trained weight for efﬁcient image processing.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

23364

