This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Region-aware Anchoring Mechanism for Efficient Referring Visual Grounding
Shuyi Ouyang1 Ziwei Niu1 Hongyi Wang1 Yen-Wei Chen2* Lanfen Lin1*
1
Zhejiang University, China 2 Ritsumeikan University, Japan
{oysy,nzw,whongyi,llf}@zju.edu.cn, chen@is.ritsumei.ac.jp

Abstract
Referring Visual Grounding (RVG) tasks revolve around
utilizing vision-language interactions to incorporate object
information from language expressions, thereby enabling
targeted object detection or segmentation within images.
Transformer-based methods have enabled effective interaction through attention mechanisms, achieving notable performance in RVG tasks. However, existing strategies for
RVG, which involve direct interaction between visual and
linguistic features, face three key challenges: (i) tendency
to focus on a single target, (ii) insufficient control over linguistic noise, and (iii) high computational cost. To address
these challenges, we propose a Region-aware Anchoring
Mechanism (RaAM) that mediates vision-language interactions. In RaAM, region-aware anchors engage in alternating interactions with vision and language modalities, acting as indicators for object presence across different regions within the image. RaAM (i) directs attention to multiple target regions for better localization, (ii) reduces crossmodal redundancy by using anchors as buffers, and (iii)
lowers time complexity. In addition, we design region and
pixel level loss functions to enhance object presence assessment and edge precision. We evaluate our RaAM-RVG on
four benchmark datasets and integrate RaAM into various
models by replacing their interaction design. Results show
that RaAM outperforms state-of-the-art methods with lower
computational cost.

Figure 1. Comparison of the existing architecture (a) for RVG
tasks with the proposed RaAM (b).

1. Introduction

ate a new dataset, gRefCOCO, and established a benchmark termed Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES) [23]. The GRES benchmark introduces scenarios where a single sample may contain multiple target
objects or none. Since these tasks involve identifying instances with specific attributes from language expressions,
we refer to them collectively as Referring Visual Grounding
(RVG). The core of RVG lies in leveraging vision-language
interactions to integrate object attributes and relationships
from language expressions into the visual context, enabling
instance localization within images. Additionally, preserving fine-grained details in visual features during interactions
is crucial for ensuring accurate boundary delineation.
Transformer-based methods have effectively facilitated vision-language interactions through various attention mechanisms, achieving advanced results across RVG
tasks [13, 26, 50]. Most existing studies use Direct In-

Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) [51, 56, 62]
aims to detect objects within an image that correspond
to a given natural language expression, while Referring
Expression Segmentation (RES) [54–56] requires precise
segmentation of these identified objects. Object localization based on language expressions relies on aligning vision and language modalities. To address more complex
real-world needs, recent work has extended RES to cre* Corresponding Authors: Lanfen Lin (llf@zju.edu.cn), Yen-Wei Chen
(chen@is.ritsumei.ac.jp).

24192

