This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DWIM: Towards Tool-aware Visual Reasoning via Discrepancy-aware Workﬂow
Generation & Instruct-Masking Tuning
Fucai Ke1,2 Vijay Kumar B G3
Weiqing Wang2 Pari Delir Haghighi2
1

Building 4.0 CRC

2

Monash University

3

Xingjian Leng4 Zhixi Cai2 Zaid Khan5
Hamid Rezatoﬁghi2 Manmohan Chandraker3,6

NEC Labs America

4

ANU

5

UNC Chapel Hill

6

UC San Diego

https://pokerme7777.github.io/DWIM.github.io/

Figure 1. Comparison of the existing agent (Before) and our tool-aware agent (After). Both follow logically valid workﬂows with the same
toolset, but our method improves tool selection and usage, minimizing tool-induced errors and ensuring more accurate, efﬁcient execution.

Abstract

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of visual reasoning (VR),
which involves constructing detailed visual scene representation and reasoning about it in steps, similar to human cognition. VR involves interpreting and analyzing visual information in response to textual queries or prompts
[3, 6, 27, 29] and encompasses a diverse range of tasks,
including, but not limited to, visual commonsense reasoning [21], external-knowledge visual question answering [44, 51], vision-language compositionality understanding [17, 55], visual adversarial sample answering [34] visual grounding [25] and complex counting [1]. Beyond basic perception, VR enhances data interpretation by integrating reasoning with visual understanding, making it crucial
in ﬁelds such as multimodal learning, autonomous driving,
unmanned systems, and medical image analysis [6, 10, 11,
71]. However, despite its signiﬁcant progress, VR remains
highly challenging due to the inherent complexity of reasoning and the vast diversity of tasks [22, 35, 37, 73].

Visual reasoning (VR), which is crucial in many ﬁelds for
enabling human-like visual understanding, remains highly
challenging. Recently, compositional visual reasoning approaches, which leverage the reasoning abilities of large
language models (LLMs) with integrated tools to solve
problems, have shown promise as more effective strategies
than end-to-end VR methods. However, these approaches
face limitations, as frozen LLMs lack tool awareness in
VR, leading to performance bottlenecks. While leveraging
LLMs for reasoning is widely used in other domains, they
are not directly applicable to VR due to limited training
data, imperfect tools that introduce errors and reduce data
collection efﬁciency in VR, and challenging in ﬁne-tuning
on noisy workﬂows. To address these challenges, we propose DWIM: i) Discrepancy-aware training Workﬂow generation, which assesses tool usage and extracts more viable workﬂows for training; and ii) Instruct-Masking ﬁnetuning, which guides the model to only clone effective actions, enabling the generation of more practical solutions.
Our experiments demonstrate that DWIM achieves stateof-the-art performance across various VR tasks, exhibiting
strong generalization on multiple widely-used datasets.

The most common VR solutions rely on end-to-end
vision-language models [37, 38], which require large annotated datasets and signiﬁcant computational resources,
limiting their scalability and efﬁciency. Recently, compo-

3378

