This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Adversarial Transferability via Residual Perturbation Attack
Jinjia Peng1,† Zeze Tao1,† Huibing Wang2,∗ Meng Wang3 Yang Wang3,∗
1
School of Cyber Security and Computer, Hebei University
2
College of Information and Science Technology, Dalian Maritime University
3
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
{pengjinjia, zeze}@hbu.edu.cn, huibing.wang@dlmu.edu.cn, eric.mengwang@gmail.com
yangwang@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to adversarial examples while suffering from incorrect predictions via imperceptible perturbations. Transfer-based attacks create adversarial examples for surrogate models and transfer these
examples to target models under black-box scenarios. Recent studies reveal that adversarial examples in flat loss
landscapes exhibit superior transferability to alleviate overfitting on surrogate models. However, the prior arts overlook the influence of perturbation directions, resulting in
limited transferability. In this paper, we propose a novel attack method, named Residual Perturbation Attack (ResPA),
relying on the residual gradient as the perturbation direction to guide the adversarial examples toward the flat regions of the loss function. Specifically, ResPA conducts an
exponential moving average on the input gradients to obtain the first moment as the reference gradient, which encompasses the direction of historical gradients. Instead of
heavily relying on the local flatness that stems from the current gradients as the perturbation direction, ResPA further
considers the residual between the current gradient and the
reference gradient to capture the changes in the global perturbation direction. The experimental results demonstrate
the better transferability of ResPA than the existing typical transfer-based attack methods, while the transferability
can be further improved by combining ResPA with the current input transformation methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/ZezeTao/ResPA.

Figure 1. Comparison between ResPA and previous methods in
searching for the perturbed point. ρ is the perturbation radius.
Within ρ, extremely sharp regions often exist. Previous methods flatten the local region by optimizing the loss of the perturbed
point in the sharpest areas. In contrast, ResPA optimizes the loss
of the perturbed point, which is beneficial for the global situation.

but can mislead a model to generate incorrect predictions.
Additionally, adversarial examples generated from the surrogate model can also transfer to other target models. The
transferability of adversarial examples renders adversarial
attacks viable in real-world scenarios [16, 29, 30, 39, 41].
Based on the adversary’s level of knowledge about the
target model, adversarial attacks can be classified into
white-box attacks [11, 17, 27] and black-box attacks [4, 36,
37]. In the white-box scenario, adversaries possess comprehensive knowledge of the target models, encompassing their
structures, parameter weights, and the training loss function. In contrast, in the black-box scenario, attackers create
adversarial examples using a white-box surrogate model,
which are subsequently transferred to the black-box target
model. In real-world applications, DNN models are often
hidden for users. Therefore, black-box attacks are generally more feasible. However, the over-parameterized DNNs
with many sharp maxima are prone to trapping adversarial
examples to be over-fitted on white-box surrogate models,
resulting in poor adversarial transferability.
To alleviate the overfitting issue to enhance adversarial transferability, substantial techniques have been pro-

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited outstanding
capabilities in various language and vision processing applications. However, adversarial examples [4, 11, 17] have
been demonstrated to be indiscernible from natural ones,
†Equal contribution.

* Corresponding authors.

1261

