This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Puzzle Similarity: A Perceptually-guided Cross-Reference Metric for Artifact
Detection in 3D Scene Reconstructions
Nicolai Hermann1,2

Jorge Condor1,2

Piotr Didyk1,2

1

USI, Lugano, Switzerland
2
IDSIA, Switzerland
{nicolai.hermann, jorge.condor, piotr.didyk}@usi.ch

Abstract
Modern reconstruction techniques can effectively model
complex 3D scenes from sparse 2D views. However, automatically assessing the quality of novel views and identifying artifacts is challenging due to the lack of ground truth
images and the limitations of no-reference image metrics
in predicting reliable artifact maps. The absence of such
metrics hinders assessment of the quality of novel views
and limits the adoption of post-processing techniques, such
as inpainting, to enhance reconstruction quality. To tackle
this, recent work has established a new category of metrics
(cross-reference), predicting image quality solely by leveraging context from alternate viewpoint captures [47]. In
this work, we propose a new cross-reference metric, Puzzle
Similarity, which is designed to localize artifacts in novel
views. Our approach utilizes image patch statistics from
the training views to establish a scene-specific distribution,
later used to identify poorly reconstructed regions in the
novel views. Given the lack of good measures to evaluate
cross-reference methods in the context of 3D reconstruction,
we collected a novel human-labeled dataset of artifact and
distortion maps in unseen reconstructed views. Through
this dataset, we demonstrate that our method achieves stateof-the-art localization of artifacts in novel views, correlating with human assessment, even without aligned references. We can leverage our new metric to enhance applications like automatic image restoration, guided acquisition, or 3D reconstruction from sparse inputs. Find the
project page at https://nihermann.github.io/
puzzlesim/.

1. Introduction
Image-based rendering and 3D reconstruction from a sparse
set of 2D views has received ample attention in recent years,
both for pure geometry reconstruction and radiance-field

modeling. Classical approaches such as structure from motion (SfM) use simple triangulation and epipolar geometry
to produce sparse point clouds of diffuse color [33]. Densifying these representations can be done explicitly [15].
Alternatively, one can learn continuous, implicit representations [3, 24, 28], normally modeled through multi-layer
perceptrons. A tangential problem to these efforts is the collection of 2D data and the handling of corrupted, distorted,
or simply incomplete sets of images from an object or scene
we would like to model. Learning representations from very
sparse inputs has been a widely studied topic, where normally learned priors from large datasets are leveraged to
enforce 3D consistency to ensure that the resulting reconstructions follow natural statistics [4, 5, 48, 57]. However,
quantifying the quality of novel views from reconstructions
is still problematic. These views can contain artifacts due to
the sparsity of the training dataset, and automatically identifying them helps with restoration (e.g., masking for imagebased inpainters [37]) or simply to guide future data acquisition to fill the gaps [17]. Recent works have followed a
Bayesian approach to quantify the uncertainty of whether
an area belongs to a reconstructed scene or not [8], which
could potentially be leveraged for simple artifact detection.
However, they require implicit models, with fundamental
changes to the scene model, and are not practical for more
general applications that require visual artifact identification outside of scene reconstruction, and are incapable of
detecting artifacts not arising from lack of coverage.
To tackle this, we propose a novel approach for artifact detection that can be leveraged on any set of images
without an encoded explicit or implicit model of the scene
or object they depict. Unlike visual difference predictors
(VDPs) [20] (which require references) and no-reference
quality metrics [25, 26] (which typically do not provide
maps, but rather produce single values of overall quality),
our approach provides visual artifact maps with no direct
references. We leverage learned perceptual patch statistics

28881

