This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Test-time Adaptation via Graph Spectral Driven Point Shift
Xin Wei Qin Yang Yijie Fang Mingrui Zhu Nannan WangB
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University
{weixin, mrzhu, nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn {qinyang, fangyijie}@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
While test-time adaptation (TTA) methods effectively address domain shifts by dynamically adapting pre-trained
models to target domain data during online inference, their
application to 3D point clouds is hindered by their irregular and unordered structure. Current 3D TTA methods often
rely on computationally expensive spatial-domain optimizations and may require additional training data. In contrast,
we propose Graph Spectral Domain Test-Time Adaptation
(GSDTTA), a novel approach for 3D point cloud classification that shifts adaptation to the graph spectral domain, enabling more efficient adaptation by capturing global structural properties with fewer parameters. Point clouds in target domain are represented as outlier-aware graphs and
transformed into graph spectral domain by Graph Fourier
Transform (GFT). For efficiency, adaptation is performed
by optimizing only the lowest 10% of frequency components, which capture the majority of the point cloud’s energy. An inverse GFT (IGFT) is then applied to reconstruct
the adapted point cloud with the graph spectral-driven point
shift. This process is enhanced by an eigenmap-guided selftraining strategy that iteratively refines both the spectral
adjustments and the model parameters. Experimental results and ablation studies on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of GSDTTA, outperforming existing
TTA methods for 3D point cloud classification.

Figure 1. A point cloud classification model (DGCNN [2]), when
trained on a clean dataset, suffers a significant performance drop
when tested on point clouds with domain shifts.

1. Introduction

point cloud classification deep model, DGCNN [2], trained
on a clean dataset (ModelNet40 [14]), suffers a significant
performance drop (over 35%) when tested on point clouds
with real-world noises (e.g., Background, Occlusion, and
LiDAR corruptions). These corruptions are inevitable, arising from factors such as scene complexity, sensor inaccuracies, and processing errors, which hinders the practical
deployment of these models.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) is a technique that enables
models trained on the source domain to dynamically adapt
to the target domain during online inference, showing significant promise in addressing domain shifts for 2D vision
tasks [15–29]. At test time, TTA methods typically adapt
either model parameters [15–22, 24, 26–29] or test data representations [23, 25] to reduce the gap between the training
and test data distributions, improving performance on specific test samples. However, the irregular and unordered
nature of 3D point clouds limits the direct application of 2D
TTA methods to the 3D domain.
While recent studies have begun exploring TTA for
3D point clouds, the field remains in its early stages.
MATE [30] introduces an auxiliary self-supervised reconstruction task during source domain training to improve robustness. Alternatively, BFTT3D [31] reduces error accumulation during adaptation by combining sourcespecific features with domain-independent ones from a non-

Point cloud classification is a fundamental area within computer vision, with a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving, virtual and augmented reality, and archaeology. Numerous deep models [1–13] have recently
been developed for point cloud classification, demonstrating impressive performance. However, their success heavily relies on the oversimplified i.i.d. assumption for training and test data, overlooking the challenges of out-ofdistribution scenarios that are frequently encountered in
real-world applications. As illustrated in Fig. 1, a powerful

26762

