This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent Swap Joint Diffusion for 2D Long-Form Latent Generation
Yusheng Dai1∗ , Chenxi Wang1∗ , Chang Li1 , Chen Wang2 , Kewei Li1 , Jun Du1† ,
Lei Sun3 , Jianqing Gao3 , Ruoyu Wang1 , Jiefeng Ma1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 iFlytek Research, Hefei, China
The continuous bubbles gurgling in the water

MD

MD

SaFa

SaFa

… A solo direct input acoustic guitar strumming ariry …

MAD

MAD

MD

MAD SyncD

SaFa

A photo of Chinese ink a vibrank landscape with famers, tourists, animal, mountains and traditional buildings

Figure 1. Our SaFa preserves more spectral details and avoids aliasing or structural misalignment in both long-form spectrum and panorama
generation, compared to current SOTA joint diffusion methods. Moreover, SaFa addresses cross-view inconsistency problems (e.g., color
and style in images; timbre and SNR in audio) in a feed-forward manner without extra time and computation cost.

Abstract
This paper introduces Swap Forward (SaFa), a modalityagnostic and efficient method to generate seamless and coherent long spectrum and panorama using a latent swap joint
diffusion process across multi-views. We first investigate
spectrum aliasing problem in spectrum-based audio generation caused by existing joint diffusion methods. Through
a comparative analysis of the VAE latent representation of
spectra and RGB images, we identify that the failure arises
from excessive suppression of high-frequency components
due to the step-wise averaging operator. To address this
issue, we propose Self-Loop Latent Swap, a frame-level bidirectional swap operator, applied to the overlapping region of
adjacent views. Leveraging step-wise differentiated trajectories, this swap operator avoids spectrum distortion and adaptively enhances high-frequency components. Furthermore,
to improve global cross-view consistency in non-overlapping
regions, we introduce Reference-Guided Latent Swap, a unidirectional latent swap operator that provides a centralized
reference trajectory to synchronize subview diffusions. By
refining swap timing and intervals, we canachieve a balance
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.

between cross-view similarity and diversity in a feed-forward
manner. Quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that SaFa significantly outperforms existing joint diffusion methods and even training-based methods in audio
generation using both U-Net and DiT models. It also adapts
well to panorama generation, achieving comparable performance with a 2 × to 20 × speedup. The project website is
available at https://swapforward.github.io.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models learn to generate data by progressively
adding noise to existing samples and subsequently reversing this process to recover the original data [4, 5]. They
initially achieved remarkable success in text-to-image [4–6]
and rapidly expanded into text-to-video [7–10] and textto-audio [11–17]. Despite these advances, modeling the
variability of the physical world remains challenging, particularly when diffusion models are trained on domain-specific
datasets. Therefore, expanding pretrained diffusion models to generate a broader range of data types has become
increasingly attractive. One significant challenge is length
extrapolation, which aims to generate images of arbitrary
shapes or audio of varying lengths using diffusion models

11006

