This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleKeeper: Prevent Content Leakage using Negative Visual Query Guidance
Jaeseok Jeong* †
Yonsei University

Junho Kim*
NAVER AI Lab

Gayoung Lee
NAVER AI Lab

jete jeong@yonsei.ac.kr

jhkim.ai@navercorp.com

gayoung.lee@navercorp.com

Yunjey Choi
NAVER AI Lab

Youngjung Uh‡
Yonsei University

yunjey.choi@gmail.com

yj.uh@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

Reference

“Dinosaur”

Ours

In the domain of text-to-image generation, diffusion
models have emerged as powerful tools. Recently, studies
on visual prompting, where images are used as prompts,
have enabled more precise control over style and content.
However, existing methods often suffer from content leakage, where undesired elements of the visual style prompt are
transferred along with the intended style. To address this
issue, we 1) extend classifier-free guidance (CFG) to utilize swapping self-attention and propose 2) negative visual
query guidance (NVQG) to reduce the transfer of unwanted
contents. NVQG employs negative score by intentionally
simulating content leakage scenarios that swap queries instead of key and values of self-attention layers from visual
style prompts. This simple yet effective method significantly
reduces content leakage. Furthermore, we provide careful solutions for using a real image as visual style prompts.
Through extensive evaluation across various styles and text
prompts, our method demonstrates superiority over existing approaches, reflecting the style of the references, and
ensuring that resulting images match the text prompts.

StyleAligned

IP-Adapter

DB-LoRA

StyleDrop

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison with the same style. Competitors face challenges in generating images with diverse layouts and
compositions, i.e., content leakage from the reference.

1. Introduction

image in Figure 1 provides a more concrete specification of
the desired style.
However, using reference images as visual style prompts
comes with a fundamental challenge: a dilemma between
better reflecting style and preventing content leakage. Figure 1 shows that the pose of the reference horse appears
in the results of previous methods. The content leakage
may include poses, specific shapes, layouts or entire objects. Furthermore, content leakage reduces diversity and
text alignments as shown in Figure 1.
Approaches that involve training the model, such as
fine-tuning a diffusion model on a set of themed images
[21, 39], learning new text embeddings [2, 10, 13], or
adapting cross-attention modules to incorporate image features [35, 52, 55, 59], come with significant drawbacks.
These methods not only incur high computational costs, but
also face an inherent trade-off between style and content.
Achieving a balance where the model faithfully captures the

Text-to-image diffusion models (T2I DMs) excel at synthesizing images that correspond to given text prompts
[37, 38]. However, relying solely on text prompts may not
allow precise control over the desired output. Even with
highly detailed text prompts, controlling the exact style of
the resulting images remains a challenge because of the
modality gap between text and image. For example, from “a
red car”, different people imagine different variants of red.
Instead, “A dinosaur” drawn in the style of the reference
* Equal contribution
† This work was done during his internship at NAVER AI Lab.
‡ Corresponding author.

15760

