This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixA: A Mixed Attention approach with Stable Lightweight Linear Attention to
enhance Efficiency of Vision Transformers at the Edge
Sabbir Ahmed1 * Jingtao Li2 Weiming Zhuang2 Chen Chen2 Lingjuan Lyu2†
1
Binghamton University, 2 Sony AI

Stability challenges in ReLU Linear Attention

Abstract
70

Vision transformers (ViTs) have become widely popular due
to their strong performance across various computer vision tasks. However, deploying ViTs on edge devices remains a persistent challenge due to their high computational demands primarily caused by the over use of selfattention layers with quadratic complexity together with
the resource-intensive softmax operation. To resolve this
challenge, linear self-attention approach has emerged as
an efficient alternative. Nonetheless, current linear attention methods experience considerable performance degradation compared to the softmax-based quadratic attention.
Hence, we propose MixA, a novel mixed attention approach
that enhances efficiency of ViT models while maintaining
comparable performance to softmax-based quadratic attention. MixA takes a pretrained ViT model and analyzes
the significance of each attention layer, and selectively apply ReLU-based quadratic attention in the critical layers
to ensure high model performance. To enhance efficiency,
MixA selects the less critical layers and replaces them with
our novel ReLU-based linear attention module called Stable Lightweight Linear Attention (SteLLA). SteLLA utilizes
theoretically motivated normalization terms that improve
stability of prior ReLU-based linear attention, resulting in
better performance (see Figure 1) while achieving significant speedup compared to softmax based quadratic attention (see Figure 2). Experiments conducted on three benchmark vision tasks show that MixA can significantly improve
efficiency of ViT models with competitive performance. Notably, MixA can improve inference speed of DeiT-T model
by 22% on Apple M1 chip with only ∼ 0.1% accuracy loss.

Validation Accuracy (%)

65

60

55

50

45

40

Prior ReLU Linear Attention
SteLLA

35
0

10

20

30

40

50

Epochs

Figure 1. ReLU-based linear attention faces stability challenges
due to the prior normalization technique [2, 23], which normalizes each row of the attention matrix by its row sum. In contrast,
our proposed SteLLA utilizes theoretically motivated normalization terms to prevent variance explosion, resulting in more stable
and superior performance.

1. Introduction

mentation [4, 38]. Despite their strong performance, ViTs
come with a substantial computational demand, often resulting in slower runtimes compared to competitive convolutional neural networks (CNNs). For example, [20]
shows that DeiT-T [28] is more than 10× slower compared
to MobileNetV2 [25] on edge inference. Hence, deployment of ViTs remains a significant challenge in resourceconstrained edge devices, where inference speed is a critical
concern [20, 22].
A key factor limiting the inference speed of ViTs is their
self-attention mechanism [2, 10, 15]. In particular, the current self-attention mechanism in ViTs introduces two major
issues. First, it results in quadratic computational complexity, O(N 2 ), with respect to the sequence length N in all
attention layer. Second, the self-attention mechanism heavily utilizes Softmax operations, which involve a large number of exponential function calls during inference. These
operations are especially resource-intensive on edge devices [15, 27, 30], where exponential functions require significantly more resources than the basic arithmetic operations, such as multiplication or addition [15].
Previous studies have attempted to address the challenge of heavy computational burden associated with self-

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have gained significant popularity and demonstrated state-of-the-art performance across
a variety of computer vision tasks, including image classification [8, 28], object detection [3, 4] and semantic seg* Work conducted during an internship at Sony AI.
† Corresponding to: lingjuan.lv@sony.com

21187

