This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Generalization of Representation Uncertainty in Earth Observation
Spyros Kondylatos1,2,3 * Nikolaos Ioannis Bountos1,2,4 * Dimitrios Michail4
Xiao Xiang Zhu5,6 Gustau Camps-Valls3 Ioannis Papoutsis1,2,7
1
National Observatory of Athens 2 National Technical University of Athens
3
University of Valencia 4 Harokopio University of Athens 5 Technical University of Munich
6
Munich Center for Machine Learning 7 Archimedes/Athena RC
{skondylatos,bountos}@noa.gr, michail@hua.gr, xiaoxiang.zhu@tum.de,
gustau.camps@uv.es, ipapoutsis@mail.ntua.gr

Abstract
Recent advances in Computer Vision have introduced
the concept of pretrained representation uncertainty, enabling zero-shot uncertainty estimation. This holds significant potential for Earth Observation (EO), where trustworthiness is critical, yet the complexity of EO data poses
challenges to uncertainty-aware methods. In this work, we
investigate the generalization of representation uncertainty
in EO, considering the domain’s unique semantic characteristics. We pretrain uncertainties on large EO datasets
and propose an evaluation framework to assess their zeroshot performance in multi-label classification and segmentation EO tasks. Our findings reveal that, unlike uncertainties pretrained on natural images, EO-pretraining exhibits strong generalization across unseen EO domains, geographic locations, and target granularities, while maintaining sensitivity to variations in ground sampling distance. We demonstrate the practical utility of pretrained
uncertainties showcasing their alignment with task-specific
uncertainties in downstream tasks, their sensitivity to realworld EO image noise, and their ability to generate spatial
uncertainty estimates out-of-the-box. Initiating the discussion on representation uncertainty in EO, our study provides insights into its strengths and limitations, paving the
way for future research in the field. Code and weights are
available at: https://github.com/Orion- AILab/EOUncertaintyGeneralization.

Figure 1. Overview of our investigation framework. We pretrain
uncertainties on upstream frozen Earth Observation (EO) representations, enabling zero-shot uncertainty estimation and spatial
uncertainty estimates for EO downstream applications. We evaluate the generalization capacity of uncertainties, considering the
key Semantic Factors (SFs) shaping EO imagery.

tions. However, standard uncertainty-aware methods introduce increased modeling complexity, high computational
overhead, and greater inference demands [14]. To overcome
these limitations, recent advances in Computer Vision (CV)
have introduced pretrained uncertainties [30, 31]. These
uncertainties are learned in the representation space of DL
models trained on large-scale upstream datasets, enabling
zero-shot uncertainty transfer to downstream tasks. Similar to representation learning [11, 32], this allows extracting representation uncertainties that support task-agnostic,
label-free, and generalizable uncertainty estimation.
EO applications can benefit from these advances; yet,
the complexity and high dimensionality of EO data hinder large-scale modeling. The EO community has made
progress in addressing these challenges via representation
learning on large EO data archives [2, 9, 51]. Motivated by
these efforts, we explore the potential of large-scale repre-

1. Introduction
The criticality of Earth Observation (EO) applications [5,
39, 52] demands trustworthy Deep Learning (DL) models
[17]. Uncertainty estimation can enhance models’ reliability by providing confidence estimates for their predic* Equal contribution

6552

