This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CNS-Bench: Benchmarking Image Classifier Robustness
Under Continuous Nuisance Shifts
Olaf Dünkel1† Artur Jesslen2 * Jiahao Xie1 *
Christian Theobalt1,3 Christian Rupprecht4 Adam Kortylewski1,2
1

3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus 2 University of Freiburg
Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI 4 University of Oxford

Abstract
An important challenge when using computer vision
models in the real world is to evaluate their performance in
potential out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. While simple synthetic corruptions are commonly applied to test OOD
robustness, they often fail to capture nuisance shifts that
occur in the real world. Recently, diffusion models have
been applied to generate realistic images for benchmarking, but they are restricted to binary nuisance shifts. In this
work, we introduce CNS-Bench, a Continuous Nuisance
Shift Benchmark to quantify OOD robustness of image
classifiers for continuous and realistic generative nuisance
shifts. CNS-Bench allows generating a wide range of individual nuisance shifts in continuous severities by applying LoRA adapters to diffusion models. To address failure
cases, we propose a filtering mechanism that outperforms
previous methods, thereby enabling reliable benchmarking
with generative models. With the proposed benchmark,
we perform a large-scale study to evaluate the robustness
of more than 40 classifiers under various nuisance shifts.
Through carefully designed comparisons and analyses, we
find that model rankings can change for varying shifts and
shift scales, which cannot be captured when applying common binary shifts. Additionally, we show that evaluating the
model performance on a continuous scale allows the identification of model failure points, providing a more nuanced
understanding of model robustness. Project page including
code and data: https://genintel.github.io/CNS .

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are typically validated and tested
on fixed datasets under the assumption of independent and
identically distributed samples. However, this does not
fully cover the true capabilities and potential vulnerabilities
† Corresponding author: oduenkel@mpi-inf.mpg.de.

* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Benchmarking under continuous nuisance shifts. We
evaluate the robustness of different models under gradually increasing nuisance shifts. This enables failure point identification
(highlighted in red).

of models when deployed in dynamic real-world environments. The robustness in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios is important, and decision-makers might need to know
how models perform under various distribution shifts and
levels severity. Therefore, it is crucial to continue building
richer and more systematic benchmarks.
Strategies for collecting out-of-distribution (OOD) images for such benchmarks involve manual data collection,
perturbations with synthetic corruptions [25, 26, 70], or
rendering from synthetic objects [4, 52]. Recently, textto-image (T2I) diffusion models have been introduced as
promising tools for benchmarking images in a scalable
manner [42, 44, 60, 69].
However, all previous approaches define categorical or
binary nuisance shifts by considering the existence or absence of a shift, which contradicts their continuous realization in real-world scenarios. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1, the snow level in an environment can range from
light snowfall to objects fully covered with snow. While
one model might fail at all snow levels, some models may
only fail under heavy occlusion. In a real-world application,
an autonomous driving company might want to know how
the system’s performance deteriorates for stronger distribution shifts. The seminal work ImageNet-C [24] has illustrated through simple corruptions that classifier A can have
a lower overall performance than classifier B, even though
classifier A degrades more gracefully in case of corruptions

19978

