This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PHATNet: A Physics-guided Haze Transfer Network for Domain-adaptive
Real-world Image Dehazing
Fu-Jen Tsai1,2 Yan-Tsung Peng3 Yen-Yu Lin4 Chia-Wen Lin1
National Tsing Hua University1 MediaTek2
National Chengchi University3 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University4
fjtsai@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

ytpeng@cs.nccu.edu.tw

Abstract

lin@cs.nycu.edu.tw

cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Neural Networks (CNNs) [10, 11, 34, 39, 41, 42, 46, 49]
and Transformers [15, 40], to improve dehazing performance. However, due to the scarcity of real-world cleanhazy image pairs for training, these methods often rely on
synthetic hazy image datasets [21] generated through the
following Atmospheric Scattering Model (ASM):

Image dehazing aims to remove unwanted hazy artifacts in
images. Although previous research has collected paired
real-world hazy and haze-free images to improve dehazing
models’ performance in real-world scenarios, these models
often experience significant performance drops when handling unseen real-world hazy images due to limited training data. This issue motivates us to develop a flexible domain adaptation method to enhance dehazing performance
during testing. Observing that predicting haze patterns
is generally easier than recovering clean content, we propose the Physics-guided Haze Transfer Network (PHATNet) which transfers haze patterns from unseen target domains to source-domain haze-free images, creating domainspecific fine-tuning sets to update dehazing models for effective domain adaptation. Additionally, we introduce a HazeTransfer-Consistency loss and a Content-Leakage Loss to
enhance PHATNet’s disentanglement ability. Experimental results demonstrate that PHATNet significantly boosts
state-of-the-art dehazing models on benchmark real-world
image dehazing datasets. The source code is available at
https://github.com/pp00704831/PHATNet.

I(x) = J(x) × t(x) + A × (1 − t(x)),

(1)

where I and J ∈ RH×W ×3 denote the hazy and corresponding haze-free images of size H × W . A ∈ R1 is the
global atmospheric light, and the transmission map is given
by t = e−βd(x) ∈ RH×W , where β represents the haze
density, d(x) is the depth map, and x is the pixel index.
However, as ASM is not sufficient to accurately simulate
haze distribution in real-world scenarios, some studies [2–
7] have focused on collecting paired real-world hazy and
clean images to improve dehazing models’ performance.
Although dehazing models trained on real-world pairs perform better than those trained on synthetic pairs, they often
suffer from significant performance drops when applied to
unseen, real-world, hazy images from different domains.
Since paired hazy and haze-free images for unseen
target domains are typically unavailable during testing,
some approaches [22, 45] utilize image-to-image translation techniques based on Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [13] to generate the paired images. However,
GAN-based methods may encounter issues, such as mode
collapse [1, 29] and instability during optimization [14, 30].
Moreover, they struggle to capture region-specific degradation patterns, such as non-uniform haze, commonly seen in
real-world scenarios. Additionally, GANs lack effective domain adaptation capabilities, necessitating re-optimization
of the generator to accommodate hazy images from unseen
domains. These challenges motivate us to develop a flexible
domain adaptation framework that allows dehazing models
to effectively adjust to new target domains at test time.
We present a novel domain adaptation framework to update dehazing models, enhancing their performance on unseen target-domain hazy images. Since haze-free counter-

1. Introduction
Images captured in hazy conditions often experience significant degradation, including occlusion, color distortion,
reduced contrast, etc. These factors severely diminish image clarity and adversely affect downstream computer vision tasks, such as image classification [24, 37], object detection [19, 27], and semantic segmentation [28, 44, 48].
Image dehazing seeks to restore high-quality, visually enhanced images from a single hazy input; however, it remains challenging due to its inherently ill-posed nature.
Image dehazing has advanced considerably in recent
years, with numerous methods developed using various
deep neural network architectures, including Convolutional

5591

