This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iManip: Skill-Incremental Learning for Robotic Manipulation
Zexin Zheng1* , Jia-Feng Cai1* , Xiao-Ming Wu1 , Yi-Lin Wei 1
Yu-Ming Tang1 , Ancong Wu1,2† , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{zhengzx25, caijf23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn

wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
The development of a generalist agent with adaptive multiple manipulation skills has been a long-standing goal in
the robotics community. In this paper, we explore a crucial
task, skill-incremental learning, in robotic manipulation,
which is to endow the robots with the ability to learn new
manipulation skills based on the previous learned knowledge without re-training. First, we build a skill-incremental
environment based on the RLBench benchmark, and explore
how traditional incremental methods perform in this setting.
We find that they suffer from severe catastrophic forgetting
due to the previous methods on classification overlooking
the characteristics of temporality and action complexity in
robotic manipulation tasks. Towards this end, we propose
an incremental Manipulation framework, termed iManip,
to mitigate the above issues. We firstly design a temporal
replay strategy to maintain the integrity of old skills when
learning new skill. Moreover, we propose the Extendable
PerceiverIO, consisting of an action prompt with extendable
weight to adapt to new action primitives in new skill. Extensive experiments show that our framework performs well
in Skill-Incremental Learning.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) An overview of our skill-incremental learning for
robotic manipulation that requires the agent to learn skill sequences over time. (b) A comparison of model performance between the traditional incremental baseline (TIB) and our iManip.

focuses on how to acquire better manipulation performance
[6, 38, 47, 57, 69] or how to transfer the knowledge from the
pretrained large language or vision models [4, 10, 21, 30]
to learn robotics manipulations, rarely works explore how
to incrementally learn new skills. LIBERO [35] is a preliminary benchmark to learn lifelong robotics control, but it
explores the incremental abilities in new objects or new spatial positions, still limited in the characteristics of the same
skills, where different tasks share the same skill.
In this paper, we thoroughly explore this crucial task,
skill-incremental learning, in robotic manipulation, which
is to leverage the previous learned knowledge to enable
the robots to learn new manipulation skills without training from scratch. To begin with, we construct a skill-

Imagine that we are in a household setting with a robot assistant that already has basic functions like folding clothes
and fetching items. Now, as the owners, we want it to learn
new skills. For instance, today we’ve purchased a dishwasher, and we’d like the robot to learn how to load dishes
into it. It could quickly acquire these new skills by observing and mimicking our demonstrations. This is an interesting and challenging requirement for robotics manipulation,
which needs the robot to learn new skills based on previously learned knowledge without retraining. However, in
the area of robotic manipulation, previous research mainly
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.

13890

