This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Riemannian-Geometric Fingerprints of Generative Models
Hae Jin Song *
Laurent Itti
USC Department of Computer Science
Abstract
Recent breakthroughs and rapid integration of generative
models (GMs) have sparked interest in the problem of model
attribution and their ﬁngerprints. For instance, service
providers need reliable methods of authenticating their models to protect their IP, while users and law enforcement seek
to verify the source of generated content for accountability
and trust. In addition, a growing threat of model collapse is
arising, as more model-generated data are being fed back
into sources (e.g., YouTube) that are often harvested for
training (“regurgitative training”), heightening the need to
differentiate synthetic from human data. Yet, a gap still exists
in understanding generative models’ ﬁngerprints, we believe,
stemming from the lack of a formal framework that can deﬁne, represent, and analyze the ﬁngerprints in a principled
way. To address this gap, we take a geometric approach and
propose a new deﬁnition of artifact and ﬁngerprint of GMs
using Riemannian geometry, which allows us to leverage
the rich theory of differential geometry. Our new deﬁnition
generalizes previous work [60] to non-Euclidean manifolds
by learning Riemannian metrics from data and replacing
the Euclidean distances and nearest-neighbor search with
geodesic distances and kNN-based Riemannian center of
mass. We apply our theory to a new gradient-based algorithm for computing the ﬁngerprints in practice. Results
show that it is more effective in distinguishing a large array
of GMs, spanning across 4 different datasets in 2 different
resolutions (64×64, 256×256), 27 model architectures, and
2 modalities (Vision, Vision-Language). Using our proposed
deﬁnition signiﬁcantly improves the performance on model
attribution, as well as a generalization to unseen datasets,
model types, and modalities, suggesting its practical efﬁcacy.

1. Introduction

work in business and science, including software development, entertainment, and scientiﬁc discovery. Despite this
advancement, there is still a big gap in understanding what
makes these models behave as they do and how one model
differs from another. In particular, a rapidly arising question
regarding GMs is model attribution and ﬁngerprints, i.e.,
what makes their synthetic data different from natural data
(e.g., GAN-generated images vs. real images), as well as
from synthetic data generated by different models (e.g., texts
generated by GPT-4 [1] vs. by Gemini [62]). While this
question has been partially studied in the context of deepfake detection [65, 69], its full extension, i.e., distinguishing amongst different methods of data generation (model
attribution) remains mostly under-explored. In this paper,
we address the problem of ﬁngerprinting and attributing
generative models in a theoretically-grounded way using
Riemannian geometry [39] and manifold learning [3, 4, 23].
The problem of ﬁngerprinting and attributing GMs bears
increasingly critical signiﬁcance in both practice and theory.
First, in practice, service providers are looking for a reliable method of authenticating their proprietary models (e.g.,
Google’s Gemini [62], OpenAI’s GPT [1]) to protect their IP,
while users and law enforcement seek to verify the source of
generated content for the trustworthiness of synthetic data
and AI regulation [42, 51]. In addition, a growing threat of
model collapse [13, 59] is arising as more model-generated
data are being fed back into sources (e.g., YouTube) that are
often harvested for training (“regurgitative training”), heightening the need to detect and differentiate synthetic from
human data. Secondly, on the theoretical front, model attribution and ﬁngerprints provide a formal, analytical way of
studying the differences between various GMs and revealing
their unique characteristics and limitations, thereby promoting the development of new models that overcome current
limitations (e.g., artifact-reduced GMs [10, 21, 30, 58]).

In recent years, we have seen a rapid development and integration of generative models (GMs) into our society. Vision
generative models like Stable Diffusion [54] and Sora [7]
are revolutionizing image and video synthesis, and LargeLanguage Models (LLMs) [1, 8] are changing how people
* Corresponding author: Hae Jin Song <haejinso@usc.edu>

11425

In this paper, we study the problem of ﬁngerprinting GMs
based on their samples and provide a formal framework
that can deﬁne, represent, and analyze the ﬁngerprints to
study and compare GMs in a principled way. Recent works
on deepfake detection [49, 56] and model biases [58, 65]
have suggested that GMs leave distinct traces of computations on their samples that differentiate model-generated data

