This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ETA: Energy-based Test-time Adaptation for Depth Completion
Younjoon Chung* Hyoungseob Park* Patrick Rim* Xiaoran Zhang Jihe He
Ziyao Zeng Safa Cicek† Byung-Woo Hong‡ James S. Duncan Alex Wong
Yale University

†

UCLA

‡

Chung-Ang University

{younjoon.chung, hyoungseob.park, patrick.rim, xiaoran.zhang}@yale.edu
safacicek@ucla.edu,

hong@cau.ac.kr, {james.duncan, alex.wong}@yale.edu

Abstract

point clouds of the 3D environment or scene; likewise these
point clouds can be estimated from images via Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) or Visual Inertial Odometry (VIO). But
in both cases, the point clouds tend to be sparse. Depth
completion is the multimodal 3D reconstruction task of estimating a dense depth map from an RGB image and its
synchronized sparse point cloud, often projected onto the
image plane as a sparse depth map.
As depth completion models, pretrained on “source”
datasets, are deployed to support a range of spatial tasks,
they often encounter novel environments or 3D scenes and
conditions. Hence, there exists a covariate shift when transferring a depth completion model to “target” testing data.
Such distributional shifts arise from nuisance variables, e.g.,
changes in illumination, occlusion, that cause changes in
object appearance, which lead to model degradations.
Mitigating this covariate shift can be achieved by means
of domain adaptation [13], which updates the model parameters to fit the target testing data, but often requires access
to source and target datasets with ground truth. Source-free
[31] and unsupervised [70] domain adaptation relax the assumption of having access to source data and ground truth,
respectively. However, they still require access to the testing
dataset and multiple passes through it for model updates.
These requirements pose a hurdle for adoption in real-time
spatial applications. Instead, we consider the problem of
test-time adaptation (TTA), where one is given access to the
testing data in a stream, i.e., one batch at a time, without access to ground truth. Hence, TTA methods must update the
parameters of a pretrained model in an unsupervised manner, under low-computational budget, with time constraints,
and without the ability to revisit previously-seen examples.
To this end, we aim to model the shift or domain gap between the source and target distributions in order to guide
test-time updates to a pretrained model to yield predictions resembling those of the source distribution. This
will be facilitated by implicitly modeling the data distributions through an energy function. The energy function

We propose a method for test-time adaptation of pretrained depth completion models. Depth completion models, trained on some “source” data, often predict erroneous
outputs when transferred to “target” data captured in novel
environmental conditions due to a covariate shift. The crux
of our method lies in quantifying the likelihood of depth
predictions belonging to the source data distribution. The
challenge is in the lack of access to out-of-distribution (target) data prior to deployment. Hence, rather than making assumptions regarding the target distribution, we utilize
adversarial perturbations as a mechanism to explore the
data space. This enables us to train an energy model that
scores local regions of depth predictions as in- or out-ofdistribution. We update the parameters of pretrained depth
completion models at test time to minimize energy, effectively aligning test-time predictions to those of the source
distribution. We call our method “Energy-based Test-time
Adaptation”, or ETA for short. We evaluate our method
across three indoor and three outdoor datasets, where ETA
improve over the previous state-of-the-art method by an
average of 6.94% for outdoors and 10.23% for indoors.
Project Page: https://fuzzythecat.github.io/eta.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3-dimensional (3D) environment is essential for spatial tasks such as autonomous driving, physical AI agents, and extended reality. Many of these tasks rely
on sensor platforms equipped with visual (e.g., camera) and
range (e.g., LiDAR or radar) sensors. These sensors are
complementary in that: Cameras capture RGB images with
(dense) irradiance at each pixel, but 3D reconstruction from
visual data is ill-posed due to the loss of a dimension in perspective projection. Range sensors measure coordinates or
* Equal contribution

6001

