This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Go to Zero: Towards Zero-shot Motion Generation with Million-scale Data
Ke Fan
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Lixing Xiao
Zhejiang University

Shunlin Lu
CUHK, Shenzhen

Minyue Dai
Fudan University

Zhiyang Dou
HKU

Junting Dong
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Lizhuang Ma†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, East China Normal University

A whirlwind kick is delivered by air.

Runyi Yu
HKUST

Jingbo Wang
Shanghai AI Laboratory

The person is swinging a sword in a choreographed motion. He first lifts
the sword behind his back, then steps forward while bringing the sword
down in a wide arc, shifting his weight to the front foot and finishing in a
low stance, showing focus and strong intention in his movements.

Figure 1. We present Go to Zero, where we can deal with out-domain and complex compositional motions.

Abstract
Generating diverse and natural human motion sequences
based on textual descriptions constitutes a fundamental
and challenging research area within the domains of computer vision, graphics, and robotics. Despite significant advancements in this field, current methodologies often face
challenges regarding zero-shot generalization capabilities,
largely attributable to the limited size of training datasets.
Moreover, the lack of a comprehensive evaluation framework impedes the advancement of this task by failing to
identify directions for improvement. In this work, we aim
to push text-to-motion into a new era, that is, to achieve the
generalization ability of zero-shot. To this end, firstly, we
develop an efficient annotation pipeline and introduce MotionMillion—the largest human motion dataset to date, featuring over 2,000 hours and 2 million high-quality motion

sequences. Additionally, we propose MotionMillion-Eval,
the most comprehensive benchmark for evaluating zero-shot
motion generation. Leveraging a scalable architecture, we
scale our model to 7B parameters and validate its performance on MotionMillion-Eval. Our results demonstrate
strong generalization to out-of-domain and complex compositional motions, marking a significant step toward zeroshot human motion generation. The code is available at
https://github.com/VankouF/MotionMillion-Codes.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author

Text-to-motion generation, which synthesizes diverse and
temporally coherent human motions from natural language
descriptions, poses a significant challenge in computer vision, graphics, and robotics. Despite notable advancements [1, 8–10, 14, 40, 61, 76, 92, 94] in large-scale generative models for text, images, 3D, and videos—showcasing

13336

