This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reinforcement Learning-Guided Data Selection
via Redundancy Assessment
Suorong Yang*
Nanjing University

Peijia Li
Nanjing University

Furao Shen⇤
Nanjing University

sryang@smail.nju.edu.cn

lipj@smail.nju.edu.cn

frshen@nju.edu.cn

Jian Zhao
Nanjing University
jianzhao@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

umes to achieve lower generalization errors, mainly due to
the high VC dimensionality of deep networks [26, 62, 80].
However, this progress comes at the cost of high computational demands, limiting the applications of models to specialized infrastructure [72, 73, 86]. Meanwhile, real-world
datasets typically contain redundancy, which can degrade
the data efficiency and performance [20, 64, 73, 78, 85]. To
address this issue and improve data-efficient training, data
selection methods select a fixed smaller subset of the most
representative data points before training begins [28, 49, 61,
64, 72–74, 85], improving training efficiency without sacrificing generalization performance.

Modern deep architectures often rely on large-scale
datasets, but training on these datasets incurs high computational and storage overhead. Real-world datasets often contain substantial redundancies, prompting the need
for more data-efficient training paradigms. Data selection
has shown promise to mitigate redundancy by identifying
the most representative samples, thereby reducing training
costs without compromising performance. Existing methods
typically rely on static scoring metrics or pretrained models, overlooking the combined effect of selected samples and
their evolving dynamics during training. We introduce the
concept of ✏-sample cover, which quantifies sample redundancy based on inter-sample relationships, capturing the
intrinsic structure of the dataset. Based on this, we reformulate data selection as a reinforcement learning (RL) process
and propose RL-Selector, where a lightweight RL agent optimizes the selection policy by leveraging ✏-sample cover
derived from evolving dataset distribution as a reward signal. Extensive experiments across benchmark datasets and
diverse architectures demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art baselines. Models trained with our selected datasets show enhanced generalization performance with improved training efficiency.

Existing approaches can be broadly categorized into: importance score-based methods [8, 13, 43, 50, 61, 64, 67, 70],
dataset distribution-based methods [58, 72, 85, 88], and
optimization-based methods [27, 28, 32, 44, 49, 69, 73, 74,
78, 79]. While these state-of-the-art methods show promising results, some limitations remain: (1) Importance scorebased methods rely on hand-crafted scores to evaluate sample importance and select ones with either higher or lower
scores. Nevertheless, combining high- and low-score samples can have a significant effect on model performance, a
phenomenon known as the “group effect” [73, 74]. Consequently, it is essential and beneficial to evaluate the impact
of a subset rather than individual samples, thereby identifying optimal subsets w.r.t. specific selection ratios [72, 73].
(2) As observed in [64], many existing methods overlook
training dynamics. Most selection methods use a converged
surrogate network for data selection [28, 49, 50, 61, 70, 72],
potentially favoring samples that are difficult or influential
in the later training stages, yet not necessarily in the earlier
or the entire training process. (3) Given the above limitations, while selecting coresets w.r.t. specific selection ratios
is more effective, it requires complete selection procedures
and incurs re-training costs [28, 61, 67, 74], limiting practicality and efficiency.

1. Introduction
The remarkable progress of modern deep learning has been
fueled by increasingly large and complex models [2, 6, 37,
42, 53, 87], which utilize vast training datasets [29, 54,
57, 65] to achieve state-of-the-art performance. This trend
is supported by theoretical analyses of generalization error
bounds, which emphasize the necessity of large data vol* Corresponding author.

1004

