This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OneGT: One-Shot Geometry-Texture Neural Rendering for Head Avatars
Jinshu Chen Bingchuan Li† Fan Zhang Songtao Zhao
Bytedance Intelligent Creation

Qian He

{chenjinshu, libingchuan, noodles, zhaosongtao.0815, heqian}@bytedance.com

𝑆𝑘𝑖𝑛,
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔,
𝑆𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑜,
𝐻𝑎𝑖𝑟,
…

𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑢𝑙
𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑦𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡

𝑺𝒌𝒆𝒍𝒆𝒕𝒐𝒏 𝑨𝒏𝒄𝒉𝒐𝒓𝒊𝒏𝒈 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒

𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

𝑛𝑜𝑛- 𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑
𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

𝐶𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑎
𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑠

𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛

𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

𝑅𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝑻𝒆𝒙𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒆 𝑹𝒆𝒏𝒅𝒆𝒓𝒊𝒏𝒈 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒

𝑨𝒏𝒄𝒉𝒐𝒓𝒆𝒅
𝑺𝒌𝒆𝒍𝒆𝒕𝒐𝒏

𝑭𝒊𝒏𝒂𝒍
𝑶𝒖𝒕𝒑𝒖𝒕

𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠

𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
𝑆𝑘𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑜𝑛

𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒
𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒

𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 𝑆𝑘𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑠 𝑅𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑

Figure 1. Inspired by the traditional rendering tools (shown in the upper part), we propose OneGT, a one-shot neural rendering pipeline
(shown in the lower part). Explicitly following the traditional rendering process, our framework contains a prior skeleton-anchoring stage
and a posterior texture-rendering stage, thus completely decoupling the geometry and the textures. The final rendered head avatars can be
easily edited through simple manipulations of the given control conditions without professional skills.

Abstract
Existing solutions for creating high-fidelity digital head
avatars encounter various obstacles. Traditional rendering
tools offer realistic results, while heavily requiring expert
skills. Neural rendering methods are more efficient but often
compromise between the generated fidelity and flexibility.
We present OneGT that adheres to the frameworks of the
rendering tools, while restructuring individual stages of the
rendering pipeline through neural networks. OneGT maintains high systemic interpretability, inheriting the superior
performances of neural rendering approaches. Specifically,
OneGT contains a skeleton-anchoring stage and a texturerendering stage, in which well-designed Transformers learn
the geometric transformations and the proposed referenceperceptible DiT renders the textures respectively. Our framework learns geometric consistency from the innovatively
introduced synthetic data, thus achieving superior performance while requiring only 10%-30% of the real-world data

typically used by competitive methods. Experimental results
demonstrate that OneGT achieves high fidelity in producing
portrait avatars, meanwhile maintaining the flexibility of
editing.

1. Introduction
Creating head avatars remains an essential but challenging
task in game development, 3D remote presentations, and
virtual reality. One common solution is the traditional rendering software. Rendering high-fidelity head avatars through
rendering tools [1, 7, 43] typically requires a manipulable
geometric head model and highly detailed texture maps. As
Fig. 1 shows, such tools process rendering in detachable
pipelines with flawless interpretability and reliability, thus
they achieve flexible geometry editing and high-quality rendering. However, the costly asset production and the complex
software pose significant barriers to their widespread usage.
Simultaneously, research has led to a new promising path

11294

