This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G A SL IGHT: Gaussian Splats for Spatially-Varying Lighting in HDR
Christophe Bolduc1

Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 Jean-François Lalonde1
1
Université Laval, 2 Adobe

Figure 1. We introduce G A SL IGHT, a framework that captures environment lighting as HDR Gaussian Splats. From a sequence of regular
photographs of a scene (backgrounds), G A SL IGHT generates plausible illumination and can readily be applied as lighting in a 3D renderer
to composite virtual objects onto images. Our representation inherently provides both high-frequency texture for reflections, as shown in
the mirror spheres, and plausible light intensity, as seen in the shading of the inserted spheres, tori, and Blender’s Suzanne.

Abstract
We present G A SL IGHT, a method that generates spatiallyvarying lighting from regular images. Our method proposes
using HDR Gaussian Splats as light source representation,
marking the first time regular images can serve as light
sources in a 3D renderer. Our two-stage process first enhances the dynamic range of images plausibly and accurately by leveraging the priors embedded in diffusion models. Next, we employ Gaussian Splats to model 3D lighting,
achieving spatially variant lighting. Our approach yields
state-of-the-art results on HDR estimations and their applications in illuminating virtual objects and scenes. To facilitate the benchmarking of images as light sources, we introduce a novel dataset of calibrated and unsaturated HDR
captures to evaluate images as light sources. We assess
our method using a combination of our dataset and an existing dataset from the literature. The code to reproduce
our method is available at https://lvsn.github.io/
gaslight/.

visuals that convincingly blend within their surroundings
and convey realistic surface appearance. This is essential in
numerous applications including multimedia productions,
virtual reality, forensics, cultural displays, and more.
Despite its importance, current methods face significant limitations in capturing and representing lighting accurately. One reason for this is the difficulty in capturing
high dynamic range (HDR), which requires multiple exposures [11] or specialized apparatus [43, 58]. As a result,
most approaches [12, 36, 67] attempt to convert regular,
low-dynamic range (LDR) images to HDR. However, as
will be demonstrated later, they primarily focus on extending the dynamic range for tonemapping and visualization
purposes [20, 24, 61], rather than extrapolating the intensity of bright light sources.
Another reason is the difficulty of simultaneously estimating HDR lighting that is both spatially-varying and high
frequency. Tab. 1 provides an overview of existing lighting representations that have been proposed in the literature. Existing approaches either focus on accurate energy
estimation, using parametric light sources [17], which allow for near-field effects, such as positioning a discrete
lamp in the scene. Alternatively, per-pixel spherical harmonics [18] tend to struggle in modeling high-frequency
lighting and cannot generate strong cast shadows. Volumetric representations [32, 33, 57, 63] do not accurately
model high-frequency lighting variations, as needed for re-

1. Introduction
Lighting is crucial not only for shaping an image, but also
for ensuring realism and aesthetic appeal when inserting
virtual content. Estimating accurate lighting representations
from one or many photographs is vital for creating lifelike

29120

