This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AllGCD: Leveraging All Unlabeled Data for Generalized Category Discovery
Xinzi Cao1,2 , Ke Chen1,2 , Feidiao Yang2 , Xiawu Zheng3 , Yonghong Tian2,4 , Yutong Lu1 *
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Xiamen University, 4 Peking University
{caoxz, chenk68}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

zhengxiawu@xmu.edu.cn

yhtian@pku.edu.cn

yangfd@pcl.ac.cn
luyutong@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to identify
both known and novel categories in unlabeled data by leveraging knowledge from labeled datasets. Current methods
employ supervised contrastive learning on labeled data to
capture known category structures but neglect unlabeled
data, limiting their effectiveness in classifying novel classes,
especially in fine-grained open-set detection where subtle
class differences are crucial. To address this issue, we
propose a novel learning approach, AllGCD, which seamlessly integrates all unlabeled data into contrastive learning to enhance the discrimination of novel classes. Specifically, we introduce two key techniques: Intra-class Contrast in Labeled Data (Intra-CL) and Inter-class Contrast
in Unlabeled Data (Inter-CU). Intra-CL first refines intraclass compactness within known categories by integrating
potential known samples into labeled data. This process
refines the decision boundaries of known categories, reducing ambiguity when distinguishing novel categories. Building on this, Inter-CU further strengthens inter-class separation between known and novel categories by applying
global contrastive learning to the class distribution in the
unlabeled data. By jointly leveraging Intra-CL and InterCU, AllGCD effectively improves both intra-class compactness and inter-class separation, effectively enhancing the
discriminability between known and novel classes. Experiments demonstrate that AllGCD significantly improves
novel classes accuracy, e.g., achieving increases of 7.4% on
CUB and 7.5% on Stanford Cars.

(a) SimGCD

(b) AllGCD

(a) ‘New’ acc w/o CL in SimGCD

(b) Attentions w/o unlabeled data

Figure 1. Comparison of ‘New’ accuracy and attention w/o
unlabeled data in supervised contrastive learning (S-CL). (a)
reveals that S-CL solely with labeled data fails to classify novel
samples (orange bar vs. blue bar) in the baseline SimGCD. In
contrast, our method with unlabeled data (green bar) significantly
improves accuracy. (b) shows that our AllGCD highlights more
class-specific object regions by incorporating unlabeled data.

(known) classes. It weakens the capability of these methods to handle novel categories, limiting the scope of their
applications [8, 11, 26, 46]. To overcome this issue, the
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) paradigm [1, 3, 28,
41, 44, 45, 49, 50] was introduced for open-world learning. It identifies both known and novel categories from unlabeled data by leveraging knowledge learned from labeled
data with known classes.
A key strategy for discovering novel classes is to transfer knowledge from labeled data to promote the learning of novel classes. Based on this idea, previous GCD
methods [3, 41, 42, 44, 45] utilize contrastive learning
[17, 39] to learn the representations of classification within
labeled data. Initially, Vaze et al. [41] adopt a two-stage
pipeline: contrastive learning for representation, followed
by k-means for classifying unlabeled data. However, clustering becomes computationally expensive as data scales.
To reduce this, Wen et al. [45] proposed SimGCD, a parametric approach that replaces clustering with a classifier
and learns class prototypes via joint contrastive learning.
Building on this, Wang et al. [44] enhanced SimGCD with
data prompts for better performance, while Cao et al. [3]

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved outstanding performance in
computer vision tasks [4, 7, 15, 31, 32, 36, 40], especially
in image classification [14, 16, 20, 33, 34, 36]. However,
most conventional methods are developed in a closed setting where all training and test data belong to pre-defined
* Corresponding author.

3293

