This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Separable Fine-Grained Representation via Dendrogram Construction
from Coarse Labels for Fine-grained Visual Recognition
Guanghui Shi1

Xuefeng Liang1,2 *

Wenjie Li2

Xiaoyu Lin2

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Guangzhou, China
ghshi@stu.xidian.edu.cn, xliang@xidian.edu.cn, {wenjielim, xylin 2}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Learning fine-grained representations from coarse labels
for fine-grained visual recognition (FGVR) is a challenging yet valuable task, as it alleviates the reliance on
labor-intensive fine-grained annotations. Early approaches
focused primarily on minimizing intra-fine-grained-class
variation but overlooked inter-fine-grained-class separability, resulting in limited FGVR performance. Subsequent
studies employed a top-down paradigm to enhance separability via deep clustering, yet these methods require predefining the number of fine-grained classes, which is often impractical to obtain. Here, we introduce a bottom-up
learning paradigm that constructs a hierarchical dendrogram by iteratively merging similar instances/clusters, inferring higher-level semantics from lowest-level instances
without predefining class numbers. Leveraging this, we propose BuCSFR, a novel method that integrates a Bottom-up
Construction (BuC) module to build the dendrogram based
on a minimal information loss criterion, and a Separable
Fine-grained Representation (SFR) module that treats dendrogram nodes as pseudo-labels to ensure representation
separability. The synergistic interaction between these
modules enables iterative enhancement, grounded theoretically in the Expectation-Maximization (EM) framework.
Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach, showcasing its effectiveness in learning separable representations for FGVR.
The source code is available at: https://github.
com/BeCarefulOfYournaoke/BuCSFR.

Figure 1. (a) Learning fine-grained representations, focusing on
local alignment but overlooking inter-fine-grained-class separability. (b) Learning separable fine-grained representations, focusing
on both alignment and separability.

example is biodiversity recognition [28, 30], where distinguishing species within a genus is essential (e.g., differentiating between the species Tabby and American Short
within the genus Cat). However, the prohibitive costs of
fine-grained annotations hinder biologists from conducting
large-scale labeling of specific biological populations. In
contrast, coarse labels (e.g., meta-categories of species) are
much easier to obtain. Consequently, many studies [4, 38]
have attempted to achieve FGVR using only coarse labels.
Specifically, models are trained solely with coarse labels
(e.g., Cat) to learn fine-grained representations that capture discriminative semantics, enabling the differentiation
of fine-grained classes (e.g., Tabby and American short).
Therefore, the ideal learned representations should exhibit two properties: (1) minimized intra-fine-grained-class
variation, and (2) maximized inter-fine-grained-class separability. Several prior studies [4, 7, 27, 38] have introduced
contrastive learning to focus on the local alignment of representations [31] (i.e., semantically similar samples have similar features, as shown in Fig. 1(a)). This alignment endows
the learned representations with the first property but over-

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual recognition (FGVR) [32, 35] remains a
fundamental challenge in computer vision with broad applications across multiple domains, yet its performance heavily relies on precise fine-grained annotations. A notable
* Corresponding Author

870

