This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PacGDC: Label-Efficient Generalizable Depth Completion
with Projection Ambiguity and Consistency
†

†

Haotian Wang1,2 , Aoran Xiao2 , Xiaoqin Zhang3 , Meng Yang1 , Shijian Lu2
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Zhejiang University of Technology

Figure 1. PacGDC generalizes effectively across unseen scenarios with a wide range of scene semantics/scales and depth sparsity/patterns.
The data include real ones from Ibims [20], VOID [58], and KITTI [11], as well as synthetic ones from Sintel [3]. The sparse depths are
captured from 0.1%/10% uniform sampling, 16 line vehicle LiDAR, and visual-inertial odometry (VIO) system with 1500 feature points.

Abstract

that supports generalization. To further diversify geometries, we incorporate interpolation and relocation strategies, as well as unlabeled images, extending the data coverage beyond the individual use of foundation models. Extensive experiments show that PacGDC achieves remarkable
generalizability across multiple benchmarks, excelling in
diverse scene semantics/scales and depth sparsity/patterns
under both zero-shot and few-shot settings. Code: https:
//github.com/Wang-xjtu/PacGDC.

Generalizable depth completion enables the acquisition of
dense metric depth maps for unseen environments, offering robust perception capabilities for various downstream
tasks. However, training such models typically requires
large-scale datasets with metric depth labels, which are often labor-intensive to collect. This paper presents PacGDC,
a label-efficient technique that enhances data diversity with
minimal annotation effort for generalizable depth completion. PacGDC builds on novel insights into inherent ambiguities and consistencies in object shapes and positions
during 2D-to-3D projection, allowing the synthesis of numerous pseudo geometries for the same visual scene. This
process greatly broadens available geometries by manipulating scene scales of the corresponding depth maps. To
leverage this property, we propose a new data synthesis
pipeline that uses multiple depth foundation models as scale
manipulators. These models robustly provide pseudo depth
labels with varied scene scales, affecting both local objects
and global layouts, while ensuring projection consistency

1. Introduction
Depth completion aims to infer dense metric depth maps
from paired images and sparse depth measurements [7],
providing accurate spatial representations that can support
various downstream applications, such as robotics [4] and
autonomous driving [27]. Despite its notable advancements, most existing methods suffer from poor generalization toward various new domains [50]. Recently, generalizable depth completion resorts to domain-agnostic models that learn from source data but enable effective deployment across various unseen downstream environments

† Corresponding author.

7709

