This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVIP: Semantically Contextualized Visual Patches for Zero-Shot Learning
Zhi Chen1 * Zecheng Zhao2∗ Jingcai Guo3 Jingjing Li4 Zi Huang2
1
University of Southern Queensland 2 University of Queensland
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
uqzhichen@gmail.com, helen.huang@uq.edu.au
class-level semantic descriptors, such as attributes [21]
serve as soft labels. For instance, each dimension of an
attribute vector may indicate the presence or absence of a
concept like the color pink. At test time, the predicted attribute vector is compared against the attributes of unseen
classes, and the most similar class is selected.
Semantic misalignment is a fundamental challenge in
ZSL [1, 4, 9, 27, 30, 46]. Raw images often contain
semantic-unrelated details that are not described by attributes. For example, background clutter, lighting variations, or surrounding objects can introduce misleading patterns. As a result, the model may latch onto unimportant
features instead of the relevant semantic cues. Since these
extraneous details are not explicitly annotated in attribute
vectors, they disrupt the visual-semantic alignment by diluting key attributes such as color and shape. This makes it
harder for the model to recognize unseen classes.
As shown in Figure 1(a), prior work attempted to address this issue by refining or disentangling features, so
that semantic-consistent information is preserved while
semantic-unrelated information is suppressed [1, 9, 27, 30].
Thus, the preserved semantic-consistent visual features can
enhance visual-semantic alignment. Although these post
hoc refinements help, they cannot fully prevent extraneous
information from seeping into the learned representations.
In parallel, transformer-based architectures [48] have
emerged as powerful backbones in vision tasks [26] by
modeling images as sequences of patches. In light of the
strong representation learning capability of Vision Transformers (ViTs) [19, 66], researchers in ZSL community are
turning into designing ViT-based methods [4, 17, 32]. The
patch modelling behavior enables identifying the semanticunrelated patches. As in Figure 1(b), ZSLViT [4] progressively prunes visual tokens that do not map to semantics
in the model space. However, research has shown that semantic features can become diluted in deeper layers of ViTs
[40], making it easier for semantic-unrelated information to
persist and potentially contaminate the final visual features.
As above, these methods either remove the semantic-

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize unseen
classes without labeled training examples by leveraging
class-level semantic descriptors such as attributes. A fundamental challenge in ZSL is semantic misalignment, where
semantic-unrelated information involved in visual features
introduce ambiguity to visual-semantic interaction. Unlike existing methods that suppress semantic-unrelated information post hoc either in the feature space or the
model space, we propose addressing this issue at the input
stage, preventing semantic-unrelated patches from propagating through the network. To this end, we introduce
Semantically contextualized VIsual Patches (SVIP) for
ZSL, a transformer-based framework designed to enhance
visual-semantic alignment. Specifically, we propose a selfsupervised patch selection mechanism that preemptively
learns to identify semantic-unrelated patches in the input
space. This is trained with the supervision from aggregated
attention scores across all transformer layers, which estimate each patch’s semantic score. As removing semanticunrelated patches from the input sequence may disrupt object structure, we replace them with learnable patch embeddings. With initialization from word embeddings, we
can ensure they remain semantically meaningful throughout
feature extraction. Extensive experiments on ZSL benchmarks demonstrate that SVIP achieves state-of-the-art performance results while providing more interpretable and semantically rich feature representations. Code is available
at https://github.com/uqzhichen/SVIP.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) [28, 37, 58] is a fundamental
learning paradigm in computer vision that enables models
to recognize classes unseen during training. ZSL methods
typically recast classification as a regression task, where
* Equal contribution. Work done while at University of Queensland.

3346

