This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PINO: Person-Interaction Noise Optimization for Long-Duration and
Customizable Motion Generation of Arbitrary-Sized Groups
Sakuya Ota1 *
1

Qing Yu2 *†

Institute of Science Tokyo

Kent Fujiwara2
2

LY Corporation

Satoshi Ikehata3
3

Ikuro Sato1

National Institute of Informatics (NII)

https://sinc865.github.io/pino/

Figure 1. Person-Interaction Noise Optimization (PINO) leverages pre-trained two-person interaction diffusion models as motion priors
to generate motions of arbitrary-sized groups with the combination of spatiotemporal penalty, prompt switching between pairs, and motion
extension. The first example employs penalties to guide humans into the form “CV”, the second generates a pair posing for a photograph,
then switches the prompt to generate the cameraman, and the third generates an alternating handshake sequence between three individuals
by extending motions while switching the prompt between the two pairs.

Abstract
Generating realistic group interactions involving multiple
characters remains challenging due to increasing complexity as group size expands. While existing conditional diffusion models incrementally generate motions by conditioning on previously generated characters, they rely on single shared prompts, limiting nuanced control and leading to overly simplified interactions. In this paper, we introduce Person-Interaction Noise Optimization (PINO), a
novel, training-free framework designed for generating realistic and customizable interactions among groups of arbitrary size. PINO decomposes complex group interactions into semantically relevant pairwise interactions, and
leverages pretrained two-person interaction diffusion mod-

els to incrementally compose group interactions. To ensure physical plausibility and avoid common artifacts such
as overlapping or penetration between characters, PINO
employs physics-based penalties during noise optimization.
This approach allows precise user control over character
orientation, speed, and spatial relationships without additional training. Comprehensive evaluations demonstrate
that PINO generates visually realistic, physically coherent, and adaptable multi-person interactions suitable for diverse animation, gaming, and robotics applications.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author, email: yu.qing@lycorp.co.jp

Generating realistic interactions among multiple characters
is essential in animation, gaming, and robotics, where natural, coordinated behaviors enhance immersion and storytelling. While significant progress has been made in gen-

10676

