This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ForeSight: Multi-View Streaming
Joint Object Detection and Trajectory Forecasting
Sandro Papais

Letian Wang
Brian Cheong
University of Toronto

Steven L. Waslander

{sandro.papais, letian.wang, brian.cheong, steven.waslander}@robotics.utias.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We introduce ForeSight, a novel joint detection and forecasting framework for vision-based 3D perception in autonomous vehicles. Traditional approaches treat detection and forecasting as separate sequential tasks, limiting
their ability to leverage temporal cues. ForeSight addresses
this limitation with a multi-task streaming and bidirectional
learning approach, allowing detection and forecasting to
share query memory and propagate information seamlessly.
The forecast-aware detection transformer enhances spatial reasoning by integrating trajectory predictions from
a multiple hypothesis forecast memory queue, while the
streaming forecast transformer improves temporal consistency using past forecasts and refined detections. Unlike
tracking-based methods, ForeSight eliminates the need for
explicit object association, reducing error propagation with
a tracking-free model that efficiently scales across multiframe sequences. Experiments on the nuScenes dataset
show that ForeSight achieves state-of-the-art performance,
achieving an EPA of 54.9%, surpassing previous methods
by 9.3%, while also attaining the best mAP and minADE
among multi-view detection and forecasting models.1

gories: dense-feature and sparse-query learning. Densefeature methods [19, 24, 29, 31, 44] align historic bird’seye-view (BEV) features to the current frame for fusion.
Sparse-query methods [35–37, 60] represent objects as
sparse queries and use attention [54] to selectively fuse temporal features, achieving strong efficiency and performance.
However, they often overlook the multi-modal motion of
surrounding agents, limiting their ability to fully exploit
temporal information. Given advances in motion forecasting [53, 57, 68, 69], neglecting to fully incorporate future
movement in detection discards valuable cues.
Traditional motion forecasting models rely on curated
ground-truth trajectories, assuming perfect detection and
tracking. However, this assumption does not hold in realworld, online perception scenarios, leading to degraded performance [66]. Meanwhile, emerging end-to-end methods integrating perception and forecasting architectures into
joint training show promise in the presence of perception
errors [13, 18]. These methods rely on tracking to bridge
the gap between forecasting and perception. However, they
trade off detection accuracy for tracking performance and
introduce errors from incorrect trajectories association, bottlenecking learning. Moreover, these forecasting methods
recompute trajectories at each timestep, making them computationally inefficient. By integrating forecasting with
temporal detection through a streaming memory queue,
ForeSight enhances computational efficiency and ensures
flexible propagation of historical context.
Our key insight is to re-think the traditional autonomy
stack, where motion forecasting is typically used for planning and then discarded. Instead, we propose an integrated
system where motion forecasts are fed back into both detection and forecasting via a joint memory queue. Therefore,
we introduce ForeSight, a novel framework that jointly optimizes detection and forecasting through unified process
for query initialization, attention, and propagation. Experiments show that bidirectional query flow enhances both
tasks, achieving state-of-the-art end-to-end forecasting performance. ForeSight uses a unified transformer architecture for temporal detection and track-free forecasting with a

1. Introduction
Perception systems in autonomous vehicles (AVs) are critical for understanding the dynamic driving environment.
Vision-based 3D detection has gained popularity due to
its low deployment cost and ability to interpret visual elements. Despite this progress, vision-based systems struggle
in complex driving scenarios, particularly with occluded or
partially visible objects which can pose critical safety risks.
To address these challenges, temporal learning methods that
leverage multi-frame histories have emerged as a solution,
improving detection by aggregating past observations and
motion cues.
Existing temporal learning methods fall into two cate1 Project page: https://foresight-iccv.github.io

25474

