This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Holistic to Localized: Local Enhanced Adapters for Efficient Visual
Instruction Fine-Tuning
Pengkun Jiao1 , Bin Zhu3 , Jingjing Chen2 *, Chong-Wah Ngo3 , and Yu-Gang Jiang2
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, China
2
Institute of Trustworthy Embodied Al, Fudan University, China
3
Singapore Management University

1

pkjiao23@m.fudan.edu.cn
{binzhu,cwngo}@smu.edu.sg, {jingjingchen,ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Holistic to localized vision perception
Holistic View

Efficient Visual Instruction Fine-Tuning (EVIT) seeks to
adapt Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to
downstream tasks with minimal computational overhead.
However, as task diversity and complexity increase, EVIT
faces significant challenges in resolving data conflicts. To
address this limitation, we propose the Dual Low-Rank
Adaptation (Dual-LoRA), a holistic-to-local framework that
enhances the adapter’s capacity to address data conflict
through dual structural optimization. Specifically, we utilize two subspaces: a skill space for stable, holistic knowledge retention, and a rank-rectified task space that locally
activates the holistic knowledge. Additionally, we introduce Visual Cue Enhancement (VCE), a multi-level local
feature aggregation module designed to enrich the visionlanguage projection with local details. Our approach is
both memory- and time-efficient, requiring only 1.16→ the
inference time of the standard LoRA method (with injection into the query and value projection layers), and just
73% of the inference time of a 4-expert LoRA-MoE. Extensive experiments on various downstream tasks and general
MLLM benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our proposed methods. Our project page is available at https:
//github.com/pengkun-jiao/Dual-LoRA.

The town is situated below the night
sky, creating a sense of depth and
perspective in the painting.

Localized View

“ Please describe this
image”

The artist used the technique of
impasto, where paint is applied in thick
layers, to add texture and a sense of
movement to the scene.

(b) Holistic to localized knowledge adaption
Instruction condition

for task 1
for task 2
for task 3

Holistic Domain Knowledge

Locally Activated Knowledge

Figure 1. The motivation behind the proposed approach. (a) Humans perceive visual signals from both holistic and localized perspectives, considering the overall image structure and local details. (b) Humans acquire holistic knowledge, with specific parts
(localized) applied to particular tasks. For example, one might
first acquire holistic knowledge of cooking and then apply specific
knowledge, e.g. ingredient recognition, to source ingredients.

vision projector to connect the vision encoder and LLM.
Vision Instruction Tuning [20] enables the practical application of MLLMs in downstream tasks. However, full
fine-tuning MLLMs can be highly resource-intensive. Efficient Vision Instruction Tuning (EVIT) addresses this challenge by tuning only the vision feature projector while integrating a small number of additional trainable parameters (adapters) into the LLM [8]. For example, Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA) [11] leverages low-rank approximations to replace full fine-tuning of LMM, significantly reducing computational overhead.
However, existing EVIT methods face a critical limita-

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
demonstrated impressive performances across a wide range
of tasks, showcasing versatility and effectiveness in diverse
applications [14–16]. Existing MLLMs [3, 20, 21] typically integrate a pretrained Large Language Models (LLM)
[6, 32] with a pretrained vision encoder [22, 28], using a
* Corresponding author

2728

