This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Supercharging Floorplan Localization with Semantic Rays
Yuval Grader
Tel Aviv University

Hadar Averbuch-Elor
Cornell University

https://tau-vailab.github.io/SemRayLoc/

xxxxx+Semantics (w/ Ours)p

Raw Floorplan (w/ [7])

Floorplans provide a compact representation of the
building’s structure, revealing not only layout information but also detailed semantics such as the locations
of windows and doors. However, contemporary floorplan localization techniques mostly focus on matching
depth-based structural cues, ignoring the rich semantics communicated within floorplans. In this work, we
introduce a semantic-aware localization framework that
jointly estimates depth and semantic rays, consolidating
over both for predicting a structural-semantic probability volume. Our probability volume is constructed in a
coarse-to-fine manner: We first sample a small set of
rays to obtain an initial low-resolution probability volume. We then refine these probabilities by performing
a denser sampling only in high-probability regions and
process the refined values for predicting a 2D location
and orientation angle. We conduct an evaluation on two
standard floorplan localization benchmarks. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach substantially outperforms state-of-the-art methods, achieving significant
improvements in recall metrics compared to prior works.
Moreover, we show that our framework can easily incorporate additional metadata such as room labels, enabling additional gains in both accuracy and efficiency.

Image

Abstract

Input & GT

Output Localization

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Floorplan localization using a raw binary floorplan (middle row) often yields ambiguous predictions. In this
work, we utilize a richer, yet readily available, representation:
a floorplan enhanced with semantic labels (bottom row). We
present an approach that supercharges floorplan localization
with semantic rays, enabling for resolving localization ambiguities, as illustrated by the comparison on the right.

Camera localization is a longstanding problem in computer vision, with significant applications in 3D reconstruction [19, 25–28], augmented reality [11, 16, 23,
29, 31], and navigation [20, 24, 30, 32, 36]. Localization within indoor environments is especially challenging due to the absence of reliable GPS signals and the
complexity of reasoning across multiple floors and layers. Hence, to bypass complicated 3D model-based localization techniques, prior work [7, 8, 12, 13, 15, 35]
has explored the problem of localizing camera observations within a provided 2D floorplan map by matching

depth-based structural cues.
However, while floorplans offer a compact and
lightweight scene representation, structural cues within
floorplans often correlate with multiple candidate locations, particularly for environments with repetitive or
symmetric layouts. Consider the example in Figure 1.
Can you localize the input image within the floorplan?
Provided with just a raw (walls only) floorplan, room
corners are indistinguishable and hence localization is

27116

