This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S CI V ID: Cross-Domain Evaluation of Video Models in Scientific Applications
Yana Hasson Pauline Luc Liliane Momeni Maks Ovsjanikov Guillaume Le Moing
Alina Kuznetsova Ira Ktena Jennifer J. Sun Skanda Koppula Dilara Gokay
Joseph Heyward Etienne Pot Andrew Zisserman
Google DeepMind
Corresponding authors:

{yhasson,paulineluc}@google.com

Abstract
In recent years, there has been a proliferation of spatiotemporal foundation models in different scientific disciplines.
While promising, these models are often domain-specific
and are only assessed within the particular applications
for which they are designed. Given that many tasks can
be represented as video modeling problems, video foundation models (ViFMs) hold considerable promise as generalpurpose domain-agnostic approaches. However, it is not
known whether the knowledge acquired on large-scale but
potentially out-of-domain data can be effectively transferred across diverse scientific disciplines, and if a single,
pretrained ViFM can be competitive with domain-specific
baselines. To address this, we introduce S CI V ID, a comprehensive benchmark comprising five S CIentific V IDeo
tasks, across medical computer vision, animal behavior,
and weather forecasting. We adapt six leading ViFMs to
S CI V ID using simple trainable readout modules, establishing strong baselines and demonstrating the potential for effective transfer learning. Specifically, we show that stateof-the-art results can be obtained in several applications by
leveraging the general-purpose representations from ViFM
backbones. Furthermore, our results reveal the limitations
of existing ViFMs, and highlight opportunities for the development of generalizable models for high-impact scientific
applications. We release our code at https://github.
com/google-deepmind/scivid to facilitate further
research in the development of ViFMs.

1. Introduction
The past decade has seen substantial progress in scientific
applications through the use of computer vision and machine learning techniques [61]. This has led to novel insights in disciplines ranging from medical image analysis [23], animal behavior understanding [6], and climate
change modelling [49], among others. Despite these successes, this progress has been relatively slow, typically re-

quiring machine learning scientists and domain specialists
to work hand in hand, collect training data and design specialized models.
In parallel, the emergence of foundation models1 has
considerably democratized the use of machine learning
models across a myriad of applications, either through
prompting or by training lightweight modules. While
image encoders [44, 46] have proven valuable for processing medical imaging modalities such as X-rays and
MRIs [5, 72], the potential of recent video foundation models (ViFMs) [37] for diverse spatio-temporal modeling tasks
remains largely unexplored. Currently, the applications of
ViFMs in scientific disciplines typically rely on domainspecific training data [15, 50, 64] and, even when trained
more broadly, are only evaluated within a particular discipline [57]. As a result, it is unclear, first, to what extent
there might be information sharing across disciplines, and,
second, whether foundation models pretrained on large, but
possibly out-of-domain datasets, can provide a useful signal
for vastly different spatio-temporal applications.
To answer these questions, we build a common test bed
and study whether pretrained foundation models can be effectively repurposed for diverse scientific applications. We
introduce S CI V ID, an open-source benchmark suite featuring a broad range of domains, tasks and data regimes (see
Fig. 1 and Tab. 1). For each application in S CI V ID, we
perform a careful comparison between state-of-the-art taskspecific baselines and discipline-agnostic ViFMs. We study
the effect of using different ViFMs, pretraining strategies
and adaptation protocols following current best practices.
Remarkably, our study shows that ViFMs can attain stateof-the-art results in science-related tasks, even when pretrained on out-of-domain data and employing simple trainable readout modules. In addition to these positive findings,
we also observe that in several applications ViFMs have
modest performance, paving the way for future research.

21800

1 By foundation models, we refer to “models that are trained on broad
data and that can be adapted (e.g., finetuned) to a wide range of downstream tasks” [10].

