This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GWM: Towards Scalable Gaussian World Models for Robotic Manipulation
Guanxing Lu1,2,⋆ , Baoxiong Jia2,⋆,† , Puhao Li2,⋆ , Yixin Chen2
Ziwei Wang3 , Yansong Tang1,† , Siyuan Huang2,†
⋆
Equal contribution † Corresponding author
1
Tsinghua University, 2 State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
gaussian-world-model.github.io

Current RGB Image(s)

Future Rollouts
with 3D GS
Lifting

Gaussian
World
Model

Human Policy
Policy Network

Conditioning

Random Policy

Online Model-based RL

Offline Imitation Learning

GWM
Demo.
Buffer

(𝒔𝒕 , 𝒂𝒕 )

𝓑

GWM
Enc.

Rollout
Buffer

Policy
Network

𝝅𝜽

(𝒔𝒕 , 𝒂𝒕 ,
𝒔𝒕+𝟏 , 𝒓𝒕 )

Imagination

Interaction

Action-conditioned
(3D) Video Prediction

𝝅𝜽
GWM

𝓑
Model-free RL

Environ.

Policy
Network

Value
Network

𝒗𝜽

RGB
Image

Future GS

Action Trajectory {𝑎𝑡 }

Figure 1. Gaussian World Model (GWM) is a novel branch of world model that predicts dynamic future states and enables robotic
manipulation based on the 3D Gaussian Splatting representation. It facilitates action-conditioned 3D video prediction, enhances visual
representation learning for imitation learning, and serves as a robust neural simulator for model-based reinforcement learning.

Abstract

Gaussian primitives under the effect of robot actions. At its
core is a latent Diffusion Transformer (DiT) combined with
a 3D variational autoencoder, enabling fine-grained scenelevel future state reconstruction with Gaussian Splatting.
GWM can not only enhance the visual representation for
imitation learning agent by self-supervised future prediction training, but can serve as a neural simulator that supports model-based reinforcement learning. Both simulated
and real-world experiments depict that GWM can precisely
predict future scenes conditioned on diverse robot actions,
and can be further utilized to train policies that outperform
the state-of-the-art by impressive margins, showcasing the

Training robot policies within a learned world model
is trending due to the inefficiency of real-world interactions. The established image-based world models and policies have shown prior success, but lack robust geometric
information that requires consistent spatial and physical
understanding of the three-dimensional world, even pretrained on internet-scale video sources. To this end, we
propose a novel branch of world model named Gaussian
World Model (GWM) for robotic manipulation, which reconstructs the future state by inferring the propagation of

9263

