This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViLU: Learning Vision-Language Uncertainties for Failure Prediction
Marc Lafon?,1
Clément Rambour1,2
1

Yannis Karmim?,1
Julio Silva-Rodrı́guez3
Paul Couairon2
Raphaël Fournier-Sniehotta1,2
Ismail Ben Ayed3
Jose Dolz3
2
Nicolas Thome

Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, CEDRIC, F-75141 Paris, France
2
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, F-75005 Paris, France
3
ETS Montreal, Canada

Abstract
Reliable Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) and failure
prediction remain open challenges for Vision-Language
Models (VLMs). We introduce ViLU, a new VisionLanguage Uncertainty quantification framework that contextualizes uncertainty estimates by leveraging all taskrelevant textual representations.
ViLU constructs an
uncertainty-aware multi-modal representation by integrating the visual embedding, the predicted textual embedding,
and an image-conditioned textual representation via crossattention. Unlike traditional UQ methods based on loss prediction, ViLU trains an uncertainty predictor as a binary
classifier to distinguish correct from incorrect predictions
using a weighted binary cross-entropy loss, making it lossagnostic. In particular, our proposed approach is wellsuited for post-hoc settings, where only vision and text embeddings are available without direct access to the model
itself. Extensive experiments on diverse datasets show the
significant gains of our method compared to state-of-theart failure prediction methods. We apply our method to
standard classification datasets, such as ImageNet-1k, as
well as large-scale image-caption datasets like CC12M and
LAION-400M. Ablation studies highlight the critical role of
our architecture and training in achieving effective uncertainty quantification. Our code is publicly available and
can be found here: ViLU Repository.

were not seen during training.
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is a fundamental challenge in deep learning and involves estimating the confidence of a model’s predictions. This paper addresses the
problem of reliable UQ for VLMs to detect their potential failures in downstream tasks. Reliable UQ is crucial
in safety-critical domains and offers significant opportunities for various applications involving VLMs, such as failure prediction [17], out-of-distribution detection [46], active learning [47], and reinforcement learning [12], among
others.
The vanilla method for UQ with VLMs is the Maximum Concept Matching (MCM) score [30], a direct extension of Maximum Class Probability (MCP) [17] for classification. Although MCM is a strong baseline, it suffers
from fundamental drawbacks: by design, it assigns high
confidence to failures and struggles with fine-grained concepts. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the VLM misclassifies the
“Eskimo dog” image as a “Siberian husky”, and
the high MCM score prevents the detection of the error.
In classification, learning-based methods have also been
explored for failure prediction. In particular, a few deep
learning models designed to predict the classifier’s loss
and dedicated to learning visual uncertainties (LVU) have
been proposed [8, 19, 47]. However, when applied to
VLMs, these methods do not model the relationships between downstream concepts, intrinsically limiting their failure prediction performance. The example in Fig. 1 still receives a high confidence score with LVU methods. Furthermore, although recent methods have proposed specific
calibration techniques for VLMs [31, 34, 42, 44, 48], fewer
works have focused on UQ solutions for VLMs in general,
with the exception of the recent [2].
This paper introduces ViLU, a post-hoc framework
for learning Vision-Language Uncertainties and detecting
VLMs’ failure. The core idea in ViLU is to define a confidence score depending both on the visual input but also
on the set of concepts that defines the downstream task,

1. Introduction
Vision Language Models (VLMs) [9, 25, 27, 36, 50] are
highly popular foundation models pre-trained on large-scale
image-text datasets, e.g., LAION [37]. They possess the
appealing capability of performing zero-shot image classification, meaning they can classify samples into classes that
? Equal contribution

Corresponding author: marc.lafon@lecnam.net

17807

