This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dataset Distillation via Vision-Language Category Prototype
Yawen Zou1 , Guang Li2 , Duo Su3 , Zi Wang4 , Jun Yu4 , Chao Zhang1
1
University of Toyama, 2 Hokkaido University, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 Niigata University
d24c8004@ems.u-toyama.ac.jp, guang@lmd.ist.hokudai.ac.jp, suduo@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
f24l501h@mail.cc.niigata-u.ac.jp, yujun@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp, zhang@eng.u-toyama.ac.jp

Original

Abstract

SRe2L

Dataset distillation (DD) condenses large datasets into
compact yet informative substitutes, preserving performance comparable to the original dataset while reducing
storage, transmission costs, and computational consumption. However, previous DD methods mainly focus on distilling information from images, often overlooking the semantic information inherent in the data. The disregard for
context hinders the model’s generalization ability, particularly in tasks involving complex datasets, which may result
in illogical outputs or the omission of critical objects. In
this study, we integrate vision-language methods into DD
by introducing text prototypes to distill language information and collaboratively synthesize data with image prototypes, thereby enhancing dataset distillation performance.
Notably, the text prototypes utilized in this study are derived
from descriptive text information generated by an opensource vision-language model. This framework demonstrates broad applicability across datasets without preexisting text descriptions, expanding the potential of dataset
distillation beyond traditional image-based approaches.
Compared to other methods, the proposed approach generates logically coherent images containing target objects, achieving state-of-the-art validation performance and
demonstrating robust generalization. Source code and
generated data are available in https : / / github .
com/zou-yawen/Dataset-Distillation-viaVision-Language-Category-Prototype/.

GR (w/o text) GR (w/ text)

Figure 1. Visualization results of SRe2 L, GR (w/o text), and GR
(w/ text). GR (w/o or w/ text) denotes the generative model outputs
without and with text descriptions. Notably, GR (w/ text) captures
rich details of target objects while preserving background diversity, leading to more comprehensive and visually coherent images.

that approximate the performance of downstream tasks conducted on the original dataset [8, 12, 30, 39]. Moreover, the
surrogate dataset helps alleviate concerns about privacy and
copyright issues [2, 7, 16].
Dataset distillation was first introduced by Wang et al.
[39] and the follow-up studies have made significant advancements in recent years [9, 17, 32, 44, 46, 48]. The
earliest methods primarily include meta-learning based and
matching based methods. In meta-learning methods, the
distilled data are optimized as hyperparameters within a
bi-level optimization framework [6, 24, 25, 27, 33]. And
the matching based methods distill images via parameter matching [3, 12, 15, 23, 43] and distribution matching
[21, 37, 45–47].
However, these methods are compute-intensive and require substantial runtime due to iterative optimization,
which ensures their representativeness. Recently, several
studies utilize generative models [9, 26, 32, 38] for DD to

1. Introduction
The rapid development of deep learning, driven by powerful computational resources and extensive datasets, has
posed substantial challenges for researchers due to the increasing demands for computational power and storage capacity [5, 14, 22]. Confronted with these issues, dataset distillation (DD) has emerged as a promising approach to extracting and distilling information from large datasets. DD
synthesizes smaller datasets with high information density

2941

