This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LDIP: Long Distance Information Propagation for Video Super-Resolution
Michael Bernasconi1,2 Abdelaziz Djelouah2 Yang Zhang2 Markus Gross1,2 Christopher Schroers2
1

2

ETH ZÈurich

michael.bernasconi@inf.ethz.ch

BasicVSR++

DisneyResearch|Studios

abdelaziz.djelouah@disney.com

RVRT

IART

Fixed Scaling (x4)

Ours

ST-AVSR

Ours

Arbitrary Scaling (x5.5)

Figure 1. Visual comparison of our method against SOTA fixed scaling and arbitrary scaling Video Super-Resolution (VSR) methods.
Thanks to the long range temporal propagation, our model extracts more information from the input video and achieves significantly higher
quality output frames.

Abstract
Video super-resolution (VSR) methods typically exploit information across multiple frames to achieve high quality
upscaling, with recent approaches demonstrating impressive performance. Nevertheless, challenges remain, particularly in effectively leveraging information over long distances. To address this limitation in VSR, we propose a
strategy for long distance information propagation with a
flexible fusion module that can optionally also assimilate information from additional high resolution reference images.
We design our overall approach such that it can leverage
existing pre-trained VSR backbones and adapt the feature
upscaling module to support arbitrary scaling factors. Our
experiments demonstrate that we can achieve state-of-theart results on perceptual metrics and deliver more visually
pleasing results compared to existing solutions.

which recent deep learning based methods employ to increase the quality: On the one hand by designing better and
larger model architectures, and on the other hand by utilizing more of the available information. Regarding the second point, consider single image super-resolution (SISR)
methods [12, 14, 28, 31, 33] . While they can be used to
upscale a video in a frame-by-frame manner, they will obviously ignore any temporal information in the sequence.
Therefore, methods specifically designed for video superresolution (VSR) [3, 4, 25, 26] that take temporal information into account achieve results with much higher quality.
Similarly, reference-based super-resolution (RefSR) methods [30] are able to take high quality reference images into
account to produce results well beyond the capability of
SISR methods.

1. Introduction

In this work we propose a novel VSR method with one
main strategy in mind ± utilizing all available information to
produce higher quality results in a wide variety of scenarios.
We identify three main areas where current state-of-the-art
VSR methods fall short and individually address them.

Upscaling low-resolution video content is a fundamental
task in computer vision that has been studied for several
decades. On a high level, there are two different strategies

First, is the propagation of information over long temporal distances. While techniques like second-order propagation [4] have been shown to greatly improve information

11558

