This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Activation Subspaces for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Barış Zöngür 1

Robin Hesse 1
1

TU Darmstadt

2

Stefan Roth 1,2

hessian.AI

Abstract
Far-OOD FPR (%, →)

MSP

To ensure the reliability of deep models in real-world applications, out-of-distribution (OOD) detection methods aim
to distinguish samples close to the training distribution (indistribution, ID) from those farther away (OOD). In this
work, we propose a novel OOD detection method that utilizes singular value decomposition of the weight matrix
of the classification head to decompose the model’s activations into decisive and insignificant components, which
contribute maximally, respectively minimally, to the final
classifier output. We find that the subspace of insignificant
components more effectively distinguishes ID from OOD
data than raw activations in regimes of large distribution
shifts (Far-OOD). This occurs because the classification objective leaves the insignificant subspace largely unaffected,
yielding features that are “untainted” by the target classification task. Conversely, in regimes of smaller distribution
shifts (Near-OOD), we find that activation shaping methods
profit from only considering the decisive subspace, as the
insignificant component can cause interference in the activation space. By combining two findings into a single approach, termed ActSub, we achieve state-of-the-art results
in various standard OOD benchmarks.1

40
Energy
GEN
ReAct
WeiPer
20

50

ViM

SCALE

Ours

ASH-S
55

60

65

70

75

Near-OOD FPR (%, →)

Figure 1. False positive rate (FPR) for OOD detection when OOD
inputs are close to (Near-OOD) and far from (Far-OOD) the ID
domain. Our approach outperforms established baselines, especially for more challenging Near-OOD examples.

functions can be based on model inherent information, such
as logits [20, 36, 64], distances [15, 31, 35, 52], or (shaped)
activations [11, 51, 57, 58].
In this work, we show that DNN activations can be decomposed into decisive directions/components, which contribute significantly to the classifier output, and insignificant directions/components, which have minimal effect
on the model’s output. Interestingly, activations still vary
strongly across the insignificant subspace, which affects
typical score functions for OOD detection. Based on this
observation, we derive two important implications for OOD
detection: First, while decisive directions are affected by
the model’s classification objective – yielding activations
that specifically support the separation of the target classes
(rather than ID from OOD data) – this effect is less pronounced for insignificant directions that are mostly ignored
during training. As a result, the insignificant activation subspace is akin to powerful features from a random neural network [4, 10, 53], which allow to solve other classification
tasks, such as OOD detection. While a similar proposition
was already made in [8], we extend these results by utilizing a larger set of insignificant directions. Second, directions from the insignificant subspace can interfere with the
decisive subspace, causing different activations to produce
the same output. This leads to them being handled inconsistently by activation shaping methods, which is undesirable.

1. Introduction
Improvements in the accuracy of deep neural networks
(DNNs) continue to drive their deployment in a broad range
of real-world settings. Consequently, ensuring the reliability of these models across a variety of conditions is becoming increasingly crucial. Since realistic applications can violate the closed-world assumption of typical DNNs, an active area of research is devoted to the development of outof-distribution (OOD) detection methods [60]. OOD detection is concerned with distinguishing OOD inputs, deviating from any of the predefined class distributions, from
in-distribution (ID) inputs that belong to the training distribution [17]. Methods for OOD detection usually utilize
score functions [33, 36, 37] to output a single scalar for each
input, indicating if that input is OOD or ID. These score
1 The code is available at https://github.com/visinf/actsub/.

3509

