This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FEVER-OOD: Free Energy Vulnerability Elimination for Robust
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Brian K.S. Isaac-Medina1 Mauricio Che2 Yona Faline A. Gaus1 Samet Akcay3 Toby P. Breckon1
1
Durham University, Durham, UK 2 University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 3 Intel
{brian.k.isaac-medina, yona.f.binti-abd-gaus, toby.breckon}@durham.ac.uk
mauricio.adrian.che.moguel@univie.ac.at

samet.akcay@intel.com

Free Energy-based OOD (VOS)

Abstract
Modern machine learning models, that excel on computer
vision tasks such as classification and object detection,
are often overconfident in their predictions for Out-ofDistribution (OOD) examples, resulting in unpredictable
behaviour for open-set environments. Recent works have
demonstrated that the free energy score is an effective measure of uncertainty for OOD detection given its close relationship to the data distribution. However, despite that free
energy-based methods representing a significant empirical
advance in OOD detection, our theoretical analysis reveals
previously unexplored and inherent vulnerabilities within
the free energy score formulation such that in-distribution
and OOD instances can have distinct feature representations yet identical free energy scores. This phenomenon occurs when the vector representing the feature space difference between the in-distribution and OOD sample belongs
to the null space of the last layer of a neural-based classifier. To mitigate these issues, we explore lower-dimensional
feature spaces to reduce the null space footprint and introduce novel regularisation to maximize the least singular value of the final linear layer, hence enhancing intersample free energy separation. We refer to these techniques
as Free Energy Vulnerability Elimination for Robust Outof-Distribution Detection (FEVER-OOD). Extensive experimentation shows that FEVER-OOD improves OOD detection in CIFAR-10 with 28.22% FPR95 and 94.78 AUROC vs 33.66% FPR95 and 92.15 AUROC of the baseline
model, CIFAR-100 with 42.77% FPR95 and 89.98 AUROC
vs 50.96% FPR95 and 88.06 AUROC of the baseline model,
and achieves state of the art OOD detection in Imagenet100, with average OOD FPR95 of 36.50% and an AUROC
of 92.74 when used with the Dream-OOD model, compared
with a 39.33% and 91.84 AUROC without FEVER-OOD.

FEVER-OOD (VOS)

Figure 1. FEVER-OOD improves baseline Free Energy-based
OOD detection methods, where baseline methods predict OOD
classes as in-distribution (left, blue), while FEVER-OOD classifies them as OOD (right, green).

OOD is essential in developing deployable machine learning systems, to ensure valid inference only on data drawn
from same distribution used in training [24, 36, 44], realworld deployments often involve scenarios where models
encounter unseen OOD classes that could otherwise undermine decision stability and hence wider system robustness.
Methods such as deep ensembles [23], ODIN [27],
Mahalanobis distance-based detection [25], and generalized ODIN [16] all utilize softmax() to differentiate indistribution from OOD. Whilst intuitive, such approaches
often struggle as deep neural networks commonly yield
overly high softmax() scores, even for inputs far from
the training data distribution [31]. Given OOD and indistribution samples should have significant spatial separation in any given feature space, Liu et al. [29] developed an
alternative scoring function to effectively measure the alignment of a given sample to an a priori learned distribution.
Denoted as the free energy scoring function, this formulation demonstrates superior OOD performance across both
classification [7–9] and detection tasks [6, 7, 18, 21].
Despite free energy-based methods representing a significant empirical advance in OOD detection, our theoretical
analysis reveals previously unexplored and inherent vulnerabilities within the free energy score formulation that could
impact their practical reliability. These vulnerabilities reveal that in-distribution and OOD instances can have distinct feature representations yet produce identical free en-

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (c.f. anomaly/outlier
detection), aims to identify abnormal samples that deviate significantly from a given data distribution. Whilst

4529

