This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-T1: Test-Time Scaling for Video Generation
Fangfu Liu1 ,* Hanyang Wang1 ,* Yimo Cai1 , Kaiyan Zhang1 , Xiaohang Zhan2 , Yueqi Duan1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Tencent
A cat wearing sunglasses and
working as a lifeguard at a pool.

A sheep and a cow.

A corgi is
playing drum kit.

A teddy bear is
swimming in the ocean.

A storm trooper
vacuuming the beach.

A Panda drinking coffee
in a cafe in Paris.

Figure 1. Video-T1: We present the generative effects and performance improvements of video generation under Test-Time Scaling (TTS)
settings. The videos generated with TTS are of higher quality and more consistent with the prompt than those generated without TTS.

Abstract
With the scale capability of increasing training data, model
size, and computational cost, video generation has achieved
impressive results in digital creation, enabling users to
express creativity across various domains. Recently, researchers in Large Language Models (LLMs) have expanded the scaling to test-time, which can significantly improve LLM performance by using more inference-time computation. Instead of scaling up video foundation models
through expensive training costs, we explore the power of
Test-Time Scaling (TTS) in video generation, aiming to answer the question: if a video generation model is allowed
to use non-trivial amount of inference-time compute, how
much can it improve generation quality given a challenging
text prompt. In this work, we reinterpret the test-time scal-

ing of video generation as a searching problem to sample
better trajectories from Gaussian noise space to the target
video distribution. Specifically, we build the search space
with test-time verifiers to provide feedback and heuristic algorithms to guide searching process. Given a text prompt,
we first explore an intuitive linear search strategy by increasing noise candidates at inference time. As full-step
denoising all frames simultaneously requires heavy testtime computation costs, we further design a more efficient
TTS method for video generation called Tree-of-Frames
(ToF) that adaptively expands and prunes video branches
in an autoregressive manner. Extensive experiments on textconditioned video generation benchmarks demonstrate that
increasing test-time compute consistently leads to significant improvements in the quality of videos. Project Page:
https://liuff19.github.io/Video-T1.

* Equal contribution. † The corresponding author.

18671

