This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NoiseController: Towards Consistent Multi-view Video Generation via
Noise Decomposition and Collaboration
Haotian Dong1,† , Xin Wang2,† , Di Lin1,† , Yipeng Wu1 , Qin Chen1 , Ruonan Liu3,
Kairui Yang1 , Ping Li2 , and Qing Guo4
1
Tianjin University 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Nankai University

Abstract
High-quality video generation is crucial for many fields,
including the film industry and autonomous driving. However, generating videos with spatiotemporal consistencies
remains challenging. Current methods typically utilize attention mechanisms or modify noise to achieve consistent
videos, neglecting global spatiotemporal information that
could help ensure spatial and temporal consistency during
video generation. In this paper, we propose the NoiseController, consisting of Multi-Level Noise Decomposition,
Multi-Frame Noise Collaboration, and Joint Denoising,
to enhance spatiotemporal consistencies in video generation. In multi-level noise decomposition, we first decompose initial noises into scene-level foreground/background
noises, capturing distinct motion properties to model multiview foreground/background variations. Furthermore, each
scene-level noise is further decomposed into individuallevel shared and residual components. The shared noise
preserves consistency, while the residual component maintains diversity. In multi-frame noise collaboration, we introduce an inter-view spatiotemporal collaboration matrix
and an intra-view impact collaboration matrix , which captures mutual cross-view effects and historical cross-frame
impacts to enhance video quality. The joint denoising
contains two parallel denoising U-Nets to remove each
scene-level noise, mutually enhancing video generation. We
evaluate our NoiseController on public datasets focusing
on video generation and downstream tasks, demonstrating its state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/TJU-IDVLab/NoiseController

15, 20, 29, 39, 41]. Multi-view video generation shows
its unique challenges compared to other video generation
tasks due to the additional need for cross-view consistency,
which necessitates a more comprehensive understanding of
the surrounding environment.
High consistency, controllability, and diversity are crucial for high-quality video generation. Achieving video
consistency involves establishing spatiotemporal correspondences across multiple views while modeling interactions between foreground objects and background environments. Controllability is the ability to generate expected content. Recently, cross-view attention [5, 13, 16,
34, 43, 48] and cross-frame attention mechanisms [11, 18,
31, 32, 34, 46] have been introduced in video diffusion models [1, 2, 26], making positive progress in generating diverse
and consistent visual content. However, they still struggle
to ensure accurate control and spatiotemporal consistency
in video generation, leaving these challenges unaddressed.
The initial noise sequences significantly affect the quality of the generated videos. Varying these sequences leads
to different videos, even using the same conditions. It indicates that attention mechanisms used in existing models
lack an adequate constraint of the initial noise, leading to inconsistent starting points for denoising. Recent works alleviate this problem via noise reinitialization strategies, such
as noise modification [10, 19, 24, 25] and single-level noise
decomposition [6, 22, 37, 47, 49]. Specifically, noise modification involves directly processing noises, such as editing
noise images and rescheduling noise sequences, to enhance
control over video generation. But directly modifying existing noise diminishes video diversity and brings artifacts,
ultimately reducing realism. Single-level noise decomposition mitigates this problem by separating noise into shared
and residual components. The shared noise can be selected
either from fixed reference frames or by referencing the previous frame. However, this method neglects global temporal information and multi-view foreground-background collaborations, limiting improvements in video quality (e.g.,
consistency, diversity, and controllability).

1. Introduction
Video generation has provided tremendous visual data with
realistic styles to train the computer vision models [8, 14,
† Haotian Dong, Xin Wang, and Di Lin are co-first authors.
Ruonan Liu is the corresponding author.

14443

