This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Uncertainty-aware Bounding Boxes
for Unsupervised 3D Object Detection

1

Ruiyang Zhang 1 Hu Zhang2 Zhedong Zheng1 *
FST and ICI, University of Macau, China 2 CSIRO Data61, Australia
{yc47931, zhedongzheng}@um.edu.mo, hu1.zhang@csiro.au

Abstract
Unsupervised 3D object detection aims to identify objects of
interest from unlabeled raw data, such as LiDAR points. Recent approaches usually adopt pseudo 3D bounding boxes
(3D bboxes) from clustering algorithm to initialize the
model training. However, pseudo bboxes inevitably contain
noise, and such inaccuracies accumulate to the final model,
compromising the performance. Therefore, in an attempt to
mitigate the negative impact of inaccurate pseudo bboxes,
we introduce a new uncertainty-aware framework for unsupervised 3D object detection, dubbed UA3D. In particular, our method consists of two phases: uncertainty estimation and uncertainty regularization. (1) In the uncertainty
estimation phase, we incorporate an extra auxiliary detection branch alongside the original primary detector. The
prediction disparity between the primary and auxiliary detectors could reflect fine-grained uncertainty at the box coordinate level. (2) Based on the assessed uncertainty, we
adaptively adjust the weight of every 3D bbox coordinate
via uncertainty regularization, refining the training process
on pseudo bboxes. For pseudo bbox coordinate with high
uncertainty, we assign a relatively low loss weight. Extensive experiments verify that UA3D is robust against the
noisy pseudo bboxes, yielding substantial improvements on
nuScenes and Lyft compared to existing approaches, with
increases of +3.9% APBEV and +1.5% AP3D on nuScenes,
and +2.3% APBEV and +1.8% AP3D on Lyft.

(a) Ground Truth Boxes

(c) Vanillia Baseline
Ground Truth

Pseudo Box

(b) Pseudo Boxes

(d) Ours (UA3D)
Baseline Predictions

Our Predictions

Figure 1. Our Motivation. Pseudo boxes generated by clusteringbased algorithms often contain noise (comparing (a) and (b)). Previous methods [50, 53, 54] directly utilize those noisy pseudo
boxes to train detection model, leading to suboptimal performance (see (c)). In contrast, we introduce uncertainty-aware
pseudo boxes by assigning coordinate-level uncertainty. High uncertainty is assigned to inaccurate coordinates, and during training, the weights of these uncertain coordinates are adaptively
reduced. This approach mitigates the negative impact of noisy
pseudo boxes, yielding robust detection (comparing (c) and (d)).

pervised 3D object detection works generally follow a selfpaced paradigm [54], i.e., estimating some initial pseudo
boxes and then iteratively updating both the pseudo label
sets and the model weights [50, 52]. However, we observe
that the initial pseudo boxes inevitably contain misalignments (see Fig. 1 (a, b)). The accuracy of the pseudo boxes
is significantly affected by the inherent characteristics of LiDAR point clouds, such as point sparsity, object proximity,
and unclear boundaries between foreground objects and the
background. In particular, large and nearby objects are usually easy to detect, and thus most estimated pseudo bboxes
are accurate. In contrast, most small, distant objects with
less sensor information pose inaccurate pseudo bboxes at
the beginning. Without rectifying such erroneous pseudo
bboxes, the wrong predictions can be accumulated, consistently compromising self-paced training (see Fig. 1 (c)).

1. Introduction
Unsupervised 3D object detection [20, 24, 41], given a
3D point cloud, is to identify objects of interest according to the point locations without relying on manual annotations [43, 50, 53, 54], largely saving extra costs and
time [25]. The applications span various domains, including autonomous driving [8, 32, 51, 58], traffic management [26, 34], and pedestrian safety [5, 6]. Existing unsu* Correspondence to zhedongzheng@um.edu.mo.

9230

