This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WIR3D: Visually-Informed and Geometry-Aware 3D Shape Abstraction
Richard Liu
University of Chicago

Daniel Fu
University of Chicago

Noah Tan
University of Chicago

guanzhi@uchicago.edu

danielfu@uchicago.edu

tntan@uchicago.edu

Itai Lang
University of Chicago

Rana Hanocka
University of Chicago

itailang@uchicago.edu

ranahanocka@uchicago.edu

Figure 1. WIR3D produces 3D shape abstractions in the form of 3D strokes. The abstractions retain the overall shape structure and capture
texture concepts (e.g. dragon scales and watermelon seeds) as well as key salient features (e.g. facial features).

Abstract
In this work we present WIR3D, a technique for abstracting 3D shapes through a sparse set of visually meaningful
curves in 3D. We optimize the parameters of Bézier curves
such that they faithfully represent both the geometry and
salient visual features (e.g. texture) of the shape from arbitrary viewpoints. We leverage the intermediate activations of a pre-trained foundation model (CLIP) to guide
our optimization process. We divide our optimization into
two phases: one for capturing the coarse geometry of the
shape, and the other for representing fine-grained features.
Our second phase supervision is spatially guided by a novel
localized keypoint loss. This spatial guidance enables user
control over abstracted features. We ensure fidelity to the
original surface through a neural SDF loss, which allows
the curves to be used as intuitive deformation handles. We
successfully apply our method for shape abstraction over a
broad dataset of shapes with varying complexity, geometric
structure, and texture, and demonstrate downstream applications for feature control and shape deformation.

A key challenge lies in finding a sparse set of curves that
best represents the shape’s visual features. We use this term
deliberately, to encompass both the geometry and texture
features which are salient to humans. This problem cannot be solved with surface analysis alone, which focuses on
low-level geometric contours. Our task is much broader, in
that we wish to capture high-level concepts, visually salient
geometry, and textures (e.g. Fig. 1).
Existing works have dealt with the problem of computing occluding contours for non-photorealistic rendering
[5, 29, 31]. Occluding contours relies entirely on surface
analysis, which is subject to the aforementioned limitations.
Furthermore, occluding contours is a 2D representation,
while we specifically seek a view-consistent, 3D representation. Occluding contours is view-inconsistent by construction, which results in the commonly observed flickering artifact when rendering dense views of a 3D shape [21].
Our objective is to abstract visual shape features into a
sparse set of 3D strokes. We optimize the parameters of a
set of Bézier curves as our stroke representation, where the
number of curves determines the level of abstraction.
We show a motivating example in Fig. 2, where we abstract a cylinder with a partial texture, and compare against
a naive solution of back-projecting 2D occluding contour
curves. The naive solution calculates a geometric contour
at each view (inset), backprojects the result to 3D curves,

1. Introduction
In this work, we explore whether it is possible to abstract a
3D shape into a sparse set of semantically-informed curves.

14810

