This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Material Recognition from Local Appearance
Matthew Beveridge and Shree K. Nayar
Columbia University
{beveridge,nayar}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

spilled on a wooden table, it may suffice to know that coffee
is a liquid. However, if it is spilled on a fabric, the cleaning
method used may be based on the liquid type (e.g., coffee v.
water). In other words, material recognition may need to be
done at different levels of detail based on the application [2].
Just as naturalists have taxonomized living organisms
into the tree of life, materials too conform to a hierarchy
(e.g., rubber Ă plastic Ă polymer). With this in mind, we
constructed a hierarchical taxonomy for materials (Sec. 3).
Our taxonomy includes materials that are commonly encountered in a variety of science and engineering disciplines, and its hierarchical structure is based on the physical properties of the materials. We have collected an inthe-wild image dataset, Matador, to populate the taxonomy
with images of materials taken at different scales (magnifications) and under different natural lighting conditions
(Sec. 4).1 Matador has „7,200 samples across 57 material
classes, where each sample includes the material’s local appearance (close-up texture), 3D structure (from lidar), and
the surrounding context (object-level information). Having 3D structure allows us to render arbitrarily many additional novel views for each sample, corresponding to different magnifications, orientations, and camera settings.
We use the taxonomy to develop a model for material
recognition by framing recognition as a hierarchical image
classification task. This is done by utilizing graph representation learning to predict the full taxonomic classification of a material from its local appearance (Sec. 5). We
show that structuring a graph neural network according to
our taxonomy improves classification accuracy on existing
benchmarks as well as our own Matador dataset, achieving state-of-the-art performance. The performance remains
high even when the taxonomy is sparsely populated with
images and when color information is excluded. A key advantage of our hierarchical approach is that, even when a
material is misclassified at the finest level, it can be correctly recognized at a higher level, still enabling useful inferences regarding its mechanical properties. Finally, we
demonstrate that our model generalizes to adverse, realworld imaging conditions, that rendering novel views for
training data can enhance this capability, and that the model
is effective at few-shot classification (Sec. 6).

We introduce a taxonomy of materials for hierarchical
recognition from local appearance. Our taxonomy is motivated by vision applications and is arranged according to
the physical traits of materials. We contribute a diverse, inthe-wild dataset with images and depth maps of the taxonomy classes. Utilizing the taxonomy and dataset, we present
a method for hierarchical material recognition based on
graph attention networks. Our model leverages the taxonomic proximity between classes and achieves state-of-theart performance. We demonstrate the model’s potential to
generalize to adverse, real-world imaging conditions, and
that novel views rendered using the depth maps can enhance
this capability. Finally, we show the model’s capacity to
rapidly learn new materials in a few-shot learning setting.

1. Importance of Material Recognition
Our ability as humans to recognize materials is critical to
every action we take. Using vision alone, we can infer that
a coffee cup will be hot to the touch if we see it is made
of paper. If it is instead perceived as a ceramic cup, we
can deduce it may be cooler and more rigid, but heavier to
lift. The ability to perceive materials from a distance thus
enables us to infer the consequences of an action before taking it. While this is second nature to us, humans, material
perception by machines remains an active field of research.
Material is a fundamental visual unit of a scene. Objects, defined by their form and function, convey what is in
a scene. In concert, materials inform how to interact with
the scene. Consider the case where our coffee cup is toppled and spills its contents. An autonomous agent must first
identify the spilled material as a liquid to then reason that a
towel is the proper cleanup tool, and not a broom. Furthermore, knowing a material enables estimation of mechanical
properties such as weight and elasticity. In the case of our
example, the agent must know that the towel is deformable
in order to handle it. In short, the ability to visually identify
materials is key to the development of autonomous systems
that can interact with the environment in more nuanced and
intelligent ways than possible today.
The term “material” can carry different meanings depending on the context. In our example, if the coffee is

1 Matador webpage: https://cave.cs.columbia.edu/repository/Matador.

8165

