This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MH-LVC: Multi-Hypothesis Temporal Prediction for Learned Conditional
Residual Video Coding
Huu-Tai Phung1 *

Zong-Lin Gao1 *
Yu-Hsiang Lin1
1

Yi-Chen Yao1
Alessandro Gnutti2

Kuan-Wei Ho1
Yi-Hsin Chen1
1
Wen-Hsiao Peng

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
2
University of Brescia, Italy

Abstract
This work, termed MH-LVC, presents a multi-hypothesis
temporal prediction scheme that employs long- and shortterm reference frames in a conditional residual video coding framework. Recent temporal context mining approaches
to conditional video coding offer superior coding performance. However, the need to store and access a large
amount of implicit contextual information extracted from
past decoded frames in decoding a video frame poses a
challenge due to excessive memory access. Our MH-LVC
overcomes this issue by storing multiple long- and shortterm reference frames but limiting the number of reference
frames used at a time for temporal prediction to two. Our
decoded frame buffer management allows the encoder to
flexibly utilize the long-term key frames to mitigate temporal cascading errors and the short-term reference frames to
minimize prediction errors. Moreover, our buffering scheme
enables the temporal prediction structure to be adapted
to individual input videos. While this flexibility is common in traditional video codecs, it has not been fully explored for learned video codecs. Extensive experiments
show that the proposed method outperforms VTM-17.0 under the low-delay B configuration in terms of PSNR-RGB
across commonly used test datasets, and performs comparably to the state-of-the-art learned codecs (e.g. DCVCFM) while requiring less decoded frame buffer and similar
decoding time. The source code of MH-LVC is available at
https://github.com/NYCU-MAPL/MHLVC.

(a) Temporal context mining with feature propagation

(b) MH-LVC

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of how temporal contextual information
is formulated for inter-frame coding. (a) The temporal context
mining learns latent features Ft−1 to be stored, propagated, and
updated temporally as Ft in coding the input frame xt . (b) Our
MH-LVC maintains multiple previously decoded frames as longand short-term reference frames, with only one short-term frame
x̂t−1 and one long-term key frame x̂key selected adaptively for
coding xt .

How to leverage the information from the past decoded
frames has been the central theme of video coding, learned
and traditional, with uni-directional temporal prediction.
Similar to traditional codecs, some early learned codecs [10,
* Equal contribution.

19649

18] explicitly store multiple decoded frames in the decoded
frame buffer. However, unlike traditional codecs, they fuse
these reference frames simultaneously with a network [18]
or a weighted trilinear warping [10] to construct a highquality temporal predictor. Many state-of-the-art learned
codecs [15–17, 26, 32] adopt a data-driven approach, using
a recurrent neural network-like mechanism to learn contextual information from past decoded frames. This method,
known as temporal context mining, requires a large buffer to
retain and propagate implicit information along the tempo-

