This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VACE: All-in-One Video Creation and Editing
Zeyinzi Jiang* Zhen Han∗

Chaojie Mao∗†

Jingfeng Zhang

Yulin Pan

Yu Liu

Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
Reference-to-video generation

Video-to-video editing

Pose Transfer (Pose Control)

Motion Transfer (Layout Control)

Structure Transfer (Depth Control)

Colorization (Gray Control)

Masked Video-to-video editing

Subject Recreation (Inpainting)

Subject Removal (Inpainting)

Canvas Extension (Outpainting)

Temporal Extension (First Clip)

Task Composition

Swap Anything (Subject Reference + Inpainting)

Animate Anything (Frame Reference + Pose Control)

Figure 1. Comprehensive capabilities of VACE. We present the outstanding generation results based on Wan2.1 (left) and LTX-Video
(right). For each task, the original input image or video (left), the context video (top left corner), and the generated frames are illustrated.

Abstract
Diffusion Transformer has demonstrated powerful capability and scalability in generating high-quality images and
videos. Further pursuing the unification of generation and
editing tasks has yielded significant progress in the domain
of image content creation. However, due to the intrinsic
demands for consistency across both temporal and spatial
dynamics, achieving a unified approach for video synthesis remains challenging. We introduce VACE, which enables users to perform Video tasks within an All-in-one
framework for Creation and Editing. These tasks include
reference-to-video generation, video-to-video editing, and
masked video-to-video editing. Specifically, we effectively

integrate the requirements of various tasks by organizing
video task inputs, such as editing, reference, and masking,
into a unified interface referred to as the Video Condition
Unit (VCU). Furthermore, by utilizing a Context Adapter
structure, we inject different task concepts into the model
using formalized representations of temporal and spatial
dimensions, allowing it to handle arbitrary video synthesis tasks flexibly. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the unified model of VACE achieves performance on par
with task-specific models across various subtasks. Simultaneously, it enables diverse applications through versatile task combinations. Project page: https://alivilab.github.io/VACE-Page/.

* Equal Contribution. † Project lead.

17191

