This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Forecasting Continuous Non-Conservative Dynamical Systems in SO(3)
Lennart Bastian1,2*
1

Mohammad Rashed1,2*

Technical University of Munich

2

Nassir Navab1,2

Munich Center of Machine Learning

3

Tolga Birdal3
Imperial College London

Detected Objects
Mustard Bottle

Missed Detections
Mustard Bottle

Missed Detection

Missed Detection

Missed Detection

Mustard Bottle

Mustard Bottle

Predictions

Modeling the rotation of moving objects is a fundamental task in computer vision, yet SO(3) extrapolation still
presents numerous challenges: (1) unknown quantities such
as the moment of inertia complicate dynamics, (2) the
presence of external forces and torques can lead to nonconservative kinematics, and (3) estimating evolving state
trajectories under sparse, noisy observations requires robustness. We propose modeling trajectories of noisy pose
estimates on the manifold of 3D rotations in a physically and
geometrically meaningful way by leveraging Neural Controlled Differential Equations guided with SO(3) SavitzkyGolay paths. Existing extrapolation methods often rely on
energy conservation or constant velocity assumptions, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios involving
non-conservative forces. In contrast, our approach is agnostic to energy and momentum conservation while being robust
to input noise, making it applicable to complex, non-inertial
systems. Our approach is easily integrated as a module in
existing pipelines and generalizes well to trajectories with
unknown physical parameters. By learning to approximate
object dynamics from noisy states during training, our model
attains robust extrapolation capabilities in simulation and
various real-world settings.

Ground Truth Observations

Abstract

"!
𝒙

…

"#
𝒙

Rotation Predictions from Pose Network

&#$%
𝒚

…

&#$&
𝒚

SG-nCDE Extrapolation

Figure 1. We propose Savitzky-Golay Neural Controlled Differential Equations (SG-nCDEs) for SO(3) forecasting, a fundamental
task at the intersection of tracking and object pose estimation. Realworld rotational observations can be occluded or otherwise errant.
Above, pose predictions (bottom left) are input into an SG-nCDE,
which robustly compensates for missed detections of a rotational
object trajectory (green predictions, bottom right).

1. Introduction

sion2 to chaos [1]. Unlike translational motion in Euclidean
space, rotational dynamics are governed by the moment of
inertia tensor - a quantity that couples the body’s mass distribution with its angular momentum in non-trivial ways. When
this inertial property is unknown, direct estimation becomes
an ill-posed inverse problem, particularly in the presence of
external torques and measurement noise [18, 41, 46]. This
problem is further complicated by the system’s sensitivity to
initial conditions - a characteristic of chaotic behavior that
emerges in many rotating rigid body systems [1].
This work proposes simultaneously addressing
SO(3) state estimation and learning unknown physical
parameters from noisy measurements. In contrast to
previous approaches that restrict themselves to conservative
systems, our method can predict rotational object trajectories
in various physical scenarios, such as dissipative forces, or
for objects under the influence of an external conservative
force field. This versatility opens the door to a variety of
applications, from improving the situational awareness of
autonomous systems [13, 41], compensating for missing
sensor measurements in tracking and localization [2, 14], to
dynamic grasping [40, 63].

Modeling the dynamics of rigid bodies in 3D is fundamental
to numerous domains such as tracking, robotic control, trajectory planning, and sensor fusion [9, 12, 14, 41]. While the
mathematical foundations of rigid body mechanics are well
understood, many modern applications require predicting rotational motion from noisy sensor data when key physical parameters are unknown. This presents significant challenges
at the intersection of data-driven and physical modeling.
The core difficulty stems from the inherent nonlinearity of
rotational motion in SO(3), where even simple rigid bodies
can exhibit complex behaviors ranging from regular preces∗ Equal Contribution

2 consider a spinning top balancing due to the gyroscopic effect.

B : lennart.bastian (at) tum.de

14845

