This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Autoregressive Denoising Score Matching is a Good Video Anomaly Detector
Hanwen Zhang*, Congqi Cao*†, Qinyi Lv, Lingtong Min, Yanning Zhang
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an Shaanxi, 710129, China
zhwwww@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, congqi.cao@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {lvqinyi, minlingtong, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video anomaly detection (VAD) is an important computer
vision problem. Thanks to the mode coverage capabilities of generative models, the likelihood-based paradigm is
catching growing interest, as it can model normal distribution and detect out-of-distribution anomalies. However,
these likelihood-based methods are blind to the anomalies
located in local modes near the learned distribution. To
handle these “unseen” anomalies, we dive into three gaps
uniquely existing in VAD regarding scene, motion and appearance. Specifically, we first build a noise-conditioned
score transformer for denoising score matching. Then, we
introduce a scene-dependent and motion-aware score function by embedding the scene condition of input sequences
into our model and assigning motion weights based on the
difference between key frames of input sequences. Next, to
solve the problem of blindness in principle, we integrate unaffected visual information via a novel autoregressive denoising score matching mechanism for inference. Through
autoregressively injecting intensifying Gaussian noise into
the denoised data and estimating the corresponding score
function, we compare the denoised data with the original
data to get a difference and aggregate it with the score function for an enhanced appearance perception and accumulate the abnormal context. With all three gaps considered,
we can compute a more comprehensive anomaly indicator. Experiments on three popular VAD benchmarks demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of our method. Code
is available at https://github.com/Bbeholder/ADSM.

Figure 1. An illustration of the local modes of anomalies. We
explore two regions in which the anomalies are residing. The
likelihood-based method is highly sensitive to regions of anomalies with inherently low probability likelihood while blind to
anomalies located in local modes near the learned distribution.

1. Introduction

data is more practical, necessitating the semi-supervised approach [9, 47].
Under this semi-supervised framework, reconstructionbased [7, 17, 18, 22, 43, 58, 63] and prediction-based [5,
6, 8, 15, 25, 29, 30, 37, 44, 49, 50] approaches are two
of the most representative paradigms. They are based on
the premise that anomalies are inherently harder to predict or reconstruct when compared to normal data [18, 29].
However, the underlying assumption of these paradigms can
not avoid undesired generalizations on anomalies because it
only considers low-level vision information in videos.
Recent years have witnessed the great progress of generative models [20, 53, 54]. The powerful pattern coverage capability of generative models lays a new solid foundation for the VAD task: an out-of-distribution anomaly
can be detected by its low likelihood under the statistical
model of normal data. However, these likelihood-based
methods build generative models for boosting visual pretext tasks [14, 60] or assisting density estimation models [19, 39, 41]. Directly using a likelihood-based indicator
for VAD remains challenging because it has some intrinsic
limitations. We consider the Stein score [28] here, which
represents the gradient of log density. As shown in Fig. 1,
the Stein score tends to be small at maxima, minima, and
saddle points, which makes it difficult to detect anomalies
that reside in local modes [39]. As a result, solely relying
on the likelihood is insufficient to make a distinction. In the

Video anomaly detection (VAD) is an important public
safety application, which aims to accurately detect abnormal events in videos in time. Since anomalies are too
scattered and rare to be sufficiently and comprehensively
collected, the setting of learning from abundant normal
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

12057

