This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-structure Preserved Real-world Image Super-resolution via
Transfer VAE Training
Qiaosi Yi1,2 , Shuai Li1 , Rongyuan Wu1,2 , Lingchen Sun1,2 , Yuhui Wu1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2 *
1
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute
qiaosiyijoyies@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
{novak.li, rong-yuan.wu, ling-chen.sun, yuhui.wu}@connect.polyu.hk

Abstract
Impressive results on real-world image super-resolution
(Real-ISR) have been achieved by employing pre-trained
stable diffusion (SD) models. However, one critical issue
of such methods lies in their poor reconstruction of image fine structures, such as small characters and textures,
due to the aggressive resolution reduction of the VAE (e.g.,
8× downsampling) in the SD model. One solution is to
employ a VAE with a lower downsampling rate for diffusion; however, adapting its latent features with the pretrained UNet while mitigating the increased computational
cost poses new challenges. To address these issues, we
propose a Transfer VAE Training (TVT) strategy to transfer the 8× downsampled VAE into a 4× one while adapting to the pre-trained UNet. Specifically, we first train a
4× decoder based on the output features of the original
VAE encoder, then train a 4× encoder while keeping the
newly trained decoder fixed. Such a TVT strategy aligns
the new encoder-decoder pair with the original VAE latent
space while enhancing image fine details. Additionally, we
introduce a compact VAE and compute-efficient UNet by
optimizing their network architectures, reducing the computational cost while capturing high-resolution fine-scale
features. Experimental results demonstrate that our TVT
method significantly improves fine-structure preservation,
which is often compromised by other SD-based methods,
while requiring fewer FLOPs than state-of-the-art onestep diffusion models. The official code can be found at
https://github.com/Joyies/TVT.

1. Introduction
Aiming at reproducing the high-resolution (HR) image
from a low-resolution (LR) input, image super-resolution
(ISR) has been extensively studied in past decades [13,
* Corresponding author. This research is supported by the PolyU-OPPO
Joint Innovative Research Center.

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of the reconstruction results of original VAE with 8× resolution downsampling (VAE-D8) and our
adapted VAE with 4× resolution downsampling (VAE-D4). (b)
Comparison of the Real-ISR results by the state-of-the-art one step
diffusion based method OSEDiff [71] and our method with Transfer VAE Training (TVT). Please zoom in for a better view.

29, 30, 33, 36, 38, 46, 61, 62, 67, 80, 85, 86]. Despite
the remarkable progresses in network architecture design
[7, 13, 35, 38, 85, 86] and training losses [18, 24, 64], realworld ISR (Real-ISR) remains a challenging problem due to
the complex, unknown, and entangled image degradations
(e.g., sensor noise, motion blur, compression artifacts).
Many researches [33, 36, 56, 61, 62, 80] have focused on
the use of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [18] to
generate photorealistic textures and details, but the generative prior of GAN is limited and the adversarial training
process will introduce many undesirable visual artifacts in
the super-resolved (SR) images [36].
Recent advances in large-scale text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [49, 50] have revolutionized the image generation task, as well as many down-streaming tasks such as
Real-ISR. Based on pre-trained stable diffusion (SD) models [49], many Real-ISR methods [39, 55, 59, 70, 75, 77]
have been proposed to improve the realistic details of ISR
outputs. Earlier works such as StableSR [59], PASD [75]

12415

