This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-Dancer: Expressive Music to Human Dance Video Generation
Zeyuan Chen1,2
Hongyi Xu2 Guoxian Song2 You Xie2 Chenxu Zhang2
Xin Chen2 Chao Wang2 Di Chang2,3
Linjie Luo2
1

UC San Diego

2

3

ByteDance

University of Southern California

Figure 1. We present X-Dancer, a unified transformer-diffusion framework for zero-shot, music-driven human image animation from a single static image. Our approach accommodates diverse body forms and appearances, generating diverse and highly expressive synchronized
full-body dance motions. It captures both fine-grained movements of the head and hands and large-scale actions such as body rotations and
jumps, seamlessly translating them into vivid and lifelike dance videos.

Abstract
We present X-Dancer, a novel zero-shot music-driven image animation pipeline that creates diverse and long-range
lifelike human dance videos from a single static image.
As its core, we introduce a unified transformer-diffusion
framework, featuring an autoregressive transformer model
that synthesize extended and music-synchronized token sequences for 2D body, head and hands poses, which then
guide a diffusion model to produce coherent and realistic
dance video frames. Unlike traditional methods that primarily generate human motion in 3D, X-Dancer addresses
data limitations and enhances scalability by modeling a

wide spectrum of 2D dance motions, capturing their nuanced alignment with musical beats through readily available monocular videos. To achieve this, we first build a
spatially compositional token representation from 2D human pose labels associated with keypoint confidences, encoding both large articulated body movements (e.g., upper and lower body) and fine-grained motions (e.g., head
and hands). We then design a music-to-motion transformer model that autoregressively generates music-aligned
dance pose token sequences, incorporating global attention to both musical style and prior motion context. Finally
we leverage a diffusion backbone to animate the reference
image with these synthesized pose tokens through AdaIN,

10602

