This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multidimensional Byte Pair Encoding:
Shortened Sequences for Improved Visual Data Generation
Tim Elsner, Paula Usinger, Julius Nehring-Wirxel, Gregor Kobsik,
Victor Czech, Yanjiang He, Isaak Lim, Leif Kobbelt
RWTH Aachen University, Germany

Abstract
In language processing, transformers benefit greatly from
characters being condensed into word fragments, building
outputs from a larger vocabulary of bigger pieces. This is
often done with Byte Pair Encoding. In the context of images, tokenisation of visual data is usually limited to regular grids obtained from quantisation methods, not using
such further abstraction of regions.
Our work improves tokenisation of visual data by bringing Byte Pair Encoding from 1D to multiple dimensions,
as a complementary add-on to existing compression. We
achieve this through counting constellations of token pairs
and replacing the most frequent token pair with a newly introduced token. Our approach only increases computation
time by a factor of 2 for images, making it applicable even
to large datasets like ImageNet within minutes on consumer
hardware. This is a lossless preprocessing step. We further
propose how networks can digest the new tokens that are no
longer in a regular grid.
Our evaluation shows improved training and inference performance of transformers on visual data achieved by compressing frequent constellations of tokens: The resulting sequences have more uniformly distributed information content, e.g. by condensing empty regions in an image into
single tokens. As our experiments show, these condensed
sequences are easier to process.

MDBPE

long Sequence

short Sequence
...

Autoregressive
Transformer

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our algorithm compresses visual data in order to make
tasks like generation more efficient: Shorter sequences, even if
they are from a larger vocabulary, are easier to handle for deep
learning architectures like transformers. The images show representative examples after the same training time, with training on
shortened sequences (right) producing better results faster.

from long sequences with small vocabulary into shorter
sequences with larger vocabulary significantly improves
the training of models. This approach increases efficiency
by encoding more information per token, resulting in
faster and more effective learning, and plays well with the
quadratic scaling of the underlying attention mechanism
[4] that has been driving many recent improvements [3]:
It is easier to assemble sentences from word fragments
rather than individual characters. One widespread strategy

Much of the recent success and widespread application
of deep learning has come with the understanding that a
generative model can be a stepping stone, a foundation
model, for further tasks. These models then can be tuned
to various tasks for practical applications, from chat
assistants [18, 36, 43] to image [11, 12, 30] or video editing
[22, 46, 60].
For natural language processing (NLP), condensation

21331

