This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraspCoT: Integrating Physical Property Reasoning for 6-DoF Grasping under
Flexible Language Instructions
Xiaomeng Chu1 , Jiajun Deng2∗ , Guoliang You1 , Wei Liu1 , Xingchen Li1 , Jianmin Ji1 , Yanyong Zhang1 *
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The University of Adelaide

Abstract

Oh, I didn't quite catch that news on TV just now. I need to
take another look.

Flexible instruction-guided 6-DoF grasping is a significant yet challenging task for real-world robotic systems. Existing methods utilize the contextual understanding capabilities of the large language models (LLMs) to
establish mappings between expressions and targets, allowing robots to comprehend users’ intentions in the instructions. However, the LLM’s knowledge about objects’ physical properties remains underexplored despite
its tight relevance to grasping. In this work, we propose
GraspCoT, a 6-DoF grasp detection framework that integrates a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning mechanism oriented to physical properties, guided by auxiliary questionanswering (QA) tasks. Particularly, we design a set of
QA templates to enable hierarchical reasoning that includes three stages: target parsing, physical property analysis, and grasp action selection. Moreover, GraspCoT
presents a unified multimodal LLM architecture, which encodes multi-view observations of 3D scenes into 3D-aware
visual tokens, and then jointly embeds these visual tokens
with CoT-derived textual tokens within LLMs to generate
grasp pose predictions. Furthermore, we present IntentGrasp, a large-scale benchmark that fills the gap in public datasets for multi-object grasp detection under diverse
and indirect verbal commands. Extensive experiments on
IntentGrasp demonstrate the superiority of our method,
with additional validation in real-world robotic applications confirming its practicality. The code is available at
https://github.com/cxmomo/GraspCoT.

Internal Reasoning

another
look?

TV?
Remote Control

durable
rigid

stiff

scratchresistant
resilient

smooth

smooth

protrusion

matte

polished

planar

Material
flexible

Bilateral pressure,
parallel surfaces,
secure stable grip.

Glasses

Surface
lowfriction

Clamp

lowfriction

hinged

Shape
bilateral

smooth

curvilinear

Precise two-point grip,

Pinch minimal force, protects
fragile components.

Pose Prediction
6-Dof Grasp Poses

Confidence Scores

Figure 1. Example of GraspCoT. Facing a rewatching TV request,
GraspCoT employs CoT reasoning, including target parsing, physical property analysis, and action selection, to interpret the scene
and predict 6-DoF grasp poses with confidence scores for critical
objects, namely remote control and glasses.

1. Introduction

plexity than its language-agnostic robotic grasping counterparts [14, 16, 24, 35, 36], mainly due to the cross-modal
alignment between textual and visual representations. Consequently, existing methods [19, 29, 37] use a text encoder [6, 17, 34] to map textual and visual features into a
unified latent space, enabling cross-modal correspondence
for instruction-guided grasping.
With the emergence of LLMs and their multi-modal variants (MLLMs), there has been a surge of research interest
in integrating semantic knowledge and common sense into
object grasping. Early works leverage LLMs mainly for semantic understanding in task-oriented grasping. For example, GraspGPT [38] uses LLMs to describe objects and taskrelevant information, enabling interaction with novel object
classes, while SemGrasp [18] fine-tunes an MLLM to gen-

The language-guided 6-DoF grasp detection task tackles the
problem of robotic grasping that interprets human instructions and 3D environments [1, 27, 52]. This capability holds
critical importance for domestic assistance, healthcare, and
industrial automation. However, it presents greater com* Corresponding authors.

10130

