This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Training for Probabilistic Robustness
Yi Zhang1 ,

Yuhang Chen1 , Zhen Chen2 , Wenjie Ruan2 , Xiaowei Huang2 ,
Siddartha Khastgir1 , Xingyu Zhao1 *
1
2
WMG, University of Warwick
University of Liverpool

{yi.zhang.16,yuhang.chen.1,s.khastgir.1,xingyu.zhao}@warwick.ac.uk;
{zhen.chen2,xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk; w.ruan@trustai.uk

Abstract

AE detection during testing [19, 23, 24, 35, 42], verification with formal guarantees [20, 26, 30, 37, 44], and various robustness improvement techniques, including distillation [40], randomized smoothing [12], gradient masking
[2], and the more widely used adversarial training (AT)
[4, 21, 22, 36, 52]. As large language models and multimodal foundation models gain popularity, more recent research has increasingly focused on understanding their robustness as well [11, 18, 28, 32, 33, 58, 71, 72, 74].
Regardless of specific DL tasks or model architectures,
robustness broadly refers to a model’s ability to maintain
consistent decisions under small input perturbations, with
local robustness focusing on stability around individual inputs, as opposed to global robustness across the entire input
distribution. More specifically, when evaluating local robustness, common problem formulations include [16, 72]:
i) a binary question, “does an AE exist within a specified
perturbation norm-ball?” [20, 30, 44, 63]; ii) a maximum
safe distance question, “what is the largest perturbation radius within which no AE exists?” [1, 38, 60, 61]; and iii)
a maximum prediction loss question, “which AE within the
norm-ball yields the highest prediction loss?”, which is often applied in AT to enhance robustness [36, 56]. It is evident that the three formulations focus on extreme scenarios,
where local robustness is evaluated based on the existence
of a deterministic AE, reflecting a worst-case perspective.
A more recent and distinct view, however, considers probabilistic robustness (PR), employing statistical approaches to its evaluation [5, 13, 41, 49, 50, 55, 59, 60,
69, 72], it answers the question of “what is the likelihood
of AEs in the given perturbation norm-ball?” [73]. However, existing AT methods are primarily designed for WCR
via the well-established “min-max” optimization [3, 21, 36]
(cf. Sec. 2.2), and are thus referred to as “AT-WCR” in this
paper. No dedicated AT methods exist for enhancing PR,
which motivates our work.
In this paper, we first formulate AT for PR as a new minmax optimization problem, and then devise AT-PR training scheme based on numerical algorithms to effectively

Deep learning (DL) has shown transformative potential
across industries, yet its sensitivity to adversarial examples (AEs) limits its reliability and broader deployment. Research on DL robustness has developed various techniques,
with adversarial training (AT) established as a leading approach to counter AEs. Traditional AT focuses on worstcase robustness (WCR), but recent work has introduced
probabilistic robustness (PR), which evaluates the likelihood of AEs within a local perturbation range, providing an
overall assessment of the model’s robustness and acknowledging residual risks that are more practical to manage.
However, existing AT methods are fundamentally designed
to improve WCR, and no dedicated methods currently target PR. To bridge this gap, we formulate a new min-max
optimization as the theoretical foundation for PR-focused
AT, and introduce an AT-PR training scheme with numerical algorithms to solve the new optimization problem. Our
experiments, based on 70 DL models trained on common
datasets and diverse architectures, demonstrate that: i)
AT-PR achieves higher improvements in PR than AT-WCR
methods; ii) it shows more consistent effectiveness across
varying local inputs; iii) it exhibits a reduced trade-off in
model’s generalization.

1. Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) has shown potential for transformative impacts across many industries including transportation, healthcare and energy. The reality that DL is not
as dependable as required now becomes a major impediment to their broader deployment. Since the first discovery of the phenomenon of Adversarial Examples (AEs) for
DL [21, 39, 48], robustness is arguably the property in the
limelight, encompassing research topics like adversarial attacks in malicious contexts [7, 8, 14, 21, 36, 64, 65, 75],
* Corresponding to X. Zhao, xingyu.zhao@warwick.ac.uk.

1675

