This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AffordDexGrasp: Open-set Language-guided Dexterous Grasp
with Generalizable-Instructive Affordance
Yi-Lin Wei*1 , Mu Lin*1 , Yuhao Lin 1 , Jian-Jian Jiang 1 ,
Xiao-Ming Wu 1 , Ling-An Zeng 1 , Wei-Shi Zheng†1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{weiylin5, linm67, linyh96, jiangjj35, wuxm65, zenglan3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

wszheng@ieee.org

https://isee-laboratory.github.io/AffordDexGrasp/
Training Data

Generalizable-Instructive Affordance

Real World Open set

Unseen Category

use
right
handle
Use the mug by contacting the handle from the right.

Use the teapot with grasping the handle from the right.

Use the mug by contacting the handle from the right.

Use the kettle by contacting the handle from the left.

Use the hammer and grasp handle from the back.

Use the frying pan and grasp handle from the back.

Hold the body of trigger sprayer from the left.

Hold the body of the lotion pump from the left.

use
right
handle
Use the frying pan and grasp handle from the right.

From the right, grasp the handle to use the knife.

hold
left
body
Hold the bottle body from the left.

Hold the body of trigger sprayer from the left.

Figure 1. Open-set Language-guided Dexterous Grasp. Our framework bridges the gap between language and grasp actions through
Generalizable-Instructive Affordance, which enables cross-category generalization via category-agnostic cues and graspable local structure.
Remarkably, our framework demonstrates strong generalization without requiring extra real training data in real-world experiments.

Abstract
Language-guided robot dexterous generation enables
robots to grasp and manipulate objects based on human
commands. However, previous data-driven methods are
hard to understand intention and execute grasping with unseen categories in the open set. In this work, we explore a
new task, Open-set Language-guided Dexterous Grasp, and
find that the main challenge is the huge gap between highlevel human language semantics and low-level robot actions. To solve this problem, we propose an Affordance Dexterous Grasp (AffordDexGrasp) framework, with the insight
of bridging the gap with a new generalizable-instructive
affordance representation. This affordance can generalize
to unseen categories by leveraging the object’s local structure and category-agnostic semantic attributes, thereby ef-

fectively guiding dexterous grasp generation. Built upon
the affordance, our framework introduces Affordance Flow
Matching (AFM) for affordance generation with language
as input, and Grasp Flow Matching (GFM) for generating
dexterous grasp with affordance as input. To evaluate our
framework, we build an open-set table-top language-guided
dexterous grasp dataset. Extensive experiments in the simulation and real worlds show that our framework surpasses
all previous methods in open-set generalization.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Achieving generalizable robot dexterous grasping is an important goal in the fields of robotics and computer vision,
with exciting potential applications in human-robot interaction and robot manipulation.
Recent works explore the task of language-guided dexterous grasp generation[20, 21, 51, 59], aiming to enable

11818

