This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedXDS: Leveraging Model Attribution Methods to counteract Data
Heterogeneity in Federated Learning
Maximilian Andreas Hoefler1 * Karsten Mueller1 Wojciech Samek1,2,3
1
Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, Berlin, Germany
2
Technical University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany
3
Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data (BIFOLD)

Abstract

local datasets private. However, the practical deployment
of federated learning systems faces fundamental challenges
regarding data heterogeneity and privacy [11, 35].
Data heterogeneity, characterized by non-IID data across
clients, leads to contradicting model updates and significantly degraded performance [12, 31]. Current approaches
address this challenge by aligning client distributions using proximal optimization terms [16] and mitigating client
drift [12, 14], while others focus on flattening the loss landscape to facilitate better model aggregation [20, 21]. In addition, recent works have shown that sharing even a small
portion of client data globally can significantly improve local model generalization [34]. Such shared data introduces
centralization, giving clients access to a more homogeneous
distribution, which reduces update divergence and mitigates
heterogeneity [34].
However, sharing raw data is not feasible due to privacy
constraints. Introducing differential privacy [9] by adding
noise to the shared data offers a potential solution, however
this can cause considerable performance loss. Alternatively,
instead of sharing raw data, abstract feature representations
or partial data could be released using generator-type approaches [30, 33, 36]. However, the obtained features are
not as potent as raw data in mitigating statistical heterogeneity, and can also be prone to privacy leaks and additionally introduce significant computational overhead due
to generators. Hence, the challenge arises of how to retain the performance improvement from data sharing while
simultaneously guaranteeing privacy.
To address this challenge we propose FedXDS (Federated Learning via XAI-guided Data Sharing) which entails
a novel approach wherein we leverage methods from the
field of eXplainable AI (XAI) [8] enabling performance enhancing data sharing while preserving privacy.
Specifically, we leverage propagation-based attribution
methods, which have been shown to reliably identify input
features that consistently contribute to model predictions
[2, 8]. Moreover, attribution maps yield a pixel-wise relevance score which highlights regions in the input space

Explainable AI (XAI) methods have demonstrated significant success in recent years at identifying relevant features in input data that drive deep learning model decisions, enhancing interpretability for users. However, the
potential of XAI beyond providing model transparency has
remained largely unexplored in adjacent machine learning
domains. In this paper, we show for the first time how
XAI can be utilized in the context of federated learning.
Specifically, while federated learning enables collaborative
model training without raw data sharing, it suffers from
performance degradation when client data distributions exhibit statistical heterogeneity. We introduce FedXDS (Federated Learning via XAI-guided Data Sharing), the first
approach to utilize feature attribution techniques to identify precisely which data elements should be selectively
shared between clients to mitigate heterogeneity. By employing propagation-based attribution, our method identifies task-relevant features through a single backward pass,
enabling selective data sharing that aligns client contributions. To protect sensitive information, we incorporate metric privacy techniques that provide formal privacy guarantees while preserving utility. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach consistently achieves higher accuracy and faster convergence compared to existing methods across varying client numbers and heterogeneity settings. We provide theoretical privacy guarantees and empirically demonstrate robustness against both membership
inference and feature inversion attacks. Code is available
at https://github.com/MaxH1996/FedXDS.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [19] has received significant attention in recent years, proving to be an effective method for
collaborative distributed machine learning while keeping
* Correspondence to maximilian.andreas.hoefler@hhi.fraunhofer.de

4572

