This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene Graph Guided Generation: Enable Accurate Relations Generation in
Text-to-Image Models via Textural Rectification
Guibao Shen1 *†
Luozhou Wang1 *†
3
Xin Tao
Di Zhang3 Pengfei Wan3
1

Jiantao Lin1
Wenhang Ge1 Chaozhe Zhang1
5
Guangyong Chen
Yijun Li4 Ying-cong Chen1, 2 ‡

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3

4

2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

5

Kling Team, Kuaishou Technology Adobe Research Hangzhou Institute of Medicine, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-image generation have been
propelled by the development of diffusion models and multimodality learning. However, since text is typically represented sequentially in these models, it often falls short in
providing accurate contextualization and structural control.
So the generated images do not consistently align with human expectations, especially in complex scenarios involving
multiple objects and relationships. In this paper, we introduce the Scene Graph Adapter (SG-Adapter), leveraging
the structured representation of scene graphs to rectify inaccuracies in the original text embeddings. The SG-Adapter’s
explicit, non-fully connected graph representation significantly improves upon the causal connections commonly
used in transformer-based text models. In causal connections, each token can attend to all previous tokens, which
may result in attribute leakage. On the other hand, we also
curated a highly clean, multi-relational scene graph-image
paired dataset MultiRels to address the challenges posed
by low-quality annotated datasets like Visual Genome [13].
Furthermore, we design three metrics derived from GPT4V [1] to effectively and thoroughly measure the correspondence between images and scene graphs. Both qualitative and quantitative results validate the efficacy of our
approach in controlling the correspondence in multiple relationships.

age quality and attract great attention from researchers as
well as industries.
However, the text encoder used by these models are suboptimal for generating coherent images. They often face
challenges in contextualizing text tokens, which requires
capturing both their intrinsic meanings and their contextual
understanding from surrounding tokens. The most commonly used text encoder, the CLIP model [23], applies
causal attention mechanisms to allow tokens to gather information from preceding ones. However, this sequential
processing can lead to the “leakage issue”, where relations
or attributes incorrectly influence unrelated elements in the
image. For example, in “A man playing the guitar back to
back with a woman”, the relation “playing guitar” might be
mistakenly applied to the woman due to the linear text sequence (Fig. 1). Such cases, where the encoder fails to recognize distinct entity boundaries, underscore the need for
more advanced text embedding methods capable of accurately depicting separate entities and their respective relations in complex scenes.
Scene graphs, with their structured representation, effectively avoid the contextualization issues inherent in sequential text tokens. Scene graphs depict images as networks
of entities (nodes) and their relationships (edges), ensuring
clear, non-linear associations. Relations are directly linked
to specific nodes, preventing the ambiguity and misinterpretation common in text-based processing. This distinct structure allows for precise and unambiguous representation of
complex scenes, enhancing the accuracy of image generation. This capability positions them as a natural control
signal for image generation.
However, pure scene graph-to-image generation [6, 12,
14, 35] lags behind text-to-image generation in terms of
image quality and is far from practical use. This is because the scene graph-image pair data are considerably
smaller than text-image pair data. For instance, Visual
Genome [13] includes 108,077 pairs with limited-quality
scene graph labels. In stark contrast, the typical text-image
dataset LAION-5B [31] contains a massive 5.85 billion

1. Introduction
Image generation has made great progress thanks to the success of a series of text-to-image diffusion models [5, 9, 21,
24, 25, 27, 30]. Due to the huge amount of text-image
paired training data [17, 29] and the numerous model parameters, these text-conditioned models show fantastic im* Equal contribution
† This work was conducted during the author’s internship at Kling.
‡ Corresponding author

15437

