This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVEv2: Improved Baselines for Encoder-Free Vision-Language Models
Haiwen Diao1,2 * Xiaotong Li3,2∗ Yufeng Cui2∗ Yueze Wang2∗
Haoge Deng4,2 Ting Pan5,2 Wenxuan Wang6,5,2 Huchuan Lu1† Xinlong Wang2†
1
DLUT 2 BAAI 3 PKU 4 BUPT 5 UCAS 6 CASIA

Abstract
Existing encoder-free vision-language models (VLMs) are
rapidly narrowing the performance gap with their encoderbased counterparts, highlighting the promising potential
for unified multimodal systems with structural simplicity
and efficient deployment. We systematically clarify the performance gap between VLMs using pre-trained vision encoders, discrete tokenizers, and minimalist visual layers from
scratch, deeply excavating the under-examined characteristics of encoder-free VLMs. We develop efficient strategies
for encoder-free VLMs that rival mainstream encoder-based
ones. After an in-depth investigation, we launch EVEv2.0, a
new and improved family of encoder-free VLMs. We show
that: (i) Properly decomposing and hierarchically associating vision and language within a unified model reduces
interference between modalities. (ii) A well-designed training strategy enables effective optimization for encoder-free
VLMs. Through extensive evaluation, our EVEv2.0 represents a thorough study for developing a decoder-only architecture across modalities, demonstrating superior data
efficiency and strong vision-reasoning capability. Code is
publicly available at: https://github.com/baaivision/EVE.

1. Introduction
With the recent rapid advancements in the large language
models (LLMs) [8, 9, 55, 73, 87] and large vision models (LVMs) [16, 20, 22, 40, 64], vision-language models
(VLMs) [2, 4, 18, 19, 51, 88] have made remarkable strides,
demonstrating impressive capabilities in multi-modal understanding and reasoning applications. As illustrated in Figure 1(1), typical practice adopts pre-trained vision encoders
to extract visual semantics, which are then translated into
the text embedding space as “Foreign” language inputs for
subsequent LLMs (e.g., BLIP [39] and LLaVA [47]). In
contrast, another representative branch transforms visual features from vision encoders’ last layer across each layer of
LLMs through cross-attention modules, like Flamingo [1]
* Equal contribution. † Correspondence to wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn.

and LLaMA-3.2V [68]. Thanks to well-aligned representations across modalities through large-scale contrastive learning [57, 62, 93], these studies can achieve promising performance and strong multi-modality capability after joint
training. However, the inductive biases during visual pretraining, e.g., image resolution, aspect ratio, and semantic
priors, limit the flexibility and applicability of the visual
learning in diverse real-world scenarios [70, 71, 85].
Unlike them, Fuyu [6] takes an early step to explore monolithic VLMs via removing pre-trained visual encoders, while
EVE [17] first pioneers a transparent, efficient, and practical
path for advancing the encoder-free VLM direction. The
subsequent PaliGemma [7] constructs an encoder-free VLM
that shows strong scaling efficiency while progressively approaching its encoder-based counterpart. With extensive
training data and computing resources, Mono-InternVL [53]
narrows the gap and matches the performance of InternVL1.5 [14], starting with the same LLM capabilities.
However, constructing encoder-free VLMs remains challenging, particularly in learning vision perception from
scratch and reducing vision-language interference within
a unified model. To date, three solutions have been put forward: (i) Visual feature supervision [17]; (ii) Incremental
training recipes [12, 17, 53]; (iii) Mixture-of-Expert (MoE)
detachment [45, 53] in Figure 1(2c). Nevertheless, we empirically discover that visual supervision can be substituted
by large-scale, high-quality image-text datasets annotated
by a powerful captioning engine. During training, properly merging language and multimodal data helps mitigate
knowledge-forgetting issues, while pressuring the development of multimodal capabilities. From the view of VLM
structure, decoupling partial visual functions from the unified model through a MoE design [5, 37, 77] aids in relieving
vision-language interference to some extent. However, we
discover significant weight shifts across various network layers between the VLMs and the original LLMs, revealing the
insufficiency of the current decoupling degree. Notably, we
further exploit a re-parameterize architecture in Figure 1(2b)
for seamless LLM adaptation. Although yielding better gains
over prototype EVE in Figure 2(2a), it does not completely
resolve the representational conflicts across modalities.

21014

