This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SummDiff: Generative Modeling of Video Summarization with Diffusion
Kwanseok Kim1 ,* Jaehoon Hahm2 ,* Sumin Kim1 , Jinhwan Sul3 , Byunghak Kim4 , Joonseok Lee1†
1
Seoul National University, 2 UIUC, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology, 4 Hyundai Card
kjvd1009@snu.ac.kr, jh141@illinois.edu, sumink@snu.ac.kr,
jsul7@gatech.edu, byunghak.kim@hcs.com, joonseok@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Video summarization is a task of shortening a video by
choosing a subset of frames while preserving its essential
moments. Despite the innate subjectivity of the task, previous works have deterministically regressed to an averaged
frame score over multiple raters, ignoring the inherent subjectivity of what constitutes a “good” summary. We propose
a novel problem formulation by framing video summarization as a conditional generation task, allowing a model to
learn the distribution of good summaries and to generate
multiple plausible summaries that better reflect varying human perspectives. Adopting diffusion models for the first
time in video summarization, our proposed method, SummDiff, dynamically adapts to visual contexts and generates multiple candidate summaries conditioned on the input
video. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SummDiff
not only achieves the state-of-the-art performance on various benchmarks but also produces summaries that closely
align with individual annotator preferences. Moreover, we
provide a deeper insight with novel metrics from an analysis
of the knapsack, which is an important last step of generating summaries but has been overlooked in evaluation.

the video (highlight detection). Due to this inherent subjectivity, most video summarization or highlight detection
datasets [20, 71] offer annotations by multiple raters to reflect various perspectives.
Since each annotator may have different opinion on the
importance of a frame, most existing methods [3, 17, 22,
34, 67, 82] take the frame-level importance scores averaged across multiple annotators as their target label, and
are trained to predict them. This frame-level score aggregation looks reasonable in some sense, but in fact it loses
the various perspectives to summarize each video. For instance, suppose half of the annotators select clips from the
first quarter of the video while the other half select clips
from the last quarter. If one simply averages their frame
scores, both the first and last quarters end up with similar importance, obscuring the two distinct valid summaries.
That is, this simple regression to the averaged frame-level
importance scores fail to preserve multiple viewpoints to
summarize the video.
In order to preserve and reflect various views to summarize a video, we pose a distribution of its good summaries
and let the model to learn it, instead of giving an alreadyaggregated single ground truth importance score. Then,
the video summarization task can be seen from a generative perspective; i.e., a process of learning and inferring
the distribution of good summaries conditioned on the input video. Specifically, the model is now in charge of estimating the distribution of plausible summaries for the given
video. Once trained, it allows us to sample multiple summaries from the estimated conditional data manifold. To
the best of our knowledge, this generative approach to the
video summarization has not been extensively studied, except for a few works [2, 50] that applied adversarial losses
to construct a summary that looks like the original video.
Formulating the video summarization problem as a conditional generation task, we propose to adopt the generative
diffusion [25, 72] mechanism, which has been successfully
applied to various conditional generation tasks [24, 54, 61].
Specifically, conditioned on the input video, our proposed
SummDiff model learns to denoise a random importance

1. Introduction
Recently, short-form videos draw significant attention on
video sharing platforms, with a trend that consumers increasingly prefer to quickly grasp the content. They often compressively convey contents that are originally in a
longer form, summarizing the core contents into a shorter
one; e.g., sport games highlights or movie summarization.
This task of selecting core parts of a long video to construct
a shorter one is called video summarization. This task is inherently subjective, since there can be multiple criteria for
a ‘good summary’; e.g., comprehensively covering the entire storyline or subjectively selecting impressive parts of
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

15096

