This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Zero-shot Object Counting via Text-guided Local Ranking and
Number-evoked Global Attention

1

Shiwei Zhang1,† , Qi Zhou1,† , Wei Ke1,2,∗
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

{zhangshiwei96,zhouqq}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, wei.ke@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Multiple Number-conditioned Text Prompts

Text-guided zero-shot object counting leverages visionlanguage models (VLMs) to count objects of an arbitrary
class given by a text prompt. Existing approaches for
this challenging task only utilize local patch-level features
to fuse with text feature, ignoring the important inﬂuence
of the global image-level feature. In this paper, we propose a universal strategy that can exploit both local patchlevel features and global image-level feature simultaneously. Speciﬁcally, to improve the localization ability of
VLMs, we propose Text-guided Local Ranking. Depending on the prior knowledge that foreground patches have
higher similarity with the text prompt, a new local-text rank
loss is designed to increase the differences between the similarity scores of foreground and background patches which
push foreground and background patches apart. To enhance
the counting ability of VLMs, Number-evoked Global Attention is introduced to ﬁrst align global image-level feature with multiple number-conditioned text prompts. Then,
the one with the highest similarity is selected to compute cross-attention with the global image-level feature.
Through extensive experiments on widely used datasets and
methods, the proposed approach has demonstrated superior
advancements in performance, generalization, and scalability. Furthermore, to better evaluate text-guided zeroshot object counting methods, we propose a dataset named
ZSC-8K, which is larger and more challenging, to establish a new benchmark. Codes and dataset are released at
https://github.com/zaqai/LGCount.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the development of deep learning techniques [10, 37, 42], category-speciﬁc counting (CSC) methods [30, 44] have gradually matured. However, existing
CSC methods face notable limitations in practical applica† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

Local Patch-level Features

Single Text Prompt

Cross-modal similarity

Backward

Global Image-level Feature

Counting Head

Counting Head

Fuse

Cross-attention

Forward

⨁

Text Encoder

Image Encoder

Class
Name

Image

(a)

Text Encoder

Image Encoder

Class Class Name with
Name Number Ranges

Image

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison of different pipelines for text-guided zeroshot object counting. (a) Only fusing single text prompt and local patch-level features. (b) Instead of overlooking the global
image-level feature, our universal strategy leverages the global
image-level feature to align with multiple number-conditioned text
prompts and select the one with the highest similarity to calculate
cross-attention with image-level feature. At last, the feature obtained by cross-attention is added to the local patch-level features.

tions. These approaches require training dedicated models
on extensive labeled datasets for each object category, so
they fundamentally lack the capacity to handle unseen objects in a human-like manner. Therefore, counting methods
that are not limited by ﬁxed categories have gradually attracted the attention of the academic community, as they
offer greater ﬂexibility and broader application potential.
Many exemplar-guided class-agnostic object counting
(CAC) methods [38, 40, 52] have been presented in this context. These methods take several human-annotated bounding boxes of objects as exemplars to specify the objectsof-interest and train a uniﬁed network that can estimate the
number of arbitrary objects-of-interest. However, previous
CAC methods heavily rely on the assumption that accurate
bounding boxes of objects can be easily obtained. In practice, this requirement is unfriendly to end-users lacking pro-

21097

