This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuraLeaf: Neural Parametric Leaf Models
with Shape and Deformation Disentanglement
Yang Yang1
1

Dongni Mao1 Hiroaki Santo1 Yasuyuki Matsushita1,2 Fumio Okura1
2
The University of Osaka
Microsoft Research Asia – Tokyo

{yang.yang,mao.dongni,santo.hiroaki,yasumat,okura}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a) shapes of various
(b)leaf species and natural
(c)
(d)
Figure 1. Our neural parametric model for leaves, NeuraLeaf, represents
3D deformation.
Our model represents the leaves’ flattened shape and their 3D deformation in disentangled latent spaces (left). Our method enables the
instance-wise reconstruction of leaves via fitting to real-world observations, besides pure CG modeling (right).

Abstract
We develop a neural parametric model for 3D leaves for
plant modeling and reconstruction that are essential for
agriculture and computer graphics. While neural parametric models are actively studied for humans and animals, plant leaves present unique challenges due to their
diverse shapes and flexible deformation. To this problem,
we introduce a neural parametric model for leaves, NeuraLeaf. Capitalizing on the fact that flattened leaf shapes
can be approximated as a 2D plane, NeuraLeaf disentangles the leaves’ geometry into their 2D base shapes and
3D deformations. This representation allows learning from
rich sources of 2D leaf image datasets for the base shapes,
and also has the advantage of simultaneously learning textures aligned with the geometry. To model the 3D deformation, we propose a novel skeleton-free skinning model
and create a newly captured 3D leaf dataset called DeformLeaf. We show that NeuraLeaf successfully generates a
wide range of leaf shapes with deformation, resulting in accurate model fitting to 3D observations like depth maps and
point clouds. Our implementation and dataset are available
at https://neuraleaf-yang.github.io/.

1. Introduction
3D leaf reconstruction is important as it provides insights
into plant growth in agricultural applications and is essen-

tial for creating virtual computer graphics (CG) assets. For
domain-specific 3D shape reconstruction, parametric 3D
models have shown remarkable success, such as for human bodies (e.g., SMPL [21]), animals (e.g., SMAL [50]),
and even plant leaves [2, 4]. Although for modeling static
leaves, some methods take bio-inspired approaches [36, 44]
using venation patterns or the nature of flattened shapes.
Neural parametric models (NPMs) learn the mapping between latent codes and target shapes [10, 27, 28, 30, 43],
showing their ability to represent detailed geometry for humans [6, 10, 30, 31, 33] trained from large-scale human
canonical shapes and their deformations. However, the requirement of large datasets for training NPMs poses challenges for leaf modeling due to the lack of a 3D dataset
containing leaves’ deformations.
To address them, we integrate leaves’ biological insights
with a data-driven framework. We propose a leaf-specific
NPM representation, NeuraLeaf, leveraging the nature of
leaves, i.e., the flattened leaves can be approximated as a
plane. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we disentangle the leaves’
3D geometry into their 2D base (i.e., flattened) shape and
3D deformation represented by different latent codes.
2D base shapes can be learned from 2D-scanned image datasets of leaves, often collected in biological studies
(e.g., [37], [16]), mitigating the lack of a large-scale 3D leaf
dataset. The 2D representation offers a natural and detailed
shape representation while simplifying texture modeling by

28167

(d)

