This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparfels: Fast Reconstruction from Sparse Unposed Imagery
Shubhendu Jena* , Amine Ouasfi* , Mae Younes, Adnane Boukhayma
Inria, Univ. Rennes, CNRS, IRISA

Figure 1. Examples of reconstruction meshes obtained within 3 minutes from sparse pose-free images via our method. We used here 6
(left) and 3 (right) input images respectively from scenes of datasets MVImgNet [97] and BlendedMVS [92].

Abstract
We present a method for Sparse view reconstruction with
surface element splatting that runs within 3 minutes on a
consumer grade GPU. While few methods address sparse
radiance field learning from noisy or unposed sparse cameras, shape recovery remains relatively underexplored in
this setting. Several radiance and shape learning testtime optimization methods address the sparse posed setting by learning data priors or using combinations of external monocular geometry priors. Differently, we propose an efficient and simple pipeline harnessing a single
recent 3D foundation model. We leverage its various task
heads, notably point maps and camera initializations to instantiate a bundle adjusting 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS)
model, and image correspondences to guide camera optimization midst 2DGS training. Key to our contribution
is a novel formulation of splatted color variance along
rays, which can be computed efficiently. Reducing this
moment in training leads to more accurate shape reconstructions. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performances
in the sparse uncalibrated setting in reconstruction and
novel view benchmarks based on established multi-view
datasets. Code will be made available at https://shubhendujena.github.io/Sparfels-web/

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is a long standing problem at the intersection of computer vision, graphics and machine learning.
It is core to a myriad of downstream applications in virtual
and augmented reality, autonomous driving, medical imaging, film and animation, to name a few. Classical optimization based techniques such as structure from motion and
* Equal contribution.

multi-view stereo [70, 71], shape from visual cues such as
shading or silhouette [28, 43], photometric stereo [83] etc.,
have been popular for decades in this regard. More recently,
deep learning has been progressively disrupting 3D vision
and top-down approaches to vision more broadly. Among
the latest additions, large vision and foundation models (e.g.
DUSt3R [79], MASt3R [44]) can offer robustness and fast
feed-forward inference compared to classical photogrammetry [70, 71]. Given a few raw uncalibrated images of
a scene, they are capable of inferring reasonable relative
poses and a competitive coarse 3D structure. These predictions can lack precision and details, though, and cannot
enable stand-alone novel view synthesis.
Furthermore, state-of-the-art data-prior free scene specific learning methods for reconstruction can deliver highly
detailed geometry and impressive novel view synthesis capabilities from dense calibrated image grids. While implicit
and some grid shape representations (e.g. NeuS, VolSDF,
HF-NeuS, Voxurf [78, 80, 85, 94]) trained via differentiable
volumetric rendering (NeRF [55]) have been powerful tools
for this task for a while, Gaussian Splatting [40] based alternatives emerged with comparable novel view and reconstruction [29, 100] quality, within a fraction of the training
time, and with orders of magnitude higher interactive rendering frame rates. These methods typically fail however
under uncalibrated and sparse training images. Contemporary literature attempts to hedge against the underconstrained nature of the sparse view problem through regularization with a multitude of deep geometric priors (monocular depth [18, 76, 104], normal [98], point cloud [67] etc.),
or training new priors from scratch [50, 67, 87]. Such strategies can prove to be cumbersome, impractical or costly in
terms of data, memory or compute.
In this paper, we propose to marry the best of both worlds
efficiently — namely pre-exisiting large 3D vision feedforward models (MASt3R) and fast test-time optimization

27476

