This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOSCATO: Predicting Multiple Object State Change through Actions
Parnian Zameni, Yuhan shen, Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University
{zameni.p, shen.yuh, e.elhamifar} @ northeastern.edu

Abstract
We introduce MOSCATO: a new benchmark for predicting
the evolving states of multiple objects through long procedural videos with multiple actions. While prior work
in object state prediction has typically focused on a single object undergoing one or a few state changes, realworld tasks require tracking many objects whose states
evolve over multiple actions. Given the high cost of gathering framewise object-state labels for many videos, we develop a weakly-supervised multiple object state prediction
framework, which only uses action labels during training.
Specifically, we propose a novel Pseudo-Label Acquisition
(PLA) pipeline that integrates large language models, vision–language models, and action segment annotations to
generate fine-grained, per-frame object-state pseudo-labels
for training a Multiple Object State Prediction (MOSP) network. We further devise a State–Action Interaction (SAI)
module that explicitly models the correlations between actions and object states, thereby improving MOSP. To facilitate comprehensive evaluation, we create the MOSCATO
benchmark by augmenting three egocentric video datasets
with framewise object-state annotations. Experiments show
that our multi-stage pseudo-labeling approach and SAI
module significantly boost performance over zero-shot VLM
baselines and naive extensions of existing methods, underscoring the importance of holistic action–state modeling for
fine-grained procedural video understanding.1

Tortilla

Tortilla

--

Nutella

Nutella

Scattered
On Tortilla

Banana

Banana
Actions

--

Spread Nutella

Folded
SemiCircular
Spread
On Tortilla

Spread
On Tortilla

--

Tortilla

Tortilla
Has Banana
Has Nutella
Flat

Has Nutella
Flat

Flat
Empty

Nutella

Nutella
Banana

Banana
Put Bananas

--

--

Fold Tortilla

Time

Figure 1. We study the new problem of multiple object state
change prediction in long videos, in which relevant objects to the
actions being performed may undergo several state changes.

1. Introduction

segmenting and tracking relevant objects [54, 72, 76]. Yet,
fine-grained procedural video understanding has remained
a challenging and an under-explored problem [15, 26, 27].
Specifically, in long procedural task videos, the states of
multiple objects change as we progress in a task, see Fig.
1. Each action/step often changes the state of several objects (e.g., spreading Nutella changes the states of both tortilla and Nutella) and the state of an object often changes
over several actions (e.g., the state of tortilla moves from
empty to has Nutella to has banana to folded). Being able to
understand which objects undergo state changes as well as
when and how their states change helps in better and more
fine-grained temporal and spatial reasoning about videos.
It allows better understanding of the actions, progress and
error (e.g., if the tortilla never reaches the state has banana
before folded, there is a missing put bananas step) and provides explainability about these predictions. In particular, it
enables task assistants to obtain spatial and temporal awareness of step-relevant parts of the scene and video for knowing when and how to intervene.

Long-form video understanding, particularly for procedural tasks, has recently achieved significant attention due
to its application in assistive technologies and robotics
[14, 27, 28, 36, 52, 61]. The majority of existing research
has focused on coarse-level video understanding, such as
action recognition [18, 23, 39, 63, 67, 75], temporal action
segmentation (TAS) [5, 13, 16, 31–33, 51, 53, 58, 68], and
action anticipation [19, 20, 38, 50, 71], as well as detecting,
1 Code and data is publicly available at https://github.com/
eelhami/iccv25_moscato.

SOTA Limitations. To the best of our knowledge, the
problem of predicting (multiple) state changes of multiple objects in a video has not been studied and there is no
dataset for evaluation of this task. Prior works in object state
prediction have mainly focused on single-object scenarios,
such as detecting and localizing a single state change for

11600

