This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incremental Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation via
Multi-Level Switchable Visual Prompts
Maoxian Wan1 , Kaige Li1 , Qichuan Geng2,† , Weimin Shi1 , Zhong Zhou1,3,†
1
Beihang University 2 Capital Normal University 3 Zhongguancun Laboratory
{wanmaoxian,lkg,shiwm,zz}@buaa.edu.cn, gengqichuan1989@cnu.edu.cn

Frozen

New Class
Old Class

Image
Samples
of novel
classes

Base Model
(step 0)

Fine-tune

Trainable
Image

Base Model
(step 0)

Updated Model
(step t)
Query Func.

(a) Existing Methods

(c) Performance Comparison

(b) Our Method

Figure 1. Comparisons between existing methods and ours. (a) Existing methods generally fine-tune parameters inherited from old
stages and avoid catastrophic forgetting by keeping distribution of old class features. (b) Our method learns novel classes by tailoring
multi-granular knowledge to input images achieved by adaptive switching prompts. (c) We compare the overall performance evaluated by
Harmonic Mean of mIoU on base and novel classes.

Abstract
Existing incremental few-shot semantic segmentation
(IFSS) methods often learn novel classes by fine-tuning parameters from previous stages. This inevitably reduces the
distinguishability of old class features, leading to catastrophic forgetting and overfitting to limited new samples. In
this paper, we propose a novel prompt-based IFSS method
with a visual prompt pool to store and switch multi-granular
knowledge across stages, boosting new class learning capability. Specifically, we introduce three levels of prompts:
1) Task-persistent prompts: capturing generalizable knowledge shared across stages, such as foreground-background
distributions, to ensure consistent recognition guidance; 2)
Stage-specific prompts: adapting to unique requirements
of each stage by integrating its discriminative knowledge
(e.g., shape difference) with common knowledge from previous stages; and 3) Region-unique prompts: encoding
category-specific structures (e.g., edges) to accurately guide
the model to retain local details. In particular, we introduce
a prompt switching mechanism that adaptively allocates
the knowledge required for base and new classes, avoiding interference between prompts and preventing catas-

trophic forgetting and reducing increasing computation.
Our method achieves new state-of-the-art performance,
outperforming previous SoTA methods by 30.28% mIoU-N
on VOC and 13.90% mIoU-N on COCO under 1-shot. Code
is available at https://github.com/WanMotion/MSVP.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding authors.

Incremental few-shot semantic segmentation (IFSS) [1–5]
aims to extend segmentation models to novel classes continuously using limited new data without accessing old
data. As models expand with few-shot samples, IFSS confronts two critical challenges: 1) catastrophic forgetting of
old classes and 2) overfitting to limited samples of novel
classes. To address the first, existing methods [1, 6–9] reduce old knowledge forgetting by preserving the distribution consistency of old class features, but fine-tuning still
harms the ability to distinguish old classes when learning
novel classes and cannot solve the dilemma of competition
between new and old abilities (see Fig. 1 (a)). Regarding the
second issue, current approaches facilitate the rapid learning of novel classes by tailoring the prototypes of these
classes [1–3] or using surrogate modalities to construct
inter-class relationships [4, 5]. Unfortunately, due to insuf-

24113

