This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intermediate Connectors and Geometric Priors for
Language-Guided Affordance Segmentation on Unseen Object Categories
Yicong Li1 Yiyang Chen1 Zhenyuan Ma1,2 Junbin Xiao1 Xiang Wang2 Angela Yao2
1
National University of Singapore 2 University of Science and Technology of China
Abstract

Training
Where would your hand touch,
when you try to pass me this bag?

Language-guided Affordance Segmentation (LASO) aims to
identify actionable object regions based on text instructions.
At the core of its practicality is learning generalizable affordance knowledge that captures functional regions across
diverse objects. However, current LASO solutions struggle to extend learned affordances to object categories that
are not encountered during training. Scrutinizing these designs, we identify limited generalizability on unseen categories, stemming from (1) underutilized generalizable patterns in the intermediate layers of both 3D and text backbones, which impedes the formation of robust affordance
knowledge, and (2) the inability to handle substantial variability in affordance regions across object categories due to
a lack of structural knowledge of the target region. Towards
this, we introduce a GeneraLized frAmework on uNseen
CategoriEs (GLANCE), incorporating two key components:
a cross-modal connector that links intermediate stages of
the text and 3D backbones to enrich pointwise embeddings
with affordance concepts, and a VLM-guided query generator that provides affordance priors by extracting a few
3D key points based on the intra-view reliability and crossview consistency of their multi-view segmentation masks.
Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate that GLANCE outperforms state-of-the-art methods
(SoTAs), with notable improvements in generalization to
unseen categories. Our code is available at https://
github.com/Monoxide-Chen/Affordance.

To hold this mug securely, which
areas should your fingers grip?
Testing Seen Object
How to take this
mug to the fridge?

Affordance
Knowledge
Of “grasp”

Testing Unseen Object

How to hold this
knife securely?

(a) Seen vs Unseen category in LASO task.

(b) Performance gap between Seen and Unseen categories.

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the unseen setting in LASO, where
learned affordance knowledge is tested on novel object categories
that is unseen during training; (b) Performance comparison of existing SoTA methods on LASO’s Seen and Unseen sets, showing
that our method, GLANCE, not only improves on the seen setting
but also achieves minimal IoU gap across the two settings.

1. Introduction

Despite recent progress in Language-guided Affordance
Segmentation (LASO) [16, 30], current approaches often
memorize category-specific cues rather than learning generalizable affordance knowledge. Consequently, while performing well when training and testing cover the same set of
objects, they struggle when testing with unseen object categories — even if the coupled affordance was encountered
during training. Specifically, in the standard LASO “unseen setting” [16], models are explicitly evaluated on object
categories withheld during training to assess generalization
capability. For example, in Fig. 1a, a model trained to grasp

Embodied agents are now capable of breaking down highlevel task commands into a series of executable instructions by using large language models (LLMs) as task planners [15, 27, 33]. Within this framework, Language-guided
Affordance Segmentation (LASO) [16] is proposed as a crucial role that identifies the actionable parts of objects based
on language instructions, which has significant implications
for human-level task completion. [7]

22836

