This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRNAS: A Training-Free Robust Neural Architecture Search
Yeming Yang1 , Qingling Zhu1 , Jianping Luo1 *, Ka-Chun Wong2 , Qiuzhen Lin1* , Jianqiang Li1
1
Shenzhen University
2
City University of Hong Kong
1

yangyeming2021@email.szu.edu.cn, {zhuqingling, ljp, qiuzhlin, lijq}@szu.edu.cn,
2

kc.w@cityu.edu.hk.

Abstract

ing [30]. To address this challenge, researchers have proposed several defense strategies, among which adversarial training (AT) has been proven to be highly effective
[10, 28]. The AT method depends on architectural design
[35], which requires extensive expertise and tedious ﬁnetuning [10, 11, 15]. Nowadays, neural architecture search
(NAS) methods can automatically and efﬁciently design
DNNs, signiﬁcantly saving time and resources [23]. However, the ﬁnal designed architecture may lack robustness
since many NAS methods are primarily designed for nonadversarial scenarios [15]. Therefore, developing a robust
NAS method has become a key challenge in safety-critical
ﬁelds.
In recent years, some robust NAS methods have been
proposed by improving evaluation mechanisms and designing new search spaces to search robust DNNs automatically. The evaluation mechanisms of robust NAS determine
whether a truly robust architecture can be searched. Initially, RACL [9] demonstrates that a lower Lipschitz constant of DNNs will exhibit better robustness. Based on this,
RobustWRN [21] further explores the changing relationship
between the Lipschitz constant and the network’s topology.
It provides deeper insights into how architectural features
affect DNNs’ robustness. In addition, RobNet [14] combines the AT process with a one-shot mechanism to train a
robust supernet for fast evaluation. Subsequently, DSRNA
[19] investigates the impact of certiﬁed lower bounds and
Jacobian norm bounds on robust networks, thereby introducing new evaluation metrics. At the same time, AdvRush
[29] focuses on the smoothness of the input loss landscape,
which reveals the relationship between input perturbation
smoothness and network robustness. Later, LRNAS [10]
introduces Shapley statistical value, which simpliﬁes the
robust evaluation process. Although the above evaluation
mechanisms are simple and efﬁcient, they all require a repeated AT process.
Therefore, some training-free methods have been proposed to improve search efﬁciency. For example, CRoZe
[15] is a pioneering study in training-free robust NAS. It

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been successfully applied in various computer tasks. However, they remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which could lead to severe
security risks. In recent years, robust neural architecture
search (NAS) has gradually become an emerging direction
for designing adversarially robust architectures. However,
existing robust NAS methods rely on repeatedly training
numerous DNNs to evaluate robustness, which makes the
search process extremely expensive. In this paper, we propose a training-free robust NAS method (TRNAS) that signiﬁcantly reduces search costs. First, we design a zero-cost
proxy model (R-Score) that formalizes adversarial robustness evaluation by exploring the theory of DNN’s linear activation capability and feature consistency. This proxy only
requires initialized weights for evaluation, thereby avoiding expensive adversarial training costs. Secondly, we introduce a multi-objective selection (MOS) strategy to save
candidate architectures with robustness and compactness.
Experimental results show that TRNAS only requires 0.02
GPU days to ﬁnd a promising robust architecture in a vast
search space including approximately 1020 networks. TRNAS surpasses other state-of-the-art robust NAS methods
under both white-box and black-box attacks. Finally, we
summarize a few meaningful conclusions for designing the
robust architecture and promoting the development of robust NAS ﬁeld.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully applied in various computer vision tasks [23]. However,
DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, in which small
perturbations can mislead the network’s judgment [36].
Thus, using DNNs in safety-critical ﬁelds such as autonomous driving and facial recognition remains challeng* Co-corresponding author.

2336

