This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Layered Graphic Design Generation with a Top-Down Approach
Jingye Chen1,2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Nanxuan Zhao2 , Li Zhang2 , Difan Liu2 , Jimei Yang3 , Qifeng Chen1
1
2
3
HKUST
Adobe Research
Runway
qwerty.chen@connect.ust.hk zhawang@adobe.com cqf@ust.hk
Non-layered Design (Reference)

Abstract
Graphic design is crucial for conveying ideas and messages. Designers usually organize their work into objects,
backgrounds, and vectorized text layers to simplify editing.
However, this workﬂow demands considerable expertise.
With the rise of GenAI methods, an endless supply of highquality graphic designs in pixel format has become more accessible, though these designs often lack editability. Despite
this, non-layered designs still inspire human designers, inﬂuencing their choices in layouts and text styles, ultimately
guiding the creation of layered designs. Motivated by this
observation, we propose Accordion, a graphic design generation framework taking the ﬁrst attempt to convert AIgenerated designs into editable layered designs, meanwhile
reﬁning nonsensical AI-generated text with meaningful alternatives guided by user prompts. It is built around a vision language model (VLM) playing distinct roles in three
curated stages: (1) reference creation, (2) design planning,
and (3) layer generation. For each stage, we design prompts
to guide the VLM in executing different tasks. Distinct from
existing bottom-up methods (e.g., COLE and Open-COLE)
that gradually generate elements to create layered designs,
our approach works in a top-down manner by using the
visually harmonious reference image as global guidance
to decompose each layer. Additionally, it leverages multiple vision experts such as SAM and element removal models to facilitate the creation of graphic layers. We train
our method using the in-house graphic design dataset Design39K, augmented with AI-generated design images coupled with reﬁned ground truth created by a customized inpainting model. Experimental results and user studies by
designers show that Accordion generates favorable results
on the DesignIntention benchmark, including tasks such as
text-to-template, adding text to background, and text derendering, and also excels in creating design variations.

1. Introduction
Graphic design is an important media format for modern visual communication. Speciﬁcally, graphic design is intrin-

Layered Design

First plan text, then image
(e.g., TextDiffuser series)

Top

Layers

Ours (Top-down Approach with Global Reference)

Bottom

First plan image, then text
(e.g., COLE, Open-COLE)
Existing Bottom-up Approach

Prompt: Create a Youtube thumbnail for a channel that provides a guide on making a romantic bouquet for Valentine's Day.
The thumbnail should include the title 'How to Make a Romantic Bouquet' and a call-to-action button 'Watch Now'.

Figure 1. Left: We convert AI-generated non-layered design reference images to layered designs by extracting background, objects,
and vectorized text layers in a top-down manner with optional further reﬁnement. The layered representation facilitates easier editing. We include a gallery for more visualizations in Appendix A.
Right: Existing bottom-up design approaches progressively generate elements on images in a predeﬁned order, yet they lack a
visual reference as the overall plan from the start to harmoniously
orchestrate each element, often resulting in visual conﬂicts. For instance, text may occupy too much space, leaving inadequate room
for the background, or causing overlaps between text regions.

sically constructed in a layered format, including distinct
layers for foreground objects, background, and vectorized
text. This structured layering allows for editability and customization. Despite the signiﬁcant utility, creating layered
graphic designs is a prohibitive task for most people due to
the need for design expertise and huge effort. With the aid
of image GenAI models, more design images have become
available in rasterized pixel format. While they are visually
compelling, they inherently lack editability. Even for simple operations such as horizontal ﬂipping, text becomes unreadable since they are not separated from the background
or other elements. Although users can employ some image editing tools [5, 14, 15, 23] to modify the attributes of
elements, such an approach is inconvenient compared to op-

16861

