This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Continual Instruction Tuning
Haiyang Guo1,2 , Fanhu Zeng2,3 , Fei Zhu4 , Wenzhuo Liu2,3 , Da-Han Wang5 ,
Jian Xu2,3 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2,3 *, Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
1
School of Advanced Interdisciplinary Sciences, UCAS 2 MAIS, CASIA
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS 4 Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS
5
FKLPRIU, School of Computer and Information Engineering, Xiamen University of Technology
{guohaiyang2023, zengfanhu2022, jian.xu}@ia.ac.cn, zhfei2018@gmail.com, {xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

to align with human preferences. However, collecting such
vast amounts of training data and computational resources
for joint fine-tuning is impractical for most researchers.
Federated Learning (FL) [28, 31, 38, 43], as a decentralized paradigm, offers a viable alternative by leveraging distributed data and computational resources for local training
while integrating local weights to produce a unified model.
This paradigm accommodates constraints on storage and
computation while ensuring privacy protection.
Generally, most existing FL frameworks [7, 55, 58] are
modeled in static, closed-world scenarios [3, 59], where
a fixed set of tasks is predefined and unchanged. However, real-world applications are dynamic [59, 63], requiring models to continuously acquire new knowledge while
retaining previously learned tasks. Taking a realistic health
emergency as an example, different hospitals act as local
clients when a major disease outbreak occurs. Large hospitals can leverage FL to collaboratively train on their case
data, building a comprehensive virus knowledge base, while
smaller clinics update their own cases using this global
knowledge. Over time, both large and small hospitals need
to keep updating the global knowledge base through continual learning methods to cope with the event. Additionally, the emergence of new strains necessitates the simultaneous integration of knowledge and response strategies
to minimize potential losses. In this scenario, traditional
FL methods struggle with newly arrived knowledge, while
Continual Learning (CL) [14, 15, 33, 56, 60] methods alone
do not facilitate knowledge sharing between clients. Only
an organic integration of both can address this real-world
problem. Recently, numerous Federated Continual Learning methods have emerged to address this challenge in traditional image classification tasks [11, 12, 57]. However, their
methodological and task-setting limitations make them insufficient for current LMM applications. Therefore, a more
comprehensive benchmark is needed to better simulate the
practical application of LMMs in real-world scenarios.
In this work, we first establish a Federated Continual In-

A vast amount of instruction tuning data is crucial for
the impressive performance of Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs), but the associated computational costs and data
collection demands during supervised fine-tuning make it
impractical for most researchers. Federated learning (FL)
has the potential to leverage all distributed data and training resources to reduce the overhead of joint training.
However, most existing methods assume a fixed number of
tasks, while in real-world scenarios, clients continuously
encounter new knowledge and often struggle to retain old
tasks due to memory constraints. In this work, we introduce
the Federated Continual Instruction Tuning (FCIT) benchmark to model this real-world challenge. Our benchmark
includes two realistic scenarios, encompassing four different settings and twelve carefully curated instruction tuning
datasets. To address the challenges posed by FCIT, we propose a dynamic knowledge organization to effectively integrate updates from different tasks during training and subspace selective activation to allocate task-specific output
during inference. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method significantly enhances
model performance across varying levels of data heterogeneity and catastrophic forgetting. Code and dataset are
released at https://github.com/Ghy0501/FCIT.

1. Introduction
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [2, 32, 34], which integrate Large Language Model [4, 20, 46, 49] with a visual encoder and multimodal projector to bridge visual and
textual modalities, have exhibited impressive visual understanding and complex reasoning abilities. A crucial factor
in this success is the supervised fine-tuning of LMMs using huge and diverse visual instruction-following data [32]
* Corresponding Author.

1325

