This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoiceCraft-Dub: Automated Video Dubbing with Neural Codec Language Models
Kim Sung-Bin1 Jeongsoo Choi2 Puyuan Peng3 Joon Son Chung2 Tae-Hyun Oh4 David Harwath3
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH
2
School of Electrical Engineering and 4 School of Computing, KAIST
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin

Figure 1. Automated video dubbing. (a) Unlike text-to-speech, which generates diverse speech based on target text, automated video
dubbing requires synthesized speech to be temporally and expressively aligned with the video while maintaining naturalness and intelligibility.
(b) Examples of synthesized speech from VoiceCraft-Dub show that each speech is aligned with the lip movements of the input video. We
strongly encourage listening to each of the synthesized samples in https://voicecraft-dub.github.io/.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present VoiceCraft-Dub, a novel approach for automated
video dubbing that synthesizes high-quality speech from text
and facial cues. This task has broad applications in filmmaking, multimedia creation, and assisting voice-impaired
individuals. Building on the success of Neural Codec Language Models (NCLMs) for speech synthesis, our method
extends their capabilities by incorporating video features,
ensuring that synthesized speech is time-synchronized and
expressively aligned with facial movements while preserving
natural prosody. To inject visual cues, we design adapters to
align facial features with the NCLM token space and introduce audio-visual fusion layers to merge audio-visual information within the NCLM framework. Additionally, we curate
CelebV-Dub, a new dataset of expressive, real-world videos
specifically designed for automated video dubbing. Extensive experiments show that our model achieves high-quality,
intelligible, and natural speech synthesis with accurate lip
synchronization, outperforming existing methods in human
perception and performing favorably in objective evaluations. We also adapt VoiceCraft-Dub for the video-to-speech
task, demonstrating its versatility for various applications.

Recent advancements in Text-to-Speech (TTS) have significantly improved the ability to synthesize human-like speech
with remarkable naturalness, content accuracy, and voice
similarity. Specifically, Neural Codec Language Models
(NCLMs) represent a new approach for speech generation
that leverages language modeling with discrete codes derived from neural speech codecs [14, 43]. This method has
demonstrated superior performance across diverse speech
generation tasks, such as TTS [7, 21, 38], speech editing [30],
and voice conversion [3], due to the strong in-context learning ability of language models. Here, context refers to the
speaker characteristics in the reference speech, enabling the
generated speech to exhibit higher speaker similarity and
naturalness compared to conventional models.
While TTS traditionally synthesizes speech from input
text, combining text with video input gives rise to a different
application: automated video dubbing [19]. Automated
video dubbing involves generating target speech given the
source speech, target text, and target video, as shown in
Fig. 1 (a). The source speech provides reference voice characteristics, while the target text and video determine the content to be synthesized, its temporal alignment to the speaker’s

14623

