This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagShield: Towards Better Robustness in Sparse Inertial Motion Capture
Under Magnetic Disturbances
Yunzhe Shao1 , Xinyu Yi1 , Lu Yin2 , Shihui Guo2 , Junhai Yong1 , Feng Xu1
1

School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University

Figure 1. We propose MagShield, an IMU orientation estimation method that specifically designed to address magnetic disturbances in
sparse inertial MoCap systems. By integrating with our method, existing sparse inertial MoCap systems (left, PNP; right, DynaIP) can
operate reliably even under severe magnetic condition.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Motion capture (MoCap) is widely used in animation,
virtual reality, and embodied-AI. Among various motion
capture systems, solutions based on Inertial Measurement
Units (IMUs) have gained increasing popularity. Early inertial MoCap systems [15, 27] adopt a dense configuration, requiring actors to wear 17 IMUs. While these approaches achieve promising results, the excessive number
of IMUs causes inconvenience for users. To achieve low
cost and portability, some researchers have explored the use
of sparser IMU configurations with 6 IMUs. The continuous advancement has enabled these methods [6, 7, 30–32]
to achieve notable progress in real-time performance, accuracy, and physical plausibility.
However, a critical challenge has been neglected in previous work, i.e., IMUs are susceptible to orientation errors
in magnetically disturbed environments [3]. This limitation
severely restricts the practical use of present IMU-based
MoCap systems, confining them to environments with stable magnetic fields and hindering their applicability in realworld scenarios such as indoor spaces or near electronic de-

This paper proposes a novel method, named MagShield,
designed to address the issue of magnetic disturbances in
sparse inertial motion capture (MoCap) systems. Existing
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) are prone to orientation estimation errors in magnetically disturbed environments, limiting the practical application of inertial Mocap
systems in real-world scenarios. To address this problem,
MagShield employs a “detect-then-correct” strategy, first
detecting magnetic disturbances through multi-IMU joint
analysis, and then correcting orientation errors using human motion priors. MagShield can be integrated with most
existing sparse inertial MoCap systems, improving their
performance in magnetically disturbed environments. Experimental results demonstrate that MagShield significantly
enhances the accuracy of motion capture under magnetic
interference and exhibits good compatibility across different sparse inertial MoCap systems. Code and dataset are
available at https://github.com/YZ-Shiao/MagShield.

29021

