This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Calibrated Variance-Stabilizing Transformations for Real-World Image
Denoising
Sébastien Herbreteau1,2,3 and Michael Unser2
CIBM Center for Biomedical Imaging, Switzerland
2
Biomedical Imaging Group, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
3
Univ Rennes, Ensai, CNRS, CREST—UMR 9194, F-35000 Rennes, France
1

sebastien.herbreteau@ensai.fr

Abstract
Supervised deep learning has become the method of
choice for image denoising. It involves the training of neural networks on large datasets composed of pairs of noisy
and clean images. However, the necessity of training data
that are specific to the targeted application constrains the
widespread use of denoising networks. Recently, several
approaches have been developed to overcome this difficulty
by whether artificially generating realistic clean/noisy image pairs, or training exclusively on noisy images. In this
paper, we show that, contrary to popular belief, denoising
networks specialized in the removal of Gaussian noise can
be efficiently leveraged in favor of real-world image denoising, even without additional training. For this to happen,
an appropriate variance-stabilizing transform (VST) has to
be applied beforehand. We propose an algorithm termed
Noise2VST for the learning of such a model-free VST. Our
approach requires only the input noisy image and an off-theshelf Gaussian denoiser. We demonstrate through extensive
experiments the efficiency and superiority of Noise2VST in
comparison to existing methods trained in the absence of
specific clean/noisy pairs.

1. Introduction
Image denoising involves the retrieval of a latent clean image s ∈ RN from its noisy observation z ∈ RN . In its most
studied formulation, each noisy pixel zi is assumed to independently follow an si -centered Gaussian distribution with
variance σ 2 , in accordance with
  z_i \sim \mathcal {N}(s_i, \sigma ^2) \,. 

(1)

The emergence of machine learning techniques has enabled
rapid and significant progress in the removal of Gaussian
noise [33, 34, 36, 61, 63–66]. The most successful denoising techniques rely on datasets composed of numerous pairs

michael.unser@epfl.ch

consisting of a clean image and its noisy counterpart, synthesized by artificially adding Gaussian noise to clean images. Such training datasets are particularly easy to build,
given the wide availability of images that one can assume to
be noise-free, along with the simple nature of the simulated
noise.
Nevertheless, empirical observations tend to indicate that
models trained specifically to remove Gaussian noise do not
generalize well to real-world scenarios [1, 45, 69, 70]. Since
real noise stems from diverse sources of degradation during
data acquisition, it is unlikely to follow a normal distribution. While recommended practice involves the training of
a specialized model on pairs of clean/noisy images from the
targeted application [1, 45, 69, 70], the assembly of a sufficiently large, high-quality dataset can be exceedingly timeconsuming or even impractical in certain contexts. This explains the growing focus on methods that train without specific clean/noisy image pairs, whether it is by generating realistic clean/noisy image pairs artificially [6, 9, 49, 60, 67],
training solely on noisy images [4, 23, 25, 30, 55], or even
without relying on any dataset [31, 32, 40, 47].
In this paper, we show that deep neural networks specialized in the removal of Gaussian noise, specifically, can also
be efficiently harnessed to tackle the denoising of real-world
images. Our work draws inspiration from the traditional
theory of variance-stabilizing transformations (VSTs), for
which the most popular representative is the Anscombe
transform [2], and revisits it with a dose of machine learning. We propose indeed to learn a function fθ : R 7→ R
that we apply pixel-wise to the input image z and that is
such that the resulting transformed distribution of the noise
adjusts approximately to a Gaussian distribution. More precisely, fθ (z) is intended to be processed by an off-the-shelf
Gaussian denoising network, with frozen weights, before
returning to the original domain by ways of the inverse
transformation. Contrary to traditional VST approaches, we
do not assume any model for the noise, except that it is zero-

10496

