This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Physically Stable and Buildable Brick Structures from Text
Ava Pun* Kangle Deng* Ruixuan Liu* Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Changliu Liu

Jun-Yan Zhu

Input Text Prompt: “A streamlined vessel with a long, narrow hull.”

…

Generated Structure
using LEGO Bricks

…

…

Manual Assembly
Automated Assembly
following the steps
by Robot Arms
(b) Real-world Assembly using LEGO Bricks

Intermediate Steps
(a) Physically Stable Text-to-Brick Generation

A bookshelf with
horizontal tiers

A rectangular table with
four legs

Gothic cathedral
bookshelf […]

Walnut wooden
table […]

A basic sofa

A high-backed chair

Vintage floral tapestry with Rustic farmhouse chair
deep reds and golds […]
[…]

A classic-style car with a
prominent front grille

A backless bench with
armrest

A classical guitar

A streamlined,
elongated vessel

Hot rod with flame
paintwork […]

Rustic stone bench with
moss growth […]

Parlor guitar with
ladder bracing […]

Weathered cargo ship
[…]

(c) Result Gallery

Figure 1. Overview of B RICK GPT. (a) Our method generates physically stable interconnecting brick assembly structures from text
descriptions through an end-to-end approach, showing intermediate brick-by-brick steps. (b) The generated designs are buildable both by
hand and by automated robots. (c) We show example results with corresponding text prompts. Besides basic brick designs (top), our method
can generate colored (bottom right) and textured (bottom left) models with appearance descriptions. We highly recommend the reader to
check our website for step-by-step videos.

Abstract
We introduce B RICK GPT, the first approach for generating physically stable interconnecting brick assembly models
from text prompts. To achieve this, we construct a large-scale,
physically stable dataset of brick structures, along with their
associated captions, and train an autoregressive large language model to predict the next brick to add via next-token
prediction. To improve the stability of the resulting designs,
we employ an efficient validity check and physics-aware
rollback during autoregressive inference, which prunes infeasible token predictions using physics laws and assembly constraints. Our experiments show that B RICK GPT
produces stable, diverse, and aesthetically pleasing brick
structures that align closely with the input text prompts. We
also develop a text-based brick texturing method to gen-

erate colored and textured designs. We show that our designs can be assembled manually by humans and automatically by robotic arms. We release our new dataset, StableText2Brick, containing over 47,000 brick structures of over
28,000 unique 3D objects accompanied by detailed captions, along with our code and models at the project website:
https://avalovelace1.github.io/BrickGPT/.

1. Introduction

* Indicates equal contribution.

3D generative models have made remarkable progress,
driven by advances in generative modeling [16, 67] and neural rendering [27, 53]. These models have enabled various
applications in virtual reality, gaming, entertainment, and scientific computing. Several works have explored synthesizing
3D objects from text [60], adding texture to meshes [8, 63],
and manipulating the shape and appearance of existing 3D

14798

