This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D-Attn: Decomposed Attention for Large Vision-and-Language Models
Chia-Wen Kuo

Sijie Zhu∗ Fan Chen Xiaohui Shen
ByteDance Intelligent Creation

Longyin Wen

Abstract
Large vision-and-language models (LVLMs) have traditionally integrated visual and textual tokens by concatenating them into a single homogeneous input for large
language models (LLMs), thereby maximally preserving
the pre-trained language capabilities. However, this constrained architecture for visual and textual tokens restricts
the design space for processing visual tokens, potentially
leading to suboptimal performance and efficiency. In
this paper, we propose Decomposed Attention (D-Attn), a
more flexible attention architecture for LVLMs, which enables modification of visual token operations without affecting textual-to-textual attention. D-Attn decomposes the
1-D causal self-attention of LVLMs into visual-to-visual,
textual-to-visual, and textual-to-textual attentions, and the
visual and textual output tokens from the decomposed attentions are merged with a carefully derived weighting strategy, namely α-weighting. Taking advantage of the flexibility, we are able to introduce two critical improvements in
visual token processing while maintaining the capacity of
pre-trained LLMs: 1) We rectify the biased positional encoding in textual-to-visual attention to boost visual understanding performance. 2) We diagonalize visual-to-visual
attention to reduce computation complexity from O(|V |2 )
to O(|V |) for |V | visual tokens without compromising performance. Extensive experiments and analysis validate the
effectiveness of D-Attn, demonstrating significant improvements on multiple image benchmarks while significantly reducing computational costs (e.g., 5× faster). Code will
be available at https://github.com/bytedance/
DecomposedAttention.

1. Introduction
Large Vision-and-Language Models (LVLMs) [23] have
become pivotal in advancing artificial intelligence, and
achieved significant advancement in various applications,
e.g., image captioning, visual question answering, and
multi-modal assistant. The success of LVLMs has largely
∗ Corresponding author, sijiezhu@bytedance.com

S-Attn Mistral v0.3 7B
S-Attn Gemma 2 9B

D-Attn Mistral v0.3 7B
D-Attn Gemma 2 9B

Figure 1. Performance comparison between proposed D-Attn
models and their self-attention (S-Attn) counterparts on popular
image benchmarks. Detailed results are available in Table 1.

benefited from the strong background knowledge and reasoning ability of pre-trained large language models (LLMs)
like LLaMA [38, 45] and Mistral [14]. To leverage the capability of pre-trained LLMs, recent LVLMs [23] usually
concatenate textual and visual tokens equally as input of
LLMs, so that the textual token operation within LLM is
not affected. Given that visual tokens generated from vision encoders (e.g., CLIP [28]) are inherently different from
the textual tokens obtained from discrete tokenizers, this
predominant way of handling them with one S-Attn (SelfAttention) could be suboptimal in terms of performance
and efficiency. 1) With the original positional encoding of
LLMs, textual tokens intrinsically attend more to the visual
tokens with closer position in the concatenated token sequence, which is biased and undesired, because different
visual tokens are equal for textual tokens. 2) The computation complexity of the self-attention between visual tokens is O(|V |2 ) (|V | denotes the number of visual tokens),
which is highly redundant, as the visual tokens are generated from bi-directional transformers and their correlation
information has been encoded. However, the current S-Attn

23935

