This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoExplorer: Active Geo-localization with Curiosity-Driven Exploration
Li Mi, Manon Béchaz, Zeming Chen, Antoine Bosselut, Devis Tuia
EPFL, Switzerland
https://limirs.github.io/GeoExplorer/

Abstract
Active Geo-localization (AGL) is the task of localizing a
goal, represented in various modalities (e.g., aerial images,
ground-level images, or text), within a predefined search
area. Current methods approach AGL as a goal-reaching
reinforcement learning (RL) problem with a distance-based
reward. They localize the goal by implicitly learning to minimize the relative distance from it. However, when distance
estimation becomes challenging or when encountering unseen targets and environments, the agent exhibits reduced
robustness and generalization ability due to the less reliable
exploration strategy learned during training. In this paper,
we propose GeoExplorer, an AGL agent that incorporates
curiosity-driven exploration through intrinsic rewards. Unlike distance-based rewards, our curiosity-driven reward is
goal-agnostic, enabling robust, diverse, and contextually
relevant exploration based on effective environment modeling. These capabilities have been proven through extensive
experiments across four AGL benchmarks, demonstrating
the effectiveness and generalization ability of GeoExplorer
in diverse settings, particularly in localizing unfamiliar targets and environments.

Figure 1. GeoExplorer combines goal-oriented and curiositydriven rewards to address AGL. (a) Task setting. Given a starting patch (◦) and a predefined search area (environment), AGL
aims at localizing a goal (△), by guiding an agent towards it. At
a given time, the agent observes a state and selects an action. The
goal location is unknown for inference. (b) Goal modalities. The
goal can be presented in various modalities including aerial images
(I), ground-level images (G) and text (T), associated with a patch
in the area. (c) GeoExplorer. The learning process of GeoExplorer is guided by two rewards: 1) a goal-oriented distance-based
reward, as in previous methods, which directs the agent toward
the goal, and 2) a goal-agnostic, curiosity-driven reward that encourages the agent to explore the environment based on curiosity
measured by similarity of state prediction and observation.

observation of the environment, and selects an action, i.e.,
a decision that modifies the agent position and the observed
state. The goal content can be described in various modalities (e.g., aerial patches, ground-level images, and textual
descriptions, Figure 1 (b)), but its location is unknown during inference. The task is considered successful if the agent
reaches the goal location within a limited search budget (B).
In real-world applications of AGL, robustness and generalizability are crucial as few scenarios are identical [25].
Existing AGL methods rely on extrinsic rewards (i.e.,
goal-oriented), and the policy is implicitly shaped by minimizing the relative distance between the agent and the goal
during training. However, this distance is unknown during
inference (since the goal’s location is unknown), making
the learned strategy less reliable. Moreover, these distance
estimations are often tailored to specific training environments, making it challenging for models to adapt to unseen

1. Introduction
Guiding unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) is essential in
search-and-rescue operations, which necessitate UAVs to
screen affected areas and locate missing individuals or damaged structures [16, 19]. Instead of conducting exhaustive searches across entire regions, UAVs can be actively
guided using available information: one could use coordinates of the point of interest, historical aerial imagery, or
even ground photographs or textual descriptions [21, 25].
The problem is known in computer vision as Active
Geo-Localization (AGL) [21, 25] within a goal-reaching
reinforcement learning (RL) context (Figure 1 (a)). AGL
focuses on localizing a target (goal), within a predefined
search area (environment) presented in the bird’s eye view,
by navigating the agent towards it. At a given time, the
agent observes a state, i.e., a patch representing a limited

6122

