This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlocking Constraints: Source-Free Occlusion-Aware Seamless Segmentation
Yihong Cao1,2,∗

Jiaming Zhang3,4,∗ Xu Zheng5,6 Hao Shi7 Kunyu Peng3 Hang Liu1
Kailun Yang1,† Hui Zhang1,†
1
2
Hunan University
Hunan Normal University 3 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 4 ETH Zürich
5
HKUST(GZ) 6 INSAIT, Soﬁa University “St. Kliment Ohridski” 7 Zhejiang University

Source Images

Source Labels

Target Labels

Performance

Constraints

Source-only

UNLOCK
SFOASS

360瀽 Perception

Amodal
Panotic

Panotic

Semantic

Amodal
Instance

Instance

UNLOCK (Ours)
12

40

11

30

10

20

9

10

(a) Unlocking the constraints of SFOASS with the proposed UNLOCK framework.

360SFUDA++

50

mAPQ
mAPQ

mPQ
mPQ

mIoU
mIoU

8

mAAP
mAAP

mAP
mAP

(b) Performance comparison of SFOASS.

Figure 1. UNLOCK framework (a) solves the Source-Free Occlusion-Aware Seamless Segmentation (SFOASS), enabling segmentation
with 360° viewpoint coverage and occlusion-aware reasoning while adapting without requiring source data and target labels, and (b)
outperforms existing SFDA methods on the Real-to-Real scenario [7] across all ﬁve segmentation metrics (i.e., mAPQ for amodal panoptic,
mPQ for panoptic, mIoU for semantic, mAAP for amodal instance, and mAP for instance).

Abstract

scores of 10.9 in mAAP and 11.6 in mAP, along with an absolute improvement of +4.3 in mAPQ over the source-only
method. All data and code will be made publicly available
at https://github.com/yihong-97/UNLOCK.

Panoramic image processing is essential for omnicontext perception, yet faces constraints like distortions,
perspective occlusions, and limited annotations. Previous
unsupervised domain adaptation methods transfer knowledge from labeled pinhole data to unlabeled panoramic
images, but they require access to source pinhole data.
To address these, we introduce a more practical task,
i.e., Source-Free Occlusion-Aware Seamless Segmentation
(SFOASS), and propose its ﬁrst solution, called UNconstrained Learning Omni-Context Knowledge (UNLOCK).
Speciﬁcally, UNLOCK includes two key modules: Omni
Pseudo-Labeling Learning and Amodal-Driven Context
Learning. While adapting without relying on source data
or target labels, this framework enhances models to achieve
segmentation with 360° viewpoint coverage and occlusionaware reasoning. Furthermore, we benchmark the proposed SFOASS task through both real-to-real and syntheticto-real adaptation settings. Experimental results show that
our source-free method achieves performance comparable to source-dependent methods, yielding state-of-the-art

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is a foundational task in computer
vision, essential for various downstream applications like
autonomous driving [44, 77], virtual reality [11, 58], and
robotics [3, 60]. Despite signiﬁcant advances in the ﬁeld,
current methods still face challenges in achieving both comprehensive and human-like perceptions of surrounding environments, limiting their ability to fully understand scenes.
Multiple critical research questions remain unsolved.
1) How to efﬁciently expand to 360° ﬁeld of view? Traditional scene understanding methods [9, 21, 70] tailored
for pinhole imagery, are limited by a narrow Field of View
(FoV). In contrast, panoramic vision offers 360° view in a
single shot, which has the potential to facilitate more comprehensive scene understanding [1, 19]. However, directly
applying traditional methods to panoramic data often results in unreliable performance due to challenges such as

∗

† Corresponding
Equal contribution.
authors (e-mail:
kailun.yang@hnu.edu.cn, zhanghuihby@126.com).

8961

