This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recover Biological Structure from Sparse-View Diffraction Images
with Neural Volumetric Prior

1

Renzhi He1 , Haowen Zhou2 , Yubei Chen,1 Yi Xue,1
University of California, Davis 2 California Institute of Technology
{cubhe, yxxue, ybchen}@ucdavis.edu, hzhou7@caltech.edu

Abstract

a. Explicit

Volumetric reconstruction of label-free living cells from
non-destructive optical microscopic images reveals cellular
metabolism in native environments. However, current optical tomography techniques require hundreds of 2D images
to reconstruct a 3D volume, hindering them from intravital
imaging of biological samples undergoing rapid dynamics.
This poses the challenge of reconstructing the entire volume
of semi-transparent biological samples from sparse views
due to the restricted viewing angles of microscopes and the
limited number of measurements. In this work, we develop
Neural Volumetric Prior (NVP) for high-fidelity volumetric reconstruction of semi-transparent biological samples
from sparse-view microscopic images. NVP integrates explicit and implicit neural representations and incorporates
the physical prior of diffractive optics. We validate NVP
on both simulated data and experimentally captured microscopic images. Compared to previous methods, NVP significantly reduces the required number of images by nearly 50fold and processing time by 3-fold while maintaining stateof-the-art performance. NVP is the first technique to enable
volumetric reconstruction of label-free biological samples
from sparse-view microscopic images, paving the way for
real-time 3D imaging of dynamically changing biological
samples. Project Page

1. Introduction
Tomography is widely used to reconstruct 3D biomedical
structures from multiple 2D image views. Computed Tomography (CT), for instance, produces images of the human body based on varying absorption of X-ray by different tissues, while optical tomography produces microscale
3D images of label-free cellular structures based on varying
diffraction of visible light by intracellular structures. Numerous advanced optical tomography systems and computational algorithms [1–16] have been developed for cultured
cells or thin tissue slices, where 3D intracellular structures

b. Implicit

(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) Embed
ding

RI

Fully parametric method

Non-parametric method
𝑛ො = 𝑊𝑒𝑛𝑟 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧

𝑛ො = 𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑟 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧

c. Triplane

d. Neural volumetric prior

RI

RI

Non-parametric
for surface

parametric

𝑛ො = 𝐹𝑡𝑟𝑖 𝑊𝑥𝑦 𝑥, 𝑦 + 𝑊𝑥𝑧 𝑥, 𝑧 + 𝑊𝑦𝑧 𝑦, 𝑧

Non-parametric
for volumetric

parametric

𝑛ො = 𝐹𝑛𝑣𝑝 𝑊𝑥𝑦𝑧 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧

Figure 1. Illustrations of different neural representation methods. (a) Explicit neural representation: A non-parametric method
in which the refractive index (RI) distribution n̂ is directly reconstructed by the projection function Wenr (x, y, z), which provide a
one-to-one mapping from spatial coordinates to RI values [17, 18].
(b) Implicit neural representation: Instead of directly reconstructing n̂, this method optimizes the parameters of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) Finr , which is then used to predict n̂ [19]. (c) Triplane: A hybrid method combining non-parametric and parametric
components by solving both the triplane features Wxy , Wxz , Wyz
and the neural model Ftri to reconstruct n̂ [20]. (d) NVP: Our proposed hybrid approach reconstructs n̂ by integrating an uncompressed volumetric prior Wxyz into the neural model Fnvp .

are reconstructed from diffracted laser or LED light as it
transmits through the sample with heterogenous refractive
index (RI). However, when the sample is too thick for visible light to transmit through, such as intact, bulky specimens or living animals, these imaging techniques cannot reconstruct 3D structures because the transmission side is inaccessible. To address this challenge, Fluorescence Diffraction Tomography (FDT) [17, 18] has been developed as a
promising technique for intravital optical tomography. It
reconstructs 3D label-free structures from diffracted fluo-

27771

