This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MemDistill: Distilling LiDAR Knowledge into Memory for
Camera-Only 3D Object Detection
Donghyeon Kwon1 Youngseok Yoon1 Hyeongseok Son3 Suha Kwak1,2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH1 Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2
AI Center, DS Division, Samsung Electronics3

Abstract
Camera-based 3D object detection has gained attention for
its cost-effectiveness, but it in general lags behind LiDARbased approaches due to its lack of explicit 3D spatial
cues. To take the best of both camera- and LiDAR-based
detectors, we propose MemDistill, a novel cross-modal
knowledge distillation framework for 3D object detection.
MemDistill transfers rich 3D knowledge from a LiDARbased teacher model to a camera-based student model
through a dedicated memory unit and a scene-dependent
memory retrieval module. To be specific, our framework
distills the teacher’s 3D knowledge, optimizes the memory
to store that knowledge compactly, and learns the retriever
that searches the memory to produce 3D features relevant
to the input scene, compensating for the missing LiDAR
modality. Experiments on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate that MemDistill significantly improves performance
of its camera-only baseline, achieving the state of the art in
camera-based 3D object detection.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of conventional KD from a
LiDAR-based teacher to a camera-based student (a) and the proposed method using a memory module, dubbed MemDistill (b).
The conventional one allows the student to distill useful 3D information from the teacher, but suffers from the absence of LiDAR
input, which substantially limits the student’s capability. MemDistill alleviates this issue with a memory module and retriever, which
are trained to distill 3D LiDAR knowledge from the teacher to
compensate for the missing LiDAR modality ①; the student is then
further fine-tuned for better alignment with the teacher ②.

1. Introduction
3D object detection, the task of localizing and classifying objects in the 3D space at once, plays crucial roles
in a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving [5, 6, 38, 39, 41], robotic navigation [1, 44] and virtual reality [11, 37]. In recent years, camera-based 3D
object detectors [4, 14, 26, 29, 40, 50] have gained significant attention for their cost-effectiveness and rich semantic cues inherent in RGB images. However, their performance remains limited compared to LiDAR-based approaches [22, 31, 33, 46, 48], which achieve superior results
by leveraging 3D point clouds that provide rich geometric
information crucial for accurate 3D object localization.
To take the best of both camera- and LiDAR-based detectors, knowledge distillation (KD) that transfers the rich
3D knowledge of a LiDAR-based detector to a camerabased detector has been studied. Existing techniques [7,

16, 20, 21, 43, 52] in this line of research adopt a teacherstudent paradigm, where a camera-based detector (student)
is trained to mimic the intermediate features and final predictions of a pre-trained LiDAR-based detector (teacher) so
that the student inherits accurate geometric information of
the teacher (Figure 1a). Despite their effectiveness, however, these methods are not optimal for cross-modal knowledge distillation in 3D object detection since the substantial modality gap between point clouds and images makes
it difficult for the student to align its features originating

6828

