This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Growing a Twig to Accelerate Large Vision-Language Models
Zhenwei Shao1 * Mingyang Wang1∗ Zhou Yu1† Wenwen Pan1 Yan Yang1
Tao Wei2 Hongyuan Zhang2 Ning Mao2 Wei Chen2 Jun Yu1, 3
1

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Space Information Sensing and Transmission,
School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
2
Li Auto Inc., China 3 School of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
{shaozw,kaka wangmy,yuz,panww,yangyan}@hdu.edu.cn,
{weitao, zhanghongyuan, maoning, chenwei10}@lixiang.com, yujun@hit.edu.cn
Code: https://github.com/MILVLG/twigvlm

Abstract

(deep)

Large vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities in open-world multimodal understanding, yet their high computational overheads pose great
challenges for practical deployment. Some recent works
have proposed methods to accelerate VLMs by pruning
redundant visual tokens guided by the attention maps of
VLM’s early layers. Despite the success of these token
pruning methods, they still suffer from two major shortcomings: (i) considerable accuracy drop due to insensitive
attention signals in early layers, and (ii) limited speedup
when generating long responses (e.g., 30 tokens). To address the limitations above, we present TwigVLM—a simple
and general architecture by “growing” a lightweight twig
upon an early layer of the base VLM. Compared with most
existing VLM acceleration methods purely based on visual
token pruning, our TwigVLM not only achieves better accuracy retention by employing a twig-guided token pruning
(TTP) strategy, but also yields higher generation speed by
utilizing a self-speculative decoding (SSD) strategy. Taking LLaVA-1.5-7B as the base VLM, experimental results
show that TwigVLM preserves 96% of the original performance after pruning 88.9% of visual tokens and achieves
154% speedup in generating long responses, delivering significantly better performance in terms of both accuracy and
speed over the state-of-the-art VLM acceleration methods.

1. Introduction
The revolution in large language models (LLMs) has reshaped the landscape of artificial intelligence [4, 17, 43].
Meanwhile, there has been growing interest in building
* Work done during an internship at Li Auto Inc.
† Zhou Yu is the corresponding author

Better accuracy retention

base VLM

VLM head

layer L
…
layer K+1

learnable
twig

layer K

twig layer

twig-guided token
pruning (TTP)

(shallow)
twig head

twig layer(s)

FastV

ours

Higher generation speed
layer K
…
layer 1
image

text

(a) TwigVLM architecture.

self-speculative
decoding (SSD)

shallow VLM

deep VLM

(b) Two key advantages of TwigVLM.

Figure 1. Our TwigVLM overview. (a) Given a base deep VLM,
the TwigVLM is obtained by freezing the base VLM while training a shallow twig block upon its early layer. (b) Compared to the
VLM acceleration methods based on visual token pruning (e.g.,
FastV [8]), TwigVLM not only achieves better accuracy retention but also yields higher generation speed. Both FastV and
TwigVLM take LLaVA-1.5-7B [29] as the base VLM (red dotted lines in the bar graphs) with the same pruning ratio of 88.9%.

large vision-language models (VLMs) [1, 9, 24, 28, 37, 40,
52], which can perform visual understanding and reasoning
and be used in various vision-language tasks such as object
grounding [35, 38], document understanding [34, 53], GUI
automation [46, 58], and robotic control [3, 22]. Despite the
remarkable progress achieved by these large VLMs, they
are usually parametric-intensive and computational-heavy.
This poses great challenges for deploying these models in
low-latency scenarios. Therefore, the research on VLM acceleration is of practical and emergent demands.
As the computational cost of transformer architectures
[45] increases quadratically with token sequence length,
reducing the number of tokens offers an effective way to
accelerate VLMs. Moreover, visual tokens usually con-

20064

