This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RGE-GS: Reward-Guided Expansive Driving Scene Reconstruction
via Diffusion Priors
Sicong Du1,†

Jiarun Liu1,2,†

Qifeng Chen1

Hao-Xiang Chen3

1 Unmanned Vehicle Dept., CaiNiao Inc., Alibaba Group

Tai-Jiang Mu3

2 Zhejiang University

Sheng Yang1,B

3 BNRist, Tsinghua University

{liujiarun.ljr,shengyang}@cainiao.com, iedusicong@126.com

Abstract
A single-pass driving clip frequently results in incomplete scanning of the road structure, making reconstructed
scene expanding a critical requirement for sensor simulators to effectively regress driving actions. Although
contemporary 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) techniques
achieve remarkable reconstruction quality, their direct extension through the integration of diffusion priors often
introduces cumulative physical inconsistencies and compromises training efficiency. To address these limitations, we present RGE-GS, a novel expansive reconstruction framework that synergizes diffusion-based generation
with reward-guided Gaussian integration. The RGE-GS
framework incorporates two key innovations: First, we propose a reward network that learns to identify and prioritize consistently generated patterns prior to reconstruction
phases, thereby enabling selective retention of diffusion outputs for spatial stability. Second, during the reconstruction process, we devise a differentiated training strategy
that automatically adjust Gaussian optimization progress
according to scene converge metrics, which achieving better convergence than baseline methods. Extensive evaluations of publicly available datasets demonstrate that RGEGS achieves state-of-the-art performance in reconstruction
quality. Our source-code will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/CN-ADLab/RGE-GS.

on under-observed regions from single-pass real-world scans
– has become a pivotal capability for autonomous driving
simulators to support reactive regressions. While recent
breakthroughs in controllable diffusion models [7, 28] have
achieved significant improvements of visual effects, these
approaches remain limited in their adaptability for scenespecific training and tuning, as well as their computational
efficiency for real-time Novel View Synthesis (NVS) along
predefined trajectories.
Therefore, many state-of-the-art diffusion-aided reconstruction frameworks [5, 20, 29] incorporate generated scans
into an explicit reconstruction pipeline to improve physical
consistency, facilitate real-time photorealistic rendering, and
enable interactive editing of reconstructed driving scenes.
Nevertheless, integrating diffused scans with physical inconsistency into Gaussian reconstruction process may lead to
unpredictable artifacts or compromised training efficiency.
To date, existing frameworks have yet to adequately resolve
this challenge, as they predominantly rely on reconstruction methods [11, 13, 19] originally designed for real-world
scans without necessary adaptations. Fine-tuning diffusion
models on domain-specific data can help narrow the gap
between generated images and real scans. However, this
approach may still fall short in addressing inherent biases
in the generated outputs. Without a robust mechanism to
identify and reject these biases, the generated images may
lack physical consistency, leading to potentially misleading
results.
To more effectively leverage diffusion priors during expansive modeling, we propose RGE-GS, a reconstruction
method that is compatible with recent advancements in controllable diffusion models [2] and represents scenes using
Gaussians. For generated scans, we quantify two pixellevel metrics revealing the reconstruction progress: (1) the
coherence between newly generated diffusion priors and existing Gaussians and (2) the current reconstruction progress
of under-observed and ongoing regions. As for the first
metric, it can be used for quality inspection and data filtering for input diffusion priors, preserving mostly correct
information for reconstruction. While fine-tuning diffusion

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving simulators necessitate sophisticated
street scene modeling that can effectively synthesize multiview sensor data while adhering to realistic physical principles – a fundamental capability critical for scalable data
augmentation [35] and closed-loop simulation [16].
Expansive scene modeling – which involves performing
physically plausible and perceptually realistic reconstruction
†: Equally contributed. B: Corresponding author.

25756

