This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Demeter: A Parametric Model of Crop Plant Morphology from the Real World
Tianhang Cheng, Akbert J. Zhai, Evan Z. Chen, Rui Zhou, Yawen Deng, Zitong Li
Kejie Zhao, Janice Shiu, Qianyu Zhao, Yide Xu, Xinlei Wang, Yuan Shen, Sheng Wang
Lisa Ainsworth, Kaiyu Guan, Shenlong Wang†
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Rose

Maize

Papaya

Tobacco

Soybean

Plant Reconstruction

Biophysical Simulation

Figure 1. Demeter is a parametric model that is trained on real-world data. It encodes plants into shape, topology, articulation, and
deformations, providing a realistic, compact representation that can generalize to many species.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Learning 3D parametric shape models of objects has gained
popularity in vision and graphics and has showed broad
utility in 3D reconstruction, generation, understanding, and
simulation. While powerful models exist for humans and
animals, equally expressive approaches for modeling plants
are lacking. In this work, we present Demeter, a data-driven
parametric model that encodes key factors of a plant morphology, including topology, shape, articulation, and deformation into a compact learned representation. Unlike previous parametric models, Demeter handles varying shape
topology across various species and models three sources
of shape variation: articulation, subcomponent shape variation, and non-rigid deformation. To advance crop plant
modeling, we collected a large-scale, ground-truthed dataset
from a soybean farm as a testbed. Experiments show that
Demeter effectively synthesizes shapes, reconstructs structures, and simulates biophysical processes. Code and data
is available at our project page.

Crop plants are essential to life on Earth and human wellbeing. Food crops such as rice, maize, and soybeans form the
foundation of global agriculture and feed billions of people;
industrial crops supply crucial raw materials for manufacturing; tree crops produce oxygen, provide habitats, and help
maintain ecological balance. Reconstructing, understanding, and modeling plants with computer vision opens pathways to enhance crop yields, monitor environmental health,
and drive agricultural innovation. A critical step toward this
goal is establishing a realistic, flexible, expressive, compact,
and preferably data-driven morphological model for plants.
While powerful parametric models [37, 45, 88] exist for human forms and quadrupedal animals, there is currently no
equally expressive model for plants.
Our goal is to bridge the gap by building a compact parametric model capable of representing, reconstructing, animating, and simulating plants of a given species. To this end,
we present Demeter, a novel, data-driven, category-based
parametric model that encodes key factors driving variations
in 3D plant morphology, including topology, articulation,
shape variations, and non-articulated deformations (Fig. 2).
The articulations of the plant body are modeled in a kine-

28740

