This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Face Retouching with Diffusion Data Generation and Spectral Restorement
Shijian Lu2 *
Xiaoqin Zhang1 *
1
Wenzhou University
2
Nanyang Technological University

Zhidan Xu1

zhidan.xu@stu.wzu.edu.cn, xqzhang@wzu.edu.cn, Shijian.Lu@ntu.edu.sg

Input

AutoRetouch [21]

pix2pixHD [26]

ABPN [9]

Retouchformer [29]

Ours

Figure 1. The proposed face retouching technique can repair local facial regions and remove blemishes with superb detail preservation and
global consistency in facial colour, facial texture, etc. Zoom-in for more details.

of JPEG compression, FSR introduces frequency-domain
quantization with spatial projections to learn enhanced feature representations. MRF fuses multi-resolution features
via laplacian pyramid fusion, removing large-area blemishes and preserving local fine details effectively. Extensive
experiments over multiple benchmarks show that the proposed framework outperforms the state-of-the-art quantitatively and qualitatively. The created benchmark also provides valuable data for training and evaluating both existing and future face retouching networks.

Abstract
Face retouching has achieved impressive performance
largely driven by its wide range of applications in various real-world tasks. However, most existing works often
encounters a dilemma between global consistency and local detail preservation, partially due to the lack of largescale and high-quality training data. We address the face
retouching challenge from two perspectives. First, we create a large-scale face retouching benchmark to mitigate the
data scarcity issue. The benchmark comprises 25,000 pairs
of high-quality facial images (before and after face retouching) that contain a variety of facial attributes and blemish
types such as acne and moles. Second, we design a novel
framework that introduces frequency selection and restoration (FSR) and multi-resolution fusion (MRF) that leverages frequency-aware dynamic aggregation and spatialfrequency filtering to achieve global consistency and local
detail preservation concurrently. Inspired by the principle

1. Introduction

*Corresponding author.

Face retouching, which aims to beautify face images by removing various blemishes and smoothing facial skin, has
attracted increasing interest due to its applications in various real-world tasks in social media, virtual avatar creation,
etc. Manual retouching has been widely practiced in the
literature, relying on expert retouchers who balance blemish removal and the global uniformity of skin tones meticulously. However, the process of manual retouching is usually time-consuming, highly skill-dependent, and short of

14722

