This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARIG: Autoregressive Interactive Head Generation for Real-time Conversations
Ying Guo* , Xi Liu,* Cheng Zhen†, Pengfei Yan, Xiaoming Wei
Vision AI Department, Meituan
{guoying16, liuqian70, zhencheng02, yanpengfei03, weixiaoming}@meituan.com

Abstract
Face-to-face communication, as a common human activity, motivates the research on interactive head generation.
However, previous clip-wise generation paradigm or explicit listener/speaker generator-switching methods have
limitations in future signal acquisition, contextual behavioral understanding, and switching smoothness, making
it challenging to be real-time and realistic. In this paper, we propose an autoregressive (AR) based frame-wise
framework called ARIG to realize the real-time generation with better interaction realism. For real-time generation, we model motion prediction as a non-vector-quantized
AR process. Unlike discrete codebook-index prediction,
we represent motion distribution using diffusion procedure, achieving more accurate predictions in continuous
space. To improve realism, we emphasize interactive behavior understanding (IBU) and detailed conversational
state understanding (CSU). In IBU, based on dual-track
dual-modal signals, we summarize short-range behaviors
through bidirectional-integrated learning and perform contextual understanding over long ranges. In CSU, we use
voice activity signals and context features to understand the
various states (interruption, feedback, pause, etc.) that exist
in actual conversations. These serve as conditions for the
final progressive motion prediction. Extensive experiments
have verified the effectiveness of our model. The Homepage
is https://jinyugy21.github.io/ARIG/.

Figure 1. Development of interactive head motion generation. a)
Only speaker generation based on last speaking behaviors. b) Different explicit generators for listener/speaker. c) Implicit clip-byclip generator based on a unified model. d) Implicit frame-byframe generator based on a unified non-quantized AR model.

1. Introduction

to provide appropriate listener responses, but it only offers
non-verbal motion feedback and cannot generate speaker
responses. In real conversations, each participant’s response
should integrate the behaviors of both parties and possess
the ability to both speak and listen. Thus, single-role generation cannot fully simulate behaviors in conversations.
Recently, some works [19, 26, 28, 29, 36, 38] have
studied the interactive head generation (IHG), as shown in
Fig. 1. Suppose the conversation between a user and a virtual agent, IHG generates interactive head responses for the
agent by utilizing available information from both parties.
Initially, early works (Fig. 1a) such as MRecGen [29] and
[19] model the conversation as a multi-turn mode and only
generate the agent’s speaker response based on the user’s
speaking behavior in the last turn. Then, methods (Fig. 1b)
in [36], DIM [26] and AgentAvatar [28] can generate interactive responses of both speakers and listeners. However, they have to assign explicit roles (speaker/listener)
for the agent and switch between two respective generators. Conversations involve more complex states beyond
speaker/listener alternation (e.g. interruption, pause, giv-

Face-to-face communication is a common human activity
around us [31]. Research on head generation makes it possible for virtual agents to become communication participants. Early works focus on single-role generation (talking/listening). In talking head generation, the input signal
comes only from the speaker himself and does not receive
signals from the other participant for interaction. The listening head generation receives signals from both participants
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

12956

