This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How Would It Sound?
Material-Controlled Multimodal Acoustic Profile Generation for Indoor Scenes
Mahnoor Fatima Saad Ziad Al-Halah
University of Utah
{mahnoor.saad, ziad.al-halah}@utah.edu

Abstract

Multimodal Scene Profile

How would the sound in a studio change with a carpeted
floor and acoustic tiles on the walls? We introduce the task
of material-controlled acoustic profile generation, where,
given an indoor scene with specific audio-visual characteristics, the goal is to generate a target acoustic profile
based on a user-defined material configuration at inference
time. We address this task with a novel encoder-decoder
approach that encodes the scene’s key properties from an
audio-visual observation and generates the target Room
Impulse Response (RIR) conditioned on the material specifications provided by the user. Our model enables the generation of diverse RIRs based on various material configurations defined dynamically at inference time. To support this
task, we create a new benchmark, the Acoustic Wonderland
Dataset, designed for developing and evaluating materialaware RIR prediction methods under diverse and challenging settings. Our results demonstrate that the proposed
model effectively encodes material information and generates high-fidelity RIRs, outperforming several baselines and
state-of-the-art methods. Project: https://mahnoorfatima-saad.github.io/m-capa.html

How would it
sound if I
change the
material to ... ?

Visual
Wall

Tile
Wall
Glass
Concrete

Target Material

Floor

Acoustic

Tile
Glass
Concrete

Target Acoustics

Carpet
Wood
Steel

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our material-controlled acoustic profile generation task.
Given a scene with specific visual and acoustic properties (top), the
objective is to create new acoustic profiles for the same scene by
allowing users to dynamically assign different materials to objects.
Our approach enables users to experience how various material
configurations impact the sound quality of the scene on the fly. For
instance, a user can explore how a classroom would sound with
acoustic tiles and big glass windows on the walls (middle) or a
carpeted floor (bottom).

Sound, along with vision, plays a fundamental role in shaping our perception of the environment. From conveying
essential spatial information to enhancing emotional and social experiences, sound improves our ability to interpret and
interact with the world around us. Realistic sound modeling
is therefore essential in applications that aim to create immersive, lifelike experiences, such as AR/VR and gaming,
where a mismatch between the visual and acoustic stimuli
may lead to the room divergence effect [51] and the collapse
of the plausibility of the whole experience.
Achieving accurate and immersive audio experiences requires precise modeling of how sound propagates in a given
space. As sound travels through a room, it interacts with

objects, surfaces, and materials through processes like reflection, absorption, and transmission. These interactions impart
unique reverberations to the sound wave that are specific to
each environment, creating a distinct acoustic signature. For
example, the experience of listening to a symphony in a living room differs dramatically from listening in a theater hall.
The Room Impulse Response (RIR) function [49] captures
these unique characteristics by modeling how sound travels
between two points within a space. By convolving an audio
signal with an RIR, we can reproduce the acoustic characteristics of the room, producing a sound that closely resembles
what a listener would experience in that environment.
Given the importance of accurate RIR modeling, there

12232

