This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PersPose: 3D Human Pose Estimation with Perspective Encoding and
Perspective Rotation
Xiaoyang Hao∗ Han Li∗†
Southern University of Science and Technology, China
{haoxy2022, lih2022}@mail.sustech.edu.cn

Previous Methods

Abstract

v

Monocular 3D human pose estimation (HPE) methods estimate the 3D positions of joints from individual images.
Existing 3D HPE approaches often use the cropped image alone as input for their models. However, the relative depths of joints cannot be accurately estimated from
cropped images without the corresponding camera intrinsics, which determine the perspective relationship between
3D objects and the cropped images. In this work, we introduce Perspective Encoding (PE) to encode the camera
intrinsics of the cropped images. Moreover, since the human subject can appear anywhere within the original image, the perspective relationship between the 3D scene and
the cropped image differs significantly, which complicates
model fitting. Additionally, the further the human subject
deviates from the image center, the greater the perspective distortions in the cropped image. To address these issues, we propose Perspective Rotation (PR), a transformation applied to the original image that centers the human
subject, thereby reducing perspective distortions and alleviating the difficulty of model fitting. By incorporating PE
and PR, we propose a novel 3D HPE framework, PersPose.
Experimental results demonstrate that PersPose achieves
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on the 3DPW, MPIINF-3DHP, and Human3.6M datasets. For example, on the
in-the-wild dataset 3DPW, PersPose achieves an MPJPE
of 60.1 mm, 7.54% lower than the previous SOTA approach. Code is available at: https://github.com/
KenAdamsJoseph/PersPose.

d

u
y

z

x

Neural
Network
𝑃!"# 3D Pose 𝑃$%&

Our Method

Perspective Rotation
Cropped Intrinsics
Perspective
Encoding

v

d

u
y

z

x

Neural
Network
𝑃!"# 3D Pose 𝑃$%&

Figure 1. Comparison of previous 3D HPE frameworks and ours.

the 3D coordinates of human joints from images, whereas
3D human pose and shape estimation (HPS) aims to predict
the 3D coordinates of human mesh vertices. Some 3D HPS
methods [4, 16, 24, 29, 42] treat 3D HPE as a sub-task, first
estimating the 3D positions of the joints (or a larger set of
mesh vertices) and then reconstructing the human mesh.
Existing 3D HPE methods [15, 23, 28, 32, 36] and 3D
HPS methods [4, 16, 17, 24, 29, 42] typically use cropped
images as input to estimate 3D joint positions, meaning
that the region corresponding to the human bounding box is
cropped from the original image, as illustrated in Figure 1.
However, the CLIFF method [18] demonstrates that using
cropped images alone cannot accurately estimate global rotation (i.e., the orientation of the human in the camera coordinate system), thus it employs both bounding box information and the cropped images as inputs to the neural network.
In this paper, we demonstrate through the example in Figure
2 that when only the cropped image is provided as input, the
relative depths of joints cannot be accurately estimated either. Additionally, the example in Figure 3 reveals that even
when the full image is used, the absence of field of view angle (FOV) information results in an inaccurate estimation of
the joints’ relative depths. Moreover, cropping can be con-

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose from a single image is a crucial
task in computer vision, with numerous practical applications such as AR/VR and human-computer interaction. The
objective of 3D human pose estimation (HPE) is to recover
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

8110

