This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reangle-A-Video: 4D Video Generation as Video-to-Video Translation
Hyeonho Jeong1,2,*

Suhyeon Lee1,*
Jong Chul Ye1
1
2
KAIST
Adobe Research
{hyeonho.jeong, suhyeon.lee, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. From a single monocular video of any scene, Reangle-A-Video generates synchronized videos from diverse camera viewpoints or movements without relying on any multi-view generative prior—using only single fine-tuning of a video generator. The first row
shows the input video, while the rows below present videos generated by Reangle-A-Video. (Left): Static view transport results. (Right):
Dynamic camera control results. Full video examples are available on our project page: hyeonho99.github.io/reangle-a-video

Abstract
We introduce Reangle-A-Video, a unified framework for
generating synchronized multi-view videos from a single input video. Unlike mainstream approaches that train multiview video diffusion models on large-scale 4D datasets, our
method reframes the multi-view video generation task as
video-to-videos translation, leveraging publicly available
image and video diffusion priors. In essence, ReangleA-Video operates in two stages. (1) Multi-View Motion
Learning: An image-to-video diffusion transformer is synchronously fine-tuned in a self-supervised manner to distill view-invariant motion from a set of warped videos. (2)
Multi-View Consistent Image-to-Images Translation: The
first frame of the input video is warped and inpainted into

various camera perspectives under an inference-time crossview consistency guidance using DUSt3R, generating multiview consistent starting images. Extensive experiments on
static view transport and dynamic camera control show that
Reangle-A-Video surpasses existing methods, establishing
a new solution for multi-view video generation. Our codes
and data are available at our project page .

1. Introduction

11164

Diffusion-based video generators [5, 7, 9, 39, 44, 57, 73,
84, 91] are rapidly advancing, enabling the generation of
visually rich and dynamic videos from text or visual inputs.
Recent progress in video generative models highlights the
∗ indicates equal contribution

