This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanOLAT: A Large-Scale Dataset for Full-Body Human Relighting and
Novel-View Synthesis
Timo Teufel1,→
Pulkit Gera1,→
Xilong Zhou1
Umar Iqbal2
1
2
1
Pramod Rao
Jan Kautz
Vladislav Golyanik Christian Theobalt1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC 2 NVIDIA

Multiple Poses

EnvMap Illumination Captures

Photometric Normals

OLAT Illumination Captures

MVS Mesh

Segmentation Mask

Image-Based EnvMap Relighting

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed HumanOLAT dataset. We record 21 subjects in three static poses each (top left) and provide
pixel-wise photometric normals, multi-view stereo (MVS) meshes and segmentation masks (top right). To enable broad-scale application
in various relighting tasks (e.g. illumination harmonization), we capture every pose both under ten environment map illuminations loaded
directly into our lightstage (bottom left) as well as 331 OLAT illuminations suitable for image-based relighting [11] (bottom right).

Abstract

cludes HDR RGB frames under various illuminations, such
as white light, environment maps, color gradients and finegrained OLAT illuminations. Our evaluations of state-ofthe-art relighting and novel-view synthesis methods underscore both the dataset’s value and the significant challenges
still present in modeling complex human-centric appearance and lighting interactions. We believe HumanOLAT
will significantly facilitate future research, enabling rigorous benchmarking and advancements in both general and
human-specific relighting and rendering techniques.

Simultaneous relighting and novel-view rendering of
digital human representations is an important yet challenging task with numerous applications. Progress in this
area has been significantly limited due to the lack of publicly available, high-quality datasets, especially for fullbody human captures. To address this critical gap, we
introduce the HumanOLAT dataset, the first publicly accessible large-scale dataset of multi-view One-Light-at-aTime (OLAT) captures of full-body humans. The dataset inω both authors contributed equally to this work

29131

