This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WIPES: Wavelet-based Visual Primitives*
Wenhao Zhang1,† , Hao Zhu1,† , Delong Wu1,† , Di Kang2 , Linchao Bao2 , Xun Cao1,∗ , Zhan Ma1
1
Nanjing University, 2 Tencent
†
Equal contribution. * Corresponding author: caoxun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Gauss. ( Large σ )
Gauss. ( Small σ )

Pursuing a continuous visual representation that offers flexible frequency modulation and fast rendering speed has recently garnered increasing attention in the fields of 3D vision and graphics. However, existing representations often rely on frequency guidance or complex neural network decoding, leading to spectrum loss or slow rendering.
To address these limitations, we propose WIPES, a universal Wavelet-based vIsual PrimitivES for representing
multi-dimensional visual signals. Building on the spatialfrequency localization advantages of wavelets, WIPES effectively captures both the low-frequency “forest” and the
high-frequency “trees.” Additionally, we develop a waveletbased differentiable rasterizer to achieve fast visual rendering. Experimental results on various visual tasks, including
2D image representation, 5D static and 6D dynamic novel
view synthesis, demonstrate that WIPES, as a visual primitive, offers higher rendering quality and faster inference
than INR-based methods, and outperforms Gaussian-based
representations in rendering quality.

Gauss. ( Large σ )
Gauss. ( Small σ )
Wave. ( High f )
Wave. ( Low f )

Wave. ( High f )
Wave. ( Low f )

Frequency-Domain

Spatial-Domain

Improvement (dB)

(a) Comparison of Gaussians and WIPES

Number of Primitives
(b) PSNR improvement of WIPES over Gaussian primitives [44]

High-complexity Image

1. Introduction

GT

WIPES

GSImage

(c) Performance comparison of WIPES and Gaussian primitives [44]

Representing visual signals as continuous functions has
garnered increasing attention in recent years. Owing to
the inherent advantages of end-to-end differentiability and
scalable querying, these continuous representations can be
seamlessly integrated with various imaging and rendering
functions. This integration facilitates the optimization of
inverse problems, whether the resolution is down-sampled
or the dimensionality is reduced. Since these representations are optimized independently for different scenarios,
pursuing a universal visual primitive, which offers complex frequency compatibility and fast rendering speed, is
of paramount importance.
However, existing representations suffer from spectral
loss or slow rendering. For instance, the representational
capacity of popular implicit neural representations (INRs)

Figure 1. Spatial-Frequency Localization Benefits of WIPES. (a)
shows the spatial and frequency distributions of Gaussian and
WIPES primitives with various parameters. Adjusting σ only
affects the Gaussian frequency bandwidth, unable to overcome
its low-frequency constraint. In contrast, WIPES flexibly modulates frequency, making it advantageous for complex visual tasks.
(b) displays image fitting on the Kodak dataset, where WIPES
achieves higher PSNR with the same primitives count, and this advantage grows with more primitives. (c) illustrates that Gaussian
primitives smooth complex textures due to low-frequency limitation, while WIPES accurately reconstructs rooftop patterns and
railings through adaptable frequency properties.

* The work was supported in part by NSFC Grant 62025108 and Tencent Rhino-Bird Joint Research Program RBFR2024009.

[34] is often constrained by spectral bias [27], only the frequencies defined by hyperparameters are effectively learned
[35, 41, 46], resulting in the loss of information in other frequency bands. Furthermore, the complex network architec-

27338

