This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LookOut: Real-World Humanoid Egocentric Navigation
Boxiao Pan

Adam W. Harley

Francis Engelmann

*

C. Karen Liu

Stanford University

Abstract
The ability to predict collision-free future trajectories from
egocentric observations is crucial in applications such as
humanoid robotics, VR / AR, and assistive navigation. In
this work, we introduce the challenging problem of predicting a sequence of future 6D head poses from an egocentric
video. In particular, we predict both head translations and
rotations to learn the active information-gathering behavior expressed through head-turning events. To solve this
task, we propose a framework that reasons over temporally
aggregated 3D latent features, which models the geometric
and semantic constraints for both the static and dynamic
parts of the environment. Motivated by the lack of training data in this space, we further contribute a data collection pipeline using the Project Aria glasses, and present
a dataset collected through this approach. Our dataset,
dubbed Aria Navigation Dataset (AND), consists of 4 hours
of recording of users navigating in real-world scenarios. It
includes diverse situations and navigation behaviors, providing a valuable resource for learning real-world egocentric navigation policies. Extensive experiments show that
our model learns human-like navigation behaviors such as
waiting / slowing down, rerouting, and looking around for
traffic while generalizing to unseen environments. Check
out our project webpage at https://sites.google.
com/stanford.edu/lookout.

1. Introduction
Navigating safely in the real world from egocentric observations is an ability that we humans possess, yet extremely
difficult for machines to learn. This is largely due to the diverse and complex situations that exist in practical scenarios. Such capabilities are crucial for various applications
including humanoid robotics [42], VR / AR [8], and assistive navigation [63].
Many works have approached this problem from different angles. Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) [18, 21, 25,
39, 66] focuses on localizing goals and planning long-term
* Equal advising

goal-directed paths, typically in simulated static environments. Robotic social navigation [14, 17, 36, 41, 56] learns
socially compliant navigation policies in dynamic environments. These works generally target wheeled or legged navigation robots, whose action and observation distributions
are vastly different from the human form factor. Recently,
several works investigate egocentric navigation that predicts
trajectories [63] or full-body poses [8] for humans. They
however assume static environments.
Despite these advances, a real-world deployable humanoid egocentric navigation policy remains challenging.
First, a method for humanoid navigation in dynamic environments is lacking. Second, existing methods ignore an
important aspect of human-like navigation, which is the active information gathering via head turning. Humans often
rotate their heads and look for useful information. For example, we look to the side before crossing roads to check
any passing vehicles, look downward when stepping off /
onto curbs, etc. This ability is helpful for real-world deployment, partly due to the limited FoV of cameras. Lastly,
we do not have a way to collect multi-modal labeled training data at scale due to the difficulty of deploying humanoid
robots in the real world.
In this work, we make steps towards a real-world deployable humanoid navigation policy from all three of these
fronts. To tackle the challenge of 3D dynamic scene
awareness, we propose a model that unprojects per-frame
DINO [2, 38] features to 3D, and aggregates the 3D feature volumes across time to gain a holistic understanding of
the geometric constraints posed by the environment. Moreover, through training on our collected dataset that contains
extensive dynamic obstacles (i.e. pedestrians and vehicles),
our model effectively learns the ability to navigate around
both static and dynamic objects. To model active information gathering, we design our framework to predict 3D head
rotations in addition to translations (i.e. 6D head pose prediction), which can be used to calculate velocity commands
normally input to humanoid robots [4, 46, 47]. Additionally, in our data collection process, we ask our human subjects to follow a careful information-gathering strategy, e.g.
always looking for passing cars before crossing roads. To

24977

*

Leonidas J. Guibas

