This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Processing and acquisition traces in visual encoders:
What does CLIP know about your camera?
Ryan Ramos1⇤

Vladan Stojnić2⇤ Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos2 Yuta Nakashima1
Giorgos Tolias2 Noa Garcia1
1
The University of Osaka 2 VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague

search

search

collection A

collection C

search

search

collection B

collection D

Figure 1. Impact of metadata on the representation space of visual encoders. The similarity in the representation space of foundation
visual encoders is influenced not only by semantic labels but also by metadata labels. This work explores and uncovers these effects for
metadata related to image processing (e.g., JPEG compression) and image acquisition (e.g., camera model). The figure illustrates the search
results for the query image with specific metadata labels. Retrieved images are ranked according to their similarity to the query. Different
image collections exhibit varied combinations of semantic and metadata labels, affecting the retrieval outcome.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual encoders are fundamental to computer vision algorithms, serving as the backbone for projecting images into
meaningful representations. This core pipeline underpins
various recognition tasks, from image classification [21, 35]
and retrieval [34, 52] to object detection [55, 56] and
segmentation [22, 33]. To ensure broad applicability in
downstream tasks, visual encoders are typically pretrained
on generic objectives such as supervised image classification [21, 67], self-supervised learning [6, 8], or contrastive
vision-language training [53, 76]. Their primary goal is to
capture the semantic content of images, encoding information about objects, attributes, and other relevant features.
Given their central role in computer vision tasks, ensuring the robustness of visual encoders across diverse image
distributions is crucial. This has led to extensive research
on their sensitivity to various transformations and corruptions, including photometric and geometric changes [23],
noise injection [23], natural corruptions [23], image compression [7, 17], adversarial perturbations [18, 36] and examples [25], and out-of-distribution inputs such as stylized
images [16] or samples from unseen datasets [25].
This work investigates robustness in the era of foundation models, which are typically kept frozen after large-

Prior work has analyzed the robustness of visual encoders
to image transformations and corruptions, particularly in
cases where such alterations are not seen during training.
When this occurs, they introduce a form of distribution shift
at test time, often leading to performance degradation. The
primary focus has been on severe corruptions that, when
applied aggressively, distort useful signals necessary for accurate semantic predictions.
We take a different perspective by analyzing parameters
of the image acquisition process and transformations that
may be subtle or even imperceptible to the human eye. We
find that such parameters are systematically encoded in the
learned visual representations and can be easily recovered.
More strikingly, their presence can have a profound impact,
either positively or negatively, on semantic predictions.
This effect depends on whether there is a strong correlation or anti-correlation between semantic labels and these
acquisition-based or processing-based labels. Our code
and data are available at: https://github.com/
ryan-caesar-ramos/visual-encoder-traces
* Equal contribution.

17056

