This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GECO: Geometrically Consistent Embedding with Lightspeed Inference
Regine Hartwig
Dominik Muhle
Riccardo Marin
Daniel Cremers
TU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
{regine.hartwig, dominik.muhle, riccardo.marin, cremers}@tum.de

Segmentation

Source Image

GECO (Ours)

Source Image

GECO (Ours)

Keypoints Matching

PCK

90

70

50

DINO
DIFTadm
DINOv2-S
DINOv2-B
Geo
GECO (Ours)
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

fps
GT

Geo[64]

Target Image

Geo[64]

Figure 1. We propose GECO, an optimal-transport-based approach for learning geometrically consistent visual features. Characterizing
geometric properties, like distinguishing left/right eyes or front/back legs, remains challenging even for sophisticated methods. For instance, in the keypoint transfer example, showing a zebra, Geo [64] confuses the eyes, while our features have low similarity. Our method
learns robust feature representations, achieving high accuracy while remaining lightweight and efficient at inference time (plot on the right),
enabling real-time applications at 30fps. Our feature embedding exhibits a continuous and structured understanding of objects, making it
highly effective for image segmentation (left) and precise keypoint matching, even in challenging scenarios involving occlusions (middle,
with attention maps overlaid on the target images).

1. Introduction

Abstract

Vision Foundation models either trained only on images [14, 42] or text-image pairs [47] produce flexible features that can be applied across various tasks such as image generation, style transfer, and correspondence estimation. While these models perform well across a range of
applications, they are constrained by their limited ability
to distinguish between geometric properties [16]. For instance, they may struggle to differentiate between left and
right eyes or the legs of a chair, issues that have been explored in the context of the Janus problem [16, 64]. Since
they are trained using consistency between self-augmented
images, including flipping, they often do not differentiate
between symmetric parts, and are even encouraged to learn
features that are invariant to such transformations. These
models often encounter challenges like ambiguous features
for semantically similar regions and confusion due to occlusions. Such mismatches can lead to severe artifacts in practical downstream applications, such as a category template
reconstruction pipeline incorrectly reconstructing 5-legged

Recent advances in feature learning have shown that selfsupervised vision foundation models can capture semantic
correspondences but often lack awareness of underlying 3D
geometry. GECO addresses this gap by producing geometrically coherent features that semantically distinguish parts
based on geometry (e.g., left/right eyes, front/back legs). We
propose a training framework based on optimal transport,
enabling supervision beyond keypoints, even under occlusions and disocclusions. With a lightweight architecture,
GECO runs at 30 fps, 98.2% faster than prior methods,
while achieving state-of-the-art performance on PFPascal,
APK, and CUB, improving PCK by 6.0%, 6.2%, and 4.1%,
respectively. Finally, we show that PCK alone is insufficient to capture geometric quality and introduce new metrics and insights for more geometry-aware feature learning.
https://reginehartwig.github.io/publications/geco/

9309

