This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoD-Loc v2: Aerial Visual Localization over Low Level-of-Detail City Models
using Explicit Silhouette Alignment
Juelin Zhu1 , Shuaibang Peng1 , Long Wang2 , Hanlin Tan1 , Yu Liu1 , Maojun Zhang1 , Shen Yan1∗
1
National University of Defense Technology, 2 Westlake University
{zhujuelin,psb24,hanlin tan,jasonyuliu,mjzhang,yanshen12}@nudt.edu.cn,wanglongzju@gmail.com

Pose Estimation over Low-LoD City Models

Predicted Silhouette

Projected Silhouette

Wide Availability
Lightweight Properties
Privacy Preservation

Prior

LoD-Loc v2

Result

Figure 1. In this paper, we introduce LoD-Loc v2 to tackle aerial visual localization using low-LoD city models. These models are
characterized by wide availability, lightweight properties, and inherent privacy-preserving capabilities. Given a query image with its prior
pose, our approach utilizes the explicit silhouette alignment to recover the camera pose.

Abstract
We propose a novel method for aerial visual localization over low Level-of-Detail (LoD) city models. Previous wireframe-alignment-based method LoD-Loc [99] has
shown promising localization results leveraging LoD models. However, LoD-Loc mainly relies on high-LoD (LoD3 or
LoD2) city models, but the majority of available models and
those many countries plan to construct nationwide are lowLoD (LoD1). Consequently, enabling localization on lowLoD city models could unlock drones’ potential for global
urban localization. To address these issues, we introduce
LoD-Loc v2, which employs a coarse-to-fine strategy using
explicit silhouette alignment to achieve accurate localization over low-LoD city models in the air. Specifically, given
a query image, LoD-Loc v2 first applies a building segmentation network to shape building silhouettes. Then, in the
coarse pose selection stage, we construct a pose cost volume by uniformly sampling pose hypotheses around a prior
pose to represent the pose probability distribution. Each
cost of the volume measures the degree of alignment between the projected and predicted silhouettes. We select
the pose with maximum value as the coarse pose. In the

fine pose estimation stage, a particle filtering method incorporating a multi-beam tracking approach is used to efficiently explore the hypothesis space and obtain the final
pose estimation. To further facilitate research in this field,
we release two datasets with LoD1 city models covering
10.7 km2 , along with real RGB queries and ground-truth
pose annotations. Experimental results show that LoDLoc v2 improves estimation accuracy with high-LoD models
and enables localization with low-LoD models for the first
time. Moreover, it outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by
large margins, even surpassing texture-model-based methods, and broadens the convergence basin to accommodate
larger prior errors. The project are available at https:
//github.com/VictorZoo/LoD-Loc-v2.

* Corresponding author

26610

1. Introduction
Aerial visual localization is a task that relies on visual inputs
to estimate an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) camera’s
position and orientation relative to a georeferenced map.
This task plays a crucial role in the fields of computer vision
and remote sensing, with applications in navigation [52],
cargo transport [83], and surveillance [18, 88].
Traditional aerial visual localization algorithms [21, 88,

