This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Combinative Matching for Geometric Shape Assembly
Nahyuk Lee1 *
1

Juhong Min1,2 *
POSTECH

2

Junhong Lee1

Chunghyun Park1
3

Samsung Research America

Minsu Cho1,3

RLWRLD

https://nahyuklee.github.io/cmnet

Abstract
Occupancy

This paper introduces a new shape-matching methodology, combinative matching, to combine interlocking parts
for geometric shape assembly. Previous methods for geometric assembly typically rely on aligning parts by finding identical surfaces between the parts as in conventional
shape matching and registration. Specifically, we explicitly
model two distinct properties of interlocking shapes: ‘identical surface shape’ and ‘opposite volume occupancy.’ Our
method thus learns to establish correspondences across regions where their surface shapes appear identical but their
volumes occupy the inverted space to each other. To facilitate this process, we also learn to align regions in rotation
by estimating their shape orientations via equivariant neural networks. The proposed approach significantly reduces
local ambiguities in matching and allows a robust combination of parts in assembly. Experimental results on geometric assembly benchmarks demonstrate the efficacy of
our method, consistently outperforming the state of the art.

Shape

Fail
Identical surface shape
+ Opposite volume occupancy
Reduced ambiguity!

Our Combinative Matching

Success

Figure 1. Combinative matching. In contrast to conventional
approaches to matching solely based on shape similarity, our combinative matching explicitly models two distinct properties of interlocking shapes, ‘identical surface shape’ and ‘opposite volume
occupancy,’ and learns to establish correspondences across regions
where their surface shapes appear identical but their volumes occupy the inverted space to each other. The figure shows the assembly of source (gray) and target (blue & red) parts, with a true
match shown by green dots (•) connected by line. The color gradient on target points indicates correlation scores with the green
source point, ranging from red (high) to blue (low). Incorporating the volume occupancy (shown in this example), reduces visual
ambiguities, achieving accurate assembly.

1. Introduction
Geometric shape assembly, the task of reconstructing a target object from multiple fractured parts, plays a crucial role
in diverse fields such as archaeology [26, 28, 36], medical
imaging [16, 24, 51], robotics [9, 38, 50], and industrial
manufacturing [2, 3]. Reliable assembly requires not only
identifying common interfaces where parts align (e.g., mating surfaces) but also establishing robust feature correspondences that account for how different parts combine with
each other. This combinative process involves challenges in
analyzing parts such as incomplete semantics, shape ambiguity, variations in orientation, and complexity in matching.
To address the challenges, prior work [5, 14] has predominantly relied on aligning parts by finding identical
surfaces between parts as in conventional shape matching
and registration. The methods typically extract visual features and maximize similarity for positive matches at in-

terfaces under the assumption of their high visual resemblance. While technically sound, this approach often suffers from local ambiguities, where visually similar shapes
from different parts are incorrectly matched, as shown in
Fig. 1. This conventional matching on pure shape similarity
often results in incorrect matching and pose estimations, as
it overlooks intrinsic properties between matching for registration and that for assembly1 . This naturally raises the
question: What do we miss in matching to address the challenges of geometric shape assembly?
Drawing inspiration from construction and civil engineering, where male and female components combine to
form stable structures, techniques such as mortise and
tenon joints, tongue and groove connections, and dovetail
1 In this manuscript, we use term “matching” to denote local pairwisecompatibility test, reserving “assembly” for global placement of all parts.

* Equal contribution

9540

