This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Why LVLMs Are More Prone to Hallucinations in Longer Responses:
The Role of Context

1

Jiajin Tang2
Sibei Yang1†
Ge Zheng1,2∗
Jiaye Qian2 *
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
ShanghaiTech University
Project Page: https://github.com/SooLab/HalTrapper

Abstract

GT

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have made significant progress in recent years but are also prone to hallucination issues. They exhibit more hallucinations in longer,
free-form responses, often attributed to accumulated uncertainties. In this paper, we ask: Does increased hallucination result solely from length-induced errors, or is there a
deeper underlying mechanism? After a series of preliminary experiments and findings, we suggest that the risk of
hallucinations is not caused by length itself but by the increased reliance on context for coherence and completeness
in longer responses. Building on these insights, we propose a novel “induce-detect-suppress” framework that actively induces hallucinations through deliberately designed
contexts, leverages induced instances for early detection of
high-risk cases, and ultimately suppresses potential objectlevel hallucinations during actual decoding. Our approach
achieves consistent, significant improvements across all
benchmarks, demonstrating its efficacy. The strong detection and improved hallucination mitigation not only validate our framework but, more importantly, re-validate our
hypothesis on context. Rather than solely pursuing performance gains, this study aims to provide new insights and
serves as a first step toward a deeper exploration of hallucinations in LVLMs’ longer responses.

Position
Hallucination

Context

Ours Detection

Coherence &
Completeness
Our HalTrapper
· Induce
· Detect
· Suppress

Figure 1. Left: Our three main findings and the three steps of our
HalTrapper method. Right: The distribution of hallucination locations detected by our HalTrapper is close to the true distribution
of hallucinations, indicating that our method, to some extent, captures the essence of LVLM hallucinations.

vision tasks [5, 20, 34, 35, 38, 49, 56, 58, 63–65, 88, 95,
96, 99, 100] within a unified framework and seamlessly
handle more comprehensive tasks [15, 16, 23, 51, 60, 79,
86, 93] that require world knowledge and complex reasoning, such as visual question answering [2, 26, 59, 62],
video-based reasoning [6, 9, 37, 41] and mathematical reasoning [54, 74]. However, LVLMs also grapple with the
hallucination issue [27, 57, 92, 97], a serious and wellrecognized challenge in deploying them in real-world scenarios [21, 36, 45, 52], due to their propensity for erroneous
generation.
Hallucination in LVLMs specifically refers to the discrepancy between the generated textual responses and the
actual visual content and user instruction received, resulting in the production of irrelevant or non-existent objects,
attributes, and other details. Various approaches have
been proposed to reduce hallucinations, including filtering more reliable training data [46, 90, 97] or using specialized contrastive training materials [28] to re-fine-tune
the model, thereby minimizing factually incorrect outputs.
Rather than relying on costly, data-intensive solutions, recent approaches propose training-free strategies, such as

1. Introduction
Recently, Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [3, 7,
8, 12, 18, 48, 98] have made significant strides in developing general-purpose foundation models, achieving new, unprecedented capabilities. These models facilitate dynamic,
context-driven interactions centered on the image content
through open-ended conversations with users, given the input image and user instructions. Their impressive generative capabilities allow them to address various traditional
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author is Sibei Yang.

4101

