This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Rate Reduction Clustering for Human Motion Segmentation
Xianghan Meng† , Zhengyu Tong† , Zhiyuan Huang, and Chun-Guang Li*
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, P.R. China
{mengxianghan,tongzhengyu,huangzhiyuan,lichunguang}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Human Motion Segmentation (HMS), which aims to partition videos into non-overlapping human motions, has attracted increasing research attention recently. Existing approaches for HMS are mainly dominated by subspace clustering methods, which are grounded on the assumption
that high-dimensional temporal data align with a Union-ofSubspaces (UoS) distribution. However, the frames in video
capturing complex human motions with cluttered backgrounds may not align well with the UoS distribution. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach for HMS, named
Temporal Rate Reduction Clustering (TR2 C), which jointly
learns structured representations and affinity to segment the
sequences of frames in video. Specifically, the structured
representations learned by TR2 C enjoy temporally consistency and are aligned well with a UoS structure, which is
favorable for addressing the HMS task. We conduct extensive experiments on five benchmark HMS datasets and
achieve state-of-the-art performances with different feature
extractors. The code is available at: https://github.
com/mengxianghan123/TR2C.

tant prior for the HMS task is that the temporally neighboring frames in a video are more likely belonging to the
same human motion. To incorporate the temporal continuity between frames in a video, various temporal regularizer is introduced to encourage the temporally neighboring frames to be clustered into the same subspace [27, 48].
More recently, transfer learning-based subspace clustering
methods, e.g., [50, 51, 62, 63], have been proposed to further improve the performance of HMS. Despite the flourish of developing these methods for the HMS task in the
past decade, the clustering performance of HMS still faces
a bottleneck.
For human activities recognition task, as explored in the
prior works [21, 41], the frames in videos capture both complex human motions and cluttered backgrounds. Thus, it
turns out to be more likely that the features of the frames in
video can hardly align well with the UoS distribution at all.
As a consequence, it is necessary to amend the representation of the frames in video to align with the UoS distribution
while performing the motion segmentation.
In this paper, we attempt to jointly learn structured representations that align with the UoS distribution and simultaneously perform motion segmentation. To be specific, we
propose a novel and effective approach for HMS, termed
Temporal Rate Reduction Clustering (TR2 C), which integrates the Maximal Coding Rate Reduction (MCR2 ) principle [58] and a temporal continuity regularization to jointly
learn the temporally consistent representations that align
with a UoS distribution and the affinity simultaneously.
We solve the problem efficiently by introducing a neural
network and leveraging differential programming. Extensive experiments are conducted on five HMS benchmark
datasets and superior performance confirms the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
The contributions of the paper are highlighted as follows.
1. We propose a novel approach, named Temporal Rate
Reduction Clustering (TR2 C), which is able to jointly
learn temporally consistent structured representations
and affinity to segment the sequences of frames in video.
2. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed TR2 C
with extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets

1. Introduction
Human motion recognition and analysis have been an active focus of research for around two decades [15, 36, 39].
As a preparatory step, Human Motion Segmentation (HMS)
aims to divide sequences of frames in a video into distinct,
non-overlapping segments, each representing a specific human motion [20]. Due to the labor-intensive nature of manually annotating sequences in video, researchers often regard HMS as an unsupervised time-series clustering task.
Roughly, the existing methods for HMS typically assume
that the frames in a video capturing consecutive motions
lie on a Union of low-dimensional Subspaces (UoS) embedded in high-dimensional data. Thus, subspace clustering methods have emerged as a dominated research line for
the HMS task [13, 25, 30, 33, 57]. However, an impor* Corresponding author. † These two authors are equally contributed.

14644

