This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Cache Enhanced Prototype Learning for Test-Time Generalization of
Vision-Language Models

1

Xinyu Chen1,2,*
Shanghai University

Haotian Zhai2,3,* Can Zhang2,* Xiupeng Shi1,† Ruirui Li2,†
Beijing University of Chemical Technology 3 University of Minnesota

2

{xinyuchen,sxp}@shu.edu.cn;haoti002@umn.edu;{alexlessend,ilydouble}@gmail.com

Abstract
In zero-shot setting, test-time adaptation adjusts pre-trained
models using unlabeled data from the test phase to enhance performance on unknown test distributions. Existing
cache-enhanced TTA methods rely on a low-entropy criterion to select samples for prototype construction, assuming intra-class compactness. However, low-entropy samples
may be unreliable under distribution shifts, and the resulting prototypes may not ensure compact intra-class distributions. This study identifies a positive correlation between
cache-enhanced performance and intra-class compactness.
Based on this observation, we propose a Multi-Cache enhanced Prototype-based Test-Time Adaptation (MCP) featuring three caches: an entropy cache for initializing prototype representations with low-entropy samples, an align
cache for integrating visual and textual information to
achieve compact intra-class distributions, and a negative
cache for prediction calibration using high-entropy samples. We further developed MCP++, a framework incorporating cross-modal prototype alignment and residual
learning, introducing prototype residual fine-tuning. Comparative and ablation experiments across 15 downstream
tasks demonstrate that the proposed method and framework
achieve state-of-the-art generalization performance.

Figure 1. Illustration of the average classification accuracy, testtime training GFLOPs, and FPS for different methods on crossdataset classification tasks. For prompt-based and cache-based
methods, the icon sizes denote the FPS values.

ing to enable models to quickly adapt to new data distributions during the inference phase, effectively mitigating
the negative impact of distribution shifts on model performance.
Recent studies have introduced TTA strategies for adapting vision-language models to downstream tasks [1, 12, 19,
33, 35, 36, 53, 55]. Test-Time Prompt Tuning (TPT) [33] pioneered this approach by learning domain-specific prompts
from test data, enforcing prediction consistency across
high-confidence augmented views of each test sample to dynamically refine the prompts. While this method effectively
enhances CLIP’s generalization capabilities, prompt-based
approaches remain computationally intensive. As a result,
cache-enhanced methods [19, 48, 53, 55], such as Test-Time
Dynamic Adaptation (TDA) [19], have gained increasing
attention. These methods build dynamic caches by selecting a limited number of reliable samples based on entropy
criteria, thereby improving model adaptability to data from
the test domain.
Existing cache-enhanced methods are based on the critical assumption that samples from the same class exhibit

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-trained models, such as CLIP [30],
ALIGN [18], have demonstrated strong zero-shot learning
capabilities across various downstream tasks and have become a research focus in recent years. However, in realworld scenarios, differences in data collection environments
or hardware devices often lead to distribution shifts between
pre-training data and test data. This necessitates adaptive
adjustments [24, 30, 42] during model deployment to maintain robust performance. To address this, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) [22, 39, 51] methods have been proposed, aim* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

2281

