This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Comprehensive Lecture Slides Understanding: Large-scale Dataset and
Effective Method
Enming Zhang1 , Yuzhe Li1 , Yuliang Liu1 , Yingying Zhu1∗ , Xiang Bai1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{emzhang,yzli,ylliu,yyzhu,xbai}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

content. 2) The complex text relations pose additional challenges for models attempting to grasp the internal logic and
generate reasonable responses.
Recently, several works [4, 5, 7, 14, 17, 27] have noticed the importance of lecture slides and introduced corresponding datasets , such as text detection in slides [5],
slide segmentation [7] and image-text retrieval for slides
and corresponding speech [14]. However, none of them has
yet paid attention on comprehensive understanding slides.
SlideVQA [27], a recent slides dataset, provides a QuestionAnswering (QA) benchmark for slides, yet it still overlooks
the global understanding task, such as generating a detailed
summary for a complete set of slides. Additionally, the restricted scales and limited number of lecture areas also constrain the development of lecture slides understanding.
Aiming to address the limitations in the lecture slides
dataset, we establish a large-scale and multi-task dataset
for comprehensive slides understanding, named LecSlides370K. Specifically, we collect 25,542 lectures composed of
370,078 slides. These lectures span 15 lecture areas, including business, natural sciences, computer sciences, and so
on, significantly surpassing previous datasets in both scale
and diversity, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Furthermore, we introduce two tasks based on our dataset, termed Lecture Summary and Lecture Question Answering (QA). These two
tasks represent the most frequently utilized functions for
students, offering varied perspectives for slides understanding. Specifically, Lecture Summary focuses on extracting key information and fostering a global understanding,
while Lecture QA focuses on locating problems and understanding fine-grained content. Finally, our dataset includes
114,472 summary annotations and 259,461 QA pairs.
Based on LecSlides-370K dataset, we evaluate the existing NLP methods [15, 22], document understanding methods [10, 28, 32, 33] and vision-language models [16, 34].
The results reveal the inferior performance of these methods. We argue that this inferiority can be attributed to the
fact that these methods have not yet adequately considered
the unique characteristic of lecture slides, that text relations
in slides are complex and contain a wealth of logic and rel-

Online education has been widespread in worldwide universities and educational institutions. Lecture slides, a fundamental component of online education, contain a wealth
of information, playing a crucial role in learning. However, previous works have not yet paid sufficient attention
to understanding lecture slides, including the absence of
the large-scale dataset and comprehensive understanding
tasks. To facilitate the research about lecture slides understanding, we establish the LecSlides-370K, which consists of 25,542 lectures with 370,078 slides across 15 areas. We also introduce two comprehensive tasks, Lecture
Summary and Lecture Question Answering (QA), for providing different perspectives of slides understanding. Furthermore, complex and flexible text relations can hinder the
understanding of the internal logic of slides. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel method, named SlideParser,
which includes an auxiliary branch to predict text relations
within slides and enhance attention between related texts,
thereby improving slides understanding. With extensive experiments, we show the superiority of our proposed method
on both LecSlides-370k and SlideVQA. Dataset and Codes
are avaliable at https://github.com/zamling/
LecSlides_370K

1. Introduction
With the rapid progress in online education, an increasing number of universities and educational institutions have
adopted online learning in many platforms [20, 21, 25].
Among diverse online education formats, such as lecture
videos and live streams, slides often serve as a key medium
for conveying significant knowledge. Consequently, more
researchers have turned their attention to this field. However, there are two obstacles to understand lecture slides:
1) Texts in slides are often conclusive and headline-style
statements, which complicate the task of providing detailed
* Corresponding author.

4455

