This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You Think, You ACT: The New Task of Arbitrary Text to Motion Generation
Runqi Wang1,2∗ Caoyuan Ma1,2∗ Guopeng Li3∗ Hanrui Xu2 Yuke Li4 Zheng Wang1,2†
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University 3 StepFun
4
University of Maryland College Park
∗ equal contribution, † corresponding to wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn

Figure 1. (a) “Action Label to Motion” generates motion with a certain action label. (b) “Action Text to Motion” generates motion
with an explicit Action Text (texts contain action labels). (c) “Arbitrary Texts to Motion” encompasses a new Scene Text to Motion task,
where scene text refers to events or situations and does not contain explicit action labels. Understanding these scene texts and generating
corresponding reactive motions is a multi-solution task.

Abstract
Text to Motion aims to generate human motions from texts.
Existing settings rely on limited Action Texts that include
action labels (e.g., “walk, bend”), which limits flexibility
and practicability in scenarios difficult to describe directly.
This paper extends limited Action Texts to arbitrary ones.
Scene texts without explicit action labels can enhance the
practicality of models in complex and diverse industries
such as virtual human interaction, robot behavior generation, and film production, while also supporting the exploration of potential implicit behavior patterns. However,
newly introduced Scene Texts may yield multiple reasonable output results, causing significant challenges in existing data, framework, and evaluation.
To address this practical issue, we first create a new
dataset H UMAN ML3D++ by extending texts of the wellannotated dataset H UMAN ML3D. Secondly, we propose a
simple yet effective framework that extracts action instructions from arbitrary texts and subsequently generates motions. Furthermore, we also benchmark this new setting
with multi-solution metrics to address the inadequacies of

existing single-solution metrics. Extensive experiments indicate that Text to Motion in this realistic setting is challenging, fostering new research in this practical direction.
More details are available in https://github.com/
RunqiWang77/TAAT.github.io.

1. Introduction

12012

Text to Motion (T2M) denotes generating motions from natural language, reducing labor costs in industries requiring
motion capture and manual editing. While current T2M
methods have demonstrated effectiveness in controllable
settings, some real-world applications such as Open-world
games and virtual assistants often demand greater flexibility, where characters must dynamically respond to unrestricted and diverse scene inputs from users, rather than following a direct action command. For example, in an openworld game, a player might warn an NPC, “Watch out! Left
punch incoming!” The NPC must interpret the intent and
dodge or block, rather than execute a “ punch” command.
Despite this need, existing T2M methods still relies on ex-

