This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intra-view and Inter-view Correlation Guided Multi-view Novel Class Discovery
Xinhang Wan1 , Jiyuan Liu2 , Qian Qu1 , Suyuan Liu1 , Chuyu Zhang3 ,
Fangdi Wang1 , Xinwang Liu1, *, En Zhu1,∗ , Kunlun He4
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha,
China 2 College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China 4 Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China
{wanxinhang, xinwangliu, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn

1. Introduction

Abstract

Clustering, which aims to partition samples into groups
based on their similarities [1, 3, 8, 9, 26, 34, 34, 35, 37,
40, 42, 44–47, 56–58, 60], is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning and data mining. Traditional clustering methods, however, often assume no prior information and rely solely on sample similarities for partitioning
[14, 17, 38, 54, 65, 67]. This assumption significantly diverges from human learning processes, where prior knowledge is commonly utilized to understand and classify new
concepts. For example, a child familiar with phones and
tablets can correctly distinguish new electronic devices,
such as computers and smartwatches, by leveraging existing knowledge. Inspired by this cognitive ability, a novel
learning paradigm, Novel Class Discovery (NCD), has been
proposed to address this limitation [6, 19, 69, 70].
NCD focuses on transferring knowledge from a labeled
dataset to cluster an unlabeled dataset with non-overlapping
categories [13, 41]. This paradigm has shown great potential in applications such as disease discovery and face
recognition. To the best of our knowledge, existing NCD
methods can be broadly categorized into two types [10]:
two-stage and one-stage methods. Two-stage methods train
a model on known classes and then fine-tune it for novel
classes, while one-stage methods simultaneously learn representations for both classes and conduct the clustering process. One-stage methods generally achieve better performance because they can capture distributional relationships
between the two datasets [24].
Despite significant advances, existing NCD methods
face two major challenges that limit their practical application and performance: 1) Ignoring multi-view data:
Most existing methods assume data comes from a single view, neglecting the increasingly common multi-view
data. For example, in clinical diagnosis, accurately identifying new diseases (e.g., COVID-19) often requires multiomics features, such as gene expression and imaging data,

In this paper, we address the problem of novel class discovery (NCD), which aims to cluster novel classes by leveraging knowledge from disjoint known classes. While recent
advances have made significant progress in this area, existing NCD methods face two major limitations. First, they
primarily focus on single-view data (e.g., images), overlooking the increasingly common multi-view data, such as
multi-omics datasets used in disease diagnosis. Second,
their reliance on pseudo-labels to supervise novel class
clustering often results in unstable performance, as pseudolabel quality is highly sensitive to factors such as data noise
and feature dimensionality. To address these challenges,
we propose a novel framework named Intra-view and Interview Correlation Guided Multi-view Novel Class Discovery
(IICMVNCD), which is the first attempt to explore NCD in
multi-view setting so far. Specifically, at the intra-view level,
leveraging the distributional similarity between known and
novel classes, we employ matrix factorization to decompose features into view-specific shared base matrices and
factor matrices. The base matrices capture distributional
consistency among the two datasets, while the factor matrices model pairwise relationships between samples. At
the inter-view level, we utilize view relationships among
known classes to guide the clustering of novel classes. This
includes generating predicted labels through the weighted
fusion of factor matrices and dynamically adjusting view
weights of known classes based on the supervision loss,
which are then transferred to novel class learning. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach.

* Corresponding author

4114

