This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMG EO: Multimodal Compositional Geo-Localization for UAVs
Yuxiang Ji1 *, Boyong He1 *, Zhuoyue Tan1 , Liaoni Wu1,2†
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
2
School of Aerospace Engineering, Xiamen University
yuxiangji@stu.xmu.edu.cn, wuliaoni@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal geo-localization methods can inherently overcome the limitations of unimodal sensor systems by leveraging complementary information from different modalities. However, existing retrieval-based methods rely on a
comprehensive multimodal database, which is often challenging to fulfill in practice. In this paper, we introduce a
more practical problem for localizing drone-view images by
collaborating multimodal data within a satellite-view reference map, which integrates multimodal information while
avoiding the need for an extensive multimodal database.
We present MMG EO that learns to push the composition
of multimodal representations to the target reference map
through a unified framework. By utilizing a comprehensive
multimodal query (image, point cloud/depth/text), we can
achieve more robust and accurate geo-localization, especially in unknown and complex environments. Additionally,
we extend two visual geo-localization datasets GTA-UAV
and UAV-VisLoc to multi-modality, establishing the first
UAV geo-localization datasets that combine image, point
cloud, depth and text data. Experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of MMG EO for UAV multimodal compositional geo-localization, as well as the generalization capabilities to real-world scenarios. The code and dataset are
at https://github.com/Yux1angJi/MMGeo.

Point Cloud

Depth Map

al
ev
tri
Re
l
a
ion
at
on
iti
liz
os
ca
p
o
om
o-L
lC
Ge
da
al
o
d
o
tim tim
ul
ul
M
M
N-Modalities

Image

The image perspective is from
above, looking down at the
streets and buildings. The scene
includes multiple high-rise
buildings, a large crane on a
construction site, and
parklike area with a circular
fountain and greenery. The …

Text Description

Satellite Map

Figure 1. The overview of our proposed MMG EO.

1. Introduction

quent localization. Some studies on visual representations
achieve significant results by using self-supervised [3] or
contrastive learning [10, 20, 51] on paired samples to push
paired image representations closer, thereby enabling retrieval. However, such vision-based single-sensor systems
struggle in scenarios where a single modality alone is difficult to recognize.
Recently, multimodal research demonstrates more precise retrieval capabilities in the field of information retrieval by leveraging the complementary strengths of different modalities [1, 4, 14, 25, 37, 48, 54]. These works
achieve a more comprehensive understanding of data by
modeling multiple modalities. In such a joint modality representation space, some matching samples are more easily pushed together as Fig. 2. Despite these advantages,
applying multimodal approaches to UAV geo-localization
still presents unique challenges. Existing multimodal place
recognition paradigm [13, 22, 33, 35, 42, 45] typically necessitate that the query and database share the same modality (e.g., Image+Point-cloud → Image+Point-cloud), which
means a comprehensive multimodal retrieval database is
needed. Another category of methods [8, 46, 47] is based

Vision-based geo-localization technology enables UAVs
with autonomous localization capabilities in GNSS-denied
environments. Existing global localization methods rely on
cross-view visual place recognition (VPR) [6, 9, 16, 20, 38,
43, 49]. Given an aerial image from drone-view, the task is
to retrieve well-matched images from a pre-processed geotagged cross-view database (e.g., satellite-view) to estimate
the approximate location, facilitating more precise subse* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

25165

