This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Vision Encoder Grafting via LLM Surrogates
Kaiyu Yue
Rifaa Qadri

Vasu Singla

Zikui Cai

Menglin Jia†

Abhinav Bhatele

University of Maryland

John Kirchenbauer

Furong Huang

Tom Goldstein

† Meta

https://github.com/facebookresearch/zero

Figure 1. Zero-shot vision encoder grafting via a small language
surrogate (srgt) model to trigger the target LLM to perform visual
understanding task without any additional training.

Figure 2. Reducing full decoder training cost with our surrogatetrained encoder for Llama-70B in VLMs. Hollow ! indicates the
average score of the surrogate-trained encoder on the left.

Abstract

the context window of an LLM. The image features must
be aligned with the representation space of the LLM, and
this is achieved by training the entire pipeline end-to-end.
The cost of such training is often severely dominated by
the language model. For example, plugging CLIP (approx
400M parameters) into Llama-70B [9] results in a pipeline
where vision encoder training occupies almost none of the
required memory and computation.

Vision language models (VLMs) typically pair a modestly
sized vision encoder with a large language model (LLM),
e.g., Llama-70B, making the decoder the primary computational burden during training. To reduce costs, a potential
promising strategy is to first train the vision encoder using a
small language model before transferring it to the large one.
We construct small “surrogate models” that share the same
embedding space and representation language as the large
target LLM by directly inheriting its shallow layers. Vision encoders trained on the surrogate can then be directly
transferred to the larger model, a process we call zero-shot
grafting1 – when plugged directly into the full-size target
LLM, the grafted pair surpasses the encoder-surrogate pair
and, on some benchmarks, even performs on par with full
decoder training with the target LLM. Furthermore, our
surrogate training approach reduces overall VLM training
costs by ∼45% when using Llama-70B as the decoder.

In this paper, we explore methods of performing encoder
alignment using relatively small lightweight language models, and transferring the resulting features to a large language model. We train small surrogate language models
with the same representation space as a larger target LLM.
After training the vision encoder on this small surrogate
model, we can then transfer it to the larger model, either
directly (grafting) or with fine-tuning.
A major focus of our work is on understanding how to construct small surrogate models that accurately mock larger
target LLMs. Our method of creating such small models
stems from analyzing the internal prediction dynamics of
LLMs, particularly how predictions evolve across layers.
This analysis reveals two distinct phases in the prediction
trajectory, separated by a clear transition point. We construct our small models by preserving the layers that participate in the early feature extraction phase of inference, and

Most modern auto-regressive VLMs are built by extracting
visual features from images using an encoder like CLIP
[37] or SigLIP [47, 52], and placing these features into
1 We define zero-shot grafting as plugging a vision encoder trained on
a surrogate model directly into its target LLM without additional training.
In contrast, transferring involves further fine-tuning after grafting.

4275

