This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOSAIC: Generating Consistent, Privacy-Preserving Scenes
from Multiple Depth Views in Multi-Room Environments
Zhixuan Liu1

Haokun Zhu1
Rui Chen1
Jonathan Francis1,2
3
1
Soonmin Hwang
Ji Zhang
Jean Oh1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Bosch Center for AI 3 Hanyang University
Privacy-Preserving Scenes
Room B
Room A

Room C

Multi-view
Consistent
RGB image
outputs

Room D
Room B

Room C

Room A

Room D

MOSAIC

“I want my house to look in
Modern style”
robot navigates the scene
& only collects Depth images

Depth image
inputs

Figure 1. For privacy-preserving scenarios where RGB collection is restricted, MOSAIC generates consistent RGB images from depth
data captured along robot paths, guided by text prompts. These outputs further enable 3D reconstruction of multi-room environments.

Abstract
We introduce a diffusion-based approach for generating
privacy-preserving digital twins of multi-room indoor environments from depth images only. Central to our approach is a novel Multi-view Overlapped Scene Alignment
with Implicit Consistency (MOSAIC) model that explicitly
considers cross-view dependencies within the same scene in
the probabilistic sense. MOSAIC operates through a multichannel inference-time optimization that avoids error accumulation common in sequential or single-room constraints
in panorama-based approaches. MOSAIC scales to complex scenes with zero extra training and provably reduces
the variance during denoising process when more overlapping views are added, leading to improved generation quality. Experiments show that MOSAIC outperforms state-ofthe-art baselines on image fidelity metrics in reconstructing
complex multi-room environments. Resources and code are
at https://mosaic-cmubig.github.io.

1. Introduction
Autonomous scene reconstruction is a crucial capability in
robotics and computer vision [1, 17, 24, 25], with applications spanning virtual reality, architectural design, and AI-

driven simulation. However, existing multi-view 3D reconstruction methods rely heavily on capturing RGB images,
which poses significant privacy risks in sensitive environments such as hospitals, factories, elder care facilities, and
private residences. Capturing RGB data in these settings
can inadvertently expose personal information [32, 47], limiting the practicality of generative AI solutions for realworld deployments where visual privacy must be preserved.
A promising solution for privacy-sensitive environments
involves deploying mobile robots that collect only geometric data, such as depth images: this strategy preserves the
scene’s structural layout while preventing the capture of
sensitive texture information. In order to create digital replicas of these scenes, we need algorithms that are capable
of generating high-quality, multiview-consistent sequential
images that align with ground truth geometry, while maintaining visual coherence across viewpoints.
Various approaches for scene-level multi-view image
generation have been proposed, with autoregressive generation techniques [8, 10, 15, 44, 45] representing the current mainstream trend. These approaches leverage powerful
inpainting models to iteratively render unseen parts of the
scene from sequential camera perspectives. However, these
approaches exhibit style drift, where images generated for

27456

