This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I Am Big, You Are Little;
I Am Right, You Are Wrong
David A Kelly
King’s College London, UK

Akchunya Chanchal
King’s College London, UK

Nathan Blake
King’s College London, UK

david.a.kelly@kcl.ac.uk

akchunya.chanchal@kcl.ac.uk

nathan.blake@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract

its classification likelihood is above a user-provided threshold. This threshold is a scalar of the model’s confidence on
an image and can be arbitrarily low. In effect, with a suitable
threshold, any combination of patches is sufficient for the
desired classification. This sufficiency is unclear: it is certainly not always sufficient to guarantee that a patch combination provides enough information to (re)produce the original classification. Indeed, given an image with low model
confidence, even a relatively high threshold is likely to see
many accepted patch combinations which tell us nothing
about the classification and very little about the model.
We start instead with the problem of ‘concentration’: the
smallest number of pixels required to get the original classification. We use ReX1 [7] to find minimal sufficient pixel
sets, or MPSs (see Figure 1). These have two important advantages over the MSEs of SAG. Firstly, they are not bound
to a particular patch size. SAG breaks the image up into a
grid of patches, so its MSE is minimal only in its combination of patches and not in its combination of pixels. ReX is
not patch based, so an MPS is likely to contain fewer unnecessary pixels than an MSE2 . Secondly, a ReX MPS is
sufficient to recreate the original (top) classification of the
image. Instead of having a confidence threshold, ReX provides an approximately minimal, non patch-based, set of
pixels which really are sufficient to get the desired classification from the model.
By putting concentration onto a sound footing, other
properties of models, such as compositionality — a measure of diversity in model concentration — can be studied
more rigorously. We investigate concentration in terms of
size, position and overlap of MPSs on 15 different image
classification models. The models cover 5 different architectures and range in size from small Inception models to
state-of-the-art transformers models with over a billion parameters. All models were fine-tuned on ImageNet. The
goal of this comparison is to answer the following research
questions:

Machine learning for image classification is an active and
rapidly developing field. With the proliferation of classifiers
of different sizes and different architectures, the problem of
choosing the right model becomes more and more important. While we can assess a model’s classification accuracy statistically, our understanding of the way these models work is unfortunately limited. In order to gain insight
into the decision-making process of different vision models,
we propose using minimal sufficient pixels sets to gauge a
model’s ‘concentration’: the pixels that capture the essence
of an image through the lens of the model. By comparing
position, overlap, and size of sets of pixels, we identify that
different architectures have statistically different concentration, in both size and position. In particular, ConvNext and
EVA models differ markedly from the others. We also identify that images which are misclassified are associated with
larger pixels sets than correct classifications.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are now a primary component of most AI
systems, especially in computer vision. There are a plethora
of studies comparing image classifiers, either within or
across different architectures [24, 25, 28]. Such comparisons tend to focus on accuracy, precision, and robustness [36]. These studies leave unanswered the question of
what features or concepts models use to make their classifications.
Jiang et al. [18] investigate “compositionality”, which
they define as a conjunction of patches that have high likelihood ratios for a particular classification. A patch is a
fixed square in a grid constructed over the image. Combinations of patches are called minimally sufficient explanations
(MSEs), and are calculated using the explainable AI (XAI)
tool, SAG [33]. As Chockler et al. [8] point out though,
SAG uses a definition of explanation which is highly unusual. A combination of patches is considered sufficient if

1 https://github.com/ReX-XAI/ReX
2 It is still only an approximation of true minimality however.
See Chockler et al. [7] for a full discussion.

817

