This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TryOn-Refiner: Conditional Rectified-flow-based TryOn Refiner for More
Accurate Detail Reconstruction
Wen Qian
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Hupan Lab
Hangzhou, Zhejiang
qianwen.qian@alibaba-inc.com

(a) Refinements of patterns

(b) Refinements of texts

(c) Refinements of faces

Figure 1. The refined results of our TryOn-Refiner. The left column shows the course try-on results generated by existing SOTA try-on
methods. TryOn-Refiner can refine various types of artifacts including patterns, texts and faces, etc.

Abstract
Diffusion techniques has significantly advanced the development of virtual try-on. However, these methods often
struggle to preserve intricate details, such as patterns, texts
and faces, etc. To tackle this challenge, we introduce a
plug-and-play module named as ”TryOn-Refiner”, which
can refine the detailed artifacts for any try-on results in only
1 ∼ 10 steps. Instead of the previous diffusion-based refine
module, TryOn-Refiner employs the conditional rectifiedflow-based mechanism for better leveraging prior information from coarse try-on results. Specifically, TryOn-Refiner
transforms the traditional refinement framework from a
noise-to-image paradigm into a flow mapping framework
that directly maps coarse images to refined images, essentially avoiding introducing uncertainty in the refinement
process. Moreover, we propose a training data construction pipeline, which can efficiently generate paired training data and includes a data smoothing strategy to overcome the blocking artifact. Extended experimental results

demonstrate our TryOn-Refiner consistently improves performance with only a few inference steps for all evaluated
existing try-on methods.

1. Introduction

15669

Image-based virtual try-on (VTON) [9, 12, 13, 19, 44, 48,
52] is an innovative technology promoting the e-commerce
industry by enhancing consumer shopping experiences and
reducing operating costs for clothing merchants through realistic image synthesis. The latest state-of-the-art (SOTA)
works [6, 7, 24, 34, 49, 50] are almost all based on diffusion model design. However, these methods still struggle to
preserve the fine-grained details such as face, text, textures,
and material properties, etc.
As discussed above, preserving all detailed information during a single try-on process is inherently challenging [6, 49]. Some studies [43] address this issue by incorporating an additional refinement module to correct details.

