This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ImageGen-CoT: Enhancing Text-to-Image In-context Learning with
Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
B

Jiaqi Liao1† , Zhengyuan Yang1 , Linjie Li1 , Dianqi Li, Kevin Lin1 , Yu Cheng2 , Lijuan Wang1
1

Microsoft 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Leather ×

Book

Apple

Box:

Made-of
Clouds ×
Similar ×

A kitten in the given image made of clouds
drifting above a bustling cityscape at sunset

(a) Input

ImageGen-CoT:
1. Book: .., An image of a brown
leather..
2. Apple: .., An image of a brown
leather apple..
3. Box: Expected Output: Based on
the pattern, the image should be a
leather object that represents a
box.

ImageGen-CoT:
1. Analysis of the subject: The
kitten's fur is unkempt..
2. Understand the IDEA: The
kitten made of Clouds..
3. Integrate Subject Consistency: ..
4. Add Detail and Avoid Abstract
Language: ..The kitten's fur is
transformed into fluffy clouds ..

(b) SEED-X

Leather ✔

Made-of
Cloud ✔
Similar ✔

(c) SEED-X FT w ImageGen-CoT dataset

Figure 1. Comparisons between SEED-X and SEED-X FT w ImageGen-CoT dataset. Our method forces the model to generate a
reasoning chain before the ImageGen. The top row shows SEED-X failing to infer ‘Leather’ style, generating only a box, while our
approach enables SEED-X to recognize the leather style and produce the intended leather box. The bottom row shows SEED-X failing to
capture the unkempt fur and cloud, while our method successfully recognizes these key elements.

Abstract

CoT.github.io/. Code will be open-sourced.

In this work, we study the problem of Text-to-Image
In-Context Learning (T2I-ICL). While Unified Multimodal
LLMs (MLLMs) have advanced rapidly in recent years, they
struggle with contextual reasoning in T2I-ICL scenarios. To
address this limitation, we propose a novel framework that
incorporates a reasoning chain called ImageGen-CoT prior
to image generation. To avoid generating ineffective reasoning steps, we develop an automatic pipeline to curate
a high-quality ImageGen-CoT dataset. We then fine-tune
MLLMs using this dataset to enhance their contextual reasoning capabilities. To further enhance performance, we
explore test-time scale-up strategies and propose a novel
hybrid scaling approach. This approach first generates
multiple reasoning chains and then produces multiple images for each chain via sampling. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Notably, fine-tuning with the ImageGen-CoT dataset leads to a
substantial 80% performance gain for SEED-X on T2I-ICL
tasks. See our project page at https://ImageGen-

1. Introduction

† Interns at Microsoft.

Human intelligence excels at learning novel concepts
through contextual observation and adapting to new inputs.
When presented with a series of interleaved text-image examples—such as “a leather-bound book”, followed by “a
leather apple”—and then asked to generate an image for
the query “a box,” humans intuitively infer the implicit
pattern of “leather” and apply it to the new query, resulting in “a leather box”. This reasoning ability to learn
novel concepts from multimodal contexts underpins creative problem-solving. Existing unified Multimodal Large
Language Models (unified MLLMs) [5, 8, 9, 14, 18, 28, 34]
have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in multimodal
understanding and generation within a single model architecture. Given their ability to process and generate across
modalities similar to human cognition, it is natural to investigate whether these models can exhibit reasoning capabilities comparable to those of humans. To evaluate this,
we adopt the Text-to-Image In-Context Learning (T2I-ICL)

17214

