This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RIPE: Reinforcement Learning on Unlabeled Image Pairs for Robust Keypoint
Extraction
Johannes Künzel1,2
1

Anna Hilsmann1

Peter Eisert1,2

2

Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institut, HHI, Germany, Humboldt University Berlin, Germany,

Abstract
We introduce RIPE, an innovative reinforcement learningbased framework for weakly-supervised training of a keypoint extractor that excels in both detection and description
tasks. In contrast to conventional training regimes that depend heavily on artificial transformations, pre-generated
models, or 3D data, RIPE requires only a binary label indicating whether paired images represent the same scene.
This minimal supervision significantly expands the pool of
training data, enabling the creation of a highly generalized
and robust keypoint extractor.
RIPE utilizes the encoder’s intermediate layers for the
description of the keypoints with a hyper-column approach
to integrate information from different scales. Additionally,
we propose an auxiliary loss to enhance the discriminative
capability of the learned descriptors.
Comprehensive evaluations on standard benchmarks
demonstrate that RIPE simplifies data preparation while
achieving competitive performance compared to state-ofthe-art techniques, marking a significant advancement in
robust keypoint extraction and description. To support further research, we have made our code publicly available at
https://github.com/fraunhoferhhi/RIPE.

Figure 1. Can you tell if these images depict the same scene? While
humans naturally ignore noise and lighting variations to solve this
effortlessly, teaching a neural network to do the same using only image pairs poses significant challenges. (Images: MegaDepth [18])

days or months apart. Variations in weather, lighting conditions and appearance (most notably from vegetation) pose
significant problems for traditional detectors. To overcome
these limitations, deep-learning-based methods were introduced to directly learn feature representations from images.
Current state of the art (SOTA) approaches, including DeDoDe [9], DISK [38] and ALIKED [47] rely on training
datasets like MegaDepth [18], which provide relative pose
and depth information. MegaDepth, for example, consists
of touristic imagery along with 3D models generated with
Structure from Motion using COLMAP [34], itself reliant on
classical SIFT keypoints. Other methods, like SuperPoint [6]
or SiLK [13] rely on self-supervision through applying artificial augmentations, but face limitations from the available
training data and the domain-gap between real and simulated
scenarios, which inadequately replicate long-term changes
of the real world.

1. Introduction
Given two images, how can we determine whether they
depict the same scene and precisely identify matching keypoints? This task, as shown in Fig. 1, is intuitive for humans:
we can identify distinctive keypoints in one image and look
for their counterparts in the other, ignoring distractions such
as moving cars, changing foliage, all while remaining unaffected by noise or lighting variations. This natural human
capability raises an intriguing question: can neural networks
learn robust keypoint extraction exclusively from binary labels indicating whether two images depict the same scene?
Traditional keypoint detection methods such as SIFT [21],
ORB [29], and SURF [3] rely on handcrafted feature detectors and descriptors that struggle significantly with long-term
registration tasks, particularly when images are taken hours,

In this paper we propose RIPE (Reinforcement Learning
on Image Pairs for Keypoint Extraction), a novel approach
that trains keypoint detectors using only image pairs labeled
as either showing the same image scene or not, eliminating
the need for depth or pose information. This significantly
expands the pool of usable datasets to include diverse realworld scenarios, such as large-scale autonomous driving data
(ACDC [30]) or place recognition data (Tokyo 24/7 [37]),
including challenging weather and illumination changes.

4868

