This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Modeling of Shape-Dependent Self-Contact Human Poses
Takehiko Ohkawa1,2* , Jihyun Lee1,3* , Shunsuke Saito1 , Jason Saragih1 , Fabian Prada1 ,
Yichen Xu1 , Shoou-I Yu1 , Ryosuke Furuta2 , Yoichi Sato2 , and Takaaki Shiratori1
1

Codec Avatars Lab, Meta

2

The University of Tokyo

3

KAIST

Project page: https://tkhkaeio.github.io/projects/25-scgen

Abstract
One can hardly model self-contact of human poses without considering underlying body shapes. For example,
the pose of rubbing a belly for a person with a low BMI
leads to penetration of the hand into the belly for a person with a high BMI. Despite its relevance, existing selfcontact datasets lack the variety of self-contact poses and
precise body shapes, limiting conclusive analysis between
self-contact poses and shapes. To address this, we begin by introducing the first extensive self-contact dataset
with precise body shape registration, Goliath-SC, consisting of 383K self-contact poses across 130 subjects. Using
this dataset, we propose generative modeling of self-contact
prior conditioned by body shape parameters, based on a
body-part-wise latent diffusion with self-attention. We further incorporate this prior into single-view human pose estimation while refining estimated poses to be in contact. Our
experiments suggest that shape conditioning is vital to the
successful modeling of self-contact pose distribution, hence
improving single-view pose estimation in self-contact.

Figure 1. Body shape dependency in self-contact poses. We observe that self-contact poses (e.g., “rubbing belly”) are influenced
by the subject’s body shape; for example, a person with a slimmer
body (top) engages in different self-contact poses over one with
a larger torso (bottom). Indeed, the contact maps on the template
mesh (right) differ noticeably. Examples are sampled from the
Goliath-SC dataset we captured.

1. Introduction
Human poses in our daily life often involve self-contact,
such as face touching, arm crossing, or hand placement,
where body parts come into contact with the body surface. These interactions with our own body are not only
unconsciously displayed but also carry profound meaning
across various disciplines, including psychology and social communication. Observing self-contact gestures, the
areas touched can signal emotional states (e.g., anxiety or
tension) [13, 14, 47], and express linguistic symbols and
contexts in sign language [6, 59, 65]. Notably, these selfcontact poses are inherently constrained by the underlying
body shapes. As shown in Fig. 1, two subjects performing
“rubbing belly” gestures exhibit different poses and contacts due to variations in body shapes and proportions re-

lated to Body Mass Index (BMI). Despite their significance,
accurately modeling self-contact poses remains a considerable challenge [11, 41]; particularly, the dependency of human poses on body shapes is underexplored.
The challenge of self-contact modeling stems from the
lack of datasets containing large self-contact poses with precise body shape registration. Existing 3D body self-contact
datasets, HumanSC3D [11] and MTP [41], contain small
self-contact poses (1-4K poses) and suffer from inaccurate
registration due to the lack of paired RGB images [41].
Other studies have highlighted specific part interactions,
such as hand-hand [40] or hand-face contact [53]. However, their scopes are limited to isolated body parts and fail
to capture the holistic nature of self-contact, overlooking
how the full-body pose and shape influence the contact.

*Work done during the internship.

5426

