This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Gaze to Movement: Predicting Visual Attention for Autonomous Driving
Human-Machine Interaction based on Programmatic Imitation Learning

1

Yexin Huang*1 Yongbin Lin*1 Lishengsa Yue†1 Zhihong Yao2 Jie Wang1
Key Laboratory of Road and Traffic Engineering, Ministry of Education, Tongji University
{hyxtjyx, linyongbin, 2014yuelishengsa, 2431781}@tongji.edu.cn
2

School of Transportation and Logistics, Southwest Jiaotong University
zhyao@swjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human-machine interaction technology requires not only
the distribution of human visual attention but also the prediction of the gaze point trajectory. We introduce PILOT,
a programmatic imitation learning approach that predicts
a driver’s eye movements based on a set of rule-based conditions. These conditions—derived from driving operations
and traffic flow characteristics—define how gaze shifts occur. They are initially identified through incremental synthesis, a heuristic search method, and then refined via LBFGS, a numerical optimization technique. These humanreadable rules enable us to understand drivers’ eye movement patterns and make efficient and explainable predictions. We also propose DATAD, a dataset that covers
12 types of autonomous driving takeover scenarios, collected from 60 participants and comprising approximately
600,000 frames of gaze point data. Compared to existing
eye-tracking datasets, DATAD includes additional driving
metrics and surrounding traffic flow characteristics, providing richer contextual information for modeling gaze behavior. Experimental evaluations of PILOT on DATAD demonstrate superior accuracy and faster prediction speeds compared to four baseline models. Specifically, PILOT reduces
the MSE of predicted trajectories by 38.59% to 88.02% and
improves the accuracy of gaze object predictions by 6.90%
to 55.06%. Moreover, PILOT achieves these gains with approximately 30% lower prediction time, offering both more
accurate and more efficient eye movement prediction.

importance[11, 16, 20]. Accurate prediction of driver’s
gaze trajectory not only helps to understand the driver’s
cognitive state[19, 23] and driving behavior[17, 42], but
also provides important support in a variety of advanced
driver assistance and autonomous driving application scenarios. For example, in the intelligent cockpit, eye movement prediction can help the vehicle system to actively adjust the information display according to the driver’s attention distribution, and improve the naturalness and responsiveness of HMI[15, 37, 38]; in advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS), utilizing driver eye movement
information helps distinguish between critical distractions
and natural attention shifts, reducing unnecessary alerts
and improving the accuracy and reliability of the warning
system[5, 39]; In automatic driving systems, eye movement
prediction can be used to assess the driver’s trust in the automatic driving behavior[2, 41] and adjust the driving style
accordingly, provide accurate auxiliary information in active/passive takeover scenarios, and improve the smoothness and safety of HMI.

1. Introduction

Eye movement sequences refer to the dynamic patterns
of eye motion during visual information processing, consisting of alternating fixations and saccades, often accompanied by micro-movements such as tremors and drifts[24].
In the context of HMI for autonomous driving, predicting driver eye movements requires not only analyzing the
spatial distribution of attention but also tracking its temporal evolution. Unlike static fixation distributions, sequential eye movements reveal how attention shifts over
time, providing insights into the driver’s cognitive state and
intent[18]. For instance, in an emergency takeover scenario,
the order and manner in which a driver observes surrounding vehicles or stationary objects play a crucial role in a
successful response. If a driver struggles to quickly identify
potential hazards, a stronger and clearer alert is necessary.
Conversely, if the hazard is readily detected, the ADAS can
delay or suppress alerts to minimize unnecessary distractions.

With the continuous development of autonomous driving,
human-machine interaction(HMI) is becoming a key technology to improve driving safety, efficiency and user experience. HMI technology relies on accurately perceiving and predicting the driver’s state, and driver eye movement is one of the most critical indicators. Predicting
driver visual attention is gaining increasing recognition and

Despite significant progress in gaze point prediction[6,
10, 14, 22, 34, 46, 48], several challenges remain. (1) Lack
of temporal consistency: Most existing methods rely on

* Equal contribution to this work.
† Corresponding author.

26146

