This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowEdit: Inversion-Free Text-Based Editing Using Pre-Trained Flow Models
Vladimir Kulikov

Matan Kleiner Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Tomer Michaeli

Real image

Edited image

Real image

Edited image

Real image

Edited image

this

home

Cat

Raccoon

LOVE

FLOW

BREAD

BACON

Mountain

Volcano

Lizard

Dragon

Man jumping

…in Pixar style

Steak

Bread

White dog
w/ cat

Dalmatian dog
w/o cat

Figure 1. FlowEdit. We present an inversion-free, optimization-free and model agnostic method for text-based image editing using pretrained flow models. As opposed to the editing-by-inversion paradigm, FlowEdit constructs an ODE that directly maps the source image
distribution to the target image distribution (corresponding to the source and target prompts). This ODE achieves a lower transport cost
and thus leads to better structure preservation, achieving state of the art results on complex editing tasks. From left to right, top to bottom,
the first five images were obtained with FLUX and the rest with Stable Diffusion 3. Text indicates changes in the prompts.

Abstract
Editing real images using a pre-trained text-to-image (T2I)
diffusion/flow model often involves inverting the image into
its corresponding noise map. However, inversion by itself
is typically insufficient for obtaining satisfactory results,
and therefore many methods additionally intervene in the
sampling process. Such methods achieve improved results
but are not seamlessly transferable between model architectures. Here, we introduce FlowEdit, a text-based editing

method for pre-trained T2I flow models, which is inversionfree, optimization-free and model agnostic. Our method
constructs an ODE that directly maps between the source
and target distributions (corresponding to the source and
target text prompts) and achieves a lower transport cost
than the inversion approach. This leads to state-of-the-art
results, as we illustrate with Stable Diffusion 3 and FLUX.
Code and examples are available on the project’s webpage.

19721

