This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RapVerse: Coherent Vocals and Whole-Body Motion Generation from Text
Jiaben Chen1

Xin Yan2 Yihang Chen3 Siyuan Cen1 Zixin Wang1
Haoyu Zhen1 Kaizhi Qian5 Lie Lu6 Chuang Gan1
1

UMass Amherst
5

2

Wuhan University

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

3

UC San Diego
6

4

Qinwei Ma4

Tsinghua University

Dolby Laboratories

Generate a holistic body motion and the corresponding singing vocals from the following lyrics:
The way I sing on these tracks now I been back now digging but broke for a minute I been up since the evening
Generated holistic body motion:

Generated singing vocals :

Figure 1. RapVerse. We present a unified text-conditioned multi-modality generation framework, for jointly generating holistic body
motions and singing vocals from textual lyrics inputs only. Note that the corresponding video frames are just shown for reference.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a challenging task for simultaneously generating 3D holistic body motions and singing
vocals directly from textual lyrics inputs, advancing beyond
existing works that typically address these two modalities
in isolation. To facilitate this, we first collect the RapVerse
dataset, a large dataset containing synchronous rapping vocals, lyrics, and high-quality 3D holistic body meshes. With
the RapVerse dataset, we investigate the extent to which
scaling autoregressive multimodal transformers across language, audio, and motion can enhance the coherent and
realistic generation of vocals and whole-body human motions. For modality unification, a vector-quantized variational autoencoder is employed to encode whole-body motion sequences into discrete motion tokens, while a vocalto-unit model is leveraged to obtain quantized audio tokens preserving content, prosodic information and singer
identity. By jointly performing transformer modeling on

these three modalities in a unified way, our framework ensures a seamless and realistic blend of vocals and human
motions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our unified generation framework not only produces coherent and
realistic singing vocals alongside human motions directly
from textual inputs, but also rivals the performance of specialized single-modality generation systems, establishing
new benchmarks for joint vocal-motion generation. Video
demonstration and more information can be found on the
project page1 .

1. Introduction

10097

In the evolving landscape of multi-modal content generation in terms of sound and motion, significant strides have
been made in individual modalities, including text-to-music
[1, 24, 51], text-to-vocal [34], text-to-motion [7, 16, 26, 35,
1 https://jiabenchen.github.io/RapVerse/.

