This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VGMamba: Attribute-to-Location Clue Reasoning for
Quantity-Agnostic 3D Visual Grounding
Yihang Zhu, Jinhao Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, Aming Wu, Cheng Deng*
Xidian University, China
{zhuyihang, zhangjinhao, wangyuxuan}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
amwu@xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

7KHEURZQ VRIDEHVLGHWKHSODQW

As an important direction of embodied intelligence, 3D Visual Grounding has attracted much attention, aiming to
identify 3D objects matching the given language description. Most existing methods often follow a two-stage process, i.e., ﬁrst detecting proposal objects and identifying
the right objects based on the relevance to the given query.
However, when the query is complex, it is difﬁcult to leverage an abstract language representation to lock the corresponding objects accurately, affecting the grounding performance. In general, given a speciﬁc object, humans usually
follow two clues to ﬁnish the corresponding grounding, i.e.,
attribute and location clues. To this end, we explore a new
mechanism, attribute-to-location clue reasoning, to conduct
accurate grounding. Particularly, we propose a VGMamba
network that consists of an SVD-based attribute mamba, location mamba, and multi-modal fusion mamba. Taking a
3D point cloud scene and language query as the input, we
ﬁrst exploit SVD to make a decomposition of the extracted
features. Then, a slidingwindow operation is conducted to
capture attribute characteristics. Next, a location mamba
is presented to obtain the corresponding location information. Finally, by means of multi-modal mamba fusion, the
model could effectively localize the object that matches the
given query. In the experiment, our method is veriﬁed on
four datasets. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of our method.


EURZQ VRID

EHVLGHSODQW

   

   






  

Figure 1. To achieve accurate 3D Visual Grounding, we explore
two clues. First, we leverage the attribute clue to capture proposal
objects. Then, a location clue is exploited to focus on the right
grounding object. Experimental results on multiple datasets verify
the effectiveness of this mechanism.

of 3D environments, this task becomes even more complex
due to the sparsity and irregularity of 3D point cloud data, as
well as the variability in object shapes, scales, and the complexity of the language descriptions. Therefore, accurately
localizing objects in 3D scene based on natural language
descriptions is crucial for robots to understand and interact
with their surroundings.
Recent studies [2, 6, 38, 40, 41] have attempted to address this challenge by incorporating both object attributes
(e.g., color, shape, texture) and spatial relationships (e.g.,
relative positions) to improve grounding accuracy. These
methods typically follow a two-stage paradigm: ﬁrst detecting candidate objects in the scene, and then assessing relevance to the given query based on feature similarity. While
these methods have demonstrated effectiveness in certain
scenarios, they still exhibit some limitations.
First, most existing works [6, 38, 40] treat object attributes and spatial relationships in isolation, neglecting the
inherent dependencies between them. In human perception,
object attributes often serve as priors for location reasoning.
For example, when searching for “The red chair next to the

1. Introduction
3D Visual Grounding aims to identify and localize objects
in a 3D scene based on natural language descriptions. This
task has become a key challenge at the intersection of computer vision and natural language processing, with signiﬁcant applications in areas such as human-robot interaction
and vision-language navigation [5, 7, 20]. In the context
* Corresponding author.

5295

