This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KOEnsAttack: Towards Efficient Data-Free Black-Box Adversarial Attacks via
Knowledge-Orthogonalized Substitute Ensembles
Chaoyong Yang1,2
Jia-Li Yin1,2 * Bin Chen1,2
Zhaozhe Hu1,2
Xiaolei Liu3
Wei Lin4 *
1
Fujian Province Key Laboratory of Information Security and Network Systems, Fuzhou, China
2
Fuzhou University 3 China Academy of Engineering Physics 4 Fujian University of Technology
{231020055, jlyin, 231010004, 241010027}@fzu.edu.cn, luxaole@gmail.com, wlin@fjut.edu.cn

Decision boundary
Target class data
Non-target class data
Adversarial attack
Adversarial example

Abstract

Victim Model

Data-free black-box attacks aim to attack a model without access to either the model parameters or training data.
Existing methods use a generator to synthesize training
samples and then train a substitute model to imitate the
victim model. The adversarial examples (AEs) are finally
generated using the substitute model to transfer to the victim model. To this end, how to generate diverse training samples for substitute model training and improve the
transferability of AEs from the substitute model to victim model become the core challenges. In this paper,
we propose a Knowledge-Orthogonalized Ensemble Attack,
dubbed KOEnsAttack, to accomplish these two goals. We
first use dual networks as the ensemble substitute model,
and then propose a sample hardness enhancement to transform the samples from the generator into hard samples that
exist in the controversial regions of the dual models for promoting the sample diversity. Next, during the substitute
model training, we design a knowledge orthogonalization
module to guide the dual networks in learning complementary and useful information from the victim model, thereby
enhancing the transferability of adversarial samples generated on the final ensemble model. Extensive experiments on
several datasets are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness
of our method. The results show that the proposed method
can achieve superior performance compared with the stateof-the-art competitors.

Substitute Model

(a)

Victim Model

Network 1
Network 2

(b)

Victim Model

Network 1
Network 2

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of different generator-based data-free
black-box attacks. (a) A substitute model is trained to imitate the
victim model, however, the reasoning gap between the substitute
model and the victim model can be large due to the distribution
shift in the synthesized samples; (b) Recent methods extend dual
networks as the substitute model to minimize the gap, but the sample space are not fully explored which leads to under-optimal results; (c) We propose the knowledge-orthogonalized ensembles to
reinforce the generalization of the substitute model which can effectively improve the attack performance.

strategically crafted perturbations—often imperceptible to
human observers—can systematically deceive model predictions. This fundamental vulnerability raises critical concerns regarding the operational security of DNN-based systems in real-world deployments. Consequently, the machine learning community has intensified efforts to address this dichotomy through two complementary research
thrusts, namely adversarial attack and defense, for better
improving the robustness of networks.
Typically, adversarial attacks can be categorized as
white-box attacks [1, 18, 19, 28] and black-box attacks
[2, 15, 32] according to the level of access to the victim
model. Existing attacks can achieve near-optimal attack
performance under the white-box settings via reversing the
gradients as the perturbations; however, they would lead
to trivial solutions under the black-box settings where only
the input-output feedback of the victim model can be accessed. Modern black-box attacks typically leverage the
transferability of adversarial perturbations, crafting AEs on

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have emerged as the dominant framework across various applications [4, 41] owing
to their demonstrated capacity for learning hierarchical representations from complex data structures. However, recent
studies [16, 28, 33–35] have exposed an inherent susceptibility of DNNs to adversarial examples (AEs), wherein
* Corresponding authors.

3101

