This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PromptDresser: Improving the Quality and Controllability of Virtual Try-On
via Generative Textual Prompt and Prompt-aware Mask
Jeongho Kim*

Hoiyeong Jin*
Sunghyun Park
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea

Jaegul Choo

{rlawjdghek, hy.jin, psh01087, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

(a) Qualitative comparison with existing methods

(b) Multiple attributes manipulation

StableVITON

OOTDiffusion

IDM-VTON

Ours

“Untucked”

“Rolled-up Pants”

“Tight Fit”

“Loose Fit”

“French Tucked, 
 “Fully Tucked in, 
 “Untucked,

Tight Fit,

Regular Fit,

Loose Fit,

Sleeve Rolled up” Sleeve Down”
Sleeve Down”

(c) Text-editable capability

“Loose Fit”

“Tight Fit”

Figure 1. Generated results of PromptDresser: (a) effectively resolves the issue of residual clothing shape in existing methods (b) highlights
multiple attributes manipulation simultaneously, and (c) generates versatile outputs across multiple clothing categories, including bottoms
and dresses.

Abstract

model, (ii) addressing the conflicts where textual information of the existing person’s clothing interferes the generation of the new clothing, and (iii) adaptively adjust the
inpainting mask aligned with the text descriptions, ensuring proper editing areas while preserving the original person’s appearance irrelevant to the new clothing. To address
these aspects, we propose PromptDresser, a text-editable
virtual try-on model that leverages large multimodal model
(LMM) assistance to enable high-quality and versatile manipulation based on generative text prompts. Our approach
utilizes LMMs via in-context learning to generate detailed
text descriptions for person and clothing images independently, including pose details and editing attributes using
minimal human cost. Moreover, to ensure the editing areas, we adjust the inpainting mask depending on the text

Recent virtual try-on approaches have advanced by finetuning pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models to leverage their powerful generative ability; however, the use of
text prompts in virtual try-on remains underexplored. This
paper tackles a text-editable virtual try-on task that modifies the clothing based on the provided clothing image
while editing the wearing style (e.g., tucking style, fit) according to the text descriptions. In the text-editable virtual try-on, three key aspects exist: (i) designing rich text
descriptions for paired person-clothing data to train the
* Equal contribution.

16026

