This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Color Grading via Look-Up Table Generation
Dongmin Shin2
Jisu Shin1
1
2
GIST
Yonsei University

Hae-Gon Jeon2†
3
Adobe Research

Joon-Young Lee3†

Color Grading
Diffusion
Predicted LUT
Reference frame

Initial

Input

Source frame

“Apply deep shadows
and high contrast, with
cool undertones”

Final

Color Grading Color Transfer Style Transfer

Seunghyun Shin1

Retouching LUT

Input

Reference

Output

User
feedback

LUT Database

Figure 1. (Left) Difference between conventional style/color transfer and the color grading task. Conventional color/style transfer aims to
match colors/textures of reference images with the input image, while video color grading captures the reference frame’s artistic intents.
(Middle) An overview of the proposed framework for reference-based video color grading and user-preferred retouching via a text prompt.
(Right) An example video clip from our video color grading framework based on the generated LUTs.

Abstract
Different from color correction and transfer, color grading involves adjusting colors for artistic or storytelling
purposes in a video, which is used to establish a specific
look or mood. However, due to the complexity of the process and the need for specialized editing skills, video color
grading remains primarily the domain of professional colorists. In this paper, we present a reference-based video
color grading framework. Our key idea is explicitly generating a look-up table (LUT) for color attribute alignment between reference scenes and input video via a diffusion model. As a training objective, we enforce that
high-level features of the reference scenes like look, mood,
and emotion should be similar to that of the input video.
Our LUT-based approach allows for color grading without any loss of structural details in the whole video frames
as well as achieving fast inference. We further build a
pipeline to incorporate a user-preference via text prompts
for low-level feature enhancement such as contrast and
brightness, etc. Experimental results, including extensive
user studies, demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
for video color grading. Codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/seunghyuns98/VideoColorGrading.

vibrant tones, evoking a sense of comfort and wealth, while
the poor family’s environment is rendered in cool, desaturated tones, emphasizing their hardship and separation from
privilege [62]. Color grading aims to add depth and meaning to each scene, guiding the viewer’s perception and interpretation of a story. It is a post-production process for video
editing in the film industry, and consists of adjusting color
and contrast to serve a creative or stylistic choice. However,
because color grading requires a blend of technical skills
and artistic vision, including a deep understanding of color
theory, visual storytelling, and mood setting, this process
remains largely within the realm of professional colorists.
Until now, studies on color grading have been conducted
in both computer vision and graphics fields. However, they
define the color grading task as color distribution matching between input and reference images [6, 38, 54]. Unfortunately, these methods are insufficient for many practical
purposes. Since color grading is a process of manipulating the colors in videos for artistic or stylistic reasons, it
requires the transfer of high-level features, such as atmosphere, tone and vibe, beyond simply adjusting color distribution. In addition, users want to have various creative
controls over the initial products.
In this paper, we propose a novel video color grading
framework that allows users to generate aesthetically pleasing videos based on preferred references in Fig. 1. Our entire pipeline is inspired by the workflow of professional colorists. Their typical process involves selecting a key-frame
and then adjusting the frame to mimic their subjective char-

1. Introduction
In the film “Parasite”, color grading is used to express class
differences: the wealthy family’s home is rendered in warm,
† Corresponding Author

19141

