This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Feature Whitening for Hyperparameter-Free Bias Mitigation
Yooshin Cho Hanbyel Cho Janghyeon Lee

HyeongGwon Hong Jaesung Ahn

Junmo Kim

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{choys95, tlrl4658, wkdgus9305, honggudrnjs, jaesung2, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

the target attribute (e.g., recognizing objects by relying on
backgrounds or textures), the generalization capability of
the neural networks is severely reduced [46, 62]. Furthermore, previous studies have empirically demonstrated that
neural networks tend to focus on easier concepts [1, 32],
and over rely on such spurious correlations [36, 40].
To address the issues, several studies have been proposed [2, 11, 36, 40]. A common strategy is to enforce
networks to learn representations that are independent to
the specified bias attributes by incorporating fairness criteria (e.g., demographic parity, equalized odds, and equal
opportunity) [2, 29, 45, 61]. Previous works have quantified the fairness criteria using statistical measures (e.g.,
mutual information, Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion, and Hirschfeld-Gebelein-Rényi coefficient) that represent the dependency between model predictions (or representations) and bias attributes. However, these measures
are often analytically intractable or computationally expensive to estimate directly. Therefore, they employed neural
networks to estimate the measures, and achieved fairness by
adopting adversarial learning or regularization terms. However, it should be noted that adversarial learning can be easily unstable, and careful tuning of hyperparameters is required for regularization terms. Furthermore, it is difficult
to evaluate whether the neural estimator precisely estimates
the dependency during the min-max game.
To overcome the limitations, we propose a simple yet effective feature whitening based approach that is robust to
hyperparameter tunings and facilitates stable training. As
noted in prior works, linear independence can be satisfied
with the whitening transform that multiplies the inverse
square root of the covariance matrix [19, 20]. Although
linear independence does not guarantee statistical independence, it ensures that one variable can not be estimated by a
linear layer that takes other variables as inputs. This property allows our approach to function similarly to adversarial training, forcing the target representation to "forget" bias
attributes in a linear regime. Furthermore, deep neural networks have empirically shown the capability to encode inputs into a representation that is linearly separable by a last
linear classifier. Based on these insights, we estimate and

As the use of artificial intelligence rapidly increases, the development of trustworthy artificial intelligence has become
important. However, recent studies have shown that deep
neural networks are susceptible to learn spurious correlations present in datasets. To improve the reliability, we propose a simple yet effective framework called controllable
feature whitening. We quantify the linear correlation between the target and bias features by the covariance matrix, and eliminate it through the whitening module. Our results systemically demonstrate that removing the linear correlations between features fed into the last linear classifier
significantly mitigates the bias, while avoiding the need to
model intractable higher-order dependencies. A particular
advantage of the proposed method is that it does not require
regularization terms or adversarial learning, which often
leads to unstable optimization in practice. Furthermore,
we show that two fairness criteria, demographic parity
and equalized odds, can be effectively handled by whitening with the re-weighted covariance matrix. Consequently,
our method controls the trade-off between the utility and
fairness of algorithms by adjusting the weighting coefficient. Finally, we validate that our method outperforms existing approaches on four benchmark datasets: Corrupted
CIFAR-10, Biased FFHQ, WaterBirds, and Celeb-A.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown impressive performance
by capturing task-relevant statistical cues from well-curated
training datasets [16, 56]. However, if training datasets are
poorly curated, neural networks often rely on spurious cues
that do not generalize well beyond the training distribution.
Nevertheless, it is challenging to determine which statistical
cues are beneficial for task performance; thus neural networks often fail when train dataset is highly biased (i.e.,
datasets in which a target attribute has a strong spurious
correlation with a particular bias attribute). For example,
if neural networks rely on spurious correlations to predict

4550

