This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VITAL: More Understandable Feature Visualization through Distribution
Alignment and Relevant Information Flow
Ada Görgün

Bernt Schiele

Jonas Fischer

{agoerguen, schiele, jonas.fischer}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Figure 1. Feature visualization through distribution matching. Unlike traditional feature visualization (FV) methods, which often produce
artifacts or repetitive patterns, VITAL generates more understandable visualizations. Our approach scales effectively to modern architectures
(rows), generalizes well across diverse classes (columns), and better captures meaningful network representations.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success
across science and industry. Their reasoning process is,
however, inherently opaque. Different lines of research in
Explainability of Machine Learning have been addressing
these issues as understanding of how a neural network arrives at a decision is crucial, especially in safety-critical
domains. To understand which input features are used for
a decision, both post-hoc, as well as built-in methodologies have been proposed, which give information about
input-output relations in the form of attribution or relevance
scores [4, 17, 34, 37]. Yet, these offer only a partial understanding of a model’s decision-making process. In the scope
of Mechanistic Interpretability [3, 31], experts are interested
in finding explanations that uncover what the model internally learns. In this line of research, methods that discover
paths of information flow – so-called circuits – have been
proposed [6, 10, 35], along with approaches to discover network components, such as groups of neurons, that together
encode a concept [9]. While these methods reveal where information is propagated towards a particular decision, they
fall short in identifying which information is encoded. Feature visualization (FV) bridges this gap by generating images that correspond to what triggers a strong response in

Neural networks are widely adopted to solve complex and
challenging tasks. Especially in high-stakes decisionmaking, understanding their reasoning process is crucial,
yet proves challenging for modern deep networks. Feature
visualization (FV) is a powerful tool to decode what information neurons are responding to and hence to better understand the reasoning behind such networks. In particular, in
FV we generate human-understandable images that reflect
the information detected by neurons of interest. However,
current methods often yield unrecognizable visualizations,
exhibiting repetitive patterns and visual artifacts that are
hard to understand for a human. To address these problems,
we propose to guide FV through statistics of real image features combined with measures of relevant network flow to
generate prototypical images. Our approach yields humanunderstandable visualizations that both qualitatively and
quantitatively improve over state-of-the-art FVs across various architectures. As such, it can be used to decode which
information the network uses, complementing mechanistic
circuits that identify where it is encoded.1
1 Code is available at: VITAL Framework

4403

