This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MemoryTalker: Personalized Speech-Driven 3D Facial Animation
via Audio-Guided Stylization
Hyung Kyu Kim1
1

Sangmin Lee2,†

Hak Gu Kim1,†

Chung-Ang University, 2 Korea University

{hyung1208,hakgukim}@cau.ac.kr, sangmin-lee@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

“Did I sacrifice every bit of love …”
Voice A

Speech-driven 3D facial animation aims to synthesize realistic facial motion sequences from given audio, matching
the speaker’s speaking style. However, previous works often
require priors such as class labels of a speaker or additional 3D facial meshes at inference, which makes them fail
to reflect the speaking style and limits their practical use.
To address these issues, we propose MemoryTalker which
enables realistic and accurate 3D facial motion synthesis by
reflecting speaking style only with audio input to maximize
usability in applications. Our framework consists of two
training stages: <1-stage> is storing and retrieving general
motion (i.e., Memorizing), and <2-stage> is to perform the
personalized facial motion synthesis (i.e., Animating) with
the motion memory stylized by the audio-driven speaking
style feature. In this second stage, our model learns about
which facial motion types should be emphasized for a particular piece of audio. As a result, our MemoryTalker can
generate a reliable personalized facial animation without additional prior information. With quantitative and qualitative
evaluations, as well as user study, we show the effectiveness
of our model and its performance enhancement for personalized facial animation over state-of-the-art methods. Project
page: https://cau-irislab.github.io/ICCV25-MemoryTalker/

Voice B

Voice C

Memory Talker
Did

I

sacrifice

every

bit

love

Speaker A

Speaker B

Speaker C

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The intuition of MemoryTalker for personalized speechdriven 3D facial animation, Memorizing and Animating. Memorizing: Storing and retrieving facial motion. Animating: Synthesizing
the personalized 3D facial motion with the stylized motion memory.
Our MemoryTalker can accurately produce the personalized 3D
facial motion for different speakers using only audio input.

Speech-driven 3D facial animation is a challenging task
that aims to synthesize realistic 3D facial motion synchronized with the given speech [2, 5, 10, 11, 16, 20, 27, 31,
39, 46, 51, 53]. This technique can be widely utilized in
various immersive applications, including VR telepresence,
character animation for film production and gaming. Recently, the advent of large-scale 3D facial animation datasets
[6, 13, 26, 34, 36] and advancements in deep learning have
significantly increased interest in this field.

The core challenge lies in developing algorithms that not
only achieve precise speech-motion synchronization but also
capture individual speaking styles - the subtle yet distinctive
patterns in how different speakers articulate the same words.
This work addresses personalization issues in speechdriven 3D facial animation by considering the speaking style
of a speaker, including the amplitude of mouth opening and
closing, the extent of pouting, etc. (see Fig. 1). To deal with
that, most previous works [6, 12, 41, 45] have employed onehot encoding of the identity classes for different speakers in
the training set. However, these models necessarily require
human identity classes even at inference time (Fig. 2 (a)).

† Corresponding Author

11241

