This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GroundFlow: A Plug-in Module for Temporal Reasoning on 3D Point Cloud
Sequential Grounding
Zijun Lin1,2

Shuting He3

Cheston Tan2

Bihan Wen1

Nanyang Technological University 2 Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
1

3

Abstract

T : Refresh yourself with a beverage
T : Task Description P : 3D Point Cloud St : Step t’s Instruction Ot : Step t’s Target Object
Grounding Sequences

Sequential grounding in 3D point clouds (SG3D) refers to
locating sequences of objects by following text instructions
for a daily activity with detailed steps. Current 3D visual
grounding (3DVG) methods treat text instructions with multiple steps as a whole, without extracting useful temporal
information from each step. However, the instructions in
SG3D often contain pronouns such as “it”, “here” and “the
same” to make language expressions concise. This requires
grounding methods to understand the context and retrieve
relevant information from previous steps to correctly locate
object sequences. Due to the lack of an effective module
for collecting related historical information, state-of-theart 3DVG methods face significant challenges in adapting
to the SG3D task. To fill this gap, we propose GroundFlow
— a plug-in module for temporal reasoning on 3D point
cloud sequential grounding. Firstly, we demonstrate that integrating GroundFlow improves the task accuracy of 3DVG
baseline methods by a large margin (+7.5% and +10.2%) in
the SG3D benchmark, even outperforming a 3D large language model pre-trained on various datasets. Furthermore,
we selectively extract both short-term and long-term step
information based on its relevance to the current instruction, enabling GroundFlow to take a comprehensive view
of historical information and maintain its temporal understanding advantage as step counts increase. Overall, our
work introduces temporal reasoning capabilities to existing
3DVG models and achieves state-of-the-art performance in
the SG3D benchmark across five datasets.

Correct Predictions

Distractor

* 3DVG-based Method

S1 : Walk to the
shorter one of two
desks with monitors
O1 : Desk
S2 : Pick up
the coke cola.
O2 : Cup

O3 : Chair_2

Chair_1

S3 : Sit on the black office
chair under that same desk
to enjoy your drink

Ours (GroundFlow)

Previous
O3

O1

O2

GroundFlow

3DVG*

S1 & S2 & S3 P

J!1

O3

GroundFlow

J!2

GroundFlow

3DVG

3DVG

3DVG

S1

S2

S3

P

P

J!3 …

P

Figure 1. An example of SG3D task (above) and a comparison between previous visual grounding framework (bottom left) and our
recurrent framework (bottom right) integrated with GroundFlow
plug-in module to enhance temporal reasoning when localizing the
target object in S3 . As shown, GroundFlow module’s output Jˆt
will be treated as input in the next step t + 1.

1. Introduction

studied task that requires the agent to locate the target objects in 3D scenes based on a text instruction describing the
object attributes in detail such as color, shape and spatial
relationships. Recently, to advance grounding tasks toward
more realistic applications, a new task called Sequential
Grounding in 3D point clouds (SG3D) [52] has been introduced. Although this task shares similarities with 3DVG
in grounding language information into the visual field,
SG3D distinguishes itself by two characteristics — sequen-

To understand and perform human instructions in the real
world, robots should precisely identify the referred objects
to complete complex tasks through natural language. 3D
Visual Grounding (3DVG) [13, 42, 48, 49, 53] is a widely

28774

