This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DistillDrive: End-to-End Multi-Mode Autonomous Driving Distillation by
Isomorphic Hetero-Source Planning Model

1

Rui Yu1
Xianghang Zhang2
Runkai Zhao3
Huaicheng Yan1†
Meng Wang1
2
3
East China University of Science and Technology
SenseAuto Research
The University of Sydney
y80220166@mail.ecust.edu.cn
hcyan@ecust.edu.cn

zhangxianghang@senseauto.com
mengwang@ecust.edu.cn

†

rzha9419@uni.sydney.edu.au

Corresponding author

(a) Perceptual Decoupled Learning-based Planning Paradigm

Abstract

No Gradient Backpropagation

Independent
Perception

End-to-end autonomous driving has been recently seen
rapid development, exerting a profound influence on both
industry and academia. However, the existing work places
excessive focus on ego-vehicle status as their sole learning
objectives and lacks of planning-oriented understanding,
which limits the robustness of the overall decision-making
prcocess. In this work, we introduce DistillDrive, an endto-end knowledge distillation-based autonomous driving
model that leverages diversified instance imitation to enhance multi-mode motion feature learning. Specifically, we
employ a planning model based on structured scene representations as the teacher model, leveraging its diversified planning instances as multi-objective learning targets
for the end-to-end model. Moreover, we incorporate reinforcement learning to enhance the optimization of stateto-decision mappings, while utilizing generative modeling
to construct planning-oriented instances, fostering intricate interactions within the latent space. We validate our
model on the nuScenes and NAVSIM datasets, achieving
a 50% reduction in collision rate and a 3-point improvement in closed-loop performance compared to the baseline model. Code and model are publicly available at
https://github.com/YuruiAI/DistillDrive

Multi-mode
Planning

Multi-View
Camera

Agent & Map Represent

Instance Encoder

(b) End-to-End Preception and Planning Paradigm
Perception
Model
Multi-View
Camera

Motion
Model

Occupancy
Model

Multi-mode
Planning

Backbone

(c) Distillation-based End-to-End Planning Paradigm
Teacher Model

Perception
Model
Multi-View
Camera

Backbone

Instance Encoder

Generative
Decoder

Transfer

Perception GT

Multi-mode
Planning

Transfer

RL Status
Optimization

Planning
Distillation

Multi-mode
Planning

Student Model

Figure 1. Comparisons of different automatic driving planing paradigms. (a) Perceptual decoupled learning-based planning model [5, 46]. (b) End-to-end perception and planning model
[16, 21]. (c) The proposed distillation-based drive model.

1. Introduction

learning [5] and simulation experiments [9]. Still, it faces a
coupling barrier [20] between perception and planning.
Unlike perceptual tasks with a unique solution, planning
tasks have uncertain feasible solutions [4], and relying on a
single expert trajectory can limit the model’s ability to learn
diverse representations. To address the issue of a limit planning goal, SparseDrive [37] incorporates unimodal planning
features into multi-mode position embedding, enabling diverse planning. Meanwhile, VADV2 [4] abstracts planning
tasks as a probabilistic action distribution, using the interaction between planning vocabulary and scenario tokens
to sample a single action. DiffusionDrive [29] proposes a
truncated diffusion policy with multi-mode anchors and the
diffusion schedule, enabling the model to learn denoising
from gaussian distribution. While the above approach offers some planning diversity, it still has several issues: (a)
Single-mode Learning: Its target remains the expert trajectory from log playback, which lacks diverse supervision

End-to-end autonomous driving [15, 16, 21] has made significant progress in recent years, primarily driven by advancements in perception technologies [30, 31, 41] and imitation learning [19]. As show in Fig. 1 (b), it learns directly
from complex sensor inputs to final planning and decision,
eliminating the intermediate processes of data transfer and
target characterization, thereby significantly reducing cascading errors [16]. However, in closed-loop experiments,
the perceptually separated planning model in Fig. 1 (a) outperforms the end-to-end model, benefiting from contrastive

26188

