This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-grained Spatiotemporal Grounding on Egocentric Videos
Shuo Liang, Yiwu Zhong, Zi-Yuan Hu, Yeyao Tao, Liwei Wang†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Exocentric Videos

Abstract

…
00:04

Spatiotemporal video grounding aims to localize target
entities in videos based on textual queries. While existing
research has made significant progress in exocentric videos,
the egocentric setting remains relatively underexplored, despite its growing importance in applications such as augmented reality and robotics. In this work, we conduct a systematic analysis of the discrepancies between egocentric and
exocentric videos, revealing key challenges such as shorter
object durations, sparser trajectories, smaller object sizes,
and larger positional shifts. To address these challenges, we
introduce EgoMask, the first pixel-level benchmark for finegrained spatiotemporal grounding in egocentric videos. It is
constructed by our proposed automatic annotation pipeline,
which annotates referring expressions and object masks
across short-, medium-, and long-term videos. Additionally,
we create EgoMask-Train, a large-scale training dataset
to facilitate model development. Experiments demonstrate
that the state-of-the-art spatiotemporal grounding models
perform poorly on our benchmark EgoMask, but fine-tuning
on EgoMask-Train yields significant improvements, while
preserving performance on exocentric datasets. Our work
thus provides essential resources and insights for advancing
egocentric video understanding. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LaVi-Lab/EgoMask.

00:10

01:30

00:04 ~ 01:40

…

(frames)

01:40

(boxes)

a dog walking

(masks)

Egocentric Videos

03:30

05:00

05:09

(text)

02:04~03:30, 05:00~05:44

…

…
02:04

(text)

05:44

the black rectangular television
located on the top level of the
white shelf…

(frames)
(boxes)
(our masks)

Figure 1. Comparison of video grounding tasks. We propose the
first pixel-level benchmark for fine-grained spatiotemporal grounding in egocentric videos.

while egocentric video grounding remains relatively underexplored. This is despite the growing interest in egocentric
video understanding [4, 7, 56], driven by its potential applications in augmented reality (AR) glasses, household robotics,
and other real-world scenarios.
Meanwhile, existing studies have observed a gap between
egocentric and exocentric videos [11, 20, 46]. For instance,
egocentric videos are characterized by rapid camera movements, causing objects to frequently enter and exit the field
of view, while also undergoing rapid appearance changes.
However, a systematic and statistical analysis of these differences remains lacking. Therefore, we conducted a study
that quantitatively analyzes the discrepancies between egocentric and exocentric videos. Our findings reveal several
key differences: entities in egocentric videos exhibit shorter
total durations, sparser continuous trajectories, smaller object sizes, and larger positional shifts compared to their
counterparts in exocentric videos. This study raises a key
question: Can existing models perform well on fine-grained
spatiotemporal grounding in egocentric videos?
To answer the question, however, there lacks a benchmark specifically designed for fine-grained spatiotemporal
grounding in egocentric videos. The most relevant datasets
are EgoTracks [46] and RefEgo [20]. EgoTracks focuses
on long-term object tracking in egocentric videos but only
provides object category labels and bounding box annota-

1. Introduction
Video grounding has been extensively studied in recent
years [11, 12, 16, 22, 44, 47, 62]. It requires models to
generate a temporal tube for target entities based on a given
language query. As illustrated in Figure 1, this tube can be
represented as a sequence of consecutive frames [11, 22]
(temporal grounding), or a set of bounding boxes and masks
that localize entities within these frames [12, 44] (spatiotemporal grounding). The mask output further requires a pixellevel localization on the fine-grained object geometry. It is
worth noting that existing works [1, 59] predominantly focus
on spatiotemporal grounding in exocentric videos [9, 44],
† Corresponding author

9385

