This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Annotation-Free Evaluation: KPAScore for Human Keypoint Detection
Xiaoxiao Wang1 * Chunxiao Li2 * Peng Sun3 Boming Miao2 Yunjian Zhang1† Yao Zhu4†
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China
3
Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing, China 4 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
wangxiaoxiao@mails.ucas.ac.cn, ee zhuy@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

manual annotation, which is highly time-consuming, laborintensive and prone to inaccuracies. For example, MPII
[1] and COCO [17] require over 400k and 5.1 million keypoint annotations. As shown in Fig. 1, missing ground truth
annotations can lead to the exclusion of some person keypoints from evaluation. Thus, developing a new metric that
is annotation-free, automated, and more objective in reflecting detection performance is essential.

Human keypoint detection is fundamental in computer
vision, with applications in pose estimation and action
recognition. However, existing evaluation metrics (e.g.,
OKS, PCP, PDJ) rely on human-annotated ground truth,
a labor-intensive process that increases costs, limits scalability. To address this, we propose KPAScore (KeyPoint
Answering Score), an annotation-free metric independent
of ground truth. It evaluates keypoint detection using a
two-stage VLM-based question-answering process: first,
the VLM identifies the presence of keypoints within the image, and second, visual prompts are introduced to query
the likelihood of each keypoint being accurately localized within a predefined boundary. To validate the rationale behind KPAScore, we propose KPUBench (KeyPoint
Understanding Benchmark), which comprehensively evaluates the VLM’s ability to determine keypoint presence and
localization. Extensive experiments demonstrate KPAScore’s effectiveness from three perspectives: consistency
to keypoint variation, correlation with traditional metrics,
alignment with human perception. We hope KPAScore will
reduce reliance on manual annotations, facilitating broader
adoption of keypoint detection in real-world applications.

With the continuous advancement of vision-language
models, VLMs [2, 16, 19] have developed robust semantic
understanding and strong generalization capabilities. These
VLMs can tackle a variety of computer vision tasks, such as
image comprehension [10] and localization [5]. Leveraging
vision-language models, Lin et al. [18] propose the VQA
score, which evaluates the alignment between image-text
prompts using the responses generated by VLMs. This approach outperforms the widely used CLIPScore [9, 21], particularly when handling complex prompts involving combinations of objects, attributes, and relationships. Inspired by
VQA score [18], we propose the Keypoint Answering Score
(KPAScore), a novel keypoint detection metric based on a
two-stage question-answering process and visual prompts.
In the first stage, the Visual Language Model (VLM) is
asked whether a specific keypoint exists in the image, and
based on the response probability of presence, different
weights are assigned to each keypoint. In the second stage,
we introduce a visual prompt to guide the VLM’s focus towards keypoint regions. Specifically, a visual prompt in the
form of a blue dot is generated on the estimated keypoint,
and the VLM is queried whether the keypoint accurately
corresponds to this prompt. The product of the probability
of answering ”yes” in the second stage and the weight determines the KPAscore for the evaluated detection algorithms.

1. Introduction
The primary evaluation metrics for human keypoint detection include Object Keypoint Similarity (OKS) [17], Percentage of Detected Joints (PDJ) [28], and Percentage of
Correct Keypoints (PCK) [1], all of which require ground
truth for computation. Typically, ground truth is obtained
in two ways. The first approach uses optical motion capture
during dataset collection to generate precise ground truth,
as seen in datasets like Human3.6M [11]; however, the limitations of motion capture equipment often result in datasets
with limited scene diversity. The second approach relies on

We conducted extensive experiments to validate the rationale, consistency, correlation with ground-truth-based
metrics, and alignment with human perception of the proposed KPAScore, thereby demonstrating its effectiveness.
Regarding its rationale, we constructed the KeyPoint Understanding Benchmark (KPUBench) for visual language
models (VLMs), which includes over 1.8 million questions.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

8441

