This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Embodied Image Captioning: Self-supervised Learning Agents
for Spatially Coherent Image Descriptions
Tommaso Galliena1,2 , Tommaso Apicella1 , Stefano Rosa1 , Pietro Morerio1 , Alessio Del Bue1 , Lorenzo Natale1
1
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy
2
University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy
name.surname@iit.it

Figure 1. An agent equipped with an instance segmentation and captioning model navigates the environment. Off-the-shelf captioners
predict partially wrong and inconsistent captions across different views of the same object: CoCa [45], BLIP2 [19], Florence2 [41],
and ChatGPT [24].

Abstract
We present a self-supervised method to improve an agent’s
abilities in describing arbitrary objects while actively exploring a generic environment. This is a challenging problem, as current models struggle to obtain coherent image
captions due to different camera viewpoints and clutter. We
propose a three-phase framework to fine-tune existing captioning models that enhances caption accuracy and consistency across views via a consensus mechanism. First,
an agent explores the environment, collecting noisy imagecaption pairs. Then, a consistent pseudo-caption for each
object instance is distilled via consensus using a large language model. Finally, these pseudo-captions are used to
fine-tune an off-the-shelf captioning model, with the addition of contrastive learning. We analyse the performance
of the combination of captioning models, exploration policies, pseudo-labeling methods, and fine-tuning strategies,
on our manually labeled test set. Results show that a policy
can be trained to mine samples with higher disagreement
compared to classical baselines. Our pseudo-captioning

method, in combination with all policies, has a higher semantic similarity compared to other existing methods, and
fine-tuning improves caption accuracy and consistency by a
significant margin. Code and test set annotations available
at https : / / hsp - iit . github . io / embodied captioning/

1. Introduction

24370

Visual understanding is a fundamental skill to recognize
and describe objects in a scene, enabling robots to navigate
and interact with the environment [12]. Despite advances
in image captioning [18, 41–43, 45], a captioner deployed
on an autonomous agent often generates wrong or inconsistent descriptions across different views of the same object,
especially in the case of occlusions or challenging viewing
directions (see Fig. 1).
Previous works tackled the problem of inconsistent captions from three research directions: agent navigation [9,
10], noisy captions [14, 16, 18], and caption comprehensiveness [3, 30]. Navigation-based captioning methods

