This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled Multi-Predictor Optimization for Inference-Efficient Model Tuning
Liwei Luo1† , Shuaitengyuan Li1† , Dongwei Ren1 , Qilong Wang1*, Pengfei Zhu1,2 , Qinghua Hu1
1

Tianjin University, China

2

Low-Altitude Intelligence Lab, Xiong’an National Innovation Center Technology Co., Ltd

Abstract

LoRA

90

Recently, remarkable progress has been made in largescale pre-trained model tuning, and inference efficiency is
becoming more crucial for practical deployment. Early exiting in conjunction with multi-stage predictors, when cooperated with a parameter-efficient fine-tuning strategy, offers a straightforward way to achieve an inference-efficient
model. However, a key challenge remains unresolved: How
can early stages provide low-level fundamental features to
deep stages while simultaneously supplying high-level discriminative features to early-stage predictors? To address
this problem, we propose a Decoupled Multi-Predictor
Optimization (DMPO) method to effectively decouple the
low-level representative ability and high-level discriminative ability in early stages. First, in terms of architecture,
we introduce a lightweight bypass module into multi-stage
predictors for functional decomposition of shallow features
from early stages, while a high-order statistics-based predictor is developed for early stages to effectively enhance
their discriminative ability. To reasonably train our multipredictor architecture, a decoupled optimization is proposed to allocate two-phase loss weights for multi-stage
predictors during model tuning, where the initial training
phase enables the model to prioritize the acquisition of
discriminative ability of deep stages via emphasizing representative ability of early stages, and the latter training
phase drives discriminative ability towards earlier stages as
much as possible. As such, our DMPO can effectively decouple representative and discriminative abilities in early
stages in terms of architecture design and model optimization. Experiments across various datasets and pre-trained
backbones demonstrate that DMPO clearly outperforms its
counterparts when reducing computational cost. Particularly, DMPO with 30% FLOPs is comparable with or even
suppresses counterparts with 70% FLOPs.

88

DMPO (Ours)

DMPO (Ours)

DyT

Accuracy (%)

Dyn-Adapter

Full tuning
Adapter

86

FLOPs -30%

84
82
80

DyT
Dyn-Adapter

Linear probing

30% FLOPs

70% FLOPs 100% FLOPs

78

DeeBERT
6

8

10

12

Inference FLOPs (G)

14

16

Figure 1. Comparison of various methods in terms of inference FLOPs and average accuracy on CIFAR-100 and five FGVC
datasets, with corresponding results presented in Tab. 3.

ers (ViT) [8, 27] pre-trained on large-scale datasets in various vision tasks. To fully exploit their potential, finetuning large-scale pre-trained models is a common practice for downstream applications. Although parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods such as Adapter [15],
LoRA [16], and VPT [18] are tuning-efficient, they may introduce additional inference costs due to the inclusion of
fine-tuning modules. Meanwhile, inference efficiency becomes increasingly crucial for practical deployment. Existing inference-efficient strategies mainly include token pruning [7, 25, 33, 49] by reducing representation size, and early
exiting [26, 42, 47, 48] by outputting prediction results with
incomplete inference. However, as shown in Fig. 1, token
pruning method, DyT [49], suffers from significant accuracy drops with decreasing FLOPs. Furthermore, negative
impacts have been observed on out-of-distribution performance [24] when removing spurious tokens. Recently, early
exiting cooperating with PEFT provides a straightforward
way to achieve an inference-efficient model tuning [47].
For enabling early exiting, it is crucial to enhance discriminative ability in early stages, which guarantees acceptable prediction accuracy with incomplete inference. However, it is well known that early stages primarily serve to
provide fundamental features to deep stages [11, 17, 21],
and there will exist conflict between low-level representa-

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advancements of
large-scale deep neural networks such as Vision Transform* Corresponding author. †Equal contribution.

E-mail: {luoliwei, listy, rendw, qlwang}@tju.edu.cn.
Project page: https://github.com/TJU-sjyj/DMPO.

3628

