This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2HandedAfforder: Learning Precise Actionable Bimanual Affordances from
Human Videos
Marvin Heidinger∗1 , Snehal Jauhri∗1 , Vignesh Prasad1 , Georgia Chalvatzaki1,2
∗
indicates equal contribution
1
Computer Science Department, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
2
Hessian.AI, Darmstadt, Germany
{snehal.jauhri, vignesh.prasad, georgia.chalvatzaki}@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
When interacting with objects, humans effectively reason about which regions of objects are viable for an intended action, i.e., the affordance regions of the object.
They can also account for subtle differences in object regions based on the task to be performed and whether one
or two hands need to be used. However, current visionbased affordance prediction methods often reduce the problem to naive object part segmentation. In this work, we
propose a framework for extracting affordance data from
human activity video datasets. Our extracted 2HANDS
dataset contains precise object affordance region segmentations and affordance class-labels as narrations of the activity performed. The data also accounts for bimanual actions, i.e., two hands co-ordinating and interacting with
one or more objects. We present a VLM-based affordance
prediction model, 2HandedAfforder, trained on the dataset
and demonstrate superior performance over baselines in
affordance region segmentation for various activities. Finally, we show that our predicted affordance regions are
actionable, i.e., can be used by an agent performing a task,
through demonstration in robotic manipulation scenarios.
Project-website: sites.google.com/view/2handedafforder

Figure 1. A motivating example: When labeling affordances for a
task ‘Pour into bowl’, typical labeled affordances provided by annotators are not precise and reduce the problem to object part segmentation. Alternatively, our affordance extraction method uses
the hand-object interaction sequence to get precise bimanual affordance regions that are not just ‘conceptual’ but also ‘actionable’.

1. Introduction

environments. For example, to pour into a bowl, the robot
should know that it should hold the bottle in a region close
to the center of mass of the bottle (Figure 1), i.e., a region
that affords pouring. Predicting such affordance regions is
challenging since it requires a fine-grained understanding of
object regions and their semantic relationship to the task.
Recent advances in large-language and multimodal models have shown impressive visual reasoning capabilities using self-supervised objectives [7, 35, 41]. However, there
is still a big gap in their ability to detect accurate object affordance regions in images [25]. Moreover, most existing
state-of-the-art affordance detection methods [15, 22, 38,
40, 48] use labeled data [17, 23, 31, 34, 38] that lacks precision and is more akin to object part segmentation rather than
actionable affordance-region prediction. When humans interact with objects, they are much more precise and use specific object regions important in the context of the task. An
example is provided in Fig. 1. For the task of pouring into
the bowl, part segmentation labels the entire bottom of the

When humans perceive objects, they understand different
object regions and can predict which object region affords
which activities [10], i.e., which object regions can be used
for a task. We wish our machines to have this ability, referred to in literature as “affordance grounding”. Affordance grounding has several downstream applications, including building planning agents, VR, and robotics. Affordance grounding is especially important for robotics since
robots must reason about various actions that can be performed using different object regions which is a crucial step
towards performing useful tasks in everyday, unstructured

14743

