This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CMT: A Cascade MAR with Topology Predictor for
Multimodal Conditional CAD Generation
Jianyu Wu1,2 Yizhou Wang3 Xiangyu Yue3 Xinzhu Ma1 Jinyang Guo4
Dongzhan Zhou1 Wanli Ouyang1,3 Shixiang Tang1†
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Beihang University
{wujianyu,tangshixiang}@pjlab.org.cn † Corresponding author

Image

Image

A rectangular platform with two
cylindrical voids symmetrically
located near the center.

A model of a cylinder
pierced by a circle.

Text

Text

Point Clouds

Point Clouds

Unconditional Generation

Figure 1. CMT generates accurate and diverse CAD models of Boundary Represention based on user’s multimodal inputs, including
texts, point clouds and mulitview images, which can be seamless applied in the design and industrial manufacturing.

Abstract

directly estimates topology in B-Reps from the compact tokens in MAR. Second, to facilitate large-scale training, we
develop a large-scale multimodal CAD dataset, mmABC,
which includes over 1.3 million B-Rep models with multimodal annotations, including point clouds, text descriptions, and multi-view images. Extensive experiments show
the superior of CMT in both conditional and unconditional
CAD generation tasks. For example, we improve Coverage and Valid ratio by +10.68% and +10.3%, respectively,
compared to state-of-the-art methods on ABC [21] in unconditional generation. CMT also improves +4.01 Chamfer
on image conditioned CAD generation on mmABC.

While accurate and user-friendly Computer-Aided Design
(CAD) is crucial for industrial design and manufacturing,
existing methods still struggle to achieve this due to their
over-simplified representations or architectures incapable
of supporting multimodal design requirements. In this paper, we attempt to tackle this problem from both methods and datasets aspects. First, we propose a cascade
MAR [25] with topology predictor (CMT), the first multimodal framework for CAD generation based on Boundary Representation (B-Rep). Specifically, the cascade MAR
can effectively capture the “edge-counters-surface” priors
that are essential in B-Reps, while the topology predictor

7014

