This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Omni-modal Pretraining with Multimodal Context: Advancing
Universal Representation Learning Across Modalities
Yiyuan Zhang1,4∗ Handong Li2,3 * Jing Liu2,3† Xiangyu Yue1,5
1
MMLab, CUHK 2 School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UCAS
3
CASIA 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 SHIAE, CUHK

Temporal Video

Paired Normal Maps

Paired Depth

Visual Content Caption

Training Omni-modal Intelligence

“Change a place, Will my life be better? when leaving here, I
know nothing When the hustle and bustle of the city covers
up the trembling of the heart, I always fantasize about a
completely different life… Still far away In the scenery that I
could not reach when I was a child, I started to hear ”

Learning Universal Representations

Audio Paired Caption

Video Paired Audio

“A man is speaking in a foreign language while
music plays in the background. ”, “The music is
playing” , “a male voice is being recorded.” .

Figure 1. Omni-modal Pretraining. To learn universal representations, we propose collecting large-scale omni-modal paired data,
including text, image, video, depth, and normal maps.

Abstract

tinct modalities, (ii) 25 cross-modal tasks spanning retrieval, question-answering, and captioning, and (iii) 18
large-scale multimodal language model benchmarks. MiCo
consistently delivers state-of-the-art results, setting 37 new
benchmarks across these tasks. We release code and models
at https://github.com/invictus717/MiCo.

This work introduces the Multimodal Context (MiCo),
a scalable pretraining framework designed to advance
omni-modal intelligence, capable of understanding multimodalities to achieve universal representations. MiCo allows for efﬁcient scaling of both the number of modalities and the volume of data, along with model parameters, during the pretraining phase. We evaluate the pretrained models across a diverse set of tasks, including:
(i) single-modality perception benchmarks covering 10 dis-

1. Introduction
In the development of artiﬁcial intelligence, scalable pretraining has emerged as a promising pathway towards general intelligence [6, 7, 74, 77, 78]. Additionally, pre-training
has been established as an effective approach for learning

* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

1336

