This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Target Bias Is All You Need: Zero-Shot Debiasing of Vision-Language Models
with Bias Corpus
Taeuk Jang

Hoin Jung
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Xiaoqian Wang

{jang141, jung414, joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract

modal models yield a variety of applications from text-toimage generation [75, 77] and modification [69, 90] to visual question answering [33, 65, 81]. However, pretrained
VLMs are susceptible to inherent biases present in their
training data, leading to fairness concerns [11, 12].
The problem of algorithmic fairness has been extensively
studied in various domains including computer vision and
natural language processing. Specifically, group fairness
[8, 32, 43] considers spurious correlation [83] or association
bias [17, 85], where sensitive attributes affect downstream
tasks. For instance, objects, e.g., bird, tend to be predicted
based on the background, e.g., sky, rather than intrinsic features in image classification [46, 68]. Similarly, occupation,
e.g., doctor, is associated with gender, e.g., male, in word or
sentence embeddings in NLP [13, 37]. Thus, group fairness
methods [43, 47, 64] aim to minimize performance disparities across subpopulations in downstream tasks, so as to
mitigate particular target bias, e.g., gender bias.
Despite their generalizability, VLMs are also known to
be vulnerable to subpopulation shifts and suffer from spurious correlation [4]. However, previous efforts focused
on debiasing for specific tasks, such as fair classification
[59, 68] or clustering [10], are not directly applicable, since
VLMs are designed in self-supervised manner to encompass various tasks. Moreover, VLM captures complex
relationship between modalities, which may not present
in single-modality models. The interplay between visual
and textual queries making existing techniques for single
modality difficult to effectively mitigate biases of VLMs.
To tackle the fairness problem of VLMs, some [88]
suggested debiasing regarding specific downstream tasks
with annotated datasets to learn residuals [80] or linear
projection via adaptors on top of pretrained embeddings
[5, 70, 92]. Moreover, leveraging large language models (LLMs) to automatically explore concepts associated
with the bias has been proposed to learn robust text queries
[3, 52]. On the other hand, text encoder was debiased
[23] by linearly transforming gender-neutral prompts to be
equidistance to gender-specific queries. However, we claim

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP have shown remarkable zero-shot performance by aligning modalities in
the embedding space, enabling diverse applications from
image editing to visual question answering. However, these
models often inherit biases from their training data, resulting in performance disparities across specific subpopulations. Traditional debiasing methods for VLMs primarily
focus on specific downstream tasks using labeled datasets,
which we argue is insufficient given the broad applicability of VLMs. Specifically, these methods struggle with generalizability, transferability, and feasibility due to overfitting, limited task applicability, and regulatory constraints
on using sensitive data, making them less practical in realworld scenarios. To address these challenges, we propose
a novel task-agnostic method for learning debiased image
embeddings in VLMs. Our approach does not require expensive annotated datasets or curated prompts for downstream tasks, while preserving the inherent zero-shot capabilities of these models. Instead, we leverage easily accessible information: 1) a bias text corpus generated by a
large language model, and 2) a generic unsupervised vision
dataset. Our method disentangles the image embedding
into bias and neutral components by applying centered kernel alignment (CKA) regularization to the text-vision representational similarity, using the bias text corpus over the
generic vision dataset. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our approach across multiple tasks, offering
a practical and versatile solution to debiasing VLMs.

1. Introduction
Foundation models (FM), such as CLIP [71] and GPT-4
[1], demonstrated remarkable abilities in generalizing to unseen tasks. Particularly, CLIP successfully manages different modalities by aligning them in the embedding space
with image-text contrastive learning (ITC). Such multi-

1935

