This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Prototype Calibration of Vision-Language Models for
Generalized Few-shot Semantic Segmentation
Jie Liu1∗ , Jiayi Shen1 , Pan Zhou2 *, Jan-Jakob Sonke3 , Efstratios Gavves1
1

University of Amsterdam

2

Singapore Management University

Abstract

3

The Netherlands Cancer Institute

Person Motobike …Car
Class Names

Generalized Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation (GFSS) aims
to extend a segmentation model to novel classes with only a
few annotated examples while maintaining performance on
base classes. Recently, pretrained vision-language models
(VLMs) such as CLIP have been leveraged in GFSS to improve generalization on novel classes through multi-modal
prototypes learning. However, existing prototype-based
methods are inherently deterministic, limiting the adaptability of learned prototypes to diverse samples, particularly for novel classes with scarce annotations. To address
this, we propose FewCLIP, a probabilistic prototype calibration framework over multi-modal prototypes from the
pretrained CLIP, thus providing more adaptive prototype
learning for GFSS. Specifically, FewCLIP first introduces a
prototype calibration mechanism, which refines frozen textual prototypes with learnable visual calibration prototypes,
leading to a more discriminative and adaptive representation. Furthermore, unlike deterministic prototype learning techniques, FewCLIP introduces distribution regularization over these calibration prototypes. This probabilistic formulation ensures structured and uncertainty-aware
prototype learning, effectively mitigating overfitting to limited novel class data while enhancing generalization. Extensive experimental results on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i
datasets demonstrate that our proposed FewCLIP significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches across both
GFSS and class-incremental setting. The code is available
at https://github.com/jliu4ai/FewCLIP.

…

…

Textual Proto.

Visual Proto.

(a)

Deterministic classifier

Input Image

𝑥

…

𝑥

𝑦

𝑦

Feature Map

Person Motobike …Car
Class Names

Prediction

…
Textual Proto.

…

(b)

Proto. distributions

Probabilistic classifier
𝑥
Input Image

Feature Map

𝑥

𝑦

𝑦
Prediction

Figure 1. Concept diagram comparing deterministic and probabilistic prototype learning with pre-trained CLIP in GFSS
task. (a) Existing methods integrate a learnable or precomputed
visual prototype with a frozen textual prototype for each class
to perform pixel-wise deterministic classification. (b) Our proposed FewCLIP models the class-wise visual calibration prototype
as a distribution, capturing intra-class variations and uncertainty.
By representing prototypes with a probabilistic distribution, our
method mitigates prototype overfitting to scarce data, thereby improving generalization to novel classes.

1. Introduction

To tackle these challenges, few-shot semantic segmentation
(FSS) [3, 7, 23, 26, 28, 31, 36, 39, 41, 43, 44] has emerged.
FSS first trains a base model on many annotated data of base
classes to learn general knowledge, and then fine-tunes the
model on a few annotated samples of novel classes for adaptation. However, FSS primarily focuses on the binary segmentation of novel classes at test time, but lacks identification ability on base classes and multi-novel classes [12, 25].
As a more practical and ambitious extension, generalized few-shot semantic segmentation (GFSS) [9, 10, 12, 25,
29, 34, 37, 38] aims to enable the segmentation of both
base and novel classes within a given image. Typically,
GFSS consists of two phases: (1) the base class training phase, where a base segmentation model is trained on
base classes with abundant annotated samples, and (2) the
novel class registration phase, where novel classes are integrated into the model using only a few annotated samples
per class. Due to the significant data availability gap between these two phases, the primary challenge in GFSS lies

Semantic segmentation [4, 5, 46] aims to assign semantic
labels to each pixel of an image and has achieved remarkable success in the deep learning era. However, traditional
semantic segmentation heavily relies on vast amounts of
data with pixel-wise annotations and often struggles with
classes absent from the training set, a.k.a. novel classes.
* Corresponding authors.

21155

