This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Split-and-Combine: Enhancing Style Augmentation for Single Domain
Generalization

1

Zhen Zhang1 , Shuai Yang1† , Qianlong Dang2 , Zhize Wu3 , Lichuan Gu1†
Anhui Agricultural University 2 Northwest A & F University 3 Hefei University
zhangz@stu.ahau.edu.cn, yangs@ahau.edu.cn, dangqianlong@nwafu.edu.cn,
wuzz@hfuu.edu.cn, glc@ahau.edu.cn

Abstract
Single domain generalization aims to learn a model with
good generalization ability from a single source domain.
Recent advances in this field have focused on increasing
the diversity of the training data through style (e.g., color
and texture) augmentation. However, most existing methods
apply uniform perturbations to the entire image, failing to
simulate complex images with multiple distinct stylistic regions. To address this, we propose a “Split-And-Combine”
(SAC) strategy to enhance style diversity. Specifically, SAC
first performs patch-aware augmentation, which splits an
image into multiple patches and applies style augmentation
independently to each patch, enabling distinct color variations across regions. Then, SAC combines these patches
to reconstruct a complete image and applies adaptive random convolutions, which utilizes a deformable convolution
layer with random and Gaussian filters to enhance texture
diversity while preserving object integrity. Notably, SAC
leverages entropy as a risk assessment criterion to adaptively determine whether a sample should undergo augmentation within the iterative process of random convolutions,
preventing excessive augmentation. Furthermore, SAC introduces an energy-based distribution discrepancy score to
quantify out-of-distribution likelihood, systematically expanding the augmented data’s distribution. SAC can serve
as a plug-and-play component to improve the performance
of recent methods. Extensive experiments on four datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of SAC.

illumination, background, or weather, which are known as
the domain shift problem [41]. Unfortunately, these traditional algorithms often face significant performance degradation when there are distributional discrepancies between
the source and target domains [24, 25, 38, 39, 47].
To tackle this problem, multi-source domain generalization [19, 22, 28, 46] has been presented, aiming to learn
a robust model by using knowledge from multiple different but related source domains without accessing target domain data. The mainstream works depend heavily on domain identifiers as supervision signals to capture domain
invariant representations. However, the collection and annotation of data from multiple domains can be prohibitively
expensive, making multi-source domain generalization less
feasible in practical applications. To alleviate this issue, a
more challenging and realistic setting known as single domain generalization [31, 33, 43] has emerged and garnered
significant attention recently, which only leverages a single
source domain to learn a model with good generalizability.
The difficulty in single domain generalization arises
from mitigating distributional discrepancies between the
source and unknown target domains. In reality, it is observed that content features, such as object features, remain
relatively stable despite environmental changes, whereas
style features, such as backgrounds, exhibit considerable
variability across different domains [1, 2]. For example,
in animal image classification, fundamental elements like
eyes, ears, and face shape constitute the content, whereas
style elements include background and lighting conditions.
Therefore, the key to effective single domain generalization is to eliminate spurious correlations between style features and labels. The current mainstream research on single domain generalization primarily focuses on increasing
the capacity of the training data through the generation of
novel domains, thereby reducing the model’s reliance on
style features due to the increased diversity of styles within
the training data. One category of methods [3, 32, 45] perturb the original data using the back-propagated gradient to
obtain augmented data. However, gradient-based perturba-

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning algorithms [11, 16, 30] have
achieved remarkable performance under the assumption
that the source (training) and target (test) domains share
the same distribution. However, in reality, such an assumption is often violated due to factors such as variations in
† Corresponding author.

15616

