This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Learning of Pose Regression and Denoising Diffusion with Score Scaling
Sampling for Category-level 6D Pose Estimation

1

KAIST

Seunghyun Lee1,3

Tae-Kyun Kim1,2

2

3

Imperial College London

Abstract

VS Company, LG Electronics

els. This approach has gained considerable attention with
its capability to handle novel instances within known categories, making it highly suitable for real-world situations.
Recent advances in diffusion models have brought notable progresses to category-level 6D pose estimation [21,
69, 70]. GenPose [69] reframed conventional regressionbased pose estimation as a generative task, effectively addressing the multi-hypothesis issue—a challenging scenario
where multiple pose candidates can be equally valid due to
object symmetries or partial observations [34]. With an encoder network of depth images as partial point clouds and a
pose diffusion model conditioned on the encoder representation, it effectively captures the underlying pose distribution without requiring any symmetry-aware designs [11, 28]
or shape priors [29, 30, 71] that were common in previous approaches. This pipeline is shown to be effective by
handling pose ambiguity arising from shape variations and
symmetric objects within categories.
Despite its SOTA performance, diffusion-based pose estimation framework exhibits a significant bottleneck: slow
training convergence. This limitation extends beyond GenPose to various approaches that model different pose representation spaces through diffusion processes [60, 61, 64].
The challenge primarily stems from the necessity of tracking extensive forward and reverse diffusion trajectories
across multiple time steps [15, 68], while the encoder network is learnt at various noise levels in an end-to-end fashion. In contrast to large volume of work based on Latent
Diffusion Models (LDMs) which benefit from pre-trained
and fixed encoders [2, 12, 14, 44, 54], pose diffusion models typically optimize both feature extraction and denoising processes concurrently. This learning process through
score-matching objectives substantially increases computational complexity and learning epochs.
Another challenge in diffusion-based pose estimation
frameworks lies in their tendency to generate outliers that
deviate from the conditional distribution during the stochastic sampling process. When generating multiple pose hypotheses, these frameworks inevitably produce some outlier
poses that do not align with the true distribution. How to effectively filter these outliers and aggregate the remaining

Latest diffusion models have shown promising results in
category-level 6D object pose estimation by modeling the
conditional pose distribution with depth image input. The
existing methods, however, suffer from slow convergence
during training, learning its encoder with the diffusion denoising network in end-to-end fashion, and require an additional network that evaluates sampled pose hypotheses
to filter out low-quality pose candidates. In this paper,
we propose a novel pipeline that tackles these limitations
by two key components. First, the proposed method pretrains the encoder with the direct pose regression head, and
jointly learns the networks via the regression head and the
denoising diffusion head, significantly accelerating training convergence while achieving higher accuracy. Second,
sampling guidance via time-dependent score scaling is proposed s.t. the exploration-exploitation trade-off is effectively taken, eliminating the need for the additional evaluation network. The sampling guidance maintains multimodal characteristics of symmetric objects at early denoising steps while ensuring high-quality pose generation at final steps. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks
including REAL275, HouseCat6D, and ROPE, demonstrate
that the proposed method, simple yet effective, achieves
state-of-the-art accuracies even with single-pose inference,
while being more efficient in both training and inference.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation aims to predict the 3D rotation
and translation of objects from RGB or depth images. It
is crucial for a wide range of real-world applications, including robotics [10, 19, 23, 36, 53], augmented reality
[35, 38, 52], and 3D scene understanding [9, 39, 67]. While
previous methods achieved promising results in instancelevel object pose estimation [3, 27, 42, 47, 56], their reliance
on CAD models of target object instances limits its applications in practical scenarios. On the other hand, categorylevel pose estimation [45, 57] has emerged as a valuable alternative, since it does not require instance-level CAD mod-

5757

