This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TREAD: Token Routing for Efficient Architecture-agnostic Diffusion Training
Felix Krause Timy Phan Ming Gui
CompVis @ LMU Munich,

Stefan Andreas Baumann Vincent Tao Hu Björn Ommer
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as the mainstream approach
for visual generation. However, these models typically suffer
from sample inefficiency and high training costs. Consequently, methods for efficient finetuning, inference and personalization were quickly adopted by the community. However, training these models in the first place remains very
costly. While several recent approaches including masking,
distillation, and architectural modifications have been proposed to improve training efficiency, each of these methods
comes with a tradeoff: they achieve enhanced performance
at the expense of increased computational cost or vice versa.
In contrast, this work aims to improve training efficiency as
well as generative performance at the same time through
routes that act as a transport mechanism for randomly selected tokens from early layers to deeper layers of the model.
Our method is not limited to the common transformer-based
model - it can also be applied to state-space models and
achieves this without architectural modifications or additional parameters. Finally, we show that TREAD reduces
computational cost and simultaneously boosts model performance on the standard ImageNet-256 benchmark in classconditional synthesis. Both of these benefits multiply to a
convergence speedup of 14ˆ at 400K training iterations
compared to DiT and 37ˆ compared to the best benchmark
performance of DiT at 7M training iterations. Furthermore,
we achieve a competitive FID of 2.09 in a guided and 3.93 in
an unguided setting, which improves upon the DiT, without
architectural changes.
Project Page: https://compvis.github.io/tread

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion models [26, 54, 61] have become
a powerful generative technique for image synthesis [54].
They have also been successfully extended to the 3D [51] and
video domains [5]. While diffusion models avoid some training challenges faced by their predecessors, such as GANs
[18], which are inherently unstable during training, they
incur high costs [35] due to slow convergence and sample

Figure 1. We introduce TREAD, a training strategy that enables
substantially more efficient training of token-based diffusion backbones. Applied to the standard backbone DiT [48], we achieve
a 14/37ˆ training speed increase w.r.t. unguided FID while also
converging to better generation quality.

inefficiency [44]. Currently, the Diffusion Transformer (DiT)
[48] is the main backbone when training diffusion models,
building on the established Transformer architecture [69].
However, the Transformer architecture has computational
cost limitations, as it scales quadratically with token length
and converges slowly, further increasing the cost of training
diffusion models. Training a DiT on standard benchmarks
alone requires thousands of A100 GPU hours without reaching convergence, and text-to-image models demand even
more resources. Stable Diffusion [54], for instance, required
about 150,000 A100 GPU hours. Despite ongoing efforts
to reduce computational demands through improved infrastructure, implementation, and hardware, democratizing the
training of diffusion models remains a distant goal. Methods such as LoRA [27] for parameter-efficient fine-tuning,
caching strategies [43, 71] to accelerate inference, and approaches for personalization [4, 16, 28, 56] have made these
aspects more accessible. However, full-scale training remains extremely costly, limiting broad participation in the
development and improvement of diffusion models. Several
works have proposed methods to accelerate training convergence utilizing external self-supervised features [29, 72],

15703

