This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicColor: Multi-Instance Sketch Colorization
Yinhan Zhang1† Yue Ma2† Bingyuan Wang1 Qifeng Chen2 Zeyu Wang1,2*
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Figure 1. Results of MagicColor. Given a set of colored references, MagicColor can colorize a line art image while maintaining color
consistency across multiple instances. Compared to traditional methods, our approach significantly improves coloring efficiency.

ing strategy to address the lack of training data. Then we
introduce an instance guider to feed the color of the instance. To achieve accurate color matching, we present
fine-grained color matching with edge loss to enhance visual quality. Equipped with the proposed modules, MagicColor enables automatically transforming sketches into
vividly-colored images with accurate consistency and multiinstance control. Experiments on our collected datasets
show that our model outperforms existing methods regarding chromatic precision. Specifically, our model critically
automates the colorization process with zero manual adjustments, so novice users can produce stylistically consistent
artwork by providing reference instances and the original
line art. Our code and additional details are available at
https://yinhan-zhang.github.io/color.

Abstract
We present MagicColor, a diffusion-based framework for
multi-instance sketch colorization. The production of multiinstance 2D line art colorization adheres to an industrystandard workflow, which consists of three crucial stages:
the design of line art characters, the coloring of individual objects, and the refinement process. The artists are
required to repeat the process of coloring each instance
one by one, which is inaccurate and inefficient. Meanwhile, current generative methods fail to solve this task due
to the challenge of multi-instance pair data collection. To
tackle these challenges, we incorporate three technical designs to ensure precise character detail transcription and
achieve multi-instance sketch colorization in a single forward pass. Specifically, we first propose the self-play train† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

15205

