This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PUMPS: Skeleton-Agnostic Point-based Universal Motion Pre-Training for
Synthesis in Human Motion Tasks
Clinton Ansun Mo1,2 , Kun Hu3, *, Chengjiang Long4 , Dong Yuan1 , Wan-Chi Siu5 , Zhiyong Wang1
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
2
The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo City, Tokyo, Japan
3
School of Science, Edith Cowan University, WA 6027, Australia
4
Meta Reality Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA
5
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
clinton.mo@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, k.hu@ecu.edu.au, clong1@meta.com
{dong.yuan, zhiyong.wang}@sydney.edu.au, enwcsiu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Motion skeletons drive 3D character animation by transforming bone hierarchies, but differences in proportions or
structure make motion data hard to transfer across skeletons, posing challenges for data-driven motion synthesis.
Temporal Point Clouds (TPCs) offer an unstructured, crosscompatible motion representation. Though reversible with
skeletons, TPCs mainly serve for compatibility, not for direct motion task learning. Doing so would require data
synthesis capabilities for the TPC format, which presents
unexplored challenges regarding its unique temporal consistency and point identifiability. Therefore, we propose
PUMPS, the primordial autoencoder architecture for TPC
data. PUMPS independently reduces frame-wise point
clouds into sampleable feature vectors, from which a decoder extracts distinct temporal points using latent Gaussian noise vectors as sampling identifiers. We introduce linear assignment-based point pairing to optimise the TPC reconstruction process, and negate the use of expensive pointwise attention mechanisms in the architecture. Using these
latent features, we pre-train a motion synthesis model capable of performing motion prediction, transition generation, and keyframe interpolation. For these pre-training
tasks, PUMPS performs remarkably well even without native dataset supervision, matching state-of-the-art performance. When fine-tuned for motion denoising or estimation, PUMPS outperforms many respective methods without
deviating from its generalist architecture. The code is available at: https://github.com/MiniEval/PUMPS.

Figure 1. Overview of PUMPS pre-training, zero-shot evaluation,
and fine-tuning pipelines. PUMPS consists of an auto-encoder
(encoder-decoder modules) and latent synthesis component, which
are pre-trained successively.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

3D motion skeletons serve as the backbone of computer
animation pipelines for character motions. A skeleton is
a hierarchical structure of joints in 3D space, used to deform the vertices of character meshes and other 3D features through positional and rotational transforms [25]. By
representing joints as line segments, i.e. as bones, skeletons provide an intuitive interface for controlling charac-

14496

