This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

“Principal Components” Enable A New Language of Images
Xin Wen1∗ Bingchen Zhao2∗† Ismail Elezi3 Jiankang Deng4 Xiaojuan Qi1‡
∗

1

University of Hong Kong

2

Equal Contribution

†

Project Lead

University of Edinburgh

3

‡

Corresponding Author

Huawei London Research Centre

4

Imperial College London

https://visual-gen.github.io/semanticist

Figure 1. Image reconstruction using our structured visual tokenization approach, which uniquely enables decoding at any token count. Each
column shows reconstructions resulting from progressively increasing the number of tokens, from a single token to 256 tokens. Unlike
conventional tokenizers that require a fixed number of tokens for meaningful decoding, our method ensures that each token incrementally
refines the image, with earlier tokens capturing the most salient features and later ones adding finer details. This demonstrates the flexibility
and effectiveness of our approach in producing coherent images even with very few tokens (view more from Fig. 17 in the Appendix).

Abstract
We introduce a novel visual tokenization framework that
embeds a provable PCA-like structure into the latent token
space. While existing visual tokenizers primarily optimize
for reconstruction fidelity, they often neglect the structural
properties of the latent space—a critical factor for both interpretability and downstream tasks. Our method generates
a 1D causal token sequence for images, where each successive token contributes non-overlapping information with
mathematically guaranteed decreasing explained variance,
analogous to principal component analysis. This structural
constraint ensures the tokenizer extracts the most salient
visual features first, with each subsequent token adding diminishing yet complementary information. Additionally, we
identified and resolved a semantic-spectrum coupling effect
that causes the unwanted entanglement of high-level semantic content and low-level spectral details in the tokens by
leveraging a diffusion decoder. Experiments demonstrate
that our approach achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction

performance and enables better interpretability to align with
the human vision system. Moreover, autoregressive models
trained on our token sequences achieve performance comparable to current state-of-the-art methods while requiring
fewer tokens for training and inference.

1. Introduction
The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.
—Ludwig Wittgenstein
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
The pursuit of compact visual representations has long
been a fundamental goal, driving advancements in visual
recognition [21, 52] and image generation [55, 62]. One
of the earliest approaches, Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) [48], achieves this by introducing decorrelated, orthogonal components that capture the most significant variations in the data in a progressively diminishing manner (i.e.,
orderliness), thereby reducing redundancies. This enables

16641

