This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NormalCrafter: Learning Temporally Consistent Normals
from Video Diffusion Priors

1

Yanrui Bin1 Wenbo Hu2 ‡ Haoyuan Wang3 Xinya Chen4 Bing Wang1 †
Spatial Intelligence Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Input

Marigold-E2E-FT

Ours

Figure 1. We innovate NormalCrafter, an effective video normal estimation model, which can generate temporally consistent normal sequences with fine-grained details from open-world videos with arbitrary lengths. Compared to results from state-of-the-art image normal
estimators, Marigold-E2E-FT [25], our results exhibit both higher spatial fidelity and temporal consistency, as shown in the frame visualizations and temporal profiles (marked by the red lines and rectangles).

Abstract

details from diverse videos. Code and models are publicly
available at https://normalcrafter.github.io/.

Surface normal estimation serves as a cornerstone for a
spectrum of computer vision applications. While numerous
efforts have been devoted to static image scenarios, ensuring temporal coherence in video-based normal estimation
remains a formidable challenge. Instead of merely augmenting existing methods with temporal components, we
present NormalCrafter to leverage the inherent temporal
priors of Video Diffusion Models (VDMs). We identify the
reason for blurry predictions when directly applying VDMs
and introduce Semantic Feature Regularization (SFR) to
encourage the model to concentrate on geometric details
by aligning diffusion features with fine-grained semantic
cues. Moreover, we introduce a two-stage training protocol that leverages both latent and pixel space learning to
preserve spatial accuracy while maintaining long temporal
context. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the efficacy of
our method, showcasing a superior performance in generating temporally consistent normal sequences with intricate
‡ Project lead

1. Introduction
Surface normals, as pivotal descriptors of 3D scene geometry, underpin a spectrum of applications, including 3D reconstruction, relighting, video editing, and mixed reality.
Estimating high-fidelity and temporally consistent normals
from diverse, unconstrained videos remains a formidable
challenge, owing to variations in scene layouts, illuminations, camera motions, and scene dynamics.
Recent advancements in normal estimation from monocular images have embraced both discriminative [2, 3, 10, 11,
19, 35] and generative paradigms [14, 15, 25, 36, 37]. While
discriminative approaches remain hampered by the limitations of training data scale and quality, resulting in suboptimal zero-shot generalization, generative methods harness
pre-trained diffusion priors to deliver state-of-the-art performance on open-world images, even when confined to synthetic training data. However, these methods are inherently

† Corresponding author

8330

