This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiT4SR: Taming Diffusion Transformer for Real-World Image Super-Resolution
Jiawei Zhang2

Zheng-Peng Duan1,2 *
Dongqing Zou2,3
1

Xin Jin1

Jimmy S. Ren2,4

4

Chunle Guo1,5
2

VCIP, CS, Nankai University

Ziheng Zhang1

Chongyi Li1,5 †

SenseTime Research
5

Hong Kong Metropolitan University

Zheng Xiong2
3

PBVR

NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian

https://adam-duan.github.io/projects/dit4sr/
The image features a large, pink castle. The castle is surrounded by a lush green forest, with
trees and bushes visible in the foreground.

DiT4SR

LR Input

LR Input

The image is a black and white photograph of a narrow city street with a group of people
walking down it, some of them carrying handbags. The street is lined with buildings.

SeeSR [60]

DiT4SR

LR Input

DiffBIR [35] DreamClear [2]

SUPIR [66]

SD3-CtrlNet [70]

DiT4SR

Figure 1. Performance comparison between our DiT4SR and other state-of-the-art methods on two real-world LR images. Thanks to the
powerful generative capabilities of SD3 and our delicate designs, which allow sufficient interaction between the input LR information and
the generation process, our method produces more realistic details while maintaining fidelity, especially in text, structures, and details.

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained diffusion models are becoming increasingly popular in solving the Real-World Image SuperResolution (Real-ISR) problem because of their rich generative priors. The recent development of diffusion transformer (DiT) has witnessed overwhelming performance
over the traditional UNet-based architecture in image gen-

eration, which also raises the question: Can we adopt the
advanced DiT-based diffusion model for Real-ISR? To this
end, we propose our DiT4SR, one of the pioneering works
to tame the large-scale DiT model for Real-ISR. Instead of
directly injecting embeddings extracted from low-resolution
(LR) images like ControlNet, we integrate the LR embeddings into the original attention mechanism of DiT, allowing for the bidirectional flow of information between the LR
latent and the generated latent. The sufficient interaction of
these two streams allows the LR stream to evolve with the

* This project is done during the internship at SenseTime Research.
† Corresponding author.

18948

