This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-Driven Expert Control:
Enhancing the Reliability of Medical Vision-Language Models
Xiao Liang1 , Di Wang1,* , Zhicheng Jiao2 , Ronghan Li1 , Pengfei Yang1 , Quan Wang1 , Tat-Seng Chua3
1

The Key Laboratory of Smart Human-Computer Interaction and
Wearable Technology of Shaanxi Province, Xidian University, China
2
Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University, USA
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
https://github.com/ecoxial2007/Expert-CFG
Vanilla MedVLM
User

Existing Efforts

Response: The image shows
intussusception, with the
characteristic target sign indicating
the folding of the intestinal walls.

MedVLM

Expert-in-the-Loop MedVLM

High-quality data

Question: What
condition does the
image show?

Radiology

Model
Structure

Expert-Controlled Classifier-Free Guidance

Pathology

MedVLM

Highlight
Knowledge
Base

Alignment
Model

Expert
High Cost

Vanilla MedVLM produces
unreliable responses.

or Editing

Question: What
condition does
the image show?

Limitations
Query Image

Expertise: Extensive swelling in
the right lower abdomen, including
the cecum and appendix, possibly
suggests peritonitis.

Uncertainty
Estimation

2

Human

Loss

Typical Intussusception

Expert Involved
or Not?

Input Query

？

1

MedVLM
3

Original MedVLM
Expert-in-the Loop MedVLM
Knowledge Reference

Unclear knowledge gaps
hinder improvements.

Original Answer: The image
shows intussusception, with the
characteristic target sign indicating
the folding of the intestinal walls.

Expert Controlled Answer: The
image shows extensive swelling
in the right lower abdomen, with
the characteristic signs possibly
indicating peritonitis.

Training-Free Clinical Expertise Alignment

Figure 1. Left: Vanilla MedVLM produces unreliable responses due to lack of clinical expertise. Middle: Existing methods mostly rely on
training and are costly while still lacking sufficient clinical alignment. Right: Our proposed Expert-CFG utilizes plug-and-play selective
expert annotations and classifier-free guidance for effective expertise alignment.

Abstract
The rapid advancements in Vision Language Models
(VLMs) have prompted the development of multi-modal
medical assistant systems. Despite this progress, current
models still have inherent probabilistic uncertainties, often producing erroneous or unverified responses—an issue
with serious implications in medical applications. Existing
methods aim to enhance the performance of Medical Vision
Language Model (MedVLM) by adjusting model structure,
fine-tuning with high-quality data, or through preference
fine-tuning. However, these training-dependent strategies
are costly and still lack sufficient alignment with clinical
expertise. To address these issues, we propose an expert-inthe-loop framework named Expert-Controlled ClassifierFree Guidance (Expert-CFG) to align MedVLM with clinical expertise without additional training. This framework

introduces an uncertainty estimation strategy to identify unreliable outputs. It then retrieves relevant references to assist experts in highlighting key terms and applies classifierfree guidance to refine the token embeddings of MedVLM,
ensuring that the adjusted outputs are correct and align
with expert highlights. Evaluations across three medical
visual question answering benchmarks demonstrate that
the proposed Expert-CFG, with 4.2B parameters and limited expert annotations, outperforms state-of-the-art models
with 13B parameters. The results demonstrate the feasibility of deploying such a system in resource-limited settings
for clinical use.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding authors.

Recently, large pre-trained visual language models (VLMs)
[4, 30, 51], such as the latest advancements in GPT-4 [37],
have demonstrated impressive performance across various

21144

