This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COSMO: Combination of Selective Memorization for
Low-cost Vision-and-Language Navigation
Siqi Zhang1 *, Yanyuan Qiao3 , Qunbo Wang2 , Zike Yan5 , Qi Wu4 , Zhihua Wei1†, Jing Liu2
1
Tongji University 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne 4 The University of Adelaide 5 Tsinghua University
{2211172,zhihua wei}@tongji.edu.cn, yanyuan.qiao@epfl.ch, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au,
qunbo.wang@ia.ac.cn, yanzike@air.tsinghua.edu.cn, jliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) tasks have gained
prominence within artificial intelligence research due to
their potential application in fields like home assistants.
Many contemporary VLN approaches, while based on
transformer architectures, have increasingly incorporated
additional components such as external knowledge bases
or map information to enhance performance. These additions, while boosting performance, also lead to larger
models and increased computational costs. In this paper, to achieve both high performance and low computational costs, we propose a novel architecture with the
combination of selective memorization (COSMO), which
integrates state-space modules (SSMs) and transformer
modules. However, direct application of SSMs in VLN results in significant performance degradation. Therefore, we
propose two VLN-customized selective state space modules:
the Round Selective Scan (RSS) and the Cross-modal Selective State Space Module (CS3). RSS facilitates comprehensive inter-modal interactions within a single scan, while the
CS3 module adapts the selective state space module into
a dual-stream architecture, thereby enhancing the acquisition of cross-modal interactions. Experimental validations
on three mainstream VLN benchmarks, REVERIE, R2R, and
R2R-CE, not only demonstrate competitive navigation performance of our model but also show a significant reduction
in computational costs. Code is available at VLN-COSMO.

Figure 1.
COSMO is a hybrid architecture that first selectively memorizes instruction-related visual observations via
VLN-tailored state-space modules, then achieves precise action
decision-making via Transformers. Comparisons of navigation
performance and computational costs between baseline DUET [9]
and COSMO on the REVERIE dataset are shown on the left,
where higher values are preferred for all metrics.

Navigation (VLN) task has been proposed and has emerged
and garnered significant attention across multiple disciplines [2, 24, 80]. Given a natural language instruction,
a VLN agent is tasked to comprehend the instruction and
navigate through an unseen environment to reach the designated destination. Throughout the process, the agent accumulates a substantial amount of visual observations from
the environment and should selectively retain visual contents pertinent to the given instruction.
Early methods [15, 66] employ recurrent neural networks to compress navigation history into one fixed-size
feature vector, which would inevitably lead to information
loss [14]. To tackle this challenge, Transformer-based architectures are adopted to retain historical observations into
a variable-length sequence [8, 72]. For instance, the widely
adopted method DUET [9] in VLN proposes a dual-scale
graph Transformer architecture. It integrates a topological
map to track historical and candidate nodes, which are then
encoded using Transformers. Building upon DUET, many
recent approaches [1, 43, 47, 48, 74] have achieved substantial performance gains by incorporating external knowledge or map information. However, while these advancements enhance model performance, they also result in larger
models and increased computational costs. In addition, de-

1. Introduction
Enabling human-robot interaction through natural language
instructions has been a long-standing objective in artificial
intelligence, with applications ranging from home assistant
robots to autonomous navigation systems in dynamic environments. In pursuit of this goal, the Vision-and-Language
* This work was done during internship at the Institute of Automation.
† Corresponding author

5511

