This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lightweight Gradient-Aware Upscaling of 3D Gaussian Splatting Images
Simon Niedermayr

Christoph Neuhauser

Rüdiger Westermann

simon.niedermayr@tum.de

christoph.neuhauser@tum.de

westermann@tum.de

Technical University of Munich

Abstract

5 Mio Gaussians

4K
3DGS (train 0.5K)

We introduce an image upscaling technique tailored for 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) on lightweight GPUs. Compared to 3DGS, it achieves significantly higher rendering
speeds and reduces commonly observed reconstruction artifacts. Our technique upscales low-resolution 3DGS renderings with a marginal increase in cost by directly leveraging
the analytical image gradients of Gaussians for gradientbased bicubic spline interpolation. The technique is agnostic to the specific 3DGS implementation, achieving novel
view synthesis at rates 3×–4× higher than the baseline implementation. Through extensive experiments on multiple
datasets, we showcase the performance improvements and
high reconstruction fidelity attainable with gradient-aware
upscaling of 3DGS images. We further demonstrate the
integration of gradient-aware upscaling into the gradientbased optimization of a 3DGS model and analyze its effects
on reconstruction quality and performance.

Render 4K

14 FPS
3DGS (train 0.5K)
Render & Upscale (0.5K

4K)

81 FPS

3DGS & Upscale (train 4K)
Render & Upscale (0.5K

4K)

81 FPS

Figure 1. Bottom-left: When used as image upscaler during rendering, our method achieves higher quality and faster rendering
than 3DGS (top-right). With upscaling embedded into training
(bottom-right), the quality is further improved.

1. Introduction
Despite continuous improvements of 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [14] in reconstruction [26, 32] and rendering performance [23], even high-end GPUs struggle to maintain a
stable 30 FPS when rendering to high-resolution displays.
This limitation is even more critical in VR applications,
where two high-resolution images must be rendered simultaneously to maintain a smooth and immersive experience.
When 3DGS models are accessed via mobile devices with
high-resolution screens but lightweight GPUs [22], rendering performance often drops to an unacceptably low level.
A common strategy to render to higher-resolution displays without increasing the rasterization load is image upscaling. Image upscaling methods such as Bicubic and
Lanczos interpolation are widely used [1] but often reduce
visual quality by introducing noticeable artifacts. Deep
learning (DL)-based upscalers offer superior quality by enhancing image details, but they also have significant draw-

25862

backs. High-quality approaches like NinaSR [9], SRGS [7]
or SwinIR [18] are not fast enough for real-time applications, while solutions such as NVIDIA DLSS [24] require
specialized hardware and rely on the use of additional image
information, such as accurate depth buffers and motion vectors, which are unavailable for 3DGS. Furthermore, when
using DL-based upscalers in VR, users often report issues
due to temporal inconsistencies and feature popping. Although such upscalers produce sharp images, the results often appear unnatural due to hallucinated artifacts, and PSNR
scores tend to decrease (see Fig. 2).
We propose a computationally lightweight image upscaling technique specifically tailored for 3DGS to address
these limitations. Innovation comes from uniquely leverag-

