This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AlignGuard: Scalable Safety Alignment for Text-to-Image Generation
Runtao Liu1 * I Chieh Chen1 * Jindong Gu2 Jipeng Zhang1 Renjie Pi1
Qifeng Chen1 Philip Torr2 Ashkan Khakzar2 Fabio Pizzati2,3
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 University of Oxford 3 MBZUAI
{rliuay,icchen}@connect.ust.hk

https://alignguard.github.io/

Abstract

No safety alignment!

Text-to-image (T2I) models are widespread, but their limited safety guardrails expose end users to harmful content
and potentially allow for model misuse. Current safety measures are typically limited to text-based filtering or concept
removal strategies, able to remove just a few concepts from
the model’s generative capabilities. In this work, we introduce AlignGuard, a method for safety alignment of T2I
models. We enable the application of Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) for safety purposes in T2I models by synthetically generating a dataset of harmful and safe imagetext pairs, which we call CoProV2. Using a custom DPO
strategy and this dataset, we train safety experts, in the form
of low-rank adaptation (LoRA) matrices, able to guide the
generation process away from specific safety-related concepts. Then, we merge the experts into a single LoRA using
a novel merging strategy for optimal scaling performance.
This expert-based approach enables scalability, allowing us
to remove 7× more harmful concepts from T2I models compared to baselines. AlignGuard consistently outperforms
the state-of-the-art on many benchmarks and establishes
new practices for safety alignment in T2I networks.
Warning: this paper includes potentially offensive content.

T2I

Hate

Sexual

Violence
…

Outputs from unsafe input prompts

Scalable concept list

AlignGuard
Expert training + merging

…

723 concepts!

T2I
Safety-aligned model!

…
Outputs from the same unsafe prompts!

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Safety alignment for T2I. T2I models released without safety alignment risk to be misused (top). We propose AlignGuard, a scalable safety alignment framework for T2I models supporting the mass removal of harmful concepts (middle). We allow
for scalability by training safety experts focusing on separate categories such as “Hate”, “Sexual”, “Violence”, etc. We then merge
the experts with a novel strategy. By doing so, we obtain safetyaligned models, mitigating unsafe content generation (bottom).

Text-to-image (T2I) models have advanced rapidly in recent
years, becoming key tools in content creation and entertainment, used by both professionals and hobbyists [48, 49].
Such an impressive growth in image synthesis capabilities,
in some cases reaching indistinguishable realism from real
samples, has generated concerns about the risks of releasing such models [9, 14, 15]. Indeed, T2I may generate
unsettling or harmful content, and expose people, particularly minors or those from sensitive cultural backgrounds,
to inappropriate outputs. Moreover, malicious users could
* Equal Contribution.

17024

easily generate, among others, violent pictures, or sexuallyexplicit deepfakes, potentially causing misinformation or
harassing specific users. Regardless of these risks, there
has been little effort in proposing effective safety alignment
techniques, i.e. strategies for limiting harmful outputs, for
T2I models. Most of the current approaches are focused on
simple input filtering strategies, such as the analysis of the
input prompt, or detectors on output images [2]. However,
these strategies are easy to circumvent [46], or they can be
deactivated if models are openly released. Conversely, large
language models (LLMs) are subject to rigorous safety
alignment procedures before being deployed [13]. It is our
objective to bridge this gap.

