This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoSOWA: Scalable monocular 3D Object detector Without human
Annotations
Jan Skvrna, Lukas Neumann
Visual Recognition Group, Department of Cybernetics
Czech Technical University in Prague
jan.skvrna@cvut.cz, lukas.neumann@cvut.cz

Dataset:1Dataset:1 Human Human Labels:1 Labels:1 Mono3D Mono3D
Detector:1
Detector:1
AnnotatorAnnotator
Dataset:nDataset:n

Labels:n Labels:n Mono3D Mono3D
Detector:n
Detector:n

(a) Traditional pipelines require human labelling and produce new model for every different camera setup

Dataset:1Dataset:1

Labels:1 Labels:1
Auto
Auto
CanonicalCanonical
Labeller Labeller
Object Object Mono3D Detector
Mono3D Detector
Space Space
Dataset:nDataset:n
Labels:n Labels:n

(b) Our method does not need human labelling and combines multiple camera setups into a single model operating in canonical object space
Figure 1. Traditional pipelines (a) vs. the proposed pipeline (b) for monocular 3D object detection.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection is a key component of many
important systems, ranging from robotics to autonomous
cars. 3D object detection methods are typically trained in
a fully-supervised setup, requiring specialized vehicles to
simultaneously capture RGB image and LiDAR modalities,
followed by human annotators manually creating 3D labels.
This is extremely laborious, costly, and limits the diversity of training data being captured. To make matters even
worse, especially in autonomous driving, new camera setups emerge constantly, which typically means this laborious and costly process needs to be repeated again.

Inferring object 3D position and orientation from a single RGB camera is a foundational task in computer vision
with many important applications. Traditionally, 3D object
detection methods are trained in a fully-supervised setup,
requiring LiDAR and vast amounts of human annotations,
which are laborious, costly, and do not scale well with the
ever-increasing amounts of data being captured.
We present a novel method to train a 3D object detector from a single RGB camera without domain-specific human annotations, making orders of magnitude more data
available for training. The method uses newly proposed Local Object Motion Model to disentangle object movement
source between subsequent frames, is approximately 700
times faster than previous work and compensates camera
focal length differences to aggregate multiple datasets.
The method is evaluated on three public datasets, where
despite using no human labels, it outperforms prior work
by a significant margin. It also shows its versatility as a
pre-training tool for fully-supervised training and shows
that combining pseudo-labels from multiple datasets can
achieve comparable accuracy to using human labels from
a single dataset. The source code and model are available
at https://github.com/jskvrna/MonoSOWA.

In this paper, we address both of these challenges –
costly human labelling and reliance on dedicated vehicles
to capture data – by introducing a new method to train a
monocular 3D rigid object detector without domain-specific
human labels and without LiDAR. Our method allows us
to exploit large amounts of training data readily available
because it does not rely on human annotations, which traditionally is the main limiting factor in exploiting captured
data, and it does not need additional sensors such as LiDAR,
which implies our method can directly exploit data collected by a majority of currently manufactured vehicles,
which typically only have a single camera. This is in contrast with some methods which require LiDAR (and human

7613

