This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards a Universal 3D Medical Multi-modality Generalization via Learning
Personalized Invariant Representation
Zhaorui Tan1,2,3 , Xi Yang2→ , Tan Pan1,4 , Tianyi Liu2,3 , Chen Jiang1,4 ,
Xin Guo , Qiufeng Wang2 , Anh Nguyen3 , Yuan Qi1,4,6 , Kaizhu Huang5 , Yuan Cheng1,4 *
1
Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
3
University of Liverpool, 4 AI3 Fudan University, 5 Duke Kunshan University, 6 Zhongshan Hospital
1,4

raytan@liverpool.ac.uk, Xi.Yang01@xjtlu.edu.cn, chengyuan@sais.com.cn

MRI

Variations in medical imaging modalities and individual
anatomical differences pose challenges to cross-modality
generalization in multi-modal tasks. Existing methods often
concentrate exclusively on common anatomical patterns,
thereby neglecting individual differences and consequently
limiting their generalization performance. This paper emphasizes the critical role of learning individual-level invariance, i.e., personalized representation Xh , to enhance
multi-modality generalization under both homogeneous and
heterogeneous settings. It reveals that mappings from individual biological profile to different medical modalities
remain static across the population, which is implied in
the personalization process. We propose a two-stage approach: pre-training with invariant representation Xh for
personalization, then fine-tuning for diverse downstream
tasks. We provide both theoretical and empirical evidence
demonstrating the feasibility and advantages of personalization, showing that our approach yields greater generalizability and transferability across diverse multi-modal medical tasks compared to methods lacking personalization. Extensive experiments further validate that our approach significantly enhances performance in various generalization
scenarios.

CT

Flair

T1ce

T2

T1

PET

…

Medical
scan

Abstract

Invariant

T1ce

T2

T1

Medical
scan

Individual differences
Flair

˝

˝

Invariant

Figure 1. A diagram of medical modalities and individual differences. These variations are significant and deserve further study
by the medical intelligence community.

1. Introduction

(MRI) [58] and Computed Tomography (CT) [36, 56] scans.
Other studies [54] focus on the functional modalities associated with biochemistry, like Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scans. Notably, all modalities exhibit significant
individual variations. Individuals differ fundamentally from
population averages [50], making anatomical and metabolic
variations evident. In clinical settings, financial or physical
limitations may restrict access to certain modalities, highlighting the need for generalization in medical image analysis across different modalities and individuals. The generalization faces significant challenges due to modality and
individual variations. We classify generalization tasks into
two types: homogeneous generalization within structural or
functional modalities, e.g., MRI sequences Fig. 1; and heterogeneous generalization across both structural and functional modalities, such as CT and PET scans.

Three-dimensional radiological medical images, generated
through specialized techniques and radiopharmaceuticals,
excel at highlighting specific physiological features, collectively providing a comprehensive view of a patient’s
structural and functional characteristics. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, current research in medical intelligence mainly targets structural modalities like Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* *Corresponding authors. This research was conducted during an internship at the Shanghai Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science.

A well-generalized medical model should integrate insights from all available modalities to support downstream
tasks, relying on condition invariance [10, 43]. Some methods enhance generalization through class-level anatomy invariance [25], which may not fit models based on functional biochemistry and may degrade transferability for un-

21895

