This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FICGen: Frequency-Inspired Contextual Disentanglement for
Layout-driven Degraded Image Generation
Wenzhuang Wang1,2 , Yifan Zhao1 *, Mingcan Ma2 , Ming Liu2 , Zhonglin Jiang2 , Yong Chen2 , Jia Li1 *
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE&QRI, Beihang University
2
Geely Automobile Research Institute (Ningbo) Co., Ltd

1

{wz wang,zhaoyf,jiali}@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1. Visualizations of degraded image generation by our FICGen. FICGen achieves superior quality compared to existing L2I
methods and demonstrates strong robustness to OOD layouts. Moreover, it shows excellent trainability for boosting object detectors, i.e.,
Faster R-CNN (R50) [29]. The alignment and trainability are evaluated on the ExDARK [18] and DIOR-H [14], respectively.

Abstract
Layout-to-image (L2I) generation has exhibited promising
results in natural domains, but suffers from limited generative fidelity and weak alignment with user-provided layouts
when applied to degraded scenes (i.e., low-light, underwater). We primarily attribute these limitations to the “contextual illusion dilemma” in degraded conditions, where
foreground instances are overwhelmed by context-dominant
frequency distributions. Motivated by this, our paper proposes a new Frequency-Inspired Contextual Disentanglement Generative (FICGen) paradigm, which seeks to transfer frequency knowledge of degraded images into the latent diffusion space, thereby facilitating the rendering of

degraded instances and their surroundings via contextual
frequency-aware guidance. To be specific, FICGen consists
of two major steps. Firstly, we introduce a learnable dualquery mechanism, each paired with a dedicated frequency
resampler, to extract contextual frequency prototypes from
pre-collected degraded exemplars in the training set. Secondly, a visual-frequency enhanced attention is employed
to inject frequency prototypes into the degraded generation
process. To alleviate the contextual illusion and attribute
leakage, an instance coherence map is developed to regulate latent-space disentanglement between individual instances and their surroundings, coupled with an adaptive
spatial-frequency aggregation module to reconstruct spatialfrequency mixed degraded representations. Extensive experiments on 5 benchmarks involving a variety of degraded
scenarios—from severe low-light to mild blur—demonstrate

* Correspondence should be addressed to Yifan Zhao and Jia Li.

19097

