This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STDDNet: Harnessing Mamba for Video Polyp Segmentation via Spatial-aligned
Temporal Modeling and Discriminative Dynamic Representation Learning
Guilian Chen1 Huisi Wu1 * Jing Qin2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

2450101015@mails.szu.edu.cn, hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Automated segmentation of polyps from colonoscopy videos
is of great clinical significance as it can assist clinicians
in making accurate diagnoses and precise interventions.
However, video polyp segmentation (VPS) is challenging
due to ambiguous polyp boundaries, as well as variations
in polyp scale, contrast, and position across consecutive
frames. Moreover, to meet clinical requirements, the inference must operate in real-time to enable intraoperative
tracking and guidance. In this paper, we propose a novel
and efficient segmentation network, STDDNet, which integrates a spatial-aligned temporal modeling strategy and
a discriminative dynamic representation learning mechanism, to comprehensively address these challenges by harnessing the advantages of Mamba. Specifically, a spatialaligned temporal dependency propagation (STDP) module
is developed to model temporal consistency from the consecutive frames based on a bidirectional scanning Mamba
block. Furthermore, we design a discriminative dynamic
feature extraction (DDFE) module to explore frame-wise
dynamic information from the structural feature generated
by the Mamba block. Such dynamic features can effectively deal with the variations across colonoscopy frames,
providing more details for refined segmentation. We extensively evaluate STDDNet on two benchmark datasets, SUNSEG and CVC-ClinicDB, demonstrating superior segmentation performance compared to state-of-the-art methods
while maintaining real-time inference. Codes are available
at https://github.com/C-GLGLGL/STDDNet.

Figure 1. The challenges of VPS: (a)-(b) blurred boundaries, and
(c)-(e) dramatic variations of a polyp between adjacent frames in
terms of scale, contrast, and position.

1. Introduction

though colonoscopy is the gold standard for CRC screening, it still remains a polyp miss rate exceeding 25%
[19]. Therefore, automatically segmenting polyps from
colonoscopy videos is highly demanded to improve the accuracy of screening and diagnosis.
Video polyp segmentation (VPS) poses significant challenges. First, the boundaries between polyps and their surrounding mucosae are ambiguous (Fig. 1 a-b). Second,
there exists variations of close-in targets in terms of scale,
contrast, and position when the colonoscopy camera is moving fast (Fig. 1 c-e). Third, to meet clinical requirements for
intraoperative tracking and guidance, the inference should
be made in a real-time manner. To address these challenges,
a segmentation model needs to leverage spatial-temporal information across consecutive frames to continuously localize foreground polyps. Additionally, learning dynamic representations is essential for perceiving fine-grained polyp
details in individual frames, particularly for distinguishing
polyp boundaries from complex colon structures.
In recent years, deep learning based approaches [27,
32, 39] have significantly outperformed traditional machine
learning methods [11, 24]. However, most existing methods are proposed for static images, failing to achieve satisfactory performance in VPS without considering temporal
correlations among frames. Later, several works have been
proposed to explore spatial-temporal information among
frames using normalized self-attention [17, 18] and multihead attention [40]. The former accelerates inferring speed
at the cost of accuracy, while the latter may incur huge

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of
cancer-related mortality worldwide [3]. It usually emerges
from polyps, which are abnormal glandular tissues originated from the epithelial cells of colonic mucosa [2]. Al* Corresponding Author

21364

