This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhysSplat
: Efficient Physics Simulation for 3D Scenes
via MLLM-Guided Gaussian Splatting
Haoyu Zhao* 1 Hao Wang* 2 Xingyue Zhao* 4 Hao Fei5
Hongqiu Wang6 Chengjiang Long†3 Hua Zou†1
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Meta Reality Lab 4 Xi’an Jiao Tong University 5 National University of Singapore
6
The Department of Systems Hub, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Given 3D Scene

Simulated Dynamic Response under Forces (

)

Figure 1. We develop an efficient method for simulating the dynamic movements of 3D objects with customizable behaviors, and synthesizing interactive 3D dynamics under arbitrary forces (red arrows). Compared to recent methods [13, 21, 47], our approach produces more
realistic 3D dynamics with much faster inference times.

Abstract

tion estimation to reduce computational costs. Finally, we
simulate objects in 3D scenes with particles sampled via
the Physical-Geometric Adaptive Sampling (PGAS) strategy, efficiently capturing complex deformations and significantly reducing computational costs. Extensive experiments
and user studies demonstrate that our PhysSplat achieves
more realistic motion than state-of-the-art methods within
2 minutes on a single GPU. Here is our project page.

Recent advancements in 3D generation models have opened
new possibilities for simulating dynamic 3D object movements and customizing behaviors, yet creating this content
remains challenging. Current methods often require manual assignment of precise physical properties for simulations or rely on video generation models to predict them,
which is computationally intensive. In this paper, we rethink
the usage of multi-modal large language model (MLLM)
in physics-based simulation, and present PhysSplat, a
physics-based approach that efficiently endows static 3D
objects with interactive dynamics. We begin with detailed
scene reconstruction and object-level 3D open-vocabulary
segmentation, progressing to multi-view image in-painting.
Inspired by human visual reasoning, we propose MLLMbased Physical Property Perception (MLLM-P3) to predict
the mean physical properties of objects in a zero-shot manner. The Material Property Distribution Prediction model
(MPDP) then estimates physical property distributions via
geometry-conditioned probabilistic sampling of MLLM-P3
outputs, reformulating the problem as probability distribu-

1. Introduction
With the development in 3D representation, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [16] offer new perspectives for 3D reconstruction
and 3D representation [35, 39, 51]. However, these approaches are unable to simulate interactions with 3D assets in simulation environments [32, 41], which is s critical for generating realistic object responses to novel interactions, such as external forces or agent manipulations in
many applications, e.g., virtual reality [15], embodied intelligence [23].
Some recent approaches aim to bridge the gap between rendering and simulation integrating physics-based

* Equal contributions.
†Corresponding Author.

5242

