This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous-Time Human Motion Field from Event Cameras
Ziyun Wang1,2 , Ruijun Zhang1 , Zi-Yan Liu1 , Yufu Wang1 , Kostas Daniilidis1,3
1
University of Pennsylvania, USA
2
Johns Hopkins University, USA
3
Archimedes, Athena RC









    





     
 



 

 

  



   

Figure 1. EvHuman predicts a set of global and local latent codes from an event stream to represent continuous-time human motions. The
latent codes are decoded by a neural human motion prior in a time-continuous MLP network that can be queried at any time resolution in
parallel efﬁciently. The human sequences on the rigth are decoded with a test event stream in MMHPSD [74].

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenges of estimating a
continuous-time human motion ﬁeld from a stream of
events. Existing human motion estimation methods rely predominantly on frame-based approaches, which are prone to
aliasing and inaccuracies due to limited temporal resolution and motion blur. In this work, we predict a continuoustime human motion ﬁeld directly from events, by leveraging
a recurrent feed-forward neural network to predict human
motion in the latent space of possible human motions. Prior
state-of-the-art event-based methods rely on computationally intensive optimization across a ﬁxed number of poses
at high frame rates, which becomes prohibitively expensive as we increase the temporal resolution. In comparison,
we present the ﬁrst work that replaces traditional discretetime predictions with a continuous human motion ﬁeld
represented as a time-implicit function, enabling parallel
pose queries at arbitrary temporal resolutions. Despite the
promises of event cameras, few benchmarks have tested the
limit of high speed human motion estimation. We introduce Beam-splitter Event Agile Human Motion Dataset—a
hardware-synchronized high-speed human dataset to ﬁll
Work completed while Ziyun Wang was at University of Pennsylvania.

this gap. On this new data, our method improves joint errors by 23.8 % compared to previous event human methods, while reducing the computational time by 69%. More
details of the work can be found on the project page:
ziyunclaudewang.github.io/evhuman.html.

1. Introduction
Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) methods recover the full
3D mesh of a moving human from a video, which has
been a core research problem in computer vision. However, with highly dynamic human motions, performing such
tasks with traditional cameras is challenging because framebased cameras can only provide sampling of human motions at a limited frame rate. First, it is challenging to predict the correct motion when the subject is moving fast and
the time resolution of a video is low. Additionally, fast motions are often accompanied by motion blur that squashes
motion information over time, preventing the network from
obtaining the correct pose information.
To address these issues, researchers have begun exploring event cameras as an alternative sensor modality [8, 66,
73–75]. Event cameras are known for their high temporal
resolution, high dynamic range, and low data throughput.
Due to their asynchronous design, there is no ﬁxed global

11502

