This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionShot: Adaptive Motion Transfer across Arbitrary Objects for
Text-to-Video Generation
Yanchen Liu1 , Yanan Sun3† , Zhening Xing3 , Junyao Gao4 , Kai Chen3 , Wenjie Pei1,2†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen),
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 Tongji University
lyc.codeplayer@outlook.com, wenjiecoder@outlook.com, junyaogao@tongji.edu.cn,
{sunyanan, xingzhening, chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn

Reference

Generated

Mario, dancing with music

Reference

Generated

Monkey, eating on the grass

Reference

Generated

Winnie the Pooh, waving his hand

Figure 1. Visualization results of our MotionShot. Given any reference video, MotionShot can effectively transfer motion across arbitrary
objects in text-to-video generation. Notably, when the reference and target objects have distinct appearances and structures—such as an
anime boy and a Winnie bear—MotionShot demonstrates remarkable adaptive motion transfer capabilities.

Abstract
Existing text-to-video methods struggle to transfer motion smoothly from a reference object to a target object
with signiﬁcant differences in appearance or structure between them. To address this challenge, we introduce MotionShot, a training-free framework capable of parsing
reference-target correspondences in a ﬁne-grained manner, thereby achieving high-ﬁdelity motion transfer while
preserving coherence in appearance. To be speciﬁc, MotionShot ﬁrst performs semantic feature matching to ensure
high-level alignments between the reference and target ob† Corresponding author.

jects. It then further establishes low-level morphological
alignments through reference-to-target shape retargeting.
By encoding motion with temporal attention, our MotionShot can coherently transfer motion across objects, even in
the presence of signiﬁcant appearance and structure disparities, demonstrated by extensive experiments. The project
page is available at: https://motionshot.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in diffusion models [9, 20, 52] have
signiﬁcantly propelled the progress of video generation
[15, 32, 51, 67]. Although existing methods can produce

11861

