This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind the Cost of Scaffold!
Benign Clients May Even Become Accomplices of Backdoor Attack
Xingshuo Han1* , Xuanye Zhang2* , Xiang Lan3 , Haozhao Wang4** , Shengmin Xu3 , Shen Ren5 ,
Jason Zeng6 , Ming Wu6 , Michael Heinrich6 , Tianwei Zhang2
1
2

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, College of Computer Science and Technology,

Nanyang Technological University,3 Fujian Normal University, 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5

Continental Automotive Singapore, 6 Zero Gravity Labs, * Equal Contribution, ** Corresponding
{xingshuo001, C200212, tianwei.zhang}@ntu.edu.sg,{jason, ming, michael}@0g.ai
{lanxiang0113, smxu1989}@gmail.com, hz wang@hust.edu.cn, shen@shenren.org

Abstract

method, setting the standard for server-side model updates
by aggregating model parameters from clients. However, its
performance deteriorates in non-IID scenarios, where data
heterogeneity causes update drifts from individual clients,
ultimately degrading convergence [22].

By using a control variate to calibrate the local gradient
of each client, Scaffold has been widely known as a powerful solution to mitigate the impact of data heterogeneity
in Federated Learning. Although Scaffold achieves significant performance improvements, we show that this superiority is at the cost of increased security vulnerabilities.
Specifically, this paper presents BadSFL, the first backdoor attack targeting Scaffold, which turns benign clients
into accomplices to amplify the attack effect. The core idea
of BadSFL is to uniquely tamper with the control variate to subtly steer benign clients’ local gradient updates
towards the attacker’s poisoned direction, effectively turning them into unwitting accomplices, significantly enhancing the backdoor persistence. Additionally, BadSFL leverages a GAN-enhanced poisoning strategy to enrich the attacker’s dataset, maintaining high accuracy on both benign
and backdoored samples while remaining stealthy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that BadSFL achieves superior attack durability, maintaining effectiveness for over 60
global rounds—lasting up to three times longer than existing baselines even after ceasing malicious model injections.

To address this challenge, Scaffold [12] was introduced
as a robust FL method designed to mitigate client update
drift through a correction mechanism based on control variates, thereby enhancing model convergence in non-IID settings. The control variate is essentially an estimate of the
difference between a client’s local gradient and the global
gradient, which helps align the local updates with the global
objective. Scaffold reduces variance in the updates caused
by data heterogeneity, making it particularly effective for
scenarios where clients have diverse data distributions.
However, Scaffold Federated Learning (SFL) not only
changes the way FL models converge but also affects their
robustness against adversarial manipulations. In particular,
malicious clients in FL can exploit model update mechanisms to introduce backdoor behaviors, embedding hidden
misbehavior into the global model [6]. While backdoor attacks have been extensively studied in FL [3, 7, 34, 36, 40],
most existing works focus on IID scenarios where attackers have full knowledge of the dataset distribution and can
easily craft poisoned updates. In contrast, non-IID data distributions introduce additional constraints, making it harder
for attackers to align poisoned models with the global model
without significantly degrading overall performance. Although recent studies have explored backdoor attacks in
non-IID FL [2, 10, 29, 42], they have largely overlooked
the unique security implications introduced by SFL. The
question this paper aims to address is: if the new mechanisms of SFL (i.e., control variate for update drift correction) can bring new security threats, and unintentionally facilitate backdoor attacks in non-IID settings?

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) enables distributed model training
while preserving client data privacy. However, the effectiveness of FL models heavily depends on the distribution of
training data across clients. Two scenarios typically arise:
1) IID data, where training data is uniformly distributed
across clients, and 2) non-IID data, a more realistic setting
where data characteristics vary significantly across clients.
For IID scenarios, FedAvg [27] stands out as the leading FL

1580

