This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Adversarial Transferability by Balancing Exploration and
Exploitation with Gradient-Guided Sampling
Zenghao Niu1 Weicheng Xie1,2,3 * Siyang Song4 Zitong Yu5 Feng Liu1 Linlin Shen6
1
School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, China
4
School of Computer Science, University of Exeter, U.K.
5
Department of Computing and Information Technology, Great Bay University, China
6
Computer Vision Institute, School of Artificial Intelligence, Shenzhen University, China
{2300271072@mail., wcxie@, feng.liu@, llshen@}szu.edu.cn
s.song@exeter.ac.uk, zitong.yu@ieee.org

Abstract
Inner-iterations
Random Sampling

Adversarial attacks present a critical challenge to deep
neural networks’ robustness, particularly in transfer scenarios across different model architectures. However, the
transferability of adversarial attacks faces a fundamental dilemma between Exploitation (maximizing attack potency) and Exploration (enhancing cross-model generalization). Traditional momentum-based methods over-prioritize
Exploitation, i.e., higher loss maxima for attack potency
but weakened generalization (narrow loss surface). Conversely, recent methods with inner-iteration sampling overprioritize Exploration, i.e., flatter loss surfaces for crossmodel generalization but weakened attack potency (suboptimal local maxima). To resolve this dilemma, we propose
a simple yet effective Gradient-Guided Sampling (GGS),
which harmonizes both objectives through guiding sampling along the gradient ascent direction to improve both
sampling efficiency and stability. Specifically, based on
MI-FGSM, GGS introduces inner-iteration random sampling and guides the sampling direction using the gradient from the previous inner-iteration (the sampling’s magnitude is determined by a random distribution). This mechanism encourages adversarial examples to reside in balanced regions with both flatness for cross-model generalization and higher local maxima for strong attack potency.
Comprehensive experiments across multiple DNN architectures and multimodal large language models (MLLMs)
demonstrate the superiority of our method over stateof-the-art transfer attacks. Code is made available at
https://github.com/anuin-cat/GGS.

Exploitation

Sampling for
Stable
Gradient Estimation

Exploration

Exploration
(c) PGN
Balance

(a) MI-FGSM

(b) RS

Gradient-Guided Sampling for
Stability Toward Flat Region

(d) Ours (GGS)

Figure 1. The loss surfaces of (a) MI-FGSM [1] (Momentum iterative fast gradient sign method), (b) RS (Base inner-iteration Random Sampling defined in section 3.2) for enhancing exploration
within the neighborhood, (c) PGN [7] (Penalizing Gradient Norm)
with Random Sampling (RS) for stable gradient estimation to enhance exploration, and (d) Our GGS (Gradient-Guided Sampling)
for efficient sampling to generate gradients that stably towards flat
regions with higher local maxima. It shows that, building upon RS,
our approach not only maintains a flat loss surface, but also improves the local maximum loss value, compared to PGN, achieving a balance between exploration and exploitation.

1. Introduction
Researches have indicated that adding imperceptible perturbations to input data can easily affect deep neural networks

* Corresponding author.

3885

