This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-Learning Dynamic Center Distance: Hard Sample Mining for Learning
with Noisy Labels
Chenyu Mu, Yijun Qu, Jiexi Yan, Erkun Yang*, Cheng Deng
Xidian University
Xi’an, China
{cym9131,qyjtoki1,jxyan1995,erkunyang,chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

Abstract
The sample selection approach is a widely adopted strategy for learning with noisy labels, where examples with
lower losses are effectively treated as clean during training.
However, this clean set often becomes dominated by easy
examples, limiting the model’s meaningful exposure to more
challenging cases and reducing its expressive power. To
overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel metric called
Dynamic Center Distance (DCD), which can quantify sample difficulty and provide information that critically complements loss values. Unlike approaches that rely on predictions, DCD is computed in feature space as the distance
between sample features and a dynamically updated center,
established through a proposed meta-learning framework.
Building on preliminary semi-supervised training that captures fundamental data patterns, we incorporate DCD to
further refine the classification loss, down-weighting wellclassified examples and strategically focusing training on
a sparse set of hard instances. This strategy prevents easy
examples from dominating the classifier, leading to more robust learning. Extensive experiments across multiple benchmark datasets, including synthetic and real-world noise settings, as well as natural and medical images, consistently
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods tend to prioritize simple, low-loss
samples, potentially overlooking harder, more informative samples that could enhance model performance. (b) Our approach
emphasizes the importance of selecting both easy and hard samples, resulting in a more robust model that learns from a broader
range of data, mitigating overfitting and improving generalization.

of active research [2, 3, 29, 48, 52, 55, 56, 58].
Existing methods for handling label noise generally fall
into two main categories: statistically consistent and statistically inconsistent approaches [30, 34, 57]. Statistically
consistent methods model the label noise by estimating a
noise transition matrix [12, 37]. While these methods are
theoretically robust, their practical effectiveness diminishes
under high noise levels or when dealing with datasets with
large class counts, as accurately estimating the noise matrix becomes difficult in such conditions [16]. In contrast,
statistically inconsistent approaches adopt various heuristic
like memorization effect [14], co-teaching [59], label correction [63], and small-loss [13] sample selection to combat
noisy labels. Most of these methods are implemented by
constructing a subset of samples, often deemed less noisy.
However, these methods tend to misidentify hard-to-learn
samples as noisy, based on shared features such as high loss
or low prediction confidence. As a result, they favor simpler, easier-to-learn samples, which can limit model learning by excluding informative ones.

1. Introduction
In supervised learning, labeled data is a crucial resource for
training effective models. However, acquiring high-quality
labeled data is often challenging, leading to the introduction of noisy labels in many datasets [35, 44, 54]. This label noise poses significant challenges, especially as deep
learning models are highly expressive and prone to overfitting—even when exposed to noisy labels [5, 7, 40, 43]. This
tendency to overfit noise can severely degrade model performance, making the mitigation of label noise a key area
* Corresponding author

415

