This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cycle-Consistent Learning for
Joint Layout-to-Image Generation and Object Detection
Xinhao Cai1 *, Qiuxia Lai2 *, Gensheng Pei1 , Xiangbo Shu1 , Yazhou Yao1,3†, Wenguan Wang4,5†
1
3

Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Communication University of China

State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Manufacturing of Advanced Construction Machinery 4 Zhejiang University
5

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
https://github.com/NUST-Machine-Intelligence-Laboratory/GDCC

Abstract

Input
condition

(a)

In this paper, we propose a generation-detection cycle
consistent (GDCC) learning framework that jointly optimizes both layout-to-image (L2I) generation and object detection (OD) tasks in an end-to-end manner. The key of
GDCC lies in the inherent duality between the two tasks,
where L2I takes all object boxes and labels as input conditions to generate images, and OD maps images back to
these layout conditions. Specifically, in GDCC, L2I generation is guided by a layout translation cycle loss, ensuring
that the layouts used to generate images align with those
predicted from the synthesized images. Similarly, OD benefits from an image translation cycle loss, which enforces
consistency between the synthesized images fed into the detector and those generated from predicted layouts. While
current L2I and OD tasks benefit from large-scale annotated layout-image pairs, our GDCC enables more efficient
use of auto-synthesized data, thereby further enhancing
data efficiency. It is worth noting that our GDCC framework is computationally efficient thanks to the perturbative single-step sampling strategy and a priority timestep
re-sampling strategy during training. Besides, GDCC preserves the architectures of L2I, OD models, and the generation pipeline within the framework, thus maintaining the
original inference speed. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GDCC significantly improves the controllability
of diffusion models and the accuracy of object detectors.

Syn.
image

Output
Input
condition layouts

Syn.
images

(b)

Pixel-wise Consistency

Image Consistency
Input
layout

(c)

Syn.
image

Dual
layout

Re-syn.
image

Trainable
Frozen
A set of data

Layout Consistency

Figure 1. Overall comparison. (a) Some works such as [33] use
a pre-trained discriminative reward model R to fine-tune the L2I
generator G. (b) Some [6, 70] show that the synthesized images
provided by a pre-trained G can improve the performance of the
object detector D. (c) GDCC enables mutual enhancement between G and D through cycle-consistent learning. See §1.

generation methods incorporate image-based [33, 36, 79]
or prompt-based [6, 77] conditional controls into text-toimage (T2I) diffusion models [52] to achieve more precise
control over the instance placement during image synthesis. These methods train diffusion models to generate realistic images from structured layouts, which include bounding
boxes and object class labels that define the spatial positioning and types of objects in the scene. On the other hand, OD
takes an image as input and identifies the objects within it
by predicting their bounding boxes and class labels. Current advancements have led to significant improvements in
the precision of instance placement for L2I generation and
the prediction accuracy of OD models.
Although both L2I generation and OD have been extensively studied, few have noticed the strong correlation between these two tasks, i.e., they can be viewed as inverse
tasks of each other, where L2I maps layouts to images and
OD maps images to layouts. This natural duality between
these two tasks has largely been overlooked in previous research. Our key finding is that such duality can be effectively leveraged to improve the performance of both tasks.
Specifically, if we map an image to its corresponding layout
using an OD model, and then map that layout back to an image using an L2I model, we should ideally recover the origi-

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in both layout-to-image (L2I) generation [36] and object detection (OD) [20] tasks have
achieved remarkable success, largely driven by the availability of large-scale annotated datasets. Specifically, L2I
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

6797

