This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WSI-LLaVA: A Multimodal Large Language Model for Whole Slide Image
Yuci Liang1 ,* Xinheng Lyu1,2 ,* Wenting Chen3†, Meidan Ding1 , Jipeng Zhang5 ,
Xiangjian He2 , Song Wu1 , Xiaohan Xing4 , Sen Yang4 , Xiyue Wang4 , Linlin Shen1†
1
Shenzhen University, 2 University of Nottingham Ningbo China, 3 City University of Hong Kong,
4
Stanford University, 5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
what is the histologic
grade of this tumor?

Recent advances in computational pathology have introduced whole slide image (WSI)-level multimodal large language models (MLLMs) for automated pathological analysis. However, current WSI-level MLLMs face two critical
challenges: limited explainability in their decision-making
process and insufficient attention to morphological features
crucial for accurate diagnosis. To address these challenges,
we first introduce WSI-Bench, a large-scale morphologyaware benchmark containing 180k VQA pairs from 9,850
WSIs across 30 cancer types, specifically designed to evaluate MLLMs’ understanding of morphological characteristics crucial for accurate diagnosis. To the best of our knowledge, WSI-Bench presents the first benchmarking systematically evaluate morphological understanding capabilities
in WSI analysis. To enhance the model explainability, we
present WSI-LLaVA, an MLLM framework for gigapixel
WSI understanding with a three-stage training strategy,
which can provide detailed morphological findings to explain its final answer. For more precise model assessment
in pathological contexts, we develop two specialized WSI
metrics: WSI-Precision and WSI-Relevance, focusing on
clinical accuracy. Extensive evaluation on WSI-Bench reveals both the capabilities and limitations of current WSI
MLLMs in morphological analysis and various pathology
tasks, while demonstrating WSI-LLaVA’s superior performance across all capabilities on both internal and external
datasets. Source code and data are released.

SlideChat：A. Grade II
WSI-VQA：Grade 2
WSI

WSI-LLaVA: The tumor is graded as SBR (Scarff-BloomRichardson) Grade 2, with an overall score of 6 out of 9. This
grading considers the moderate differentiation of duct-like
structures (differentiation score of 2), the pronounced nuclear
pleomorphism (score of 3), and the low mitotic count (score
of 1). The combination of these factors indicates a moderately
differentiated tumor, aligning with SBR Grade 2, which
suggests an intermediate prognosis in terms of
aggressiveness and progression.

Figure 1. Comparison of WSI MLLMs. Existing frameworks offer only brief answers without explanations, while WSI-LLaVA
provides comprehensive grading with detailed morphological reasoning, showing the explainability gap in WSI analysis.

1. Introduction

calized tissue regions, WSI-level MLLMs leverage comprehensive contextual information from gigapixel images
for diagnostics. WSI-level analysis is particularly valuable
since histopathological diagnosis requires holistic analysis
where pathologists integrate findings across extensive tissue areas [10, 27, 32]. The WSI-level MLLMs fall into two
categories: transformer-based models [3, 4, 12] for pathology report generation and simple visual question answering
(VQA), and LLM-based model [5] for complex VQA tasks.
Despite their promising performance, these models still face
significant challenges.

Recent computational pathology advances have introduced
both patch-level [9, 18, 25, 30, 31] and whole slide image
(WSI)-level [3–5, 12, 19, 28] multimodal large language
models (MLLMs). While patch-level models analyze lo* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

The first challenge in current WSI-level MLLMs lies in
their explainability: these models typically struggle to provide explanations for their final answers. Existing WSIlevel models tend to offer short answers without supporting

22718

