This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training-Free Geometric Image Editing on Diffusion Models
Hanshen Zhu1∗

Zhen Zhu2∗ Kaile Zhang1 Yiming Gong2 Yuliang Liu1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1

{zhs china, klzhang, ylliu, xbai}@hust.edu.cn
2

Source

Prompt

Xiang Bai1†

Result

{zhenzhu4, yimingg8}@illinois.edu

Source

Prompt

Result

Source

Prompt

Result

30°

35°

20°

(a) 2D-Edits

(b) 3D-Edits

(c) Region Refinement

Figure 1. Given an image and an editing instruction, our method precisely performs geometric edits while maintaining high fidelity and
avoiding artifacts. Besides, our training-free framework achieves impressive structural completion and background generation.

1. Introduction

Abstract
We tackle the task of geometric image editing, where an
object within an image is repositioned, reoriented, or reshaped while preserving overall scene coherence. Previous diffusion-based editing methods often attempt to handle
all relevant subtasks in a single step, proving difficult when
transformations become large or structurally complex. We
address this by proposing a decoupled pipeline that separates object transformation, source region inpainting, and
target region refinement. Both inpainting and refinement
are implemented using a training-free diffusion approach,
FreeFine. In experiments on our new GeoBench benchmark, which contains both 2D and 3D editing scenarios,
FreeFine outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives in image fidelity, and edit precision, especially under demanding transformations. Code and benchmark are available at:
https://github.com/CIawevy/FreeFine
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Image generation models have made remarkable progress in
producing photorealistic and detail-rich results [2, 43, 47,
48]. With these advancements, the community has shown
growing interest in controllable image editing to enable
users to manipulate existing images with both high fidelity
and accuracy. In this paper, we address the task of repositioning, reorienting, or reshaping an object within an image
(e.g., moving an object to a new location, rotating it in 3D,
or changing its proportions) while preserving overall scene
coherence, a task we refer to as geometric image editing.
This problem requires solving multiple interdependent
subtasks: (1) coarsely transforming the object to its desired
location, (2) inpainting the source region to avoid artifacts,
and (3) refining the relocated object to blend seamlessly
with the background. Recent methods that support dragbased edits [8, 10, 33, 39, 50] typically address these goals
with a single, unified objective, yielding compelling results
for smaller or moderate transformations. However, they of-

19130

