This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FRET: Feature Redundancy Elimination for Test Time Adaptation
Linjing You1,* Jiabao Lu1,* Xiayuan Huang2,† Xiangli Nie1,†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
College of Science, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China
{youlinjing2023, lujiabao2025, xiangli.nie}@ia.ac.cn
huangxiayuan@bjfu.edu.cn
* Equal contribution, †Corresponding author

Abstract
Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) aims to enhance the generalization of deep learning models when faced with test
data that exhibits distribution shifts from the training data.
In this context, only a pre-trained model and unlabeled
test data are available, making it particularly relevant for
privacy-sensitive applications. In practice, we observe
that feature redundancy in embeddings tends to increase
as domain shifts intensify in TTA. However, existing TTA
methods often overlook this redundancy, which can hinder the model’s adaptability to new data. To address this
issue, we introduce Feature Redundancy Elimination for
Test-time Adaptation (FRET), a novel perspective for TTA.
A straightforward approach (S-FRET) is to directly minimize the feature redundancy score as an optimization objective to improve adaptation. Despite its simplicity and
effectiveness, S-FRET struggles with label shifts, limiting its robustness in real-world scenarios. To mitigate
this limitation, we further propose Graph-based FRET (GFRET), which integrates a Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) with contrastive learning. This design not only reduces feature redundancy but also enhances feature discriminability in both the representation and prediction layers. Extensive experiments across multiple model architectures, tasks, and datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
S-FRET and show that G-FRET achieves state-of-the-art
performance. Further analysis reveals that G-FRET enables the model to extract non-redundant and highly discriminative features during inference, thereby facilitating
more robust test-time adaptation. The code is available at
https://github.com/youlj109/fret.

Figure 1. An intuitive demonstration of the relationship between
embedded feature redundancy and distribution migration.Top:
Second-order feature relation graph of embedding features. Bottom: Plot of feature redundancy versus the level of corruption.

vast range of human tasks [1, 15, 38]. However, the basic assumption that training and test data are drawn independently and identically (i.i.d.) may not be suitable
in many real-world scenarios where the test/target distribution diverges from the training/source distribution [50].
This phenomenon, known as distribution shift, often leads
to poor performance [8]. To tackle this issue, a variety
of generalization or adaptation techniques have been developed to improve model robustness against distribution
shifts [24, 54, 60]. Among these, Test Time Adaptation
(TTA) [10, 40, 41] has been the focus of recent and active
research. TTA has the advantage of only requiring access
to the pre-trained model from the training/source domain
and unlabeled test data. Therefore, TTA is a more secure
and practical solution especially when models are publicly

1. Introduction
Recently, the emergence of deep neural networks (DNNs)
[12, 18] has signiﬁcantly propelled the advancement in a

2120

