This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent Time-of-Flight Depth Denoising via Graph-Informed Geometric
Attention

1
1

Weida Wang1∗ Changyong He1 * Jin Zeng1† Di Qiu2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University 2 Google
{2151300, 2433293, zengjin}@tongji.edu.cn

2

sylvesterqiu@gmail.com

Abstract
Depth images captured by Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensors are
prone to noise, requiring denoising for reliable downstream
applications. Previous works either focus on single-frame
processing, or perform multi-frame processing without considering depth variations at corresponding pixels across
frames, leading to undesirable temporal inconsistency and
spatial ambiguity. In this paper, we propose a novel ToF
depth denoising network leveraging motion-invariant graph
fusion to simultaneously enhance temporal stability and
spatial sharpness. Specifically, despite depth shifts across
frames, graph structures exhibit temporal self-similarity,
enabling cross-frame geometric attention for graph fusion.
Then, by incorporating an image smoothness prior on the
fused graph and data fidelity term derived from ToF noise
distribution, we formulate a maximum a posterior problem
for ToF denoising. Finally, the solution is unrolled into iterative filters whose weights are adaptively learned from
the graph-informed geometric attention, producing a highperformance yet interpretable network. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed scheme achieves stateof-the-art performance in terms of accuracy and consistency on synthetic DVToF dataset and exhibits robust generalization on the real Kinectv2 dataset. Source code is available at https://github.com/davidweidawang/GIGA-ToF.

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) GT depth, noisy ToF depth in (b) current frame and (c) previous frame, (d) single-frame GLRUN [17]
where noise remains, (e) multi-frame MTDNet [9] fusing depth
features, (f) proposed GIGA-ToF fusing graph structures. Due to
depth shifts at corresponding pixels in red rectangles, (e) loses details, while (f) removes noise while preserving sharpness because
the neighborhood correlation graphs are motion-invariant.

[5] as shown in Fig. 1(b), which significantly impedes their
performance in advanced applications.
To enhance the quality of ToF depth images, researchers
have proposed a variety of denoising methods. Early work
primarily focused on statistical model-based filtering techniques, such as bilinear [36] and non-local means [11] filtering. Leveraging progress in graph signal processing (GSP),
ToF depth denoising is formulated as a maximum a posteriori (MAP) problem using graph-based image priors to
promote depth image properties such as sparsity [16] or
smoothness [32, 41]. With the advent of deep learning,
methods based on deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance [6, 15, 30, 34]. However, most existing DNN schemes focus on single-frame
processing and ignore cross-frame correlations, resulting
in undesirable temporal inconsistency. Fig. 1(d) exemplifies the single-frame scheme GLRUN [17], where the result
contains noticeable noise due to limited intra-frame information for denoising, further leading to temporal jittering.
This motivates recent multi-frame processing methods
exploiting temporal correlation inherent in ToF depth video.
These methods typically estimate scene flow [20, 35] or
inter-frame correlation [9] to establish correspondence be-

1. Introduction
Continuous-wave Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensing [4] has
emerged as the mainstream 3D imaging scheme due to its
real-time response speed and low power consumption, empowering various applications such as robotics [22], 3D reconstruction [18], augmented reality [10], etc. For brevity,
we hereinafter refer to continuous-wave ToF sensors as ToF
sensors. However, depth images captured by ToF sensors
are subject to noise at distant, low-reflectance, glossy areas
* indicates equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Jin Zeng.

5188

