This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Track Anything
Yunyang Xiong, Chong Zhou, Xiaoyu Xiang, Lemeng Wu, Chenchen Zhu, Zechun Liu,
Saksham Suri, Balakrishnan Varadarajan, Ramya Krishna Akula, Forrest Iandola,
Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi, Bilge Soran, Vikas Chandra
Meta AI Research
https://yformer.github.io/efficient-track-anything/

Abstract

Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM 2) has emerged as a powerful tool for video object segmentation and tracking anything. Key components of SAM 2 that drive the impressive
video object segmentation performance include a large multistage image encoder for frame feature extraction and a
memory mechanism that stores memory contexts from past
frames to help current frame segmentation. The high computation complexity of image encoder and memory module
has limited its applications in real-world tasks, e.g., video
object segmentation on mobile devices. To address this limitation, we propose EfficientTAMs, lightweight end-to-end
track anything models that produce high-quality results with
low latency and small model size. Our idea is based on
adopting lightweight Vision Transformer (ViT) as an image
encoder for video object segmentation, and introducing an
efficient memory module, which reduces the complexity for
both frame feature extraction and memory computation for
current frame segmentation. We take vanilla lightweight
ViTs and efficient memory module to build EfficientTAMs,
and train the models on SA-1B and SA-V datasets for video
object segmentation and track anything tasks. We evaluate
on multiple video segmentation benchmarks including semisupervised VOS and promptable video segmentation, and
find that our proposed EfficientTAM with lightweight ViT performs comparably to SAM 2 model (SAM 2-HieraB+) with
∼1.6x speedup on A100 and ∼2.4x parameter reduction.
On segment anything image tasks, our EfficientTAMs also
perform favorably over original SAM with ∼20x speedup
on A100 and ∼20x parameter reduction. On mobile devices such as iPhone 15 Pro Max, our EfficientTAM can run
at ∼28 FPS for near real-time video object segmentation
with reasonable quality, highlighting the capability of small
models for on-device video object segmentation applications.
Our EfficientTAM code and models are available at here.

Figure 1. Comparative analysis. FPS/Parameter/Performance comparison of EfficientTAM and other models for zero-shot video object segmentation on SA-V test. We benchmark FPS of all models
on a single NVIDIA A100. Our EfficientTAM performs comparably to SAM 2 model with ∼1.6x speedup and ∼2.4x parameter
reduction, and outperforms other models by a large margin with
comparable complexity. Our EfficientTAM-Mobile reduces the
inference time of SAM 2 by ∼4.6x and parameter size by ∼4.5x.
Comparing to EdgeTAM, our EfficientTAM-Mobile is more accurate while being ∼2x efficient on A100 and achieving ∼1.8x
speedup on iPhone 15 Pro Max.

1. Introduction

11513

Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM 2) [55] is a foundational model for unified image and video object segmentation, achieving state-of-the-art performance in various
segmentation tasks such as zero-shot image segmentation [6, 7, 18, 35], semi-supervised video object segmentation [1, 9, 13, 40, 48, 52, 56, 66, 70, 75, 77, 78, 84], interactive video segmentation [3, 10, 13, 14, 17, 30, 31, 54, 76],
and other real-world applications [20, 53, 58, 60, 71, 85, 87,
90]. SAM 2 uses a multistage image encoder to extract hierarchical frame features and introduces a memory module to
cross-attend to both current frame features and stored memories from observed frames for consistent object segmentation
across frames and interactive tracking in videos.
Despite these advantages, SAM 2 is not efficient for mobile deployment, particularly because the large image en-

