This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAD-Recode: Reverse Engineering CAD Code from Point Clouds
Danila Rukhovich1

Elona Dupont1

Dimitrios Mallis1

danila.rukhovich@uni.lu

elona.dupont@uni.lu

dimitrios.mallis@uni.lu

Kseniya Cherenkova12

Anis Kacem1

Djamila Aouada1

kseniya.cherenkova@uni.lu

anis.kacem@uni.lu

djamila.aouada@uni.lu

1

SnT, University of Luxembourg

2

Artec3D, Luxembourg

Point cloud

Abstract

CAD model

CAD Reverse Engineering

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models are typically
constructed by sequentially drawing parametric sketches
and applying CAD operations to obtain a 3D model. The
problem of 3D CAD reverse engineering consists of reconstructing the sketch and CAD operation sequences from 3D
representations such as point clouds. In this paper, we
address this challenge through novel contributions across
three levels: CAD sequence representation, network design, and training dataset. In particular, we represent CAD
sketch-extrude sequences as Python code. The proposed
CAD-Recode translates a point cloud into Python code
that, when executed, reconstructs the CAD model. Taking
advantage of the exposure of pre-trained Large Language
Models (LLMs) to Python code, we leverage a relatively
small LLM as a decoder for CAD-Recode and combine it
with a lightweight point cloud projector. CAD-Recode is
trained on a procedurally generated dataset of one million
CAD sequences. CAD-Recode significantly outperforms
existing methods across the DeepCAD, Fusion360 and realworld CC3D datasets. Furthermore, we show that our CAD
Python code output is interpretable by off-the-shelf LLMs,
enabling CAD editing and CAD-specific question answering from point clouds.

(a) Existing approaches
Hand-crafted
dataset

CAD-specific decoder
Point cloud encoder

Method-specific
representation

(b) CAD-Recode, ours
Procedural
generation

LLM

Python code

Projector

Figure 1. 3D CAD reverse engineering is a process of converting a point cloud into a CAD model (top). Existing methods are
constrained by the use of method-specific CAD representations
and limited hand-crafted training datasets (a). On the contrary,
CAD-Recode employs a pre-trained LLM with a lightweight projector that translates point clouds into executable Python code and
is trained on a procedurally generated dataset (b).

pathway to CAD creation [17].
Automated 3D CAD reverse engineering has a long history in the fields of computer vision and graphics [13, 42],
with goals evolving alongside advancements in the field.
These objectives have progressed from identifying CAD
parts in 3D point clouds [42] to predicting the sequence of
steps a designer may take to recreate a 3D scanned object
in CAD software [21, 34]. This latter goal is particularly
appealing, as it aims not only to produce a final CAD parametric model but also to capture the design steps behind
it, enabling further editing within CAD software [21, 43].
In CAD software, designers typically construct their CAD
model as feature-based design sequences, where a sequence
of 2D sketches is transformed into 3D objects via opera-

1. Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) modeling is the standard
approach for designing manufactured objects, ranging from
furniture to mechanical components [3, 30]. However, creating a 3D CAD model is a time-consuming task that demands specialized expertise, as the model must not only
capture the object’s shape but also maintain its functional
requirements—commonly referred to as the design intent [4, 27]. To streamline this process, 3D CAD reverse
engineering aims at generating CAD models directly from
3D scanned objects, offering a faster and more accessible

9801

