This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain-aware Category-level Geometry Learning Segmentation for
3D Point Clouds
Pei He, Lingling Li∗ , Licheng Jiao*, Ronghua Shang, Fang Liu, Shuang Wang, Xu Liu, Wenping Ma
Xidian University, China
hepei@stu.xidian.edu.cn, llli@xidian.edu.cn, lchjiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization in 3D segmentation is a critical
challenge in deploying models to unseen environments.
Current methods mitigate the domain shift by augmenting
the data distribution of point clouds. However, the model
learns global geometric patterns in point clouds while ignoring the category-level distribution and alignment. In
this paper, a category-level geometry learning framework
is proposed to explore the domain-invariant geometric features for domain generalized 3D semantic segmentation.
Specifically, Category-level Geometry Embedding (CGE)
is proposed to perceive the fine-grained geometric properties of point cloud features, which constructs the geometric properties of each class and couples geometric embedding to semantic learning. Secondly, Geometric Consistent Learning (GCL) is proposed to simulate the latent 3D distribution and align the category-level geometric embeddings, allowing the model to focus on the geometric invariant information to improve generalization. Experimental results verify the effectiveness of the proposed
method, which has very competitive segmentation accuracy compared with the state-of-the-art domain generalized point cloud methods. The code will be available at
https://github.com/ChicalH/DCGL.

environmental changes will affect the generalization and robustness of point cloud semantic segmentation [2, 16, 35].
Currently, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods
[11, 39] can adapt the source domain (training data) to a
specific target domain. Although UDA shows promising
performance on predefined target domains, its effectiveness
decreases when applied to unseen domains.
Domain generalization aims to improve the generalization of unknown domain. Data augmentation that simulates the target domain has been shown to be an effective
approach [10, 25, 35, 43]. PointDR [35] is a pioneering
work in this field that proposes a benchmark dataset and
a domain randomization technique to improve generalization in the wild. DGUIL [10] improves data diversity by
simulating point uncertainty in domain shift. And some
methods consider synthesizing data patterns under adverse
weather[25, 43]. UniMix [43] proposes a general method
to simulate adverse weather data and mix in the source domain. LiDARWeather [25] identifies the key factors of severe weather and proposes a jittering strategy to enhance
point cloud data.
However, point clouds are presented in 3D physical
space, and how to deal with complex geometric information
to improve cross-domain generalization has been ignored.
The geometric relations of point clouds generally show
cross-domain stability. However, two issues need to be considered when exploring domain-invariant geometric information in point clouds. On the one hand, the model learns
global geometric patterns while ignoring the category-level
distribution. Geometric information is important for representing 3D point clouds. Although data augmentation
brings some geometric perturbations that allow the model
to automatically learn geometric patterns in point clouds,
this focuses on the global distribution of the domain while
the perturbations make the model ignore the geometric patterns within the class. On the other hand, the alignment of
geometric features before and after the perturbation is ignored. Although augmented data methods are conducive to
model learning diverse features, they lack special attention
to the domain-invariant information in geometric features.

1. Introduction
Point clouds segmentation is widely used in autonomous
driving [21, 34], medical analysis [22, 37], and robot navigation [4, 7, 45]. The point cloud data captured by LiDAR can be used to understand the three-dimensional scene
through semantic segmentation, which assigns the category
to each point cloud [14, 18, 40]. Although deep learningbased segmentation models have made significant progress,
existing methods usually assume that training data and test
data have the same distribution [13, 23, 29]. In real scenes,
complex data collection conditions, different sensors, and
* Corresponding authors

28324

