This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Jigsaw++: Imagining Complete Shape Priors for Object Reassembly
Jiaxin Lu1 , Gang Hua2 , Qixing Huang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Amazon
lujiaxin@utexas.edu, ganghua@gmail.com, huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

partially assembled pieces and the complete object prior.
Rather than replacing existing assembly algorithms, our approach learns to synthesize plausible complete shape priors
that can guide the reassembly process. While previous methods have attempted to compose shape priors [8, 64, 69] ,
they typically impose restrictive constraints, such as requiring specific object categories or pre-existing complete shape
templates. In contrast, Jigsaw++ learns to generate complete
shape directly from partial assemblies, which enables our
method to support a broader range of assembly scenarios.

The automatic assembly problem has attracted increasing
interest due to its complex challenges that involve 3D representation. This paper introduces Jigsaw++, a novel generative method designed to tackle the multifaceted challenges of
reconstructing complete shape for the reassembly problem.
Existing approach focusing primarily on piecewise information for both part and fracture assembly, often overlooking
the integration of complete object prior. Jigsaw++ distinguishes itself by learning a shape prior of complete objects.
It employs the proposed “retargeting” strategy that effectively leverages the output of any existing assembly method
to generate complete shape reconstructions. This capability
allows it to function orthogonally to the current methods.
Through extensive evaluations on Breaking Bad dataset and
PartNet, Jigsaw++ has demonstrated its effectiveness, reducing reconstruction errors and enhancing the precision of
shape reconstruction, which sets a new direction for future
reassembly model developments.

Our approach draws inspiration from the recent success
of 3D shape generators employing diffusion models, which
map Gaussian noise to instances on the data manifold. Based
on this principle, we propose to learn a complete shape prior
through the generative model, then optimize the mapping
from the partially assembled input towards this complete
shape space. Ideally, this method will provide a realistic
representation of what the complete object would look like
based on the given input. Among many 3D representations,
we focus on the point-cloud representation, due to its tight
connection to the data acquisition devices and problem settings [33, 67].

1. Introduction

Learning a point cloud generative model for fractured object reassembly is difficult. Most approaches require a fixed
number of points and are also restricted to specific categories
or need class conditioning. Another challenge is the scale of
training data for learning shape priors. We overcome these
challenges by adopting the LEAP image-to-3D reconstruction model [21] under the point cloud representation. Our
goal is to leverage its training on broad 2D datasets [41]. by
developing a suitable mapping between raw point clouds and
RGB images.

The challenge of object reassembly spans numerous applications from digital archaeology to robotic furniture assembly, and even to the medical field with fractured bone
restoration. Object reassembly problems are classified into
part assembly, which deals with semantically significant
parts [11, 26, 49, 59, 67], and fractured assembly, which
handles pieces broken by substantial forces [20, 33, 60].
However, existing approaches face a critical limitation: they
lack comprehensive understanding of the complete object
when working with fragmentary inputs. This limitation is
particularly acute in real-world scenarios where only a subset
of fragments is available, and current reconstruction methods heavily rely on category-specific templates, c.f. [42, 54].
It underscores the need for a new approach that could address these gaps and provide a complete shape prior to future
research.
To address this fundamental challenge, we introduce Jigsaw++, a novel framework that bridges the gap between

Drawing insights from contemporaty image editing approaches [37, 40, 51], our model interprets the partially assembled object as user input, with the target being the complete object. This setup helps to utilize the learned shape
generative model to predict the complete object from partial
inputs. However, the difference in our setting is that the
input is inaccurate and incomplete. Naively conditioning
the output on the input still leads to inaccurate output. To
address this issue, we introduce a “retargeting” phase which

6704

