This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Egocentric Visual-Inertial SLAM at City Scale
Anusha Krishnan1 * Shaohui Liu1 * Paul-Edouard Sarlin2 * Oscar Gentilhomme1
David Caruso3 Maurizio Monge3 Richard Newcombe3 Jakob Engel3 Marc Pollefeys1,4
1
ETH Zürich 2 Google 3 Meta Reality Labs Research 4 Microsoft Spatial AI Lab

wearable sensor

low light
moving platform
control point
detection
survey-grade
control points

visual-inertial

500m

exposure change

Figure 1. We introduce a dataset to benchmark multi-sensor VIO/SLAM with egocentric data at city scale. We record hours and
kilometers of trajectories with Project Aria devices [21], with pose annotations derived from centimeter-accurate surveyed control points.
We cover unique challenges of egocentric data, including low light, exposure changes, moving platforms, time-varying calibration, etc.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Precise 6-DoF simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) from onboard sensors is critical for wearable devices capturing egocentric data, which exhibits speciﬁc challenges, such as a wider diversity of motions and viewpoints,
prevalent dynamic visual content, or long sessions affected
by time-varying sensor calibration. While recent progress
on SLAM has been swift, academic research is still driven
by benchmarks that do not reﬂect these challenges or do
not offer sufﬁciently accurate ground truth poses. In this
paper, we introduce a new dataset and benchmark for visualinertial SLAM with egocentric, multi-modal data. We record
hours and kilometers of trajectories through a city center
with glasses-like devices equipped with various sensors. We
leverage surveying tools to obtain control points as indirect
pose annotations that are metric, centimeter-accurate, and
available at city scale. This makes it possible to evaluate extreme trajectories that involve walking at night or traveling
in a vehicle. We show that state-of-the-art systems developed
by academia are not robust to these challenges and we identify components that are responsible for this. In addition,
we design tracks with different levels of difﬁculty to ease
in-depth analysis and evaluation of less mature approaches.
The dataset and benchmark are available at lamaria.ethz.ch.
* indicates equal contribution

Estimating the precise location of a camera over time is a
fundamental problem in computer vision. Algorithms like
Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) or Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (VI-SLAM) can estimate a 6 Degrees-ofFreedom (DoF) pose for each image of a sequence, often
aided by inertial sensors. Positioning plays a crucial role in
ensuring the persistence of digital content over time and enabling seamless sharing across devices, which is especially
important for applications like AI assistants and augmented
reality. Progress in mobile computing has fueled the development of wearable devices that are equipped with various
sensors, including multiple color or depth cameras, inertial
units, and radio receivers. The egocentric, multi-modal data
that they capture presents unique challenges that are often
overlooked in computer vision research, which typically
relies on curated datasets with controlled viewpoints and
motions tailored to algorithms or visual content of interest.
Differently, egocentric data is passive and accidental: it
does not constrain the user’s actions but rather endures them.
As a result, this data exhibits signiﬁcantly more diversity in
motion patterns, viewpoints, and environments than typically
found in computer vision datasets. Moreover, egocentric
devices aspire to be all-day wearables that capture data over
extended durations, in which factors like sensor calibration

25207

