This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make Your Training Flexible: Towards Deployment-Efficient Video Models
Chenting Wang1,2 Kunchang Li2
Tianxiang Jiang2,4 Xiangyu Zeng2,5 Yi Wang2,3 Limin Wang1,2,5♠
1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4 University of Science and Technology of China

2 Shanghai AI Laboratory

3 Shanghai Innovation Institute

5 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

Abstract
Current video training methods rely on fixed spatiotemporal
sampling grids to extract a predetermined number of tokens,
limiting adaptability to diverse computational budgets and
resulting in suboptimal accuracy-computation trade-offs.
This rigidity constrains high-performance models trained in
resource-rich environments from being efficiently deployed
on resource-constrained devices. We hence introduce a
novel paradigm for lossless adaptation across scenarios,
enabling models to maintain optimal performance under
high-resource conditions while seamlessly transferring to
low-resource environments. Central to this is Token Optimization (TO), an adaptive inference framework that dynamically samples and selects input token set to optimize
input information under varied computational constraints.
To support this, we propose Flux, an augmentation tool
that enables flexible sampling grids and token selection.
It integrates seamlessly into popular video training frameworks, significantly enhancing model robustness and adaptability with negligible additional cost. Applied to largescale video pretraining, our method produces FluxViT,
which achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple tasks under standard costs. Remarkably, with only 1/4
of the tokens, FluxViT matches prior state-of-the-art models under TO across tasks, achieving nearly 90% computational savings. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/OpenGVLab/FluxViT.

1. Introduction
Video representation learning [20, 45, 71] is a fundamental task in computer vision, as it is critical in developing
spatiotemporal perception and procedural reasoning in multimodal large language models [38, 41, 54, 77] and embodied AI systems [24, 78]. However, the deployment of video
models is computationally intensive due to the high volume
♠ Corresponding author.

𝑅𝑎𝑤 𝑉𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑜
𝐹𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒

𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑

Sampling & Patchify

(

⋯ )

(

⋯ )

𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒, 𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒, …

𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚

𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛
𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
0 1 2 3 4 5 6

0 2 3 4 6

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
0 2 9 2 4 6 8

Figure 1. Flux (right) employs flexible sampling and token selection to achieve Token Optimization. Common methods(left) use
rigid sampling(and use token reduction for applications directly).

of video tokens compared to image tokens. Popular video
training methods work on fixed-count patched tokens sampled from a predefined spatiotemporal grid (e.g., 8×2242 ),
leading to considerable redundancy in training and deployment, especially for long, high-resolution videos. Moreover, this inflexible and fixed training achieves sub-optimal
results for tasks that require dynamic resolution settings, including restricted computation or emphasizing frame counts
rather than frame resolution. Researchers have developed
different approaches for better trade-offs.
First, to fit a limited computation budget in inference,
many works [15, 31, 59] use token reduction on the same
densely sampled tokens as in training, showing sub-optimal
performance. For one thing, there is a trade-off between the
complexity (cost) and performance of the token reduction
strategy. Current strategies can not perform well with a significant reduction rate. For another, the inflexibly trained
models can not generalize with the sparse, masked tokens.
Second, existing methods for flexible network training,
such as Resformer [65] and FFN [88], have demonstrated
the efficacy of flexible networks operating at different spatial or temporal resolutions but not both simultaneously. Al-

23880

