This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-Driven Storytelling with Multiple Lifelike Humans in a 3D Scene
Donggeun Lim1
1
1

Jinseok Bae1 Inwoo Hwang1 Seungmin Lee1
Hwanhee Lee2 Young Min Kim1†
2

Seoul National University

Chung-Ang University

{rms2836, capoo95, inusu0818, rsual, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

2

hwanheelee@cau.ac.kr

Figure 1. Our framework populates 3D scenes with multiple characters. The generated characters interact with their surroundings and
other people, bringing the space to life.

Abstract

at our project page: https://rms0329.github.io/
Event-Driven-Storytelling/.

In this work, we propose a framework that creates a
lively virtual dynamic scene with contextual motions of
multiple humans. Generating multi-human contextual motion requires holistic reasoning over dynamic relationships
among human-human and human-scene interactions. We
adapt the power of a large language model (LLM) to digest
the contextual complexity within textual input and convert
the task into tangible subproblems such that we can generate multi-agent behavior beyond the scale that was not
considered before. Specifically, our event generator formulates the temporal progression of a dynamic scene into
a sequence of small events. Each event calls for a welldefined motion involving relevant characters and objects.
Next, we synthesize the motions of characters at positions
sampled based on spatial guidance. We employ a highlevel module to deliver scalable yet comprehensive context,
translating events into relative descriptions that enable the
retrieval of precise coordinates. As the first to address this
problem at scale and with diversity, we offer a benchmark
to assess diverse aspects of contextual reasoning. Benchmark results and user studies show that our framework effectively captures scene context with high scalability. The
code and benchmark, along with result videos, are available

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author

A scene with digital humans creates lively atmosphere and
has a wide range of applications in VR, games, and movies.
The realism incurs from natural motions of multiple characters that seamlessly integrate into the surrounding environment. However, existing motion synthesis works focus
on individual characters independently or extend to interactions with either the surrounding environment [1, 4, 13, 19,
26, 37–40, 45, 47] or another human [10, 23, 25, 31, 35],
remaining limited to a single type of interaction. Hence,
they severely lack generalizability and scalability to concurrently generate plausible interactions of multiple characters
in a crowded scene. It is highly challenging to correctly
assign the behavior of individual characters at the correct
time stamp as it requires extensive dynamic contextual and
spatial reasoning.
To fulfill such holistic requirements, we take inspiration
from recent advances in large language models (LLMs).
LLMs demonstrated phenomenal performance in various
areas, especially for high-level planning [11, 15, 24, 30, 34,
36] or behavior modeling [3, 29]. We deduce that LLMs
have the potential to interpret nuanced semantics from

11654

