This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Incomplete Multi-view Clustering with Distribution Dual-Consistency
Recovery Guidance
Jiaqi Jin1 , Siwei Wang2 , Zhibin Dong1 , Xihong Yang1 , Xinwang Liu1, * , En Zhu1,∗ , Kunlun He3
1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Chinese PLA General hospital, Beijing, China
{jinjiaqi, xinwangliu, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view clustering leverages complementary representations from diverse sources to enhance performance. However, real-world data often suffer incomplete cases due to
factors like privacy concerns and device malfunctions. A
key challenge is effectively utilizing available instances to
recover missing views. Existing methods frequently overlook the heterogeneity among views during recovery, leading to significant distribution discrepancies between recovered and true data. Additionally, many approaches focus on
cross-view correlations, neglecting insights from intra-view
reliable structure and cross-view clustering structure. To
address these issues, we propose BURG, a novel method for
incomplete multi-view clustering with distriBution dUalconsistency Recovery Guidance. We treat each sample as a
distinct category and perform cross-view distribution transfer to predict the distribution space of missing views. To
compensate for the lack of reliable category information, we
design a dual-consistency guided recovery strategy that includes intra-view alignment guided by neighbor-aware consistency and cross-view alignment guided by prototypical
consistency. Extensive experiments on benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of BURG in the incomplete multi-view
scenario.

Figure 1. Basic idea of cross-view distribution transfer recovery.
The consistent distribution obtained from the complete views is
transferred to the missing views using view-specific flow models.
The recovered representation is then input into the view-specific
decoder to generate the recovered data.

Therefore, the key to addressing this issue lies in how to
utilize the available views to reasonably impute the missing ones[28, 32, 43], thereby restoring the integrity of the
data and maintaining the natural alignment of multi-view
data[21, 25, 30].
Currently, most mainstream deep incomplete multi-view
clustering (DIMVC) methods first impute the missing instances in each view, and then perform clustering based on
the complete and recovered views. These methods are commonly referred to as recovery-based DIMVC and can be
broadly categorized into three types based on the recovery
paradigm: GAN-based[39], graph-structured[4, 41], and information entropy-based methods[26, 27].
However, existing recovery-based methods often assume
that all views are similar in the feature space or can be
directly mapped to the same feature space. This perspective overlooks the fact that different views may exhibit diverse feature distributions and data characteristics due to
their varied sources, which is commonly referred to as the
heterogeneity between views. Furthermore, these methods
treat the recovery of missing view instances as independent
across samples. While this paradigm may be suitable for
tasks that seek one-to-one correspondences, the learned representations are not optimal for clustering, as the goal is to
map N representations into K clusters. In other words, dur-

1. Introduction
In today’s data-driven research landscape, multi-view
clustering[5, 6, 9, 22, 40, 47, 51] aims to integrate information from different perspectives in an unsupervised manner,
enhancing the predictive capability of the model[23, 29].
However, in real-world scenarios, multi-view data is often incomplete due to high acquisition costs or privacy
concerns[30, 37, 44, 53]. The missing information may
hinder the discovery of underlying patterns and structures
within the data, leading to inaccurate or unstable clustering.
* Corresponding author

1016

