This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V2M4: 4D Mesh Animation Reconstruction from a Single Monocular Video
Jianqi Chen

Biao Zhang Xiangjun Tang
KAUST

Peter Wonka

{jianqi.chen, biao.zhang, xiangjun.tang, peter.wonka}@kaust.edu.sa

Figure 1. Given a monocular video, our method can output a high-quality 4D mesh asset readily usable in graphics and game software.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present V2M4, a novel 4D reconstruction method that
directly generates a usable 4D mesh animation asset from
a single monocular video. Unlike existing approaches that
rely on priors from multi-view image and video generation
models, our method is based on native 3D mesh generation models. Naively applying 3D mesh generation models to generate a mesh for each frame in a 4D task can
lead to issues such as incorrect mesh poses, misalignment
of mesh appearance, and inconsistencies in mesh geometry and texture maps. To address these problems, we propose a structured workflow that includes camera search
and mesh reposing, condition embedding optimization for
mesh appearance refinement, pairwise mesh registration for
topology consistency, and global texture map optimization
for texture consistency. Our method outputs high-quality
4D animated assets that are compatible with mainstream
graphics and game software. Experimental results across a
variety of animation types and motion amplitudes demonstrate the generalization and effectiveness of our method.
https://windvchen.github.io/V2M4.

Creating 4D mesh animations is a challenging task. Unlike
the synthesis of 3D geometry or 2D images, the scarcity of
4D mesh animations makes it difficult to employ a learningbased framework. Monocular videos provide rich motion
cues, making them a potential source for animation reconstruction. However, reconstructing 4D mesh animations from single-view videos remains an underexplored
problem, posing challenges in addressing the ambiguity in
single-view video and maintaining both visual and topological consistency over time.

11643

Existing methods [14, 15, 31, 32, 40, 47, 49, 54, 56,
59, 62] have explored animation reconstruction based on
implicit representations such as NeRF [24] or topologyindependent representations like Gaussian Splatting [17].
To mitigate occlusions and ambiguities in single-view
videos, these approaches leverage knowledge embedded
in multi-view image diffusion [22, 36, 43] and video diffusion [1, 11]. While these methods are viable alternatives, they face disadvantages, such as the difficulty of ensuring 3D consistency in multi-view image diffusion and
video diffusion. Additionally, converting these implicit and

