Splat

This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RadarSplat: Radar Gaussian Splatting for High-Fidelity Data Synthesis and 3D
Reconstruction of Autonomous Driving Scenes
Pou-Chun Kung

Skanda Harisha Ram Vasudevan Aline Eid
University of Michigan

Katherine A. Skinner

{pckung, skandah, ramv, alineeid, kskin}@umich.edu

Radar 3D Reconstruction

Radar Image Rendering

3D Reconstruction

2D Radar Input

GT Radar

Radar Fields

Radar Inverse Rendering
Ours

Real Targets

Multipath

Itarget

IM

Noise

Full Render

Inoise

IFull

RadarSplat

PSNR:
21.07

0

Ground-Truth Camera

Ground-Truth LiDAR

1

PSNR:
25.16
Power Returns

Radar Occupancy Estimation
LiDAR

Radar Fields

Ours

Accuracy:
0.3

Accuracy:
0.72

2 (m)

0 (m)
Height

0

*Points enlarged for visibility

1

Occupancy Prob.

IFull = Itarget + IM + Inoise

Figure 1. RadarSplat enables radar 2D-to-3D scene reconstruction, image synthesis, and occupancy estimation. RadarSplat outperforms
the state-of-the-art neural rendering method [5] both qualitatively and quantitatively while also enabling additional radar inverse rendering.

Abstract
High-fidelity 3D scene reconstruction plays a crucial role in
autonomous driving by enabling novel data generation from
existing datasets. This allows simulating safety-critical scenarios and augmenting training datasets without incurring
further data collection costs. While recent advances in radiance fields have demonstrated promising results in 3D
reconstruction and sensor data synthesis using cameras
and LiDAR, their potential for radar remains largely unexplored. Radar is crucial for autonomous driving due to its
robustness in adverse weather conditions like rain, fog, and
snow, where optical sensors often struggle. Although the
state-of-the-art radar-based neural representation shows
promise for 3D driving scene reconstruction, it performs
poorly in scenarios with significant radar noise, including
receiver saturation and multipath reflection. Moreover, it is
limited to synthesizing preprocessed, noise-excluded radar
images, failing to address realistic radar data synthesis.
To address these limitations, this paper proposes RadarSplat, which integrates Gaussian Splatting with novel radar
noise modeling to enable realistic radar data synthesis and
enhanced 3D reconstruction. Compared to the state-of-

the-art, RadarSplat achieves superior radar image synthesis (+3.4 PSNR / 2.6× SSIM) and improved geometric reconstruction (−40% RMSE / 1.5× Accuracy), demonstrating its effectiveness in generating high-fidelity radar data
and scene reconstruction. A project page is available at
https://umautobots.github.io/radarsplat.

27596

1. Introduction
Data-driven, learning-based methods have significantly advanced autonomous driving; however, acquiring suitable
training data remains a substantial challenge. Real-world
data collection to train models is time-consuming and prohibitively expensive, while developing realistic sensor simulations during real-world driving scenarios is hindered by
the persistent simulation-to-reality gap.
Recent advances in 3D scene reconstruction using neural radiance field (NeRF) and Gaussian Splatting (GS) enabled closed-loop simulation [57] and synthetic data generation [27, 33, 49], which are critical for enhancing datadriven autonomous driving systems. While radar is an essential sensor for modern autonomous vehicles, most existing 3D scene reconstruction and data synthesis methods

