This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flow to the Mode: Mode-Seeking Diffusion Autoencoders
for State-of-the-Art Image Tokenization
Kyle Sargent1 , Kyle Hsu1 , Justin Johnson2 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Jiajun Wu1
1

Stanford University, 2 University of Michigan
Cosmos 16x16

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generative models such as diffusion models [14, 21, 33, 34,
46, 47] and discrete autoregressive models [6, 13] have seen
compelling applications in the creation of image and video
content [4, 29, 44]. Although less common systems such as
cascaded [44] and single-stage [18, 22] systems have been
explored, state-of-the-art systems for visual generation generally consist of two stages: first, a “tokenizer” is learned to
compress pixel data to a smaller and more tractable discrete
or continuous latent space; second, a generative model is
trained over this compressed latent space. Due to the dominance of this two-stage paradigm, tokenization has become

4.15
2.00

TiTok-L-32

LlamaGen-16

TiTok-B-64

rFID

Since the advent of popular visual generation frameworks like VQGAN and latent diffusion models, stateof-the-art image generation systems have generally been
two-stage systems that first tokenize or compress visual
data into a lower-dimensional latent space before learning a generative model. Tokenizer training typically follows a standard recipe in which images are compressed
and reconstructed subject to a combination of MSE, perceptual, and adversarial losses. Diffusion autoencoders
have been proposed in prior work as a way to learn
end-to-end perceptually-oriented image compression, but
have not yet shown state-of-the-art performance on the
competitive task of ImageNet-1K reconstruction. We propose FlowMo, a transformer-based diffusion autoencoder
that achieves a new state-of-the-art for image tokenization
at multiple compression rates without using convolutions,
adversarial losses, spatially-aligned two-dimensional latent codes, or distilling from other tokenizers. Our key
insight is that FlowMo training should be broken into
a mode-matching pre-training stage and a mode-seeking
post-training stage. In addition, we conduct extensive analyses and explore the training of generative models atop the
FlowMo tokenizer. Our code and models are available at
https://kylesargent.github.io/flowmo.

1.50

MaskBiT
ViT-VQGAN
OpenMagViT-V2

1.00

FlowMo-Lo (ours)

Cosmos 8x8

LlamaGen-32
FlowMo-Hi (ours)

0.50
0.0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Bits per Pixel

0.2

Figure 1. Discrete tokenizer comparison. State-of-the-art discrete tokenizers are benchmarked by encoding and reconstructing
the ImageNet-1K validation dataset at 256 × 256 resolution. with
performance measured in reconstruction FID (rFID), which trades
off against compression rate as measured in bits per pixel (BPP).
Whether trained for reconstruction at a low BPP (FlowMo-Lo) or
high BPP (FlowMo-Hi), FlowMo achieves state-of-the art image
tokenization performance compared with the respective baselines.
Moreover, FlowMo is a transformer-based diffusion autoencoder
which does not use convolutions, adversarial losses, or proxy objectives from auxiliary tokenizers.

an active research area in its own right, with multiple influential works focusing heavily on tokenizer training and
design [15, 35, 51, 56, 57]. In this work, we focus on tokenizers with a discrete latent space.
Since VQGAN [13], a dominant architecture and training scheme for discrete image tokenizers has emerged.
State-of-the-art image tokenizers are typically convolutional autoencoders trained to downsample visual data to
a 2-dimensional, spatially-aligned latent code, and then upsample the latent code to a reconstruction regularized by adversarial and perceptual losses. Various deviations from this
setup have been proposed: TiTok [57] used a transformerbased architecture and 1-dimensional latent code although
relying on a traditional CNN-based tokenizer for an initial

19471

