This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Gaussian Splatting:
Generating 3D Scenes with Video Diffusion Priors
Katja Schwarz

Norman Müller

Peter Kontschieder

Meta Reality Labs Zurich, Switzerland

Figure 1. Overview: Given one or more input images, GGS leverages a video diffusion prior to directly generate a 3D radiance field
parameterized via 3D Gaussian primitives. GGS first generates a feature field with a pose-conditional diffusion model and subsequently
decodes the feature splats, yielding an explicit 3D representation of the generated scene. Project page: https://katjaschwarz.github.io/ggs/

Abstract

1. Introduction

Synthesizing consistent and photorealistic 3D scenes is an
open problem in computer vision. Video diffusion models
generate impressive videos but cannot directly synthesize
3D representations, i.e., lack 3D consistency in the generated sequences. In addition, directly training generative 3D
models is challenging due to a lack of 3D training data at
scale. In this work, we present Generative Gaussian Splatting (GGS) – a novel approach that integrates a 3D representation with a pre-trained latent video diffusion model.
Specifically, our model synthesizes a feature field parameterized via 3D Gaussian primitives. The feature field is then
either rendered to feature maps and decoded into multi-view
images, or directly upsampled into a 3D radiance field. We
evaluate our approach on two common benchmark datasets
for scene synthesis, RealEstate10K and ScanNet++, and
find that our proposed GGS model significantly improves
both the 3D consistency of the generated multi-view images,
and the quality of the generated 3D scenes over all relevant
baselines. Compared to a similar model without 3D representation, GGS improves FID on the generated 3D scenes
by ∼20% on both RealEstate10K and ScanNet++.

27510

Diffusion models work remarkably well for generating photorealistic images and videos from noise when trained on
vast amounts of data. For 3D scenes, however, 3D training data is scarce and generative models fall short in terms
of quality and generalization ability compared to their 2D
counterparts. As a consequence, some recent works leverage pre-trained video diffusion models as backbones to
first generate multi-view images, and subsequently stitch
the generated views together using 3D reconstruction algorithms [13, 70, 76]. However, the generated multi-view images often lack 3D consistency, requiring carefully tailored
3D reconstruction algorithms [13, 70] or time consuming
iterative procedures [76].
Another line of works improve 3D consistency of the generated images by using a 3D representation within the diffusion model [1, 4, 60]. However, these works cannot leverage pre-trained video diffusion models, because of their
custom network architectures for incorporating the 3D representation. In this work, we investigate how 3D representations can be directly integrated with powerful video
diffusion priors to improve the consistency of the generated images and thereby the generated 3D scenes. One

