This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-Semantic Enhanced Variational Autoencoder for Zero-Shot
Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Wenhan Wu1 , Zhishuai Guo2 , Chen Chen3 , Hongfei Xue1 , Aidong Lu1
1 Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
2 Department of Computer Science, Northern Illinois University
3 Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida

{wwu25, hongfei.xue, aidong.lu}@charlotte.edu, zguo@niu.edu, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Zero-shot skeleton-based action recognition aims to develop
models capable of identifying actions beyond the categories
encountered during training. Previous approaches have primarily focused on aligning visual and semantic representations but often overlooked the importance of fine-grained
action patterns in the semantic space (e.g., the hand movements in drinking water and brushing teeth). To address
these limitations, we propose a Frequency-Semantic Enhanced Variational Autoencoder (FS-VAE) to explore the
skeleton semantic representation learning with frequency
decomposition. FS-VAE consists of three key components:
1) a frequency-based enhancement module with high- and
low-frequency adjustments to enrich the skeletal semantics
learning and improve the robustness of zero-shot action
recognition; 2) a semantic-based action description with
multilevel alignment to capture both local details and global
correspondence, effectively bridging the semantic gap and
compensating for the inherent loss of information in skeleton sequences; 3) a calibrated cross-alignment loss that
enables valid skeleton-text pairs to counterbalance ambiguous ones, mitigating discrepancies and ambiguities in skeleton and text features, thereby ensuring robust alignment.
Evaluations on the benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, validating that frequency-enhanced
semantic features enable robust differentiation of visually
and semantically similar action clusters, improving zeroshot action recognition. Our project is publicly available
at: https://github.com/wenhanwu95/FS-VAE.

Figure 1. The overall design of our frequency-semantic enhanced
variational autoencoder for zero-shot skeleton action recognition.

1. Introduction

[20, 33], and automated driving [20, 33]. Among the various
modalities, skeleton-based action recognition stands out for
its robustness to environmental variations, as it focuses on
3D structural poses derived from human joints. Although
conventional supervised approaches [6, 9, 18, 21, 24, 30, 43–
45] have achieved remarkable success in this domain, their
reliance on extensive labeled data limits their performance
to diverse and unseen action categories. Zero-shot skeletonbased action recognition (ZSSAR) addresses this challenge
by enabling models to recognize unseen actions using knowledge from seen action categories and semantic descriptions.
Existing ZSSAR methods [7, 15, 19, 27, 28, 48, 49] primarily align skeleton features with text embeddings within
a shared latent space to enhance generalization. Specially,
[15, 27, 28] employ Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) [22]
as the training framework to learn structured and generalizable latent representations. However, these VAE-based
approaches often yield less semantic information due to their
coarse feature representations. Skeleton sequences, unlike
raw videos, lack detailed appearance cues, making it difficult to encode the fine-grained semantics. As a result,
critical motions (e.g., nuanced limb or hand movements)
are often underrepresented, limiting the models’ ability to
capture semantic distinctions between similar actions such

Human action recognition has gained significant attention
in computer vision due to its wide-ranging applications, including surveillance [38, 39], human-computer interaction

11122

