This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trade-offs in Image Generation: How Do Different Dimensions Interact?

Yuli Zhang3

Sicheng Zhang1* Binzhu Xie2*
†
Donghao Zhou2 Xiaofei Chen4 Shi Qiu2
1

Khalifa University
4

2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University

5

Zhonghao Yan3*
†
Jiaqi Liu5 Guoyang Xie5
3

Zhichao Lu5

Queen Mary University of London

City University of Hong Kong

Prompt: A medium view of a river flowing
strongly through a bunch of big black rocks.
On left and right sides of the river, there are
multiple trees that have dried out.

Correct Relation
Low Realism

(a) Pairwise Dimensional
Subset Results

(b) Dimension Trade-off Map

i) Trade-off Analysis

Task Alignment - Relation

High Relation (0.70)
but Low Realism (0.25)

High Relation (0.71)
and High Realism (0.75)

Trade-off !

Balance
High Relation (0.80)
and High Realism (0.87)
High Realism

Low Relation (0.44)
but high Realism (0.76)

Wrong Relation

Image Quality - Realism

Prompt: A couple walking hand in hand,
the man in the left of the woman with their
shadows long behind them in the setting sun.

ii) Trade-off of Relation – Realism pairwise dimension

iii) Fine-tuned output

Figure 1. Trade-off Overview. In Figure i), we use (a) Pairwise Dimensional Subset results and (b) Dimension Trade-off Map (DTM) to
uncover trade-offs among different dimensions. Figure ii) illustrates an example of the trade-off between Relation Alignment and Realism,
where each point represents an image generated by Janus-Pro [9], with the two axes indicating TRIGScores, our VLM-as-judge metric for
dimension-specific evaluation. The top image correctly aligns relations but lacks realism, while the bottom image has incorrect relations
(with male/female positions swapped) but higher realism, demonstrating the trade-off. In Figure iii), after fine-tuning on DTM, the generated
image demonstrates a mitigated trade-off.

Abstract
Model performance in text-to-image (T2I) and image-toimage (I2I) generation often depends on multiple aspects,
including quality, alignment, diversity, and robustness. However, models’ complex trade-offs among these dimensions
have been rarely explored due to (1) the lack of datasets
that allow fine-grained quantification of these trade-offs,
and (2) using a single metric for multiple dimensions. To
address this gap, we introduce TRIG-Bench (Trade-offs
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author: shiqiu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk;guoyang.xie@ieee.org

in Image Generation), which spans 10 dimensions (Realism, Originality, Aesthetics, Content, Relation, Style, Knowledge, Ambiguity, Toxicity and Bias), contains 40,200 samples, and covers 132 Pairwise Dimensional Subsets. Furthermore, we develop TRIGScore, a VLM-as-judge metric
that automatically adapts to various dimensions. Based
on TRIG-Bench and TRIGScore, we evaluate 14 cuttingedge models across T2I and I2I tasks. In addition, we
propose the Relation Recognition System and generate the
Dimension Trade-off Map (DTM), which visualizes modelspecific capability trade-offs. Our experiments demonstrate
that DTM consistently provides a comprehensive under-

17256

