This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Color Matching Using Hypernetwork-Based Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
Artem Nikonorov1∗ Georgy Perevozchikov2∗ Andrei Korepanov1,7 Nancy Mehta2∗∗
Mahmoud Aﬁﬁ3∗∗† Egor Ershov4,5,6 Radu Timofte2
1

2
Samara National Research University
Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Würzburg
3
AI Center-Toronto, Samsung Electronics 4 Color Reproduction and Synthesis Institute
5
7
Moscow Center for Advanced Studies 6 Computational Color Photography Lab
iMotions

Abstract

8QVXSHUYLVHG

We present cmKAN, a versatile framework for color matching. Given an input image with colors from a source
color distribution, our method effectively and accurately
maps these colors to match a target color distribution in
both supervised and unsupervised settings. Our framework
leverages the spline capabilities of Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs) to model the color matching between source
and target distributions. Speciﬁcally, we developed a hypernetwork that generates spatially varying weight maps
to control the nonlinear splines of a KAN, enabling accurate color matching. As part of this work, we introduce a
ﬁrst large-scale dataset of paired images captured by two
distinct cameras and evaluate the efﬁcacy of our and existing methods in matching colors. We evaluated our approach across various color-matching tasks, including: (1)
raw-to-raw mapping, where the source color distribution is
in one camera’s raw color space and the target in another
camera’s raw space; (2) raw-to-sRGB mapping, where the
source color distribution is in a camera’s raw space and the
target is in the display sRGB space, emulating the color rendering of a camera ISP; and (3) sRGB-to-sRGB mapping,
where the goal is to transfer colors from a source sRGB
space (e.g., produced by a source camera ISP) to a target
sRGB space (e.g., from a different camera ISP). The results
show that our method outperforms existing approaches by
37.3% on average for supervised and unsupervised cases
while remaining lightweight compared to other methods.
The codes, dataset, and pre-trained models are available at:
https://github.com/gosha20777/cmKAN.git

6XSHUYLVHG

3DLUHGEDVHG

0EVL]H
.SDUDPV

FP.$1

 5DZWR5DZ
RXUV

WDUJHW



 5DZWRV5*%

 V5*%WRV5*%

RXUV

RXUV

WDUJHW



WDUJHW



Figure 1. We present cmKAN, a learning framework for color
matching. Our framework is versatile, supporting three colormatching scenarios: supervised and unsupervised ofﬂine training,
as well as paired-based optimization. It is suitable for different
color-matching tasks, such as (1) raw-to-raw, (2) raw-to-sRGB
and (3) sRGB-to-sRGB mapping. Compared to other methods
(e.g., SIRLUT [42]), our method demonstrates promising results
across all tasks with a small number of parameters.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Camera Image Signal Processors (ISPs) consist of various
modules that process input image colors to produce the ﬁnal output [12, 18, 29, 34, 49]. These ISPs perform spatially nonuniform color transformations that map the initial
image colors from the camera’s raw space – deﬁned by the
camera’s characteristics – to standardized color spaces (e.g.,
sRGB, DCI P3, etc) [12, 49].
However, variations in the ﬁnal rendered colors arise
when the same scene is captured by different camera systems. These discrepancies arises from several factors, including the initial raw colors produced by the camera sensor and the diverse algorithms employed by ISPs, which can
vary in accuracy and reﬂect the desired styles that the camera manufacturer aims for in the ﬁnal image [18, 51, 64, 74].
Color matching, or more speciﬁcally, color stabilization,
aims to adjust the colors of an input image (source) to

* These Authors Contributed Equally
** Corresponding Author

† Work done prior to joining Samsung

7099

