This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Serialization based Point Cloud Oversegmentation
Chenghui Lu1,2 , Jianlong Kwan1,2 , Dilong Li1,2* , Ziyi Chen1,2 , Haiyan Guan3
1
Department of Computer Science & Xiamen CVPR Key Laboratory, Huaqiao University
2
Fujian Key Lab. of Big Data Intell. and Security, Huaqiao University
3
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
{23013083012, jianlongkwan}@stu.hqu.edu.cn, {scholar.dll, chenziyihq}@hqu.edu.cn

Input point cloud

Segments

Hilbert Serialization

Reallocation

Superpoints

Figure 1. Our method efficiently generates superpoints from serialized point clouds by optimizing boundaries through reallocating points
from each segment to the most appropriate surrounding segments (shown in green and red).

Abstract
Point cloud oversegmentation, as a fundamental preprocessing step for 3D understanding, is a challenging task
due to its spatial proximity and semantic similarity requirements. Most existing works struggle to efficiently group semantically consistent points into superpoints while maintaining spatial proximity. In this paper, we propose a novel
serialization based point cloud oversegmentation method,
which leverages serialization to avoid complex spatial
queries, directly accessing neighboring points through sequence locality for similarity matching and superpoint clustering. Specifically, we first serialize point clouds into a
Hilbert curve and spatially-continuously partition them into
initial segments. Then, to guarantee the internal semantic
consistency of superpoints, we design an adaptive update
algorithm that clusters superpoints by matching feature
similarities between neighboring segments and refines segment features via Cross-Attention. Experiments on largescale indoor and outdoor datasets demonstrate state-of-theart performance in point cloud oversegmentation. Moreover, it is also adaptable to semantic segmentation and
achieves promising performance. The code is available at
https://github.com/CHL-glitch/SPCNet.

termed superpoints, which adaptively represent a set of
points. Due to their representativeness, superpoint-based
methods can significantly reduce computational complexity
and improve semantic consistency. Therefore, it is becoming increasingly important in the field of point cloud processing and has attracted considerable attention from many
researchers.
Early point cloud oversegmentation approaches primarily combined hand-crafted features with clustering or graph
partitioning to generate superpoints. Papon et al. [26] introduced VCCS, which employed Fast Point Feature Histograms, selected seed points via octree structures, and performed K-means clustering. Lin et al. [22] reformulated the
task as a subset selection problem while still using FPFH
descriptors. Guinard et al. [12] simplified the process into a
graph cut problem by extracting geometric features before
applying a greedy algorithm. Similarly, Landrieu et al. [19]
partitioned superpoints by solving an energy minimization
problem with graph-based simplicity penalties. However,
handcrafted features have limited representation, and the
non-differentiable superpoint assignments prevent end-toend training.

1. Introduction

Recent point cloud oversegmentation methods generate
superpoints using deep networks. Landrieu et al. [18] first
used deep networks to extract point embeddings instead
of handcrafted features, but their framework is not end-toend. SPNet [15] proposed an end-to-end superpoint network that achieved clustering by iteratively constructing a

Point cloud oversegmentation partitions point clouds into
multiple spatially and semantically homogeneous regions,

25831

