This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tiling artifacts and trade-offs of feature normalization in the segmentation of
large biological images
Elena Buglakova1 , Anwai Archit2 , Edoardo D’Imprima1,4 , Julia Mahamid1 ,
Constantin Pape2,3 , Anna Kreshuk1
1

2
3

European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg
Institute of Computer Science, University of Göttingen

Cluster of Excellence ‘Multiscale Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to Networks of Excitable Cells‘
4

(MBExC), Georg-August-University Göttingen
IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, via Manzoni 56, 20089 Rozzano, Milan, Italy

Abstract
Segmentation of very large images is a common problem
in microscopy, medical imaging or remote sensing. The
problem is usually addressed by sliding window inference,
which can theoretically lead to seamlessly stitched predictions. However, in practice many of the popular pipelines
still suffer from tiling artifacts. We investigate the root cause
of these issues and show that they stem from the normalization layers within the neural networks. We propose indicators to detect normalization issues and further explore
the trade-offs between artifact-free and high-quality predictions, using three diverse microscopy datasets as examples.
Finally, we propose to use BatchRenorm as the most suitable normalization strategy, which effectively removes tiling
artifacts and enhances transfer performance, thereby improving the reusability of trained networks for new datasets.

1. Introduction
Segmentation is an essential ﬁrst step of pipelines in biological image analysis, a diverse domain of computer vision that enables automated quantiﬁcation for various types
of microscopy images. While this domain has beneﬁted
a lot from the developments in natural image analysis, it
also poses unique challenges. Investigation of biological
diversity, discovery of unexpected phenotypes and development of novel imaging protocols leads to high variability of
datasets. This explains the popularity of human-in-the-loop
approaches to segmentation, where a small amount of data
is either annotated from scratch or from the output of pretrained models [1, 22, 26], then a new model is either trained
from scratch or ﬁne-tuned. After that the next rounds of
correction and training happen, until the desired quality is
reached. Being able to quickly train a smaller model for an

13109

unseen image type is crucial in this setting.
Another important feature of biological images, especially for volumetric imaging, is their large size. Electron
microscopy volumes for connectomics [6] or light sheet microscopy volumes [20] can reach the scale of multiple terabytes. It is routine to work with 10-100 GB images of
∼ 10003 pixels, which exceed GPU memory.
As shown in Fig. 1, during training random patches are
sampled from the annotated images and combined into a
batch. During inference/evaluation, the image is split into
a grid of tiles which are predicted independently and then
stitched back to form the full prediction. Here we refer both
to 2D and 3D image patches as tiles. In this setup the size
of the tiles is limited from above by GPU memory and from
below by the receptive ﬁeld of the network [21]. Typical
tile size is around 96x96x96 - 256x256x256 pixels and the
training batch size is 2-3 tiles per batch. During inference it
is not necessary to store gradients, therefore either tile size
or batch size can be larger.
Tile-wise prediction and stitching might look like a
purely technical step, however for microscopy patch sampling and stitching can signiﬁcantly affect prediction quality
and create artifacts. In contrast, big natural image datasets,
such as ImageNet [5], CityScapes [4] and SAM dataset
[14], usually contain relatively small 2D images, making
tiling and stitching unnecessary, as well as allowing for
larger batch size.
It has been shown that seamless stitching with CNNs is
possible if edge effects are taken into account [17]. For
CNNs only a limited area of the input image called the receptive ﬁeld affects the prediction value in a given pixel
[16]. Pixels on the edge of the tile do not get full context for prediction, resulting in a mismatch between neighboring tiles. To deal with this issue the tiles are sampled
with overlap and only the central part of each tile is used

