This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stronger, Steadier & Superior: Geometric Consistency in Depth VFM Forges
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation
Siyu Chen1, 3 Ting Han2 † Changshe Zhang4 Xin Luo1 Meiliu Wu3 Guorong Cai1 Jinhe Su1 †
Jimei University 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 University of Glasgow 4 Xidian University
66.19
65.12
63.54

Ni
t

gh

60.4

Depth

w/ DepthForge

REIN

Ours

Snow
HGFormer
CMFormer

lar
y

33.7 64.3
52.7
68.6
55.9
70.6
57.4
73.5

REIN*
FADA

RobustNet

75.93

pil

g
Fo
.5
79
.2
80
2
81.

66.9

.86
75 3
.0
74 0
.1
71

69.9

.8

Input

59.27

67.6 53.4
77

w/o DepthForge

k

72.0

Input

00
D1

BD

Rain
75.0
72.5

75.4

Ma

1

75.4
DepthForge
(Ours)

(a) Stronger Pre-trained Models

(b) Steadier Visual-Spatial Attention

(c) Superior Generalization Ability

Figure 1. Existing methods fail to fully exploit the potential of VFMs for DGSS when visual cues are limited or absent. To this end,
we introduce a novel and robust fine-tuning strategy DepthForge that leverages depth cues from a depth VFM to optimize visual cues,
and employs spatial consistency to enhance feature discriminability. The proposed DepthForge achieves (a) stronger performance under
extreme conditions, owing to (b) steadier visual-spatial attention, and thus delivers (c) superior generalization ability.

Abstract

DepthForge exhibits outstanding performance under extreme conditions (e.g., night and snow). Code is available
at https://github.com/SY-Ch/DepthForge.

Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) have delivered remarkable performance in Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS). However, recent methods often overlook
the fact that visual cues are susceptible, whereas the underlying geometry remains stable, rendering depth information
more robust. In this paper, we investigate the potential of
integrating depth information with features from VFMs,
to improve the geometric consistency within an image and
boost the generalization performance of VFMs. We propose a novel fine-tuning DGSS framework, named DepthForge, which integrates the visual cues from frozen DINOv2 or EVA02 and depth cues from frozen Depth Anything V2. In each layer of the VFMs, we incorporate depthaware learnable tokens to continuously decouple domaininvariant visual and spatial information, thereby enhancing depth awareness and attention of the VFMs. Finally,
we develop a depth refinement decoder and integrate it into
the model architecture to adaptively refine multi-layer VFM
features and depth-aware learnable tokens. Extensive experiments are conducted based on various DGSS settings
and five different datasets as unseen target domains. The
qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that our
method significantly outperforms alternative approaches
with stronger performance, steadier visual-spatial attention, and superior generalization ability. In particular,

1. Introduction
Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation (DGSS)
aims to improve prediction accuracy across multiple unseen domains without requiring access to their data, thereby
ensuring robust generalization for practical applications
[34, 45, 53]. One common approach involves decomposing the learned features into domain-invariant and domainspecific components [42, 47]. This method aims to achieve
robustness against domain variations by isolating contentrelated factors from those that vary between domains. A
second strategy employs meta-learning techniques [24],
which focus on training models to generalize effectively
across domains by learning more adaptable representations,
often leveraging shared structures across different datasets.
Recently, VFMs have emerged as a promising approach,
primarily owing to their strong generalization capabilities,
which are enabled by pre-trained on large-scale datasets
[15, 25, 36]. Fine-tuning these models has become increasingly popular due to their cost-effectiveness and superior
performance [2, 44]. However, a significant challenge remains: what constitutes robust feature information for domain generalization, and how can such robust informa-

8285

