This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One Look is Enough: Seamless Patchwise Refinement for Zero-Shot Monocular
Depth Estimation on High-Resolution Images
Byeongjun Kwon
KAIST*

Munchurl Kim †
KAIST*

byeongjun.kwon@kaist.ac.kr

mkimee@kaist.ac.kr

https://kaist-viclab.github.io/One-Look-is-Enough_site

Images

PatchFusionP=16
(CVPR’24)

PatchRefinerP=16
(ECCV’24)

PRO (Ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of patch-based depth estimation models (PatchFusion [23], PatchRefiner [24] and PRO (Ours)) for
high-resolution images. PatchRefiner [24] and PRO (Ours) also visualize the residuals to effectively highlight depth discontinuity issues
in the 4th and 6th columns. All models perform depth estimations on 4 × 4 patches of input images. Zoom-in can help distinguish the grid
lines (depth discontinuities) of the 4 × 4 patches. Our proposed PRO achieves smooth boundary transitions without depth discontinuity
artifacts along the grid boundaries.

Abstract

tremendous memory consumption, while downsampling to
the training resolution results in blurred edges in the estimated depth images. Prevailing high-resolution depth estimation methods adopt a patch-based approach, which introduces depth discontinuity issues when reassembling the
estimated depth patches, resulting in test-time inefficiency.
Additionally, to obtain fine-grained depth details, these
methods rely on synthetic datasets due to the real-world
sparse ground truth depth, leading to poor generalizability.
To tackle these limitations, we propose Patch Refine Once
(PRO), an efficient and generalizable tile-based framework.

Zero-shot depth estimation (DE) models exhibit strong generalization performance as they are trained on large-scale
datasets. However, existing models struggle with highresolution images due to the discrepancy in image resolutions of training (with smaller resolutions) and inference (for high resolutions). Processing them at full resolution leads to decreased estimation accuracy on depth with
* Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology.
† Corresponding author.

8077

