This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MM-Spatial: Exploring 3D Spatial Understanding in Multimodal LLMs
Erik Daxberger
Nina Wenzel†
David Griffiths†
Haiming Gang
Justin Lazarow
Gefen Kohavi
Kai Kang
Marcin Eichner
Yinfei Yang
Afshin Dehghan
Peter Grasch
Apple

Figure 1. (Left) We generate the Cubify Anything VQA (CA-VQA) dataset and benchmark, covering various 1) input signals: single
image, metric depth (sensor-based and estimated), multi-frame/-view, and 2) spatial understanding tasks: e.g., relationship prediction,
metric estimation, 3D grounding. (Right) We train MM-Spatial, a generalist multimodal LLM that excels at 3D spatial understanding. It
supports Chain-of-Thought spatial reasoning involving 2D grounding and depth estimation, and can also leverage depth input via tool-use.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding object locations and spatial relationships in
both 2D and 3D space is crucial for interpreting complex
visual scenes. While multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) have achieved notable success for 2D visual tasks
including referring and grounding [122, 127] and spatial relation prediction (e.g., “left” vs. “right”, “above” vs. “below”) [27], they still struggle with 3D object perception
tasks such as estimating 1) relative depth (“in front” vs.
“behind”), 2) object distances or sizes in metric units (“A
is 2.74m away / 1.32m wide.”), and, ultimately, 3) precise
3D bounding boxes. Yet, the ability to reason about objects
in 3D scenes is not only a part of general visual comprehension, but is also foundational in domains like robotics and
AR / VR, e.g., for navigation and manipulation tasks [83].
There have been comparatively few works on 3D object
perception with MLLMs [15, 20, 27, 28, 32, 98]; moreover,
they only consider a subset of tasks, and do not comprehensively assess depth and multi-view inputs. To address these

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) excel at
2D visual understanding but remain limited in their
ability to reason about 3D space. In this work, we
leverage large-scale high-quality 3D scene data with
open-set annotations to introduce 1) a novel supervised
fine-tuning dataset and 2) a new evaluation benchmark,
focused on indoor scenes. Our Cubify Anything VQA
(CA-VQA) data covers diverse spatial tasks including
spatial relationship prediction, metric size and distance
estimation, and 3D grounding. We show that CA-VQA
enables us to train MM-Spatial, a strong generalist MLLM
that also achieves state-of-the-art performance on 3D
spatial understanding benchmarks, including our own.
We show how incorporating metric depth and multi-view
inputs (provided in CA-VQA) can further improve 3D
understanding, and demonstrate that data alone allows
our model to achieve depth perception capabilities comparable to dedicated monocular depth estimation models.

† Equal contribution. E-Mail: edaxberger@<company>.com

https://github.com/apple/ml- cubifyanything

7395

