This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SV4D 2.0: Enhancing Spatio-Temporal Consistency in Multi-View Video Diffusion
for High-Quality 4D Generation
Yiming Xie1,2∗ Vikram Voleti1 Huaizu Jiang2†
1
Stability AI 2 Northeastern University
∗
Equal contribution † Equal advising

Varun Jampani1†

Output: Novel-view Videos

View

Input Video

Chun-Han Yao1∗

Time

Real-world data
Novel-view Video Synthesis

Synthetic data
Generated 4D Assets

Figure 1. SV4D 2.0 generates multiple novel-view videos from an input monocular video. The generated novel-view videos have high
fidelity in terms of detail sharpness and consistency across view and time/frame axes, which can be used to optimize high-quality 4D assets.
We also refer reviewers to the Supplemental Material for the video demo.

Abstract
We present Stable Video 4D 2.0 (SV4D 2.0), a multi-view
video diffusion model for dynamic 3D asset generation. Compared to its predecessor SV4D [69], SV4D 2.0 is more robust
to occlusions and large motion, generalizes better to realworld videos, and produces higher-quality outputs in terms
of detail sharpness and spatio-temporal consistency. We
achieve this by introducing key improvements in multiple aspects: 1) network architecture: eliminating the dependency
of reference multi-views and designing blending mechanism
for 3D and frame attention, 2) data: enhancing quality and
quantity of training data, 3) training strategy: adopting progressive 3D-4D training for better generalization, and 4)
4D optimization: handling 3D inconsistency and large motion via 2-stage refinement and progressive frame sampling.
Extensive experiments demonstrate significant performance
gain by SV4D 2.0 both visually and quantitatively, achiev-

ing better detail (-14% LPIPS) and 4D consistency (-44%
FV4D) in novel-view video synthesis and 4D optimization
(-12% LPIPS and -24% FV4D) compared to SV4D.

1. Introduction
Dynamic 3D generation, also known as 4D generation, aims
to synthesize a moving object/scene in 3D space, capturing
the dynamics of the subject across time. The generated 4D
assets can be used in a wide range of applications such as
video games, movie production, AR/VR experience, etc.
Traditionally, such 4D asset generation requires a tedious
process where 3D artists handcraft 3D geometry, texture, as
well as rigging on the 3D object. With the recent advances
in image [45, 46] and video [3, 4, 14, 60] diffusion models
which show astonishing generation quality in the 2D domain,
there has been a growing interest in extending them to 3D
and 4D to speed up and/or automate this process.
Generating a dynamic 3D object from a single-view video

13248

