This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIComposer: Any Style and Content Image Composition via Feature Integration
Haowen Li∗1,2

Zhenfeng Fan2 Zhang Wen2 Zhengzhou Zhu1 Yunjin Li2
1
Peking University, China
2
Beijing Yuanli Science and Technology Co., Ltd., China

lhwen@alumni.pku.edu.cn, fanzhenfeng@kanyun.com, wenzhangbj@kanyun.com
zhuzz@pku.edu.cn, liyj@kanyun.com

Precise prompt:
“a pencil drawing
of a fox in the
sunset.”

Short prompt:
“a dragon.”

Null prompt: “”

Background image

Background mask

Foreground image

Foreground mask

TF-ICON

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison between our proposed method and a representative state-of-the-art approach TF-ICON [30] for cross-domain image
composition. Both methods deliver good results when the text prompt provides detailed objects and styles. However, our method significantly outperforms TF-ICON in the absence of text prompts describing the style and content. This advancement makes our method highly
practical in scenarios where the style and content are difficult to describe with words.

Abstract
Image composition has advanced significantly with largescale pre-trained T2I diffusion models. Despite progress
in same-domain composition, cross-domain composition
remains under-explored. The main challenges are the
stochastic nature of diffusion models and the style gap between input images, leading to failures and artifacts. Additionally, heavy reliance on text prompts limits practical
applications. This paper presents the first cross-domain image composition method that does not require text prompts,
allowing natural stylization and seamless compositions.
Our method is efficient and robust, preserving the diffusion prior, as it involves minor steps for backward inver-

sion and forward denoising without training the diffuser.
Our method also uses a simple multilayer perceptron network to integrate CLIP features from foreground and background, manipulating diffusion with a local cross-attention
strategy. It effectively preserves foreground content while
enabling stable stylization without a pre-stylization network. Finally, we create a benchmark dataset with diverse contents and styles for fair evaluation, addressing the
lack of testing datasets for cross-domain image composition. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art techniques in
both qualitative and quantitative evaluations, significantly
improving the LPIPS score by 30.5% and the CSD metric by 18.1%. We believe our method will advance future research and applications. Code and benchmark at
https://github.com/sherlhw/AIComposer.

* This work was completed during an internship at Beijing Yuanli Science and Technology Co., Ltd..

16840

