This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Weather Synthesis and Removal with Video Diffusion Models

1

NVIDIA

Chih-Hao Lin1,2 , Zian Wang1,3,4 , Ruofan Liang1,3,4 , Yuxuan Zhang1 ,
Sanja Fidler1,2,3 , Shenlong Wang2 , Zan Gojcic1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 3 University of Toronto 4 Vector Institute
Project Website

Realistic, controllable weather synthesis
Input

Fog

Input / Rain, t=1

Input / Rain, t=2

Effective and general weather removal
Snow

Input / Rain, t=3

Input

Input

Input

Fog

Rain

Snow

Clear

Clear

Clear

Remove fog

Remove rain

Remove snow

Temporally-consistent editing

Figure 1. We introduce W EATHERW EAVER, a generative editing method for synthesizing and removing weather effects. Given an input
video, it creates corresponding videos with diverse weather condition (rain, snow, fog, clouds) and precise control over the intensity (left),
removes weather from real footage (right). The results are photorealistic, temporally consistent, and faithfully preserve the original scene.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Simulating photorealistic weather effects in videos, such
as rain, snow, fog, or clouds, is a challenging yet essential
task in computer vision and graphics. High-quality weather
simulations enable a range of creative applications in film
production, AR/VR, and video games. Moreover, controllable weather simulation is invaluable for training and evaluating perception systems in safety-critical domains such as
autonomous driving and robotics, where robust performance
under diverse weather conditions is crucial.

Generating realistic and controllable weather effects in
videos is valuable for many applications. Physics-based
weather simulation requires precise reconstructions that
are hard to scale to in-the-wild videos, while current video
editing often lacks realism and control. In this work, we introduce W EATHERW EAVER, a video diffusion model that
synthesizes diverse weather effects—including rain, snow,
fog, and clouds—directly into any input video without the
need for 3D modeling. Our model provides precise control
over weather effect intensity and supports blending various
weather types, ensuring both realism and adaptability. To
overcome the scarcity of paired training data, we propose a
novel data strategy combining synthetic videos, generative
image editing, and auto-labeled real-world videos. Extensive evaluations show that our method outperforms stateof-the-art methods in weather simulation and removal, providing high-quality, physically plausible, and scene-identitypreserving results over various real-world videos.

13580

Comprehensive weather simulation must capture both
transient effects—such as falling rain, swirling snow, or
drifting fog—and persistent or accumulative changes, such
as snow buildup on the ground or water puddles after rain.
In modern graphics engines, transient effects are often handled using particle-based simulations [21, 25, 70], while
persistent changes are approximated by modifying scene asset materials [19]. However, these methods rely on detailed,
simulation-ready 3D models, limiting their applicability to
synthetic environments. Recent work has attempted to adapt

