This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIEB: Massive Image Embedding Benchmark
Chenghao Xiao1,† Isaac Chung2 Imene Kerboua3,4 Jamie Stirling1
Xin Zhang5 Márton Kardos6 Roman Solomatin7
Noura Al Moubayed1 Kenneth Enevoldsen6 Niklas Muennighoff 8,9
1

Durham University, 2 Zendesk, 3 Esker, 4 INSA Lyon, LIRIS,
5
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 6 Aarhus University,
7
ITMO University, 8 Contextual AI, 9 Stanford University
†

Correspondence: chenghao.xiao@durham.ac.uk

Abstract

tocols reveal the lack of standardized criteria for assessing
image representations.

Image representations are often evaluated through disjointed, task-specific protocols, leading to a fragmented understanding of model capabilities. For instance, it is unclear whether an image embedding model adept at clustering images is equally good at retrieving relevant images
given a piece of text. We introduce the Massive Image Embedding Benchmark (MIEB) to evaluate the performance of
image and image-text embedding models across the broadest spectrum to date. MIEB spans 38 languages across 130
individual tasks, which we group into 8 high-level categories. We benchmark 50 models across our benchmark,
finding that no single method dominates across all task
categories. We reveal hidden capabilities in advanced vision models such as their accurate visual representation of
texts, and their yet limited capabilities in interleaved encodings and matching images and texts in the presence of
confounders. We also show that the performance of vision
encoders on MIEB correlates highly with their performance
when used in multimodal large language models. Our code,
dataset, and leaderboard are publicly available at https:
//github.com/embeddings- benchmark/mteb.

We introduce the Massive Image Embedding Benchmark (MIEB) to provide a unified comprehensive evaluation protocol to spur the field’s advancement toward universal image-text embedding models. We build on the standard
for the evaluation of text embeddings, MTEB [41], extending its codebase and leaderboard for image and image-text
embedding models. MIEB spans 130 tasks grouped into
8 task categories: Aligning with MTEB, we integrate Clustering, Classification, and Retrieval. Notably, we consider
fine-grained aspects, such as interleaved retrieval, multilingual retrieval, instruction-aware retrieval. We additionally
include Compositionality Evaluation and Vision Centric
Question Answering, respectively assessing nuanced information encoded in embeddings and their capabilities in
solving vision-centric QA tasks. We focus on tasks that require strong visual understanding of texts, for which we include Visual STS, the visual counterpart of semantic textual
similarity in NLP, and Document Understanding, assessing the vision-only understanding of high-resolution documents with dense texts and complex layout, enabling evaluation that pushes forward the development of natural interleaved embeddings.

1. Introduction

Our analysis across task categories shows that the performance of current image embedding models is fragmented,
with no method dominating all task categories. We further study the predictability of the performance of visual
encoders as part of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs), via a large-scale correlation study. We find that
the performance of vision encoders on MIEB strongly correlates with the performance of MLLMs that use the same
vision encoder. For instance, the performance on our Visual
STS tasks has over 99% correlation with the performance of

Image and text embeddings power a wide range of use
cases, from search engines to recommendation systems [19,
23, 67]. However, evaluation protocols for image and multimodal embedding models vary widely, ranging from imagetext retrieval, zero-shot classification [46, 68], linear probing [45, 46], fine-tuning the models [8, 21], and using
MLLM performance as proxies [54]. These divergent pro-

22187

