This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training-Free Text-Guided Image Editing with Visual Autoregressive Model
Yufei Wang1,2 , Lanqing Guo3∗ , Zhihao Li2 , Jiaxing Huang2 , Pichao Wang, Bihan Wen2 , Jian Wang1∗
1

Snap Research

2

Nanyang Technological University

3

UT Austin

https://github.com/wyf0912/AREdit

（a）

Original

“with laptop”

“laptop -> apple” （b） Original

（c）

Original

“with glasses”

“silver sculpture” （d） Original

（e）

Original

“horse” -> “camel”

“horse” -> “zebra” （f）

Original

“face-to-face”

“with hats”

“ground” -> “cloud” “sitting” -> “standing”

“3D Disney cartoon style” + “laughing”

Figure 1. AREdit for Text-Guided Image Editing. It can effectively handle a variety of editing tasks for both artificial and natural
images, e.g., object removal (as in examples a), object addition (b, c), attribute modification (b, d), and style alteration (c, f). Our method
excels at preserving unrelated areas of the image while offering a flexible trade-off with generative capacity. Remarkably fast, our approach
processes a 1080p input image in 2.5 seconds for the first run and ∼1.2 second for subsequent runs on an A100 GPU.
1

Abstract

guided image editing is an essential task that enables users
to modify images through natural language descriptions.
Recent advances in diffusion models and rectified flows
have significantly improved editing quality, primarily
relying on inversion techniques to extract structured noise
from input images. However, inaccuracies in inversion
can propagate errors, leading to unintended modifications
and compromising fidelity. Moreover, even with perfect
inversion, the entanglement between textual prompts and
image features often results in global changes when only
1 The authors marked with an asterisk (*) are co-corresponding authors.

Textlocal edits are intended. To address these challenges,
we propose a noel text-guided image editing framework
based on VAR (Visual AutoRegressive modeling), which
eliminates the need for explicit inversion while ensuring
precise and controlled modifications. Our method introduces a caching mechanism that stores token indices and
probability distributions from the original image, capturing
the relationship between the source prompt and the image.
Using this cache, we design an adaptive fine-grained
masking strategy that dynamically identifies and constrains
modifications to relevant regions, preventing unintended
changes. A token re-assembling approach further refines
the editing process, enhancing diversity, fidelity and
control. Our framework operates in a training-free manner

17577

