This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DuCos: Duality Constrained Depth Super-Resolution via Foundation Model
Zhiqiang Yan1 Zhengxue Wang2 Haoye Dong1 Jun Li2 Jian Yang2 Gim Hee Lee1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{yanzq, gimhee.lee}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Foundation
Model

We introduce DuCos, a novel depth super-resolution framework grounded in Lagrangian duality theory, offering a flexible integration of multiple constraints and reconstruction
objectives to enhance accuracy and robustness. Our DuCos
is the first to significantly improve generalization across diverse scenarios with foundation models as prompts. The
prompt design consists of two key components: Correlative
Fusion (CF) and Gradient Regulation (GR). CF facilitates
precise geometric alignment and effective fusion between
prompt and depth features, while GR refines depth predictions by enforcing consistency with sharp-edged depth maps
derived from foundation models. Crucially, these prompts
are seamlessly embedded into the Lagrangian constraint
term, forming a synergistic and principled framework. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DuCos outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods, achieving superior accuracy, robustness, and generalization. The code is available
at https://github.com/yanzq95/DuCos.

Prompt
Learning

ℒ𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔

ℒ𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐

Gradient
Regulation

Correlative
Fusion

LR
Depth Net

ℒ𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟

HR

min ℒ𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 , 𝑠𝑠. 𝑡𝑡. ℒ𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 < 𝜖𝜖1 , ℒ𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔 < 𝜖𝜖2 ⇒ ℒ𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 = ℒ𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 + 𝜆𝜆ℒ𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 + 𝜇𝜇ℒ𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔
𝜔𝜔

Figure 1. Overview of our DuCos: A highly synergistic system
that integrates prompt learning with a Lagrangian duality (LD)
based optimization algorithm. It combines the reconstruction loss
with geometric consistency and edge preservation constraints to
capture both global content and fine-grained local details, and uses
foundation models to enhance generalization.

error minimization that relies heavily on pixel-level differences [36, 41, 57]. As a result, it often fails to capture finegrained local geometric details, leading to blurred or oversmoothed depth recovery [12, 26, 45]. Moreover, the predictions become increasingly inaccurate and unreliable with
disturbances such as noise in the input data. In addition, existing DSR solutions often focus on specialized network designs tailored to specific training data distributions. Despite
their effectiveness in certain scenarios, these methods may
face challenges in generalization across diverse resolutions
and conditions.
We propose DuCos, a novel paradigm of duality
constrained DSR via foundation model to address the
above-mentioned issues. As illustrated in Fig. 1, DuCos
establishes a theoretical framework for accurate and robust
DSR while integrating prompt learning to enhance generalization. Specifically, our DuCos first reformulates DSR
as a constrained optimization problem with the Lagrangian
duality (LD) theory [1, 25]. The total LD loss comprises
a reconstruction term and a constraint term. The reconstruction term minimizes global errors, while the constraint

1. Introduction
Depth super-resolution (DSR) [60] is a fundamental task in
computer vision that aims to restore high-resolution (HR)
depth data from low-resolution (LR) depth inputs. It plays
a crucial role in various downstream applications such as
3D reconstruction [3, 5, 18, 45, 46, 62, 63], augmented reality [35, 39, 47, 55], and robotic sensing [24, 36, 50, 57].
These applications are largely reliant on clear and HR depth
predictions. However, depth data typically has much lower
resolution than color images 1 due to the differing advancements of color cameras and depth sensors. It is therefore essential to enhance the resolution of low-quality depth data.
Numerous advanced approaches have been developed,
often using a reconstruction loss to minimize the discrepancy between depth predictions and ground truth annotations. However, this loss focuses predominantly on global
1 For example, the RGB-D system of Huawei P30 Pro [5, 48, 49] captures 3648 × 2736 color images while the depth maps are only 240 × 180.

8361

