This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianUpdate: Continual 3D Gaussian Splatting Update
for Changing Environments
Lin Zeng*
Boming Zhao*
Jiarui Hu
Xujie Shen
Ziqiang Dang
Hujun Bao
Zhaopeng Cui†
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
Generate
Render

Replay Data

Existing Gaussian Fields

Updated Gaussian Fields

Current Data

Rendered Images

Gemetric Layout Changes

Update

Figure 1. GaussianUpdate. We present GaussianUpdate, a novel framework that can update the existing Gaussian fields by generatively
replaying past data and currently captured data. The updated Gaussian fields can synthesize novel views across different times, capturing
geometric layout changes between consecutive timestamps.

1. Introduction

Abstract

High-quality scene reconstruction and realistic image rendering are crucial for many applications, such as AR/VR,
3D gaming, and robotics. In recent years, neural scene
representations, represented by Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [22], have demonstrated outstanding performance
for novel view synthesis. While these rendering results are
impressive, the same scene often undergoes many changes
over time. For example, the same room will have different
objects, different furniture placements, and different lighting conditions at different times. Therefore, updating the
original neural model is crucial to render images that align
with the current appearance of the scene. Additionally,
the knowledge from previous moments is valuable, and we
hope to retain information from various times after updating
the original 3D model. This would enable high-quality images of the same scene to be rendered at different moments
when needed.
A simple approach is to retrain a neural model with the
images from the current moment. However, preserving
neural models from each moment would increasingly consume storage space. Another strategy is to directly update
the neural model with data from the current time, but this
may lead to catastrophic forgetting [21], causing the neural
model to lose appearance and geometric information from

Novel view synthesis with neural models has advanced
rapidly in recent years, yet adapting these models to scene
changes remains an open problem. Existing methods are
either labor-intensive, requiring extensive model retraining,
or fail to capture detailed types of changes over time. In
this paper, we present GaussianUpdate, a novel approach
that combines 3D Gaussian representation with continual
learning to address these challenges. Our method effectively updates the Gaussian radiance fields with current
data while preserving information from past scenes. Unlike
existing methods, GaussianUpdate explicitly models different types of changes through a novel multi-stage update
strategy. Additionally, we introduce a visibility-aware continual learning approach with generative replay, enabling
self-aware updating without the need to store images. The
experiments on the benchmark dataset demonstrate our
method achieves superior and real-time rendering with
the capability of visualizing changes over different times.
Please refer to our project webpage for more informations:
https://zju3dv.github.io/GaussianUpdate.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

25800

