This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedAGC: Federated Continual Learning with Asymmetric Gradient Correction
Chengchao Zhang1 , Fanhua Shang1†, Hongyin Liu2†, Liang Wan1,2 , Wei Feng1 ,
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
Medical College, Tianjin University, China
{chengchaozhang, fhshang, hyliu2009, lwan, wfeng}@tju.edu.cn

Actual model training
Desired model training

Low loss region for previous task
Low loss region for current task
Low loss region for both

Abstract

Task 𝑡-1

Federated Continual Learning (FCL) has emerged as a
prominent distributed learning paradigm and aims at addressing model learning challenges in both federated and
continual learning settings. Efficient personalization in
FCL remains a major challenge, as it must handle not only
conflicts between old and new knowledge within parallel
task streams but also heterogeneous knowledge conflicts
from different clients. Recent approaches attempt to mitigate these issues through gradient correction. However,
they often overlook the combined impact of gradient magnitude and direction, leading to unsatisfactory gradient solutions. To address these issues, we propose a novel federated
continual learning method (called FedAGC) with asymmetric gradient correction, which performs memory rehearsal
using representative samples selected via a centroid-based
approach from historical tasks. By formulating the problem as a multi-objective optimization problem, FedAGC derives more effective gradients while incorporating grouplevel personalization to facilitate useful knowledge integration and irrelevant knowledge isolation, effectively mitigating both temporal and spatial catastrophic forgetting. Extensive experiments confirm the effectiveness of FedAGC.

𝑾𝒕−𝟏

Task 𝑡

Accuracy

𝑾∗

𝑾𝒕

Next task start

Round

(a) Temporal catastrophic forgetting
Local update of client 1
Local update of client 𝑁
Aggregation of server
Global optimum
Server global model
𝑾𝟎
Client local model
Initial model
Parameter divergence
Client drift

𝑾𝟏𝟏

𝑾𝟏𝟐

𝑾𝟏𝒓

𝑾𝟏𝟑

…
𝑾𝑵
𝟏

𝑾𝑵
𝟐

𝑾𝑵
𝟑

𝑾𝑵
𝒓

(b) Spatial catastrophic forgetting

Figure 1. Spatial-Temporal Catastrophic Forgetting. (a) Direct
access to new tasks leads to a significant performance decline on
old tasks. (b) Non-IID data exacerbates the weight disparity.

unpredictable future changes. As shown in Fig. 1a, severe
temporal catastrophic forgetting (TemporalCF) [38, 45] occurs when the local model on each client learns a newly
introduced task, leading to performance degradation on previously learned tasks as new knowledge is acquired.
Improving the generalizability of FL in multi-task evolving scenarios has emerged as a critical and challenging research topic. Recently, Continual Learning (CL) [17] has
made significant advances in addressing TemporalCF, enabling effective mitigation of this problem. Based on such
characteristics, the concept of Federated Continual Learning (FCL) [6, 46, 47] came into being, which integrates CL
methods into the FL framework. In the FCL setting, FL can
be regarded as a distributed instance of conventional CL,
while CL methods assist in addressing FL challenges.
FCL breaks the static limitation of traditional FL, where
each client is confined to learning a single task sequence.
However, integrating CL into the FL framework poses
substantial challenges. Besides TemporalCF, FCL also

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [21, 22, 29], as a novel distributed
machine learning paradigm, aims to train a global model by
leveraging independent and diverse data across clients in a
privacy-preserving and collaborative manner. FL has been
widely applied in various domains, such as medical image
analysis [23] and object detection [24]. It has been proven
to effectively address the issue of data silos [33] without
compromising client privacy. Most existing FL methods are
limited to single-task learning, assuming that client data remains static over time. However, in real-world scenarios,
data is continuously evolving, forming sequential tasks with
† Corresponding author.

3841

