This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoftUp: Learning a Coordinate-Based Feature Upsampler for
Vision Foundation Models
Haiwen Huang1,2
Anpei Chen1,2
Volodymyr Havrylov1
1,2
Andreas Geiger
Dan Zhang3
1
2
3
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract

Semantic Seg.
61.11

Vision foundation models (VFMs) such as DINOv2 and
CLIP have achieved impressive results on various downstream tasks, but their limited feature resolution hampers
performance in applications requiring pixel-level understanding. Feature upsampling offers a promising direction
to address this challenge. In this work, we identify two critical factors for enhancing feature upsampling: the upsampler architecture and the training objective. For the upsampler architecture, we introduce a coordinate-based crossattention transformer that integrates the high-resolution images with coordinates and low-resolution VFM features to
generate sharp, high-quality features. For the training objective, we propose constructing high-resolution pseudogroundtruth features by leveraging class-agnostic masks
and self-distillation. Our approach effectively captures
fine-grained details and adapts flexibly to various input
and feature resolutions. Through experiments, we demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms existing
feature upsampling techniques across various downstream
tasks. Our code is released at https://github.com/
andrehuang/loftup.

Depth Estimation
88.71
91.35

53.76

LoftUp (ours)
Max(FeatUp, LiFT)
Backbone only
Interactive Seg.
78.49

65.89

69.83
72.61
Normal Estimation

44.30

26.61
27.82
Open-Voc Seg.

60.25
Video Object Seg. (Object Tracking)
Figure 1. LoftUp improves significantly across various tasks
over the VFM backbone (DINOv2-S [37]) and current SoTA
feature upsampling performance (FeatUp [12] and LiFT [52]).
See experiment details in Sec. 5.

training or fine-tuning VFMs on high-resolution images demands substantial computational resources and meticulous
tuning [37, 43, 45, 55]. An alternative strategy is to train
task-specific decoders that leverage multi-layer intermediate features to upsample VFM outputs [3, 16, 24, 27, 62].
Yet, this approach often comes with significant training
costs and necessitates retraining the decoder for each new
application. In addition, many downstream tasks lack sufficient data needed to fine-tune a high-quality decoder.
More recently, FeatUp [12] and LiFT [52] have independently introduced task-agnostic feature upsamplers
trained with general reconstruction losses, demonstrating
that such methods can substantially enhance VFM performance across a variety of tasks. By upsampling VFM features and pairing them with a lightweight task-specific decoder, these approaches provide a promising alternative that
avoids heavy, task-specific training while achieving a more
generalizable solution. Nonetheless, as shown in Fig. 1, current feature upsamplers still fall short of reaching optimal
performance.

1. Introduction
High-quality pretrained representations from Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) have become standard for a wide
range of computer vision tasks [10, 16, 21, 37, 41, 43, 45,
54, 56, 62, 63]. However, because of the patrification or
aggressive pooling operations in VFMs, the output features
are typically 16 or even more times smaller in spatial resolution than the input images, limiting their utility for tasks
that require fine-grained, pixel-level understanding.
To address the challenge of limited feature resolution in
VFMs, one straightforward approach is to use larger image
inputs to obtain higher-resolution features. However, processing high-resolution inputs incurs a quadratic increase
in computational cost and can introduce severe artifacts if
the VFMs are not trained for such resolutions. Moreover,

9913

