This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Princeton365: A Diverse Dataset with Accurate Camera Pose
Karhan Kayan∗ , Stamatis Alexandropoulos∗ , Rishabh Jain, Yiming Zuo, Erich Liang, Jia Deng
Princeton University
{karhan,sa6924,jainr,zuoym,el1685,jiadeng}@princeton.edu

Abstract

tion Capture (MoCap) system, but it is restricted to only
two indoor environments. On the other hand, the Michigan NCLT dataset [9] covers 147.4 km of both indoor and
outdoor scenes. However, it has inaccurate ground truth trajectories with a 10 cm error margin.

We introduce Princeton365, a large-scale diverse dataset
of 365 videos with accurate camera pose. Our dataset
bridges the gap between accuracy and data diversity in current SLAM benchmarks by introducing a novel ground truth
collection framework that leverages calibration boards and
a 360◦ camera. We collect indoor, outdoor, and object scanning videos with synchronized monocular and stereo RGB
video outputs as well as IMU. We further propose a new
scene scale-aware evaluation metric for SLAM based on
the the optical flow induced by the camera pose estimation
error. In contrast to the current metrics, our new metric
allows for comparison between the performance of SLAM
methods across scenes as opposed to existing metrics such
as Average Trajectory Error (ATE), allowing researchers to
analyze the failure modes of their methods. We also propose a challenging Novel View Synthesis benchmark that
covers cases not covered by current NVS benchmarks, such
as fully non-Lambertian scenes with 360◦ camera trajectories. Please visit princeton365.cs.princeton.edu for the
dataset, code, videos, and submission.

The reason why current SLAM benchmarks have to
make an accuracy-diversity tradeoff is that accurate ground
truth collection methods either do not scale or are restricted
to particular scenes. For instance, MoCap is a common
approach that provides mm camera pose accuracy, but requires a cumbersome setup every time the environment is
changed, preventing data collection from scaling. Furthermore, it generally does not work outdoors [27], preventing data collection in outdoor environments. While RTKcorrected GPS provides centimeter level positional accuracy outdoors, it does not work indoors or near buildings
[9, 27]. Structure-from-Motion (SfM) or IMU based ground
truth collection methods are scalable because they do not require a special setup. However, they are inaccurate and can
bias the evaluation of SLAM methods [5].
Additionally, large-scale benchmarks have restricted
camera motion. For instance, KITTI [13], Malaga Urban
[4], and Michigan NCLT [8] cover large distances with long
recordings. However, the rotation of their camera is restricted to one axis since the camera is mounted on cars or
wheeled robots. This means that SLAM methods are evaluated on 4-DoF camera trajectories in such benchmarks instead of a full 6-DoF movement. Handheld datasets such
as Newer College Dataset [27], TUM RGB-D [35], and
TUM VI [32] do not suffer from this problem. However,
their ground-truth collection methods are not scalable and
restricted to small environments.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is the
task of estimating a camera’s 6-DoF trajectory and creating a 3D reconstruction of the scene using RGB video input. The 3D reconstruction of the scene can be in different formats such as point clouds [20, 24, 37], Neural Radiance Fields [43–45], or meshes [28]. In contrast, the camera trajectory output is typically a sequence of SE(3) poses
{Ti }Ti=1 . As a result, SLAM algorithms are generally evaluated on how well they reconstruct the camera trajectory
compared to a ground-truth camera trajectory.
The issue with current SLAM benchmarks is that their
ground-truth camera trajectories are either inaccurate or not
diverse. For instance, the TUM RGB-D [35] benchmark
has millimeter accuracy ground-truth collected with a Mo-

We propose a novel ground-truth collection method that
allows us to collect a large-scale dataset with accurate camera pose and full 6-DoF camera motion. Our method requires about five minutes to set up data collection in a
completely new environment. We simply place calibration boards with uniquely identifiable markers and capture
a video with a 360◦ camera where we render two views:
the user-view, which records the trajectory, and the groundtruth view, which sees the calibration boards. The user-view

*These authors contributed equally (random order).

7645

