This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiverSeg: Scalable Interactive Segmentation of Biomedical Imaging Datasets
with In-Context Guidance
Hallee E. Wong
MIT CSAIL & MGH

Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz
Databricks

John Guttag
MIT CSAIL

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT CSAIL & MGH,HMS

hallee@mit.edu

josejg@mit.edu

guttag@mit.edu

adalca@mit.edu

Image

Seg.

MultiverSeg

User
Interactions
(optional)

Previous
Prediction
(optional)

Interactive Inputs

Context Set (optional)

In-Context Inputs

Figure 1. MultiverSeg enables users to rapidly segment new datasets. The MultiverSeg network takes as input an image to segment,
user interactions, and a context set of previously segmented image-segmentation pairs (left). As the user completes more segmentations,
those images and segmentations become additional inputs to the model, populating the context set. As the context set of labeled images
grows, the number of interactions required to achieve an accurate segmentation decreases (right).

Abstract
Medical researchers and clinicians often need to perform
novel segmentation tasks on a set of related images. Existing methods for segmenting a new dataset are either interactive, requiring substantial human effort for each image,
or require an existing set of previously labeled images.
We introduce a system, MultiverSeg, that enables practitioners to rapidly segment an entire new dataset without
requiring access to any existing labeled data from that task
or domain. Along with the image to segment, the model
takes user interactions such as clicks, bounding boxes or
scribbles as input, and predicts a segmentation. As the user
segments more images, those images and segmentations become additional inputs to the model, providing context. As
the context set of labeled images grows, the number of interactions required to segment each new image decreases.
We demonstrate that MultiverSeg enables users to interactively segment new datasets efficiently, by amortizing the number of interactions per image to achieve an
accurate segmentation. Compared to using a state-ofthe-art interactive segmentation method, MultiverSeg reduced the total number of clicks by 36% and scribble

steps by 25% to achieve 90% Dice on sets of images
from unseen tasks. We release code and model weights at
https://multiverseg.csail.mit.edu.

1. Introduction

20966

Segmentation is an important step in biomedical image
analysis pipelines. Biomedical and clinical researchers often acquire novel images types or identify new regions of
interest, and need to perform new segmentation tasks. Typically, scientists want to segment the same region of interest
in many similar images from a new dataset.
Manually segmenting images is labor-intensive and requires domain expertise. Interactive segmentation systems,
in which a user provides a few clicks or scribbles on an image to produce a predicted segmentation, help to speed up
the annotation of individual images. But with existing interactive segmentation systems, the user must independently
repeat the same process for each image [19, 61, 85, 88, 130,
137]. Ideally, a system should be able to learn from experience, becoming more accurate as the user completes more
segmentations from the same task.
We propose MultiverSeg, a new interactive system that,

