This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OccluGaussian: Occlusion-Aware Gaussian Splatting
for Large Scene Reconstruction and Rendering
Shiyong Liu1∗ Xiao Tang1∗ Zhihao Li1∗ Yingfan He2
Chongjie Ye Jianzhuang Liu3 Binxiao Huang4 Shunbo Zhou5 Xiaofei Wu1†
1
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology 4 The University of Hong Kong
5
Huawei Embodied Intelligence Lab
2

Wall

(b) Occlusion-agnostic division

(a) A large scene with
frequent occlusions

(c) Occlusion-aware division

LPIPS↓/ PSNR↑/FPS↑ 0.17/24.45/191.30
Ground Truth

VastGaussian

0.07/28.45/261.78
Our OccluGaussian

Figure 1. (a) In large scene reconstruction from ground-level captures, there are frequent occlusions such as walls and buildings. (b)
Previous scene division methods are occlusion-agnostic, so they produce regions with severe internal occlusions, leading to poor reconstruction results. (c) We propose an occlusion-aware division method to generate regions that better align with the scene layout (see the two
regions highlighted in yellow in (b) and (c)), thus improving the reconstruction quality significantly. Besides, we introduce a region-based
rendering technique to accelerate the rendering speed of 3D Gaussian splatting in a large scene with massive primitives.

Abstract
In large-scale scene reconstruction using 3D Gaussian
splatting, it is common to partition the scene into multiple smaller regions and reconstruct them individually.
However, existing division methods are occlusion-agnostic,
meaning that each region may contain areas with severe
occlusions. As a result, the cameras within those regions
are less correlated, leading to a low average contribution
to the overall reconstruction. In this paper, we propose an
occlusion-aware scene division strategy that clusters training cameras based on their positions and co-visibilities to

acquire multiple regions. Cameras in such regions exhibit
stronger correlations and a higher average contribution,
facilitating high-quality scene reconstruction. We further
propose a region-based rendering technique to accelerate
large scene rendering, which culls Gaussians invisible to
the region where the viewpoint is located. Such a technique significantly speeds up the rendering without compromising quality. Extensive experiments on multiple large
scenes show that our method achieves superior reconstruction results with faster rendering speed compared to existing state-of-the-art approaches. Project page: https:
//occlugaussian.github.io.

∗

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding author

26643

