This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I2VControl: Disentangled and Unified Video Motion Synthesis Control
Wanquan Feng1† Tianhao Qi1,2 Jiawei Liu1 Mingzhen Sun1,3 Pengqi Tu1
Tianxiang Ma1 Fei Dai1 Songtao Zhao1 Siyu Zhou1 Qian He1
1

Intelligent Creation Team, ByteDance
3

2

University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)

ra
me t
Ca men
e
ov
M

ion
ot f
M s hf
u
Br
Motion Strength = 1000

ct
je g
Ob ggin
a
Dr

I2VControl

ed
ifi ol Motion Strength
Un ntr = 300
Co

Input Images & Control Signals

Generated Video Frames with I2VControl Framework

Figure 1. We propose an all-in-one disentangled and unified framework for image-to-video motion synthesis control, named
I2VControl. In the illustration, we show several scenarios of controls, including camera movement (camera dollies in and gets closer
to the sculpture), motion brush (smoke flows in the wind, with a given motion strength value), object movement (the astronaut walks forward), and the combination of all above control types (camera tilts down; drag the apple; brush the squirrel). Users can select the control
modes according to their requirements, where the control modes can be combined without conflict.

Abstract
Motion controllability is crucial in video synthesis. However, most previous methods are limited to single control
types, and combining them often results in logical conflicts. In this paper, we propose a disentangled and unified framework, namely I2VControl, to overcome the logical conflicts. We rethink camera control, object dragging,
and motion brush, reformulating all tasks into a consistent
representation based on point trajectories, each managed
by a dedicated formulation. Accordingly, we propose a
spatial partitioning strategy, where each unit is assigned
to a concomitant control category, enabling diverse control types to be dynamically orchestrated within a single
synthesis pipeline without conflicts. Furthermore, we design an adapter structure that functions as a plug-in for

14051

pre-trained models and is agnostic to specific model architectures. We conduct extensive experiments, achieving
excellent performance on various control tasks, and our
method further facilitates user-driven creative combinations, enhancing innovation and creativity. Project page:
https://wanquanf.github.io/I2VControl.

1. Introduction
“The whole is greater than the sum of its parts.”
– Aristotle, Metaphysics
Motion controllability plays a pivotal role in video synthesis technology [1, 5, 22, 32], particularly when video
creators require meticulously designed spatiotemporal dynamics. To align generated video motion with human in-

