This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Augmented Mass-Spring Model for Real-Time Dense Hair Simulation
J. Alejandro Amador H.
KAUST
jorge.amadorherrera@kaust.edu.sa
Chengan He
Yale University
chengan.he@yale.edu

Yi Zhou

Xin Sun Zhixin Shu
Adobe Research
{yizho, xinsun, zshu}@adobe.com
Sören Pirk
Kiel University
sp@informatik.uni-kiel.de

Dominik L. Michels
KAUST
dominik.michels@kaust.edu.sa

Figure 1. Our AMS model for dense hair simulation is capable of handling complex settings with a large number of strands, efficiently
simulating scenarios such as hair under wind (left, 14, 718 strands at 67 FPS), hair-face contact (middle, 7, 528 strands at 156 FPS), and
hair interacting with complex objects (right, 10, 298 strands at 114 FPS), all in real time.

Abstract
We propose a novel Augmented Mass-Spring (AMS) model
for real-time simulation of dense hair at the strand level.
Our approach considers the traditional edge, bending, and
torsional degrees of freedom in mass-spring systems, but
incorporates an additional one-way biphasic coupling with
a ghost rest-shape configuration. Through multiple evaluation experiments with varied dynamical settings, we show
that AMS improves the stability of the simulation in comparison to mass-spring discretizations, preserves global features, and enables the simulation of non-Hookean effects.
Using a heptadiagonal decomposition of the resulting matrix, our approach provides the efficiency advantages of

11339

mass-spring systems over more complex constitutive hair
models, while enabling a more robust simulation of multiple strand configurations. Finally, our results demonstrate
that our framework enables the generation, complex interactivity, and editing of simulation-ready dense hair assets
in real time.

1. Introduction
Hair dynamics play a crucial role in enhancing the visual
realism of digital characters. However, simulating hair remains one of the most challenging and resource-intensive
tasks, due to its thin, flexible structure, the interactions be-

