This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Reinforcing Prototype Evolution with Dual-Knowledge Cooperation for
Semi-Supervised Lifelong Person Re-Identification
Kunlun Xu1
1

Fan Zhuo1

Xu Zou3

Jiahuan Zhou1 *

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2

3

Jiangmeng Li2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China

xkl@stu.pku.edu.cn

fanzhuo@stu.xidian.edu.cn

jiangmeng2019@iscas.ac.cn

zoux@hust.edu.cn

jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Current lifelong person re-identification (LReID) methods
predominantly rely on fully labeled data streams. However, in real-world scenarios where annotation resources
are limited, a vast amount of unlabeled data coexists with
scarce labeled samples, leading to the Semi-Supervised
LReID (Semi-LReID) problem where LReID methods suffer
severe performance degradation. Existing LReID methods,
even when combined with semi-supervised strategies, suffer from limited long-term adaptation performance due to
struggling with the noisy knowledge occurring during unlabeled data utilization. In this paper, we pioneer the investigation of Semi-LReID, introducing a novel Self-Reinforcing
PRototype Evolution with Dual-Knowledge Cooperation
framework (SPRED). Our key innovation lies in establishing a self-reinforcing cycle between dynamic prototypeguided pseudo-label generation and new-old knowledge
collaborative purification to enhance the utilization of unlabeled data. Specifically, learnable identity prototypes are
introduced to dynamically capture the identity distributions
and generate high-quality pseudo-labels. Then, the dualknowledge cooperation scheme integrates current model
specialization and historical model generalization, refining
noisy pseudo-labels. Through this cyclic design, reliable
pseudo-labels are progressively mined to improve currentstage learning and ensure positive knowledge propagation
over long-term learning. Experiments on the established
Semi-LReID benchmarks show that our SPRED achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Our source code is available
at https://github.com/zhoujiahuan1991/ICCV2025-SPRED

Figure 1. (a) In Semi-LReID, the training data is continuously
obtained with partial labeling. (b) As the labeling rate decreases,
the performance of existing LReID methods suffers severe degradation. (c) Our SPRED improves the knowledge acquisition of
unlabeled data significantly.

Since real-world applications often involve dynamic environments where new data continuously arrives [13, 50, 56,
57, 64], lifelong person re-identification (LReID) [8, 52,
53] has emerged as a research frontier, where a significant
challenge is the issue of catastrophic forgetting [9, 54]. Traditional LReID methods typically assume that all training
samples are labeled [33, 52, 59], an assumption that is often impractical due to the high labor costs of ReID annotation [12, 38, 61]. To address this limitation, we explore a
more realistic setting, semi-supervised lifelong person reidentification (Semi-LReID), where only a subset of the
data stream is labeled, as depicted in Fig. 1 (a). In such
a scenario, the scarcity of labeled samples leads to significant performance degradation in existing LReID methods,
as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Consequently, the core challenge in

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) [7, 15, 16, 69] has been extensively studied in stationary scenarios [12, 19, 25, 60].
* Corresponding author

3564

