This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FoundIR: Unleashing Million-scale Training Data to Advance Foundation
Models for Image Restoration

1

Hao Li1∗ Xiang Chen1∗ Jiangxin Dong1 Jinhui Tang2 Jinshan Pan1†
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Nanjing Forestry University
https://www.foundir.net

(a) Scaling up real-world training data

(b) Scaling up model generalization

Figure 1. The potential of large-scale training data for universal image restoration. (a) Analysis of universal image restoration performance
in real-world scenarios as training data vary. As the size of real-world training data increases, the image restoration model (the generalist
model of FoundIR) can achieve significant performance improvement. (b) Our proposed FoundIR, trained on our million-scale dataset,
achieves state-of-the-art performance across a broad range of restoration tasks compared to existing universal image restoration methods.

Abstract
Despite the significant progress made by all-in-one models in universal image restoration, existing methods suffer from a generalization bottleneck in real-world scenarios, as they are mostly trained on small-scale synthetic
datasets with limited degradations. Therefore, large-scale
high-quality real-world training data is urgently needed
to facilitate the emergence of foundation models for image restoration. To advance this field, we spare no effort
in contributing a million-scale dataset with two notable
advantages over existing training data: larger-scale realworld samples and higher-diversity data types. By adjusting internal camera settings and external imaging conditions, we can capture aligned image pairs using our welldesigned data acquisition system over multiple rounds and
our data alignment criterion. Moreover, we propose a robust model, FoundIR, to better address a broader range of
restoration tasks in real-world scenarios, taking a further
step toward foundation models. Specifically, we first utilize
∗ Co-first authorship
† Corresponding author

a diffusion-based generalist model to remove degradations
by learning the degradation-agnostic common representations from diverse inputs, where an incremental learning
strategy is adopted to better guide model training. To refine
the model’s restoration capability in complex scenarios, we
introduce degradation-aware specialist models for achieving final high-quality results. Extensive experiments show
the value of our dataset and the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
The foundation model [17] is an emerging paradigm that denotes a model trained on broad data that is capable of being
adapted to a wide range of tasks. Recently, NLP and highlevel CV foundation models, such as GPT-4 [2], CLIP [45],
SAM [22], have achieved remarkable generalization capabilities across a broader scope of scenes. However, in contrast to the advancements in these fields enabled by extensive datasets and large-scale models, advancements in foundation models for image restoration are less pronounced.
To advance this field, general image restoration meth-

12626

