This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Lesson in Splats: Teacher-Guided Diffusion for 3D Gaussian Splats Generation
with 2D Supervision
Chensheng Peng1

Ido Sobol2

Masayoshi Tomizuka1
1

UC Berkeley

2

Kurt Keutzer1

Technion

3

Chenfeng Xu1

Or Litany2,3

NVIDIA

Figure 1. (Left) Standard diffusion training is constrained to same-modality supervision. We break this barrier by decoupling the sources
of noised samples and supervision. Leveraging imperfect predictions of a feedforward 3D reconstruction module, our method offers a
fully image-based 3D diffusion training scheme. (Right) When paired with two different noisy teachers, our diffusion model enhances
reconstruction quality and 3D geometry across both objects and scenes. Notably, our model is trained on the same data as the teachers, and
uses a smaller model size. "Medium" and "Large" denote the model size, see Sec. 4.1.

Abstract
We present a novel framework for training 3D imageconditioned diffusion models using only 2D supervision. Recovering 3D structure from 2D images is inherently ill-posed
due to the ambiguity of possible reconstructions, making
generative models a natural choice. However, most existing
3D generative models rely on full 3D supervision, which is
impractical due to the scarcity of large-scale 3D datasets. To
address this, we propose leveraging sparse-view supervision
as a scalable alternative. While recent reconstruction models use sparse-view supervision with differentiable rendering
to lift 2D images to 3D, they are predominantly deterministic,
failing to capture the diverse set of plausible solutions and
producing blurry predictions in uncertain regions. A key
challenge in training 3D diffusion models with 2D supervi-

sion is that the standard training paradigm requires both the
denoising process and supervision to be in the same modality.
We address this by decoupling the noisy samples being denoised from the supervision signal, allowing the former to remain in 3D while the latter is provided in 2D. Our approach
leverages suboptimal predictions from a deterministic imageto-3D model—acting as a "teacher"—to generate noisy 3D
inputs, enabling effective 3D diffusion training without requiring full 3D ground truth. We validate our framework on
both object-level and scene-level datasets, using two different 3D Gaussian Splat (3DGS) teachers. Our results show
that our approach consistently improves upon these deterministic teachers, demonstrating its effectiveness in scalable
and high-fidelity 3D generative modeling. See our project
page https://lesson-in-splats.github.io/.

28707

