This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning A Unified Template for Gait Recognition
Panjian Huang1 , Saihui Hou1 , Junzhou Huang2 , Yongzhen Huang1,3 *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of Texas at Arlington
3
WATRIX.AI

Abstract
“What I cannot create, I do not understand.” Human
wisdom reveals that creation is one of the highest forms
of learning. For example, Diffusion Models have demonstrated remarkable semantic structure and memory in image generation, understanding, and restoration, which intuitively benefits representation learning. However, current
gait networks rarely embrace this perspective, relying primarily on learning by contrasting gait samples under varying complex conditions, leading to semantic inconsistency
and uniformity issues. To address these issues, we propose Origins with generative capabilities whose underlying philosophy is that different entities are generated from
a unified template, inherently regularizing gait representations within a consistent and diverse semantic space to
capture accurate gait differences. Admittedly, learning this
unified template is exceedingly challenging, as it requires
the comprehensiveness of the template to encompass gait
representations with various conditions. Inspired by Diffusion Models, Origins diffuses the unified template into
timestep templates for gait generative learning, and meanwhile transfers the unified template for gait representation learning. Especially, gait generative and representation learning serve as a unified framework for end-to-end
joint training. Extensive experiments on CASIA-B, CCPG,
SUSTech1K, Gait3D, GREW and CCGR-MINI demonstrate
that Origins performs unified generative and representation
learning, achieving superior performance.

Figure 1. Origins performs unified generative and representation
learning. The unified template T diffuses to the timestep templates, which generates gait representations. Meanwhile, the unified template T transfers to capture accurate gait differences.

1. Introduction

and memory that support an expansive associative search,
facilitating the combination of distant concepts into novel
ideas [1, 27, 36]. Indeed, modern Generative AI (e.g., Diffusion Models) has demonstrated remarkable visual control, memory and imagination in image generation [20], understanding [26], and restoration [61]. Intuitively, a network, capable of controllably generating diverse entities
across different categories, implies a powerful representation space [5, 28, 49, 62, 67].
Within the scope of representation learning, gait serves
as a descriptor of walking patterns for long-distance human recognition [44, 46]. Although current gait recognition
has made significant progress, the gait representation learning obtains identity information by contrasting gait samples
under varying complex conditions (e.g., cross-view, crossclothing, occlusion and illumination conditions), causing
two problems: (i) Semantic Inconsistency. Gait representations with different complex conditions may exhibit
significant gaps. For example, semantic inconsistency has
been observed in VPNet [35], where different view angles
correspond to distinct prompts, indicating significant variations in the current gait representations. Additionally, crossview gait networks potentially learn the 3D human body
projections from various 2D view angles and the chaining
relations between different view angles [34], while cross-

“The Tao produced One; One produced Two; Two produced
Three; Three produced All things.”
— Laozi, Tao Te Ching, ch. 42

According to the associative theory of creativity, individuals with higher creativity possess richer semantic structure
* Corresponding Author

12459

