This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MGSR: 2D/3D Mutual-boosted Gaussian Splatting for High-fidelity Surface
Reconstruction under Various Light Conditions
Qingyuan Zhou1 , Yuehu Gong1 , Weidong Yang1 *, Jiaze Li2 , Yeqi Luo1 , Baixin Xu2 ,
Shuhao Li1 , Ben Fei3∗ , Ying He2
1
Fudan University, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zhouqy23@m.fudan.edu.cn, wdyang@fudan.edu.cn, benfei@cuhk.edu.hk, yhe@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Novel view synthesis (NVS) and surface reconstruction (SR)
are essential tasks in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). Despite recent progress, these tasks are often addressed independently, with GS-based rendering methods struggling
under diverse light conditions and failing to produce accurate surfaces, while GS-based reconstruction methods
frequently compromise rendering quality. This raises a
central question: must rendering and reconstruction always involve a trade-off? To address this, we propose
MGSR, a 2D/3D Mutual-boosted Gaussian Splatting for
Surface Reconstruction that enhances both rendering quality and 3D reconstruction accuracy. MGSR introduces two
branches—one based on 2DGS and the other on 3DGS. The
2DGS branch excels in surface reconstruction, providing
precise geometry information to the 3DGS branch. Leveraging this geometry, the 3DGS branch employs a geometryguided illumination decomposition module that captures reflected and transmitted components, enabling realistic rendering under varied light conditions. Using the transmitted component as supervision, the 2DGS branch also
achieves high-fidelity surface reconstruction. Throughout
the optimization process, the 2DGS and 3DGS branches
undergo alternating optimization, providing mutual supervision. Prior to this, each branch completes an independent warm-up phase, with an early stopping strategy implemented to reduce computational costs. We evaluate MGSR
on a diverse set of synthetic and real-world datasets, at both
object and scene levels, demonstrating strong performance
in rendering and surface reconstruction. Code is available
at https://github.com/TsingyuanChou/MGSR.

representing scenes as collections of 3D Gaussian primitives, 3DGS offers a more flexible and adaptive representation, enabling accurate and efficient rendering and visualization without relying on neural networks. 3DGS effectively resolves the issues of low training efficiency and
insufficient geometric accuracy in previous NeRF methods. Due to its impressive rendering efficiency and accuracy, 3DGS has been widely applied in fields such as
SLAM [15], dynamic real-world or large-scale scene modeling [16, 20], reconstruction [11, 18], navigation [28], manipulation [13, 14, 19], 3D generation [2, 29], and 3D human simulation [17], etc.
Nevertheless, achieving high-fidelity surface reconstruction (SR) and improving the realism of novel view synthesis
(NVS) under various light conditions are two main challenges in 3DGS. Specifically, considering that GS-based
rendering methods are affected by different light conditions,
previous methods [4, 8] proposed to decompose light to enhance the neural rendering in scenes containing reflective
surfaces with the introduction of BRDF (Figure 1a). However, despite the effectiveness of illumination decomposition in rendering, these methods are time-consuming and
still struggle to achieve meaningful mesh extraction due to
inherent limitations in 3DGS. For instance, the centers of
Gaussian primitives do not align well with the surface. On
the other hand, GS-based SR methods [5, 6, 24] endeavor
to constrain the Gaussian primitives close to the surface, inevitably sacrifice rendering quality and are sensitive to light
conditions, which may cause surface artifacts on surfaces
(Figure 1b). For example, 2DGS [6] utilize 2D Gaussian
primitives for 3D scene representation, facilitating accurate
and view-consistent geometry modeling. However, 2DGS
still cannot effectively model surfaces when ambient lighting changes.
To solve these contradictions, we propose MGSR,
a 2D/3D Mutual-boosted Gaussian splatting for Surface
Reconstruction that enhances both rendering quality and
3D reconstruction accuracy (Figure 1c). Specifically, two
branches are devised based on 2DGS and 3DGS, which are

1. Introduction
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [9] has recently gained great
attention in computer graphics and 3D vision [3]. By
* Corresponding authors

27295

