This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STIV: Scalable Text and Image Conditioned Video Generation
Zongyu Lin1 ,* Wei Liu1 , Chen Chen2 , Jiasen Lu2 , Wenze Hu2 , Tsu-Jui Fu2 ,
Jesse Allardice2 , Zhengfeng Lai2 , Liangchen Song2 , Bowen Zhang2 ,
Cha Chen2 , Yiran Fei, Lezhi Li, Yinfei Yang
Apple
Cupertino, CA
Yizhou Sun , Kai-Wei Chang
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA
Abstract
We present a simple and scalable text and image conditioned video generation method. Our approach, named
STIV, integrates a variable number of image conditions
into a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) through frame replacement. This design enables STIV to perform both text-tovideo (T2V) and text-image-to-video (TI2V) tasks simultaneously, as well as long video generation through autoregressive rollouts. Additionally, STIV can be easily extended
to various applications, such as video prediction, frame interpolation, and multi-view generation, etc. With comprehensive ablation studies on T2I, T2V, TI2V, and long video
generation, STIV demonstrate strong performance, despite
its simple design. An 8.7B model with 5122 resolution
achieves 83.1 on VBench T2V, surpassing both leading open
and closed-source models like CogVideoX-5B, Pika, Kling,
and Gen-3. The same-sized model also achieves a state-ofthe-art result of 90.1 on VBench I2V task at 5122 resolution.
Combine all of these, we ﬁnally scale up our model to 540p
with over 200 frames. By providing a transparent recipe for
building cutting-edge video generation models, we aim to
empower future research and accelerate progress for video
generation.

1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of video generation has witnessed a signiﬁcant
progress with the introduction of Sora [42], a video generation model based on Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [43]
architecture. Researchers have been actively exploring op* This work was done during an internship at Apple.
1 First authors
2 Core authors
 Senior authors

timal methods to incorporate text and other conditions into
the DiT architecture. For example, PixArt-α [8] leverages
cross attention, while SD3 [18] concatenates text with the
noised patches and applies self-attention using the MMDiT
block. Several video generation models [20, 46, 63] adopt
similar approaches and have made substantial progress in
the text-to-video (T2V) task.
Despite substantial progress in text-to-video generation,
pure T2V approaches often struggle with producing coherent and realistic videos, as their outputs are not grounded
in external references or contextual constraints [12]. To address this limitation, text-image-to-video (TI2V) introduce
an initial image frame along with the textual prompt, providing a more concrete grounding for the generated video.
Although various studies [3, 6, 10, 13, 49, 60, 68] have examined methods of integrating image conditions into the UNet architectures, how to effectively incorporate such conditions into the DiT architecture remains unsolved. Besides,
it remains an open question whether a single model can simultaneously perform both T2V and TI2V, and how to efﬁciently generate long videos.
Furthermore, there is a pressing need for stable, efﬁcient large-scale training strategies, as well as improving
the overall quality of training datasets. Existing studies in
video generation often focuses on individual aspects independently, overlooking the how their collective impact on
overall performance. To address these issues, a comprehensive, step-by-step “recipe” would greatly assist in developing uniﬁed models that handle both T2V and TI2V task under one framework. Overcoming these challenges is essential for advancing the ﬁeld and fully realizing the potential
of video generation models.
In this work, we introduce STIV, a single model capable of performing both T2V and TI2V tasks through simple

16249

