This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARMO: Autoregressive Rigging for Multi-Category Objects
Mingze Sun1* Shiwei Mao1* Keyi Chen1 Yurun Chen1
Shunlin Lu2 Jingbo Wang3 Junting Dong3† Ruqi Huang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China

Figure 1. We propose ARMO, a pipeline that generates accurate skeleton results from mesh inputs, enabling precise control over the mesh
to generate realistic and accurately driven results.

Abstract

tokens. A mesh-conditioned latent diffusion model is used to
predict the latent embedding for conditional skeleton generation. Our method addresses the limitations of regressionbased approaches, which often suffer from error accumulation and suboptimal connectivity estimation. Through extensive experiments on the OmniRig dataset, our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance in skeleton prediction, demonstrating improved generalization across diverse
object categories. The code and dataset will be made available at https://armo-omnirig.github.io/.

Recent advancements in large-scale generative models
have significantly improved the quality and diversity of 3D
shape generation. However, most existing methods focus
primarily on generating static 3D models, overlooking the
potential dynamic nature of certain shapes, such as humanoids, animals, and insects. To address this gap, we
focus on rigging, a fundamental task in animation that establishes skeletal structures and skinning for 3D models. In
this paper, we introduce OmniRig, the first large-scale rigging dataset, comprising 79,499 meshes with detailed skeleton and skinning information. Unlike traditional benchmarks that rely on predefined standard poses (e.g., A-pose,
T-pose), our dataset embraces diverse shape categories,
styles, and poses. Leveraging this rich dataset, we propose
ARMO, a novel rigging framework that utilizes an autoregressive model to predict both joint positions and connectivity relationships in a unified manner. By treating the skeletal
structure as a complete graph and discretizing it into tokens,
we encode the joints using an auto-encoder to obtain a latent embedding and an autoregressive model to predict the

1. Introduction
Recently, large-scale generative models have achieved impressive advancements on generating 3D shapes of high
quality and great diversity through multi-modal hints, such
as text [17, 34], images [18, 36, 45], or point clouds [4, 5].
However, the majority of efforts in this field focus on delivering static digitizations, to some extent overlooking the
potential dynamic nature of the shapes of interest (e.g., humanoids, animals, insects). To alleviate this discrepancy,
we resort to rigging, a long-standing task from animation
research, which creates a skeletal structure for a 3D shape

* Indicates Equal Contribution. † Indicates Corresponding Author.

7721

