This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Who is a Better Talker: Subjective and Objective Quality Assessment for
AI-Generated Talking Heads
Yingjie Zhou1,2 Jiezhang Cao*3 Zicheng Zhang1,2 Farong Wen1,2
Yanwei Jiang1,2 Jun Jia1,2 Xiaohong Liu*1,2 Xiongkuo Min*1,2 Guangtao Zhai*1,2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 PengCheng Laboratory 3 Harvard Medical School
Abstract

Designing digital human
heads by hand is tedious
and time-consuming.

Speech-driven methods for portraits are ﬁguratively known
as “Talkers” because of their capability to synthesize
speaking mouth shapes and facial movements. Especially
with the rapid development of the Text-to-Image (T2I) models, AI-Generated Talking Heads (AGTHs) have gradually become an emerging digital human media. However,
challenges persist regarding the quality of these talkers
and AGTHs they generate, and comprehensive studies addressing these issues remain limited. To address this gap,
this paper presents the largest AGTH quality assessment
dataset THQA-10K to date, which selects 12 prominent T2I
models and 14 advanced talkers to generate AGTHs for
14 prompts. After excluding instances where AGTH generation is unsuccessful, the THQA-10K dataset contains
10,457 AGTHs. Then, volunteers are recruited to subjectively rate the AGTHs and give the corresponding distortion categories. In our analysis for subjective experimental
results, we evaluate the performance of talkers in terms of
generalizability and quality, and also expose the distortions
of existing AGTHs. Finally, an objective quality assessment method based on the ﬁrst frame, Y-T slice and tonelip consistency is proposed. Experimental results show
that this method can achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in AGTH quality assessment. The work is released
at https://github.com/zyj-2000/Talker.

1. Introduction
Digital humans represent an emerging digital media technology focused on generating realistic representations of
virtual characters endowed with human-like characters [67].
Currently, the majority of high-quality digital humans are
predominantly crafted and manipulated by skilled designers, necessitating extensive expertise and experience. In
particular, the design process is cumbersome and timeconsuming in terms of character modeling and facial an* Corresponding authors.

Artistic Designer

Face Binding in Maya

It may be efficient to design
through T2I and Talker.

Speech Signal Processing

Speech-based Driver

Provide Rich Human Images

Who is a better Talker?

T2I
TG1

TG2

TG3

Factor A. Generalization
Input Prompts

Input Audios

TQ1

TQ2

Factor B. Quality
Human Images for
Quality Assessment

Input Images

Talker

TQ3

Talking Heads for
Quality Assessment

Figure 1. Manual approach to digital human head design versus
Text-to-Image and Talker-based approaches.

imation. This method of manual design obviously suffers from low efﬁciency and high cost, hindering the popularization and promotion of digital humans. Fortunately,
advancements in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) have signiﬁcantly facilitated the design of digital humans. On one
hand, various types of text-to-image (T2I) models [1–3, 9–
11, 25, 31, 32, 34, 35] have been able to generate various
types of character images, allowing for a more diverse appearance of digital humans. On the other hand, a variety
of speech-driven methods [6, 7, 23, 33, 42, 43, 46, 47, 49–
51, 63, 64], which can be viewed as “Talkers,” have been
developed to achieve the effect of Talking Head (TH). Although these talkers have improved the efﬁciency of digital
human design, they inevitably face a variety of quality problems, which adversely impact the user experience. Therefore, it is imperative to evaluate these Talkers to provide
objective and reliable reference metrics for various generative methods, thereby fostering the ongoing development of
the digital human domain and enhancing user experience
with AI-Generated Talking Head (AGTH) videos. More
speciﬁcally, considering the AGTH generation process, two
aspects should be considered to assess the quality of the
talkers. A) Generalization: A better talker should produce
high-quality AGTHs across a wide range of portrait images.

12201

