This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayesian-Inspired Space-Time Superpixels
Kent Gauen
Purdue University

Stanley Chan
Purdue University

gauenk@purdue.edu

stanchan@purdue.edu

Abstract

quality while dramatically reducing the wall-clock runtime.
BIST is a novel extension of the Bayesian Adaptive Superpixel Segmentation (BASS) method and it is distinct
from previous space-time work.1 Previous methods process
several frames together, and focus on designing heuristic
energy functions to be minimized [3, 12, 13, 25, 26, 38].
In contrast, BIST is designed using heuristic modiﬁcations
to a theoretically justiﬁed sampler of a DP-GMM. BIST
proposes no heuristic energy functions to be minimized,
which clearly separates this paper from previous work. Ultimately, BIST achieves state-of-the-art benchmark quality
and is the fastest available space-time superpixel method
with open-source code. BIST processes images of size
480 × 320 at over 60 frames-per-second (fps), while the
next fastest space-time superpixel method with publicly
available code runs at about 2 fps [3].
BIST consists of three main steps: a shift-and-ﬁll step
to move superpixels according to video motion, boundary updates to deform the segmentation boundaries, and
split/merge/relabeling steps to adjust the number of superpixels. These steps are common to existing space-time superpixel methods [3, 13, 38]. The novelty of BIST is a new
temporal coherence term used within the split step, which
adaptively controls the number of split superpixels according to the video dynamics. This term is a heuristic modiﬁcation to the theoretically correct Hastings ratio used for posterior sampling of a DP-GMM [3, 32]. Hence, the method
is Bayesian-inspired rather than actually Bayesian.
The theoretically correct method leads to several hundred split/merge steps when estimating superpixels, and this
rapidly replaces old labels with new ones which makes enforcing temporal consistency challenging. The new temporal coherence term works by simply reducing the chance of
splitting a propagated superpixel. The strength of this term
is controlled by a hyperparameter, and selecting this hyperparameter does not require special tuning to return consistent results across the entire dataset. This term allows BIST
to maintain approximately the same number of superpixels
per frame as its single-image analogue (BASS) while preserving temporal consistency.

This paper presents Bayesian-inspired Space-Time Superpixels (BIST): a fast, state-of-the-art method to compute
space-time superpixels. BIST is a novel extension of a
single-image Bayesian method named BASS, and it is inspired by hill-climbing to a local mode of a DirichletProcess Gaussian Mixture Model (DP-GMM). The method
is only Bayesian-inspired, rather than actually Bayesian,
because it includes heuristic modications to the theoretically correct sampler. Similar to existing methods, BIST
can adapt the number of superpixels to an individual frame
using split-merge steps. A key novelty is a new temporal coherence term in the split step, which reduces the chance of
splitting propagated superpixels. This term enforces temporal coherence in propagated regions, but allows for unconstrained adaptation in disoccluded regions. A hyperparameter determines the strength of this new term, which does not
require special tuning to return consistent results across a
dataset of videos. The wall-clock runtime of BIST is over
twice as fast as BASS and over 30 times faster than the
next fastest space-time superpixel method with open-source
code.

1. Introduction
Superpixel models [23] represent images as a collection
of contiguous, deformably-shaped clusters of perceptually
similar pixels. They are inspired by Gestalt principles,
which posit humans view images by subconsciously grouping parts into a whole. Recent works show superpixels can be used to improve the quality of deep neural
networks (DNNs) for computer vision tasks. [8, 10, 40].
Space-time superpixels extend the single-image concept
to video by propagating the same label across multiple
frames, with applications in tracking, image registration,
and 3D reconstruction. However, the wall-clock runtime
of existing space-time superpixel methods can be over
one second per frame, which is unacceptably slow. This
paper presents Bayesian-inspired Space-Time Superpixels
(BIST), a method that achieves state-of-the-art superpixel

1  https://gauenk.github.io/bist_website/

5382

