This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge-Guided Part Segmentation
Xuejian Gou, Fang Liu,* Licheng Jiao, Shuo Li, Lingling Li, Hao Wang, Xu Liu, Puhua Chen, Wenping Ma
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
International Research Center for Intelligent Perception and Computation,
Joint International Research Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Computation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
xjgou13@163.com, f63liu@163.com

(a) Separate object and part segmentation

Abstract

x Ignoring potential connections between parts
Object mask

In real-world scenarios, objects and their parts inherently possess both coarse-grained differences and intricate
fine-grained structural relationships. These characteristics can be formalized as knowledge, leveraged for finegrained part comprehension. However, existing part segmentation models consistently fail to capture these complex
inter-part relationships, treating parts as independent entities and disregarding object-level distinctions. To address
these limitations, we propose a novel Knowledge-Guided
Part Segmentation (KPS) framework. Our approach automatically extracts structural relationships between parts
using a large language model (LLM) and integrates them
into a knowledge graph. Subsequently, a structural knowledge guidance module employs a graph convolutional network (GCN) to model these relationships. Furthermore,
a coarse-grained object guidance module captures objectspecific distinctions and integrates them as visual guidance. The integrated insights from the part structure and
object differentiation guide the fine-grained part segmentation. Our KPS achieves notable improvements in segmentation performance, with a 4.96% mIoU gain on PartImageNet and a 3.73% gain on Pascal-Part. Moreover, in the
open-vocabulary setting on Pascal-Part-116, it improves
hIoU by 3.25%, highlighting the effectiveness of knowledge
guidance in enhancing fine-grained part segmentation.

Object Seg.

Bird

Segmentation

Part mask
Bird head,
Bird wing,
Bird tail,
etc.

Part Seg.
(b) Cognitive Processes in Reality
A bird.

The structure of the bird?
Wing

Tail

Head

Foot
Body

Global Awareness

Coarse-grained Object

Structural Knowledge

Parts Details

(c) Joint object and part segmentation(ours)

√ Learning about potential connections between parts
Object Seg.

SKGM
Structure
Knowledge
Guidance Module
Knowledge Generation

Coarse-grained
Object
Guidance Module
COGM

Part Segment

Part Seg.
Bird head,Bird wing,
Bird tail,etc.

Figure 1. Comparison of existing methods and our KPS framework inspired by human cognition. (a) Existing methods treat
parts as independent, ignoring relationships. (b) Human cognitive process: global recognition followed by part details. (c)
Our KPS framework combines structured knowledge and coarsegrained object guidance inspired by cognitive processes to enhance part segmentation.

1. Introduction

[1, 4, 21, 31, 40, 50, 63] primarily focus on coarse-grained
information, performing well on large object regions but often neglecting the fine details required for part-level segmentation [8, 9, 58, 61]. To address these limitations, finegrained part segmentation has become essential for capturing intricate details, especially in complex or detail-rich
scenes where precise recognition is critical. By focusing on
fine-grained features, these methods enhance feature representations and sensitivity to subtle variations, thereby im-

Fine-grained part semantic segmentation [20, 45, 52, 60]
aims to achieve pixel-level segmentation of fine-grained
object parts within a complete image by capturing distinguishing details of individual parts, such as the head of
a bird, the wheels of a car, or the ears of a dog. In
comparison, traditional semantic segmentation approaches
* Corresponding author

5490

