This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IRASim: A Fine-Grained World Model for Robot Manipulation
Fangqi Zhu1,2 , Hongtao Wu2† * , Song Guo1 * , Yuxiao Liu2 , Chilam Cheang2 , Tao Kong2
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 ByteDance Seed
fangqi.zhu@connect.ust.hk, wuhongtao.123@bytedance.com, songguo@cse.ust.hk
Historical
Observation

Abstract
World models allow autonomous agents to plan and explore
by predicting the visual outcomes of different actions. However, for robot manipulation, it is challenging to accurately
model the fine-grained robot-object interaction within the
visual space using existing methods which overlooks precise alignment between each action and the corresponding
frame. In this paper, we present IRASim, a novel world
model capable of generating videos with fine-grained robotobject interaction details, conditioned on historical observations and robot action trajectories. We train a diffusion transformer and introduce a novel frame-level actionconditioning module within each transformer block to explicitly model and strengthen the action-frame alignment.
Extensive experiments show that: (1) the quality of the videos
generated by our method surpasses all the baseline methods and scales effectively with increased model size and
computation; (2) policy evaluations using IRASim exhibit
a strong correlation with those using the ground-truth simulator, highlighting its potential to accelerate real-world
policy evaluation; (3) testing-time scaling through modelbased planning with IRASim significantly enhances policy
performance, as evidenced by an improvement in the IoU
metric on the Push-T benchmark from 0.637 to 0.961; (4)
IRASim provides flexible action controllability, allowing virtual robotic arms in datasets to be controlled via a keyboard or VR controller. Video and code are available at
https://gen-irasim.github.io/.

Prediction / Ground-truth

Input Trajectory

IRASim

Figure 1. Overview of IRASim. IRASim is a fine-grained world
model for robot manipulation. It generates high-fidelity videos that
simulate accurate robot-object interactions of a robot executes an
action trajectory, given historical observation.

icy evaluation – they can generate realistic and reasonable
physical interactions, providing an efficient alternative to
real-world evaluation [32].
When training a world model for robot manipulation, accurately simulating the intricate interactions between the
robot, objects, and the surrounding environment remains a
substantial challenge. Manipulation tasks are inherently delicate, where even subtle variations can result in task failure.
Consequently, constructing a fine-grained world model is
essential for faithfully capturing these precise interactions.
Moreover, modern robotic manipulation policy leverages an
action chunking technique [9, 57] which generates action
trajectories rather than single actions to accomplish complex
manipulation tasks. In this paper, we focus on building a
world model that generates videos, with fine-grained robotobject interaction details, of a robot executing an action
trajectory given historical observation (Fig. 1). We refer to
this task as the trajectory-to-video task. Inspired by recent
advances in text-to-video generation [6, 59], we leverage
generative models to capture visual details that are essential
for representing the intricate dynamics of the world (e.g.,
robot-object contact and object articulation). However, textto-video models are trained to generate videos based on
high-level textual descriptions that provide general contextual cues rather than detailed, frame-level instructions. This
is different from the trajectory-to-video task in which each

1. Introduction
World models empower agents to foresee the outcomes of
their actions by learning the fundamental dynamics of the
world [1, 54]. This capability offers two key applications
for robot manipulation. Firstly, it allows robots to improve
autonomous policies by exploring various action proposals
in the model and selecting the optimal one for executing.
Secondly, world models offer the potential for scalable pol* Corresponding authors.
† Project lead.

9834

