This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CE-FAM: Concept-Based Explanation via Fusion of Activation Maps
Michihiro Kuroki Toshihiko Yamasaki
The University of Tokyo
kuroki@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Although saliency maps can highlight important regions
to explain the reasoning behind image classification in
artificial intelligence (AI), the meaning of these regions
is left to the user’s interpretation. In contrast, conceptbased explanations decompose AI predictions into humanunderstandable concepts, clarifying their contributions.
However, few methods can simultaneously reveal what concepts an image classifier learns, which regions are associated with them, and how they contribute to predictions.
We propose a novel concept-based explanation method,
Concept-based Explanation via Fusion of Activation Maps
(CE-FAM). It employs a branched network that shares activation maps with an image classifier and learns to mimic the
embeddings of a Vision and Language Model (VLM). The
branch network predicts concepts in an image, and their
corresponding regions are represented by a weighted sum of
activation maps, with weights given by the gradients of the
concept prediction scores. Their contributions are quantified based on their impact on the image classification score.
Our method provides a general framework for identifying
the concept regions and their contributions while leveraging VLM knowledge to handle arbitrary concepts without
requiring an annotated dataset. Furthermore, we introduce
a novel evaluation metric to assess the accuracy of the concept regions. Our qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate our method outperforms existing approaches
and excels in zero-shot inference for unseen concepts.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method, showing the concepts
underlying classification predictions, their corresponding regions,
and their contributions to the final prediction.

Explainable AI (XAI) has gained significant attention
for enhancing AI transparency. For example, saliency
maps highlight important regions in image classification
by visualizing pixel-wise contributions. Grad-CAM [39]
is a widely used method that generates a saliency map by
weighting and summing activation maps in the final layer
of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). It uses the gradients obtained by backpropagation of the class prediction
score as the weights. However, the limited expressiveness
of saliency maps has recently been recognized as a challenge. Since the interpretation of highlighted regions is left
to the user, identifying which specific aspects, such as patterns or shapes, are truly critical remains difficult. In contrast, concept-based explanations have been proposed as a
method for identifying the factors that contribute to a prediction. Concepts refer to human-interpretable elements,
such as colors, textures, and object parts. For example, Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) [22] introduces feature representations corresponding to each concept just before the
final fully connected layer, and makes predictions based on
their linear combination. TCAV [20] utilizes the Concept

1. Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has been rapidly advancing and
is increasingly being integrated into various aspects of daily
life, with the potential to further enhance our everyday experiences. While AI is expected to play a crucial role in
complex domains such as autonomous driving and healthcare, its black-box nature poses the risk of unexpected behaviors, which may result in critical failures. To ensure safe
and effective human-AI collaboration, enhancing AI transparency and interpretability is essential.

1413

