This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Video Bi-flow
Chen Liu
University College London

Tobias Ritschel
University College London

chen.liu.21@ucl.ac.uk

t.ritschel@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

Full-seq.
diffusion

We propose a novel generative video model to robustly learn
temporal change as a neural ordinary differential equation (ODE) flow with a bilinear objective which combines
two aspects: The first is to map from the past into future
video frames directly. Previous work has mapped the noise
to new frames, a more computationally expensive process.
Unfortunately, starting from the previous frame, instead of
noise, is more prone to drifting errors. Hence, second, we
additionally learn how to remove the accumulated errors
as the joint objective by adding noise during training. We
demonstrate unconditional video generation in a streaming
manner for various video datasets, all at competitive quality compared to a conditional diffusion baseline but with
higher speed, i.e., fewer ODE solver steps.

Conditional
diffusion

High coverage

Video
flow

Video
bi-flow

Short distance

Streaming

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The two main ways to generate videos on the left and
our approaches on the right. The rightmost is our final approach.
“Coverage” denotes if training sees all conditions occurring at test.
Higher coverage indicates more robust inference, while low coverage results in quick divergence. “Distance” is the length of the
ODE solver path. The shorter distance to solve means fewer steps.
“Streaming” is the ability to adapt to the condition and produce an
infinite image stream using finite memory.

We suggest a method to generate videos. Our model is
based on a neural ODE flow, modeling the pixel evolution over time. To train the model, we reformulate the flow
matching objective [1, 13, 19, 22], which has been widely
used to map the noise distribution to an image or video distribution. One of our key insights is to consider a video
dataset as separate image datasets in the temporal dimension. We can now learn flow between the current and the
next-frame distribution. To make this work, we need to improve the coverage of the training space and learn a joint
flow field of denoising by using train-time noise. This enables robust inference with few ODE solver steps. Our approach can produce new video frames in a streaming fashion at an interactive rate, making it a candidate technique
for interactive applications such as computer games.
So far, there are mainly two dominant ways to generate videos, which we compare to our approaches, summarized as different columns in Fig. 1. The first approach, fullsequence diffusion [16], is a straightforward extension from
images to videos. With large curated video datasets and established methods such as the noise conditional score function [29], this achieves good coverage of empirical video
distributions, denoted as a success in the row “High cov-

19363

erage” in Fig. 1. However, it is a computationally intense
process in both memory and time as the diffusion problem
requires numerous steps to solve from a 3D noise tensor
to a complete video, denoted as a challenge in the “Short
distance” row in Fig. 1. It also does not support streaming
video generation or the ability to react to external input in
interactive applications. We seek to improve these aspects.
The second approach, conditional diffusion, is performed on frames in isolation. To help temporal consistency, the generation is conditioned on one or multiple previous frames. This allows for streaming, but still starts from
noise and requires solving a large distance, as a result of
which the compute demands remain high.
We introduce here a third approach, video streaming
flow, which relates to the classic single-image animation
problem, generating a plausible video sequence given a single image. The ODE flow models the gradient concerning
the current frame and predicts the next frame directly from
it, thus eliminating the lengthy denoising process. Such an
approach is ideal, as it allows streaming, and does not need
to change much between frames. Nevertheless, since the
flow is trained solely to map from one frame to another

