This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoxelKP: A Voxel-based Network Architecture for Human Keypoint Estimation
in LiDAR Data
Jian Shi
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

jian.shi@kaust.edu.sa

peter.wonka@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We present VoxelKP, a novel fully sparse network architecture tailored for human keypoint estimation in LiDAR data. The key challenge is that objects are distributed sparsely in 3D space, while human keypoint detection requires detailed local information wherever humans
are present. First, we introduce a dual-branch fully sparse
spatial-context block where the spatial branch focuses on
learning the local spatial correlations between keypoints
within each human instance, while the context branch aims
to retain the global spatial information. Second, we use a
spatially aware multi-scale BEV fusion technique to leverage absolute 3D coordinates when projecting 3D voxels to
a 2D grid encoding a bird’s eye view for better preservation
of the global context of each human instance. We evaluate our method on the Waymo dataset and achieve an improvement of 27% on the MPJPE metric compared to the
state-of-the-art, HUM3DIL, trained on the same data, and
12% against the state-of-the-art, GC-KPL, pretrained on
a 25× larger dataset. To the best of our knowledge, VoxelKP is the first single-staged, fully sparse network that is
specifically designed for addressing the challenging task of
3D keypoint estimation from LiDAR data, achieving stateof-the-art performance. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/shijianjian/VoxelKP.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation (HPE) is a critical area of research
with applications spanning computer vision, robotics,
human-computer interaction, and augmented/virtual reality.
Previous works [23, 32, 36] are mostly based on 2D images
and videos. Compared to regular RGB input, LiDAR sensors provide detailed 3D structural information by measuring the distance to objects using laser light. Apart from its
robustness under occlusion and illumination changes, LiDAR also offers privacy protection as it can not retain facial details. Existing 3D HPE approaches often rely on
multi-stage pipelines [40], or require additional supervision, either from synthetic LiDAR data [37] or RGB im-

ages [42, 44]. Despite significant progress in 3D object detection from LiDAR point clouds [26–28], our experiments
(in supplementary material) show that simply introducing
a keypoint estimation head to these models often leads to
suboptimal performance in 3D HPE tasks. Based on this
observation, we suspect the object detection methods focus
on capturing objects scattered sparsely across the 3D space,
while the keypoints tend to be distributed densely within
localized regions around the human body. This fundamental discrepancy in the context captured by existing detectors limits their suitability for precise 3D keypoint prediction due to the lack of fine-grained spatial information. In
addition, most 3D object detectors use projected bird’s-eye
view (BEV) features to reduce computational costs. These
height-compressed features complicate the precise keypoint
localization. To address these gaps, we aim to extend the
success of 3D object detection to 3D HPE for LiDAR point
cloud data by introducing novel components to preserve
fine-grained spatial information while retaining height information. As shown in Figure 1, our method significantly
improves the precision of the estimated keypoints.
We introduce VoxelKP, a novel fully sparse neural network tailored specifically for human pose estimation within
LiDAR point clouds. We introduce a dual-branch fully
sparse spatial-context block that integrates local dense features with the global spatial context from the sparse representations of LiDAR scans. More precisely, the spatial
branch is used to extract local spatial correlation between
keypoints, whilst the context branch is used to preserve the
global spatial details. In this work, we refer to local features as fine-grained keypoint details within a detected human, and global features as larger-scale scene context. Second, we propose a spatially aware multi-scale BEV fusion
module that aims to effectively encode absolute 3D coordinates to light-weight BEV representations. To the best
of our knowledge, VoxelKP is the first single-staged, fully
sparse network that is specifically designed for addressing
the challenging task of 3D HPE from LiDAR data, achieving 27% on the MPJPE metric compared to the current
state-of-the-art trained on the same data.

28282

