This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guiding Diffusion Models with Adaptive Negative Sampling
Without External Resources
Alakh Desai Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego
{ahdesai, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

a cat and a dog

a diamond ring on a girl’s hand

a couch on the left of a chair

a confused grizzly bear in calculus class

a mouse and a pink bow

a dog riding bicycle

a sign that says ‘Text to Image’

seat for a person with a back and four legs

a white bench and purple glasses

a panda as a human

two cats and three dogs sitting on the grass

a girl diving into the pool

Figure 1. Images synthesized by SDXL (CFG) (Left) vs. SDXL+ANSWER (Right) for the prompt displayed below each image pair.
ANSWER optimizes the negative guidance at each diffusion step to maximize image quality and prompt compliance.

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have demonstrated an unparalleled ability to create diverse and high-ﬁdelity images from
text prompts. However, they are also well-known to vary
substantially regarding both prompt adherence and quality.
Negative prompting was introduced to improve prompt compliance by specifying what an image must not contain. Previous works have shown the existence of an ideal negative
prompt that can maximize the odds of the positive prompt.
In this work, we explore relations between negative prompting and classiﬁer-free guidance (CFG) to develop a sampling procedure, Adaptive Negative Sampling Without External Resources (ANSWER), that accounts for both positive
and negative conditions from a single prompt. This leverages the internal understanding of negation by the diffusion
model to increase the odds of generating images faithful to
the prompt. ANSWER is a training-free technique, applicable to any model that supports CFG, and allows for negative grounding of image concepts without an explicit negative prompts, which are lossy and incomplete. Experiments

show that adding ANSWER to existing DMs outperforms the
baselines on multiple benchmarks and is preferred by humans 2× more over the other methods.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs), such as DALL-E 2 [22], Imagen [27], or SDXL [20], have shown a remarkable ability
to generate compelling images from textual prompts, and
are now considered state-of-the-art image synthesis. However, while the quality of the synthesized images is usually
excellent, these methods still suffer from limited control
over the image semantics. As shown in Figure 2, the generated images frequently fail to comply with the prompt (e.g.
“two cats” instead of “a cat on the left of a dog”). This has
motivated a literature on DMs that condition image synthesis on user-speciﬁed visual constraints, such as bounding
boxes [17, 19, 39], sketches [33, 38], etc. While effective,
these approaches have limitations of their own. First, it is
difﬁcult to devise a universal visual conditioning module.
While bounding boxes can easily specify object locations,
it is much less clear what visual user input can help a model

16122

