This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionAgent: Fine-grained Controllable Video Generation
via Motion Field Agent
Liao Wang2
Xinyao Liao1,2
Xianfang Zeng2 *
1
Nanyang Technological University

2

Gang Yu2†
Guosheng Lin1†
Chi Zhang3
3
StepFun
Westlake University

https://github.com/leoisufa/MotionAgent

Abstract

“A spaceship is descending,
camera pans right.”

...

We propose MotionAgent, enabling fine-grained motion
control for text-guided image-to-video generation. The key
technique is the motion field agent that converts motion information in text prompts into explicit motion fields, providing flexible and precise motion guidance. Specifically,
the agent extracts the object movement and camera motion
described in the text, and converts them into object trajectories and camera extrinsics, respectively. An analytical optical flow composition module integrates these motion representations in 3D space and projects them into a unified
optical flow. An optical flow adapter takes the flow to control the base image-to-video diffusion model for generating
fine-grained controlled videos. After that, an optional rethinking step can be adopted to ensure the generated video
is aligned well with motion information in the prompt. The
significant improvement in the Video-Text Camera Motion
metrics on VBench indicates that our method achieves precise control over camera motion. We further construct a
subset of VBench to evaluate the alignment of motion information in the text and the generated video, outperforming
other advanced models on motion generation accuracy.

Text Encoder

I2V Generation Model
(a) I2V via text encoder

or

Motion Control Module

...

I2V Generation Model
(b) I2V via motion control module

Rethinking
“A spaceship ...”

Optical Flow
Composition

Agent

...

Optical Flow
Adapter

I2V Generation Model
(c) I2V via agent

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Different frameworks of I2V generation models. (a)
Controllable I2V generation via text encoder. (b) Controllable I2V
generation via special control module. (c) Our method, controllable I2V generation via motion field agent.

text input remains a field worth exploring.
Some I2V generation models [5, 18] randomly make the
input image dynamic, resulting in an uncontrollable generated result. Other I2V models [11, 36, 37, 44, 63, 73, 74]
support simple control through text input. As shown in Figure 1(a), they adopt a text encoder to inject control information into visual features. They can perform overall control,
but it is difficult to achieve fine-grained control over each element of the video. Additionally, training an I2V generation
model with high alignment between motion information in
the text and the video relies heavily on the quality of training data [4, 8, 50, 54, 55, 67], and obtaining high-quality
training data is also labor-intensive.
As illustrated in Figure 1(b), some controllable I2V

Recently, image-to-video (I2V) generation models [5, 7, 11,
18, 27, 36, 37, 44, 63, 68, 73, 74] develop rapidly. These
models bring images to life, making the visual content more
dynamic and vivid. Compared to text-to-video (T2V) generation models [2, 6, 15, 19, 21–23, 38, 47], I2V models
use an image as the reference, which further constrains the
content and reduces the uncertainty of the generated video.
Most existing I2V generation models already achieve highquality video generation, allowing them to preserve the visual details of the input image while generating stable results. However, precise control over the video using only
* Xianfang Zeng is the project leader.
† Corresponding authors: skicy@outlook.com, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

11305

