This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry Distributions
Biao Zhang
KAUST

Jing Ren
ETH Zurich

Peter Wonka
KAUST

biao.zhang@kaust.edu.sa

jing.ren@inf.ethz.ch

pwonka@gmail.com

E1 (X)
E2 (X)

X∼N

Figure 1. Our representation can handle 3D geometry with complex details, high genus, sharp features, and non-watertight surfaces: our
trained diffusion networks Ei can transform the samples X from a Gaussian distribution N to the geometry M ⊂ R3 . The colors indicate
the correspondence between the Gaussian noise and the surface points.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Geometry representations are at the heart of most 3D vision problems. With the rapid advancement of deep learning, there is growing interest in developing neural networkfriendly geometric data representations. Recent advances in
this field, particularly those based on coordinate networks,
have shown promise in modeling 3D geometry for various
applications, as their functional nature integrates well with
neural networks. However, they also face challenges like
limited accuracy in capturing complex geometric structures
and difficulties in handling non-watertight objects.

Neural representations of 3D data have been widely
adopted across various applications, particularly in recent
work leveraging coordinate-based networks to model scalar
or vector fields. However, these approaches face inherent challenges, such as handling thin structures and nonwatertight geometries, which limit their flexibility and accuracy. In contrast, we propose a novel geometric data representation that models geometry as distributions—a powerful representation that makes no assumptions about surface genus, connectivity, or boundary conditions. Our approach uses diffusion models with a novel network architecture to learn surface point distributions, capturing finegrained geometric details. We evaluate our representation
qualitatively and quantitatively across various object types,
demonstrating its effectiveness in achieving high geometric fidelity. Additionally, we explore applications using our
representation, such as textured mesh representation, neural surface compression, dynamic object modeling, and rendering, highlighting its potential to advance 3D geometric
learning.

To overcome these challenges, we propose a new geometric data representation, possessing a simple and consistent data structure capable of accommodating shapes
with varying genus, boundary conditions, and connectivity—whether open, watertight, fully connected, or not
(see Fig. 2). A key insight is that any surface, regardless
of its topology or structural integrity, can be closely approximated by a sufficiently large number of points sampled on the surface. Recent advancements in generative
models have shown that, in theory, they can sample an infinite amount of data from a distribution. Building on these

1495

