This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoSplatt3R: Leveraging Perspective Pretraining for Generalized
Unposed Wide-Baseline Panorama Reconstruction
Jiahui Ren* Mochu Xiang* Jiajun Zhu Yuchao Dai†
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University and
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information Acquisition and Processing, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China

Abstract
Wide-baseline panorama reconstruction has emerged as a
highly effective and pivotal approach for not only achieving geometric reconstruction of the surrounding 3D environment, but also generating highly realistic and immersive novel views. Although existing methods have shown
remarkable performance across various benchmarks, they
are predominantly reliant on accurate pose information. In
real-world scenarios, the acquisition of precise pose often
requires additional computational resources and is highly
susceptible to noise. These limitations hinder the broad
applicability and practicality of such methods. In this paper, we present PanoSplatt3R, an unposed wide-baseline
panorama reconstruction method. We extend and adapt the
foundational reconstruction pretrainings from the perspective domain to the panoramic domain, thus enabling powerful generalization capabilities. To ensure a seamless and efficient domain-transfer process, we introduce RoPE rolling
that spans rolled coordinates in rotary positional embeddings across different attention heads, maintaining a minimal modification to RoPE’s mechanism, while modeling
the horizontal periodicity of panorama images. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that PanoSplatt3R, even
in the absence of pose information, significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art methods. This superiority is
evident in both the generation of high-quality novel views
and the accuracy of depth estimation, thereby showcasing
its great potential for practical applications. Project page:
https://npucvr.github.io/PanoSplatt3R

capability has found wide applications across various domains. In Virtual Reality (VR) [3, 16], Augmented Reality (AR) [34] and real estate [45], panorama images enhance user experiences by offering a more natural and engaging interaction with digital environments, enabling users
to explore spaces remotely or in immersive settings. In autonomous driving and robotics [30], panorama images contribute to situational awareness, allowing systems to navigate complex environments with a broader context. These
popular applications highlight the need for methods capable of accurately reconstructing entire 3D structures from
panorama images while delivering photorealistic synthesis that allows users to freely explore and interact with
the scene. Given a pair of panorama images, generalized
panorama reconstruction methods [8, 10, 72] offer efficient
and scalable solutions to this challenge.
Existing methods address the challenge of reconstructing scene geometry and synthesizing novel views from twoview wide-baseline panorama images by constructing specialized cost volumes for panoramic data to estimate 360◦
depth maps. However, these approaches have two significant limitations. First, they require camera pose information
as input, which not only demands additional computational
resources but also introduces vulnerability to noise in realworld scenarios. Second, depth estimation from panoramic
cost volumes constitutes a domain-specific problem, creating substantial barriers to the effective transfer of established knowledge from the perspective domain. For practical applications, there is a clear need for an unposed general
method that demonstrates robust generalization capability
across diverse scenarios.
Utilizing more than 8 million training samples, foundational stereo models in the perspective domain significantly
advanced stereo matching, optical flow [63], depth estimation, pose regression [61], visual localization and 3D reconstruction [32]. Given the broader knowledge base established in the perspective imagery, transfer learning from
perspective to panoramic domains offers a promising approach to enhance model generalization abilities. Existing methods typically employ teacher-student frameworks

1. Introduction
Panorama images capture 360◦ scene information from
a single viewpoint, providing immersive visuals that can
recreate the surrounding environment in full detail. This
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author (daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn).

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62271410 and 12150007.

28959

