This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial Preference Rewarding for MLLMs Spatial Understanding
Han Qiu1 , Peng Gao2 , Lewei Lu3 , Xiaoqin Zhang4 , Ling Shao5 , Shijian Lu1 *
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Sensetime Research, 4 Zhejiang University of Technology
5
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab,University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
han023@e.ntu.edu.sg, Shijian.Lu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

grating pretrained large language model [2, 14, 49] with vision encoders [8, 37, 42], leading to significant advancements in a wide range of general vision-language tasks.
By combining visual and language signals, MLLMs have
demonstrated superior capabilities in multimodal understanding, reasoning, and interaction as compared with traditional vision models. Recently, several studies have further
injected spatial knowledge into MLLMs, thereby improving MLLMs’ fine-grained perception of visual inputs and
enabling tasks such as referential dialogue [10, 16], grounding captioning [35, 58, 62], region description [31, 52], and
object detection [61], etc. These advances have paved the
way for MLLMs to serve as versatile visual assistants supporting a wider range of applications.
Despite recent advancements, MLLMs still face challenges in fine-grained spatial understanding, with responses
not aligned with human preferences. As illustrated in 1,
the generated grounded region descriptions are often vague
with inaccurate object localizations, and models may fail to
focus on the queried region, distracted from other regions in
the image. The issue in spatial understanding could be attributed to the lack of positive-negative preference feedback
in existing instruction-tuned MLLMs. Specifically, instruction fine-tuning (SFT) directly optimizes MLLMs to mimic
ground truth positive samples, but it cannot impose any
penalties if the model produces inaccurate negative samples for localization during actual inference. As a result,
MLLMs may struggle to generate positive descriptions with
accurate object localization and instead produce negative
and inaccurate descriptions, leading to responses that do not
align with user expectations. In addition, optimization using positive and negative samples has been proven crucial
for spatial understanding in traditional object detection algorithms [7, 29, 45], highlighting a significant gap in the
current MLLM training on spatial understanding.
Several studies [38, 48, 50, 59, 65, 69] attempt to introduce preference optimization for better MLLM alignment, where the preference data are constructed by collect-

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have
demonstrated promising spatial understanding capabilities,
such as referencing and grounding object descriptions. Despite their successes, MLLMs still fall short in fine-grained
spatial perception abilities, such as generating detailed region descriptions or accurately localizing objects. Additionally, they often fail to respond to the user’s requirements for desired fine-grained spatial understanding. This
issue might arise because existing approaches primarily
focus on tuning MLLMs to model pre-annotated instruction data to inject spatial knowledge, without direct supervision of MLLMs’ actual responses. We address this
issue by SPR, a Spatial Preference Rewarding (SPR) approach that enhances MLLMs’ spatial capabilities by rewarding MLLMs’ detailed responses with precise object localization over vague or inaccurate responses. With randomly selected image regions and region descriptions from
MLLMs, SPR introduces semantic and localization scores
to comprehensively evaluate the text quality and localization quality in MLLM-generated descriptions. We also refine the MLLM descriptions with better localization accuracy and pair the best-scored refinement with the initial
descriptions of the lowest score for direct preference optimization, thereby enhancing fine-grained alignment with
visual input. Extensive experiments over standard referring
and grounding benchmarks show that SPR improves MLLM
spatial understanding capabilities effectively with minimal
overhead in training. Data and code will be released at
https://github.com/hanqiu-hq/SPR.

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [3, 15, 18, 31,
32, 51, 58, 70] have achieved remarkable success by inte* Corresponding author.

720

