This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PS3: A Multimodal Transformer Integrating Pathology Reports with Histology
Images and Biological Pathways for Cancer Survival Prediction
Manahil Raza

Ayesha Azam Talha Qaiser
University of Warwick, UK

Nasir Rajpoot

{manahil.raza, ayesha.azam, talha.qaiser, n.m.rajpoot}@warwick.ac.uk

1. Introduction

Abstract

Current multimodal fusion approaches in computational
oncology primarily focus on integrating multi-gigapixel histology whole slide images (WSIs) with genomic or transcriptomic data, demonstrating improved survival prediction. We hypothesize that incorporating pathology reports
can further enhance prognostic performance. Pathology reports, as essential components of clinical workflows, offer readily available complementary information by summarizing histopathological findings and integrating expert
interpretations and clinical context. However, fusing these
modalities poses challenges due to their heterogeneous nature. WSIs are high-dimensional, each containing several
billion pixels, whereas pathology reports consist of concise text summaries of varying lengths, leading to potential modality imbalance. To address this, we propose a
prototype-based approach to generate balanced representations, which are then integrated using a Transformerbased fusion model for survival prediction that we term
PS3 (Predicting Survival from Three Modalities). Specifically, we present: (1) Diagnostic prototypes from pathology reports, leveraging self-attention to extract diagnostically relevant sections and standardize text representation;
(2) Histological prototypes to compactly represent key morphological patterns in WSIs; and (3) Biological pathway
prototypes to encode transcriptomic expressions, accurately
capturing cellular functions. PS3, the three-modal transformer model, processes the resulting prototype-based multimodal tokens and models intra-modal and cross-modal interactions across pathology reports, WSIs and transcriptomic data. The proposed model outperforms state-ofthe-art methods when evaluated against clinical, unimodal
and multimodal baselines on six datasets from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA). The code will be released upon publication.

Patient prognosis in oncology refers to the predicted progression and outcome of cancer, often determined by clinical, pathological and molecular factors [44, 71]. It is essential to guide treatment strategies, inform risk assessment
and facilitate patient-centered decision-making to optimize
survival and quality of life [13, 38]. Recently, integrating
multiple data modalities have been shown to improve survival prediction in cancer research, with most studies focusing on combining genomic data such as transcriptomic
data with histology whole slide images (WSIs) [7, 52, 54].
These approaches leverage the strengths of each modality—genomics captures molecular subtypes, while WSIs
provide spatial and morphological insights into tumor characteristics [72]. However, pathology reports remain an
under-utilized resource despite providing essential information to clinicians for estimating the prognosis of cancer patients. Generated by expert pathologists, they are mandatory for definitive cancer diagnosis [42] and contain critical clinical and prognostic information including biomarker
status, tumor grading, staging and histological subtypes
[24, 27, 41]. They often complement histology and genomic data by incorporating expert-driven diagnostic insights [1, 53]. Moreover, as routinely produced components
of clinical workflows, pathological reports serve as a readily
available source of medical knowledge [23]. Despite their
clinical significance, they remain largely untapped in computational survival prediction models.

22175

Early multimodal approaches often relied on late fusion techniques [6, 31, 64], which integrated unimodal representations only at the final decision stage [12]. However, these methods struggled to model cross-modal interactions, which may be crucial for accurate prognosis. In contrast, more recent studies have investigated early fusion approaches for integrating WSIs and genomic data. Although
early fusion captures fine-grained cross-modal interactions
more effectively [5, 20, 51, 67], it remains computationally
demanding due to the high dimensionality and heterogeneity of the data.

