This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GIViC: Generative Implicit Video Compression
Ge Gao

Siyue Teng Tianhao Peng Fan Zhang David Bull
Visual Information Lab, University of Bristol

{ge1.gao, siyue.teng, tianhao.peng, fan.zhang, dave.bull}@bristol.ac.uk
https://ge1-gao.github.io/GIViC

Abstract
While video compression based on implicit neural representations (INRs) has recently demonstrated great potential, existing INR-based video codecs still cannot achieve
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance compared to their
conventional or autoencoder-based counterparts given the
same coding configuration. In this context, we propose a
Generative Implicit Video Compression framework, GIViC,
aiming at advancing the performance limits of this type
of coding methods. GIViC draws inspiration from the remarkable ability of large language and diffusion models to
capture long-range dependencies, a characteristic also inherent to Implicit Neural Representations (INRs). Through
the newly designed implicit diffusion process, GIViC performs diffusive sampling across coarse-to-fine spatiotemporal decompositions, gradually progressing from coarsergrained full-sequence diffusion to finer-grained per-token
diffusion. A novel Hierarchical Gated Linear Attentionbased transformer (HGLA), is also integrated into the
framework, which dual-factorizes global dependency modeling along scale and sequential axes. The proposed GIViC
model has been benchmarked against SOTA conventional
and neural codecs using a Random Access (RA) configuration (YUV 4:2:0, GOPSize=32), and yields BD-rate savings
of 15.94%, 22.46% and 8.52% over VVC VTM, DCVC-FM
and NVRC, respectively, on the UVG test set. As far as we
are aware, GIViC is the first INR-based video codec that
outperforms VTM, in terms of coding performance, based
on the RA coding configuration.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (Top) Illustration of the implicit diffusion framework
based on spatiotemporal downsampling of a GOP X with additive
noise, interlinking independent diffusion within constant-sized tokens {xki,j } across k = 1, . . . , K levels of abstractions. (Bottom)
The global spatiotemporal dependencies are captured by the 2D
hidden states Ski,j of the HGLA transformer, recurrently updated
along both scale and sequence axes.

The ubiquitous consumer demand for high-quality digital
video has accelerated the development of increasingly powerful compression techniques [12]. While the latest video
standards, such as MPEG H.266/VVC [10] and AOM (Alliance for Open Media) AV1 [29], offer impressive coding efficiency and architectural compatibility with previous

17356

standards, their coding gains are achieved through the use of
increasingly sophisticated tools built upon the conventional
hybrid video coding framework. In contrast, neural video
compression [48, 50, 53] has emerged in recent years as a
data-driven framework, leveraging end-to-end optimization
to achieve a performance level that rivals, or in some cases,
surpasses [38, 50, 80] that of standard video codecs.
More recently, implicit neural representation (INR)
based solutions [13] have provided a more flexible, and potentially lightweight, alternative to these ‘generic’ neural
video coding backbones. By adaptively overfitting a neural network to a specific (input) video sequence, INR-based
video codecs [14, 45, 47] exploit long-term spatiotemporal dependencies through sequence-level parameter sharing and stochastic optimization, showing the potential to
achieve competitive coding performance [24, 46].
However, the application scenarios, and more critically,

