This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchy-Aware Pseudo Word Learning with Text Adaptation
for Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval

1

Zheren Fu1
Kun Zhang2
Zhendong Mao1
Zhe Li1
Lei Zhang1 *
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC
{lizhe777, fzr}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {leizh23, kkzhang, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR) aims to retrieve the target image based on a reference image and a
text describing the user’s intention without training on the
triplet datasets. The key to this task is to make specified
changes to specific objects in the reference image based on
the text. Previous works generate single or multiple pseudo
words by projecting the reference image to the word embedding space. However, these methods ignore the fact that the
editing objects of CIR are naturally hierarchical, and lack
the ability of text adaptation, thus failing to adapt to multilevel editing needs. In this paper, we argue that the hierarchical object decomposition is the key to learning pseudo
words, and propose a hierarchy-aware dynamic pseudo
word learning (HIT) framework to equip with HIerarchy
semantic parsing and Text-adaptive filtering. The proposed
HIT enjoys several merits. First, HIT is empowered to dynamically decompose the image into different granularity
of editing objects by a set of learnable group tokens as
guidance, thus naturally forming the hierarchical semantic concepts. Second, the text-adaptive filtering strategy is
proposed to screen out specific objects from different levels
based on the text, so as to learn hierarchical pseudo words
that meet diverse editing needs. Extensive experiments on
three challenging benchmarks show that HIT outperforms
prior state-of-the-art ones by 5%-8% in average recall.

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) The first kind of
method focuses on single pseudo word generation. (b) The second
kind of method directly converts the entire image into multiple
pseudo words. (c) Our HIT decomposes the image into different
granularity of objects, then adaptively screens out desired editing
objects from different levels based on the text, thus dynamically
learning hierarchical pseudo words to meet diverse editing needs.

1. Introduction

spite significant improvements achieved, two major issues
remain. First, it is laborious and time-consuming to collect massive annotated triplets as training data. Second, supervised methods trained on specific domains are also hard
for generalization. Therefore, to alleviate the data-hunger
and domain generalization issues, considerable studies have
turned their attention to the zero-shot CIR (ZS-CIR) task.
Recently, pseudo word-based methods [4, 13, 24, 25,
31, 35] dominate this field credited to their simplicity yet
competitive performance. Current solutions [4, 31] aim to
learn a mapping network, which converts the image into a
pseudo word in the word embedding space and combines it
with the modified text, thus converting the CIR into a standard text-to-image retrieval problem. In general, existing
methods can be divided into two categories. The first single

Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) [3, 38, 39] aims to retrieve the target image based on a reference image and
a modification description. Unlike cross-modal retrieval
[10, 22, 48, 49], this bimodal query provides users with
more precise control over the desired images by integrating
visual and language content. As survey [50] pointed out,
previous CIR works [7, 18, 19, 40] mainly rely on supervised learning to compose the reference image and text. De* Corresponding author

24319

