This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving SAM for Camouflaged Object Detection via Dual Stream Adapters
Jiaming Liu, Linghe Kong∗ , Guihai Chen
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
{jmliu99, linghe.kong}@sjtu.edu.cn, gchen@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

𝐴𝑑𝑎𝑅𝐺𝐵
RGB Image

Supervised

𝐿𝑅𝐺𝐵

Segment anything model (SAM) has shown impressive
general-purpose segmentation performance on natural images, but its performance on camouflaged object detection
(COD) is unsatisfactory. In this paper, we propose SAMDSA that performs COD for RGB-D inputs via Dual Stream
Adapters. While keeping the SAM architecture intact, dual
stream adapters are expanded on the image encoder to
learn potential complementary information from RGB images and depth images, and fine-tune the mask decoder and
its depth-aware replica to perform dual-stream mask prediction. In practice, the dual stream adapters are embedded
into the attention block of the image encoder in a parallel
manner to facilitate the refinement and correction of the two
types of image embeddings. To mitigate channel discrepancies arising from dual stream embeddings that do not directly interact with each other, we augment the association
of dual stream embeddings using bidirectional knowledge
distillation including a model distiller and a modal distiller.
In addition, to predict the masks for RGB and depth attention maps, we integrate the two types of image embeddings
which are jointly learned with the prompt embeddings to
update the initial prompt, and then feed them into the mask
decoders to synchronize the consistency of image embeddings and prompt embeddings. Experimental results on four
COD benchmarks show that our SAM-DSA achieves excellent detection performance gains over SAM and achieves
state-of-the-art results with a given fine-tuning paradigm.

SAM

𝐿𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ

𝐴𝑑𝑎𝐷epth
Depth Image

Frozen

Tunable

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed SAM-DSA. The two learnable adapters based on the SAM model are extended to act on
paired input streams of RGB images and depth images, respectively. Subject to co-supervision, AdaRGB focuses on perceiving pixel semantics to segment objects and AdaDepth focuses on
structural transformation to separate objects from the background.

1. Introduction

jects have properties such as low contrast and texture blending to create visual confusion with the background [51].
Based on the above observations, we further argue that
fine-tuning is an important step in applying SAM to camouflaged images. We first analyze two key advantages associated with SAM: (1) The training dataset of SAM inherently contains a large number of backgrounds of camouflaged images, and the fixed parameters are sufficient to
parse the overall visual environment. (2) After fine-tuning
without changing the original weights, SAM still has strong
generalization potential as a pre-trained large-scale VFM,
which is crucial for effectively deploying models for COD
in images with large inter-domain differences.
We then aim to adapt SAM for specific applications
by incorporating domain knowledge. Recent studies on
parameter-efficient adaptation methods have explored two
primary strategies: fine-tuning a small subset of pretrained
parameters [44, 46, 66] and integrating lightweight adapter
modules [3, 7, 59]. The positive results have been achieved
with only a small number of parameter modifications or additions, which motivates us to develop an efficient SAM
adapter for the COD task. In contrast to previous research,
our desired adapter needs to be applicable to both modalities, as RGB images and depth images can naturally com-

SAM [26] is a visual foundation model (VFM) for promptable image segmentation with strong zero-shot capability
and wide generalization. A fact is that SAM’s ability to discriminate 2D images depends on the distribution coverage
from the training data. Thus, a natural question arises: can
SAM be directly extended to solve the task of segmenting
camouflaged images for special scenarios? Recent research
[8, 22] shows that this is not feasible, as camouflaged ob-

21906

