This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What to Distill? Fast Knowledge Distillation with Adaptive Sampling
Byungchul Chae
Kyung Hee University; SqueezeBits Inc.

Seonyeong Heo
Kyung Hee University

chaechae7@khu.ac.kr

seonyeong.heo@khu.ac.kr

Abstract

75

LogitSTD+Ours

Accuracy (%)

74.5

Knowledge Distillation (KD) has been established as an
effective technique for reducing the resource requirements
of models when tackling computer vision tasks. Prior work
has studied how to distill the knowledge of a teacher model
better, but it overlooks how data affects the distillation result. This work examines the impact of data in knowledge
distillation from two perspectives: (i) quantity of knowledge
and (ii) quality of knowledge. Our examination finds that
faster knowledge distillation can be achieved by using data
with a large amount of high-quality knowledge in distillation. Based on the findings, this work proposes an efficient
adaptive sampling method called KDAS for faster knowledge distillation, which enhances the distillation efficiency
by selecting and applying ‘good’ samples for the distillation. This work shows that our adaptive sampling methods
can effectively accelerate the training efficiency of a student
model when combined with existing KD methods.

74

LogitSTD
DKD

KD+Ours

73.5

ReviewKD
CRD

OFD

73

KD

72.5
72

RKD

71.5
FitNet

71
70.5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Relative Training Time

Figure 1. Average training time (relative to vanilla KD [9]) vs.
top-1 accuracy on CIFAR-100. We set ResNet110 as the teacher
and ResNet32 as the student.

This work first conducts an empirical analysis of the impact of training data on KD, specifically focusing on two
key perspectives: quantity of knowledge and quality of
knowledge. The underlying hypothesis of our investigation
is that not all data contribute equally to the distillation process; some data may contain richer information that can enhance the learning of the student model. We examine the
impact of data with the new metrics for the quantity and
quality of knowledge, aiming to provide insights into how
data should be applied for distillation efficiency.
Based on our analysis, we propose a new adaptive sampling method called KDAS for accelerating the distillation
process. The method dynamically selects and applies training samples, considering both the quantity and quality of
knowledge with two techniques: quantity-based subsampling and quality-calibrated loss weighting. The proposed
method can efficiently distill the knowledge of the teacher
model by excluding samples that have little or negative impact on the distillation process.
This work evaluates the adaptive sampling method in
combination with standard and state-of-the-art KD methods. The experimental results show that the proposed
method can accelerate the training of student models by at
most 36 % without compromising on performance. Furthermore, in many cases, the method enables an even higher
performance of student models. The results demonstrate
that the method can enable a more efficient and effective
development of resource-efficient models with KD.

1. Introduction
As deep learning has become more prevalent, reducing the
resource requirement of deep learning models is considered
essential for resource-constraint computing systems [19].
Among various model compression techniques, knowledge
distillation (KD) has emerged as a pivotal technique for
lowering the complexity of deep learning models. KD is to
transfer the knowledge of a sophisticated teacher model to
a simpler student model, enabling the student model to obtain comparable performance with fewer resources [5]. The
widespread adoption of KD demonstrates its significance in
modern machine learning applications.
Previous work has proposed a variety of methods to maximize the knowledge transfer from teacher models to student models [28]. Although these methods may help student models achieve a performance level similar to that of
teacher models, they do not sufficiently consider the role of
data in the distillation process. As far as we discover in this
work, the selection of data can largely influence the effectiveness and efficiency of KD, yet this dimension remains
underexplored in previous work.

2407

