This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-Level Optimization for Self-Supervised AI-Generated Face Detection
Mian Zou1,2 , Nan Zhong2 , Baosheng Yu3 , Yibing Zhan4 , and Kede Ma2, *
1
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics 2 City University of Hong Kong
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Yunnan United Vision Technology
mianzou2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {nzhong, kede.ma}@cityu.edu.hk,
baosheng.yu@ntu.edu.sg, zybjy@mail.ustc.edu.cn
https://github.com/MZMMSEC/AIGFD_BLO

Abstract
AI-generated face detectors trained via supervised learning
typically rely on synthesized images from specific generators, limiting their generalization to emerging generative
techniques. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a selfsupervised method based on bi-level optimization. In the inner loop, we pretrain a vision encoder only on photographic
face images using a set of linearly weighted pretext tasks:
classification of categorical exchangeable image file format
(EXIF) tags, ranking of ordinal EXIF tags, and detection of
artificial face manipulations. The outer loop then optimizes
the relative weights of these pretext tasks to enhance the
coarse-grained detection of manipulated faces, serving as a
proxy task for identifying AI-generated faces. In doing so,
it aligns self-supervised learning more closely with the ultimate goal of AI-generated face detection. Once pretrained,
the encoder remains fixed, and AI-generated faces are detected either as anomalies under a Gaussian mixture model
fitted to photographic face features or by a lightweight twolayer perceptron serving as a binary classifier. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our detectors significantly outperform existing approaches in both one-class and binary
classification settings, exhibiting strong generalization to
unseen generators.

1. Introduction
The synthesis of human faces by modern generative
models—ranging from generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [13, 27] to diffusion models [1, 39, 44, 46,
55, 58]—has reached a level of realism that renders AIgenerated faces virtually indistinguishable from “real” face
photographs [37]. While this progress unlocks enormous
creative and practical potential, it also amplifies risks related to misinformation, privacy breaches, and cybercrime.

As new generators emerge, the urgent need for robust detectors of AI-generated faces has never been greater.
Most existing detectors rely on supervised learning,
treating the problem as end-to-end feature learning and binary classification between photographic and AI-generated1
faces [7, 10, 12, 15, 32, 34, 47, 52, 53]. Unfortunately,
these methods latch onto artifacts specific to the generators seen during training, and thus struggle to adapt to
novel generative techniques. An alternative line of work
seeks model-agnostic cues, e.g., physiological inconsistencies in head poses [57], pupil shapes [18], or corneal highlights [22]. However, handcrafted features may miss the
subtle statistical differences introduced by state-of-the-art
generators. More recently, self-supervised features learned
solely from photographic images [8, 38] have demonstrated
better cross-generator performance. Yet, because their pretext tasks are not explicitly tailored to AI-generated face detection, these approaches can still fall short of optimal.
To bridge this gap, we build on the prior work [66]
by introducing a bi-level optimization scheme [9] that explicitly aligns self-supervised pretraining with AI-generated
face detection. In the inner loop, we train a vision encoder on face photographs using a linearly weighted combination of pretext tasks, including 1) classification of categorical exchangeable image file format (EXIF) tags (e.g.,
white balance mode and flash), 2) ranking of ordinal EXIF tags (e.g., ISO speed and aperture), and
3) detection of artificial face manipulations (e.g., flipped or
affine-warped regions). In the outer loop, we dynamically
adjust the relative task weights to refine the feature space
for coarse-grained manipulated face detection. This proxy
task enables us to better identify AI-generated faces without
ever incorporating them during self-supervision.
Once pretraining is complete, the encoder is frozen.
AI-generated faces can then be uncovered either by treat-

* Corresponding author.

18959

1 In this paper, we refrain from using the terms “real” and “fake,” since
it is challenging to operationalize a precise definition of “a real face” in the
context of image generation [65].

