This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHeaP: Self-Supervised Head Geometry Predictor Learned via 2D Gaussians
Liam Schoneveld1

Zhe Chen1

Davide Davoli2

Ko Nishino4
1

Woven by Toyota

2

Jiapeng Tang3

Saimon Terazawa1

Matthias Nießner3
3

Toyota Motor Europe NV/SA

Technical University of Munich

4

Kyoto University

associated partner by contracted service

Figure 1. Our method, named SHeaP, instantly predicts accurate human head geometry from a single image. First row: input images;
second row: predicted meshes; bottom row: rendered predicted Gaussians.

Abstract

1. Introduction
The accurate reconstruction and animation of 3D human
head models from single 2D images is a vital task in computer vision, with wide-ranging applications such as lifelike avatars for virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality
(AR), realistic digital content creation, and enhanced facial
recognition systems. These applications demand precise 3D
geometry to achieve high levels of realism and interaction
quality. Moreover, many of these applications require realtime processing, necessitating efﬁcient methods that can reconstruct 3D geometry from single 2D images. Estimating
accurate 3D head geometry from single images is, however,
extremely challenging due to the lack of inherent depth information, further compounded by variations in lighting,
expressions, and occlusions. These challenges necessitate
innovative approaches that can overcome these limitations
while achieving both speed and accuracy.

Accurate, real-time 3D reconstruction of human heads
from monocular images and videos underlies numerous visual applications. As 3D ground truth data is hard to come
by at scale, previous methods have sought to learn from
abundant 2D videos in a self-supervised manner. Typically,
this involves the use of differentiable mesh rendering, which
is effective but faces limitations. To improve on this, we
propose SHeaP (Self-supervised Head Geometry Predictor
Learned via 2D Gaussians). Given a source image, we predict a 3DMM mesh and a set of Gaussians that are rigged
to this mesh. We then reanimate this rigged head avatar
to match a target frame, and backpropagate photometric
losses to both the 3DMM and Gaussian prediction networks. We ﬁnd that using Gaussians for rendering substantially improves the effectiveness of this self-supervised approach. Training solely on 2D data, our method surpasses
existing self-supervised approaches in geometric evaluations on the NoW benchmark for neutral faces and a new
benchmark for non-neutral expressions. Our method also
produces highly expressive meshes, outperforming state-ofthe-art in emotion classiﬁcation.

14162

To simplify the task of human head geometry estimation,
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) are often used. Ofﬂine
optimization-based methods have been effective in achieving high-quality reconstructions but are often computationally intensive and unsuitable for real-time applications. As
a result, there has been a shift toward using feedforward

