This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Augmented and Softened Matching for Unsupervised Visible-Infrared Person
Re-Identification
Zhiqi Pang1
1

Lingling Zhao1
Junjie Wang2
Chunyu Wang1 *
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Nanjing Medical University, China

zqpang98@gmail.com, chunyu@hit.edu.cn, zhaoll@hit.edu.cn, junjiehit@163.com

Abstract
Color variations, a key challenge in the unsupervised
visible-infrared person re-identification (UVI-ReID) task,
have garnered significant attention. While existing UVIReID methods have made substantial efforts during the
optimization phase to enhance the model’s robustness to
color variations, they often overlook the impact of color
variations on the acquisition of pseudo-labels. To address
this, in this paper, we focus on improving the robustness
of pseudo-labels to color variations through data augmentation and propose an augmented and softened matching
(ASM) method. Specifically, we first develop the crossmodality augmented matching (CAM) module, which performs channel augmentation on visible images to generate
augmented images. Then, based on the fusion of the visibleinfrared and augmented-infrared centroid similarity matrices, CAM establishes cross-modality correspondences that
are robust to color variations. To increase training stability,
we design a soft-labels momentum update (SMU) strategy,
which converts traditional one-hot labels into soft-labels
through momentum updates, thus adapting to CAM. During the optimization phase, we introduce the cross-modality
soft contrastive loss and cross-modality hard contrastive
loss to promote modality-invariant learning from the perspectives of shared and diversified features, respectively.
Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness of
the proposed method, showing that ASM not only outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods but also competes with some supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) [10, 13,
15, 17, 18, 25, 29] aims to match images of the same person across the visible and infrared modalities. Leveraging
various custom model architectures [38, 42] and multiple
* Corresponding author: Chunyu Wang

Dual
Similarity

Single
Similarity

Visible
cluster

similarity
similarity

similarity

Match?

Infrared cluster

Match?

similarity

Visible cluster

(a) Existing methods

Infrared
cluster

Augmented
cluster

(b) CAM in ASM

Figure 1. The differences between existing methods and CAM
in ASM. (a) Existing methods match the visible clusters with the
infrared clusters directly. (b) CAM integrates both visible-infrared
and augmented-infrared similarities.

optimization strategies [40, 41, 45], existing supervised VIReID (SVI-ReID) methods have achieved promising performance. However, the heavy reliance on manually annotated
identity labels in SVI-ReID severely limits their flexibility.
As a result, many researchers have shifted their focus to unsupervised VI-ReID (UVI-ReID) methods [2, 27, 30, 32–
36], which typically use automatically generated pseudolabels to replace the manual identity labels.
Existing UVI-ReID methods typically first perform
intra-modality homogeneous learning, followed by intermodality heterogeneous learning [30, 32, 36]. The former
focuses on enabling the model to acquire preliminary identity recognition capabilities, while the latter emphasizes enhancing the model’s robustness to modality gaps, which is
the primary focus of existing UVI-ReID methods. In the
pseudo-label acquisition stage of heterogeneous learning,
current methods first use clustering algorithms [6] to obtain identity pseudo-labels within each modality (i.e., intramodality pseudo-labels), and then apply matching methods to acquire cross-modality correspondences (i.e., intermodality pseudo-labels). During the optimization phase,
color variations [41, 43] have emerged as a key factor contributing to the gaps between the visible and infrared modalities, attracting significant attention from researchers. To

11100

