This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TruthPrInt: Mitigating Large Vision-Language Models Object Hallucination
Via Latent Truthful-Guided Pre-Intervention
Jinhao Duan1 *, Fei Kong2 ∗ , Hao Cheng3 , James Diffenderfer4 , Bhavya Kailkhura4 ,
Lichao Sun5 , Xiaofeng Zhu2 , Xiaoshuang Shi2 , Kaidi Xu1†
1
Drexel University 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 4 LLNL 5 Lehigh University

Abstract

ing and instruction following, their trustworthiness is threatened by Object Hallucination (OH) [42, 43]. Although recent work reveals that Large Language Model (LLM) internal states, such as hidden states, entail richer semantic
and contextual information [1, 4, 5, 12, 27, 65] that can reveal the truthfulness (or uncertainty) [13, 24, 30] of model
generations, it remains under-explored (i) whether internal states in LVLMs encode information about truthfulness,
(ii) whether they support “per-token” hallucination analysis, and (iii) whether this information can be transferred
to enhance practical applications, e.g., Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) shifting. Preliminary research on internal states of
LVLM relies mainly on statistical aspects of internal states
to identify hallucinations, such as self-attention activation
patterns [18, 21] and long-term decay [56] in RoPE [45].
However, these approaches do not explicitly link hidden
states to hallucination behaviors and tend to be effective
only for specific datasets and model architectures.
In this paper, we investigate: Are internal states reliable and practical indicators of LVLM per-token hallucination behaviors? To answer this, we first create datasets consisting of thousands of internal states,
each labeled with hallucination membership, i.e., as truthful or hallucinated. By training models on it for hallucination detection, we observe that ➊ LVLM internal
states provide undesirable overall performance yet they are
high-specificity indicators: the Likelihood Ratio for Positive Results (LR+) achieves nearly 20, indicating internal states provide confident detection with extremely low
false alarm; ➋ There exist latent common hallucination
subspaces shared by different LVLMs, in which detectors
trained on the projections in this subspace are capable of
transferring to OOD domains. This suggests the existence
of common “truthful directions” shared by various LVLMs.
Based on these, we design TruthPrInt, a novel
two-stage OH mitigation framework: first locating hallucinated tokens from latent subspace and then performing truthful-guided interventions enabling truthful decoding. We also propose ComnHallu, a hallucination sub-

Object Hallucination (OH) has been acknowledged as
one of the major trustworthy challenges in Large VisionLanguage Models (LVLMs). Recent advancements in
Large Language Models (LLMs) indicate that internal
states, such as hidden states, encode the “overall truthfulness” of generated responses. However, it remains
under-explored how internal states in LVLMs function and
whether they could serve as “per-token” hallucination indicators, which is essential for mitigating OH. In this paper, we first conduct an in-depth exploration of LVLM internal states with OH issues and discover that ➊ LVLM
internal states are high-specificity per-token indicators of
hallucination behaviors. Moreover, ➋ different LVLMs encode universal patterns of hallucinations in common latent subspaces, indicating that there exist “generic truthful directions” shared by various LVLMs. Based on these
discoveries, we propose Truthful-Guided Pre-Intervention
(TruthPrInt) that first learns the truthful direction of
LVLM decoding and then applies truthful-guided inferencetime intervention during LVLM decoding. We further propose ComnHallu to enhance both cross-LVLM and crossdata hallucination detection transferability by constructing and aligning hallucination latent subspaces. We evaluate TruthPrInt in extensive experimental settings, including in-domain and out-of-domain scenarios, over popular LVLMs and OH benchmarks. Experimental results indicate that TruthPrInt significantly outperforms stateof-the-art methods. Codes will be available at https:
//github.com/jinhaoduan/TruthPrInt.

1. Introduction
As Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [32, 58, 64]
have rapidly advanced in cross-modal content understand* Equal Contribution
† Correspondence to Kaidi Xu kx46@drexel.edu

7372

