This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shot-by-Shot: Film-Grammar-Aware Training-Free Audio Description Generation
Junyu Xie 1

Tengda Han1 Max Bain1 Arsha Nagrani1 Eshika Khandelwal 2,3
Gül Varol1,3 Weidi Xie1,4 Andrew Zisserman1
1
3

2
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad
4
LIGM, École des Ponts ParisTech
SAI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/vgg/research/shot-by-shot/

Thread 0

AD video clip
Shot 0

Shot-based
+
temporal context
Shot number
+
labelling

Film
grammar
prediction

Shot 1

Shot 2

Thread structure

Shot scales

Thread 0:
[Shot 0, Shot 2, Shot 4]

Shot 0: Medium shot
Shot 1: Medium shot
Shot 2: Medium shot
Shot 3: Full shot

Thread 1: [Shot 1]
Thread 2: [Shot 3]

......

Shot 3

Training-free
prompting

Predicted AD

Shot 4

Stage I VideoLLM
Stage II

LLM

Holding the open box of detergent,
Leonard peers at Penny.

Figure 1. Overview of our training-free Audio Description (AD) generation framework. The input video clip (corresponding to the AD interval)
is extended to include adjacent shots, providing richer temporal visual context. Each video frame is labeled with its corresponding shot number.
The extended clip then undergoes a film grammar prediction process, where the thread structure and shot scales are estimated. The AD is generated
in two stages: Stage I utilises the predicted cinematic information as training-free prompt guidance to produce dense video descriptions. Stage
II then employs an LLM to generate a summarised AD output.

Abstract
Our objective is the automatic generation of Audio Descriptions
(ADs) for edited video material, such as movies and TV series.
To achieve this, we propose a two-stage framework that leverages “shots” as the fundamental units of video understanding.
This includes extending temporal context to neighboring shots
and incorporating film grammar devices, such as shot scales
and thread structures, to guide AD generation. Our method
is compatible with both open-source and proprietary VisualLanguage Models (VLMs), integrating expert knowledge from
add-on modules without requiring additional training of the
VLMs. We achieve state-of-the-art performance among all prior
training-free approaches and even surpass fine-tuned methods
on several benchmarks. To evaluate the quality of predicted
ADs, we introduce a new evaluation measure – an action score –
specifically targeted to assessing this important aspect of AD.
Additionally, we propose a novel evaluation protocol that treats
automatic frameworks as AD generation assistants and asks
them to generate multiple candidate ADs for selection.

1. Introduction
In movies and TV series, Audio Descriptions (ADs) are
narrations provided for the visually impaired, conveying visual
information to complement the original soundtrack. Their

purpose is to ensure a continuous and coherent narrative flow,
enabling audiences to follow the plot effectively. Unlike video
captions, ADs are constrained by length, prioritising the most
visually salient and story-centric information, such as character
dynamics and significant objects, whilst omitting redundant
details like background figures or unchanging locations.
Additionally, ADs are typically produced by professional
narrators in a specific style and format, ensuring coherence
while not interfering with the original audio.
With the advent of Visual-Language Models (VLMs), there
has been a growth of interest in automatically generating ADs
for both movies [16, 23–25, 45, 72, 86, 89] and TV material [19, 82]. However, as anyone who has ever watched a movie
or read a book about film editing knows – the fundamental unit
of edited video material is the shot, not the frame [37, 50, 52].
Shots are used to structure the video material, defining the
granularity and temporal context through choices in its scale
(close-up, long shot, etc.) and its movement (panning, tracking,
etc.). The “film grammar” is then used to convey meaning
through specific editing choices on shot transitions (cuts, fades,
etc.), durations, and composition (threads, montage, etc.).
Current approaches to automating AD generation, and
video large language models (VideoLLMs) in general, are not
shot-aware, hindering interpretation of edited video material that
has frequent shot transitions [68]. In this paper, our principal

16503

