This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

INSTINCT: Instance-Level Interaction Architecture for Query-Based
Collaborative Perception
Yunjiang Xu1 , Lingzhi Li1 *, Jin Wang2 *, Yupeng Ouyang1 , Benyuan Yang2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University
2
School of Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University
{yjxu95, ouyangchina1}@gmail.com, {lilingzhi, wjin1985, byyang}@suda.edu.cn

Abstract

INSTINCT: Instance Interation

...

Collaborative perception systems overcome single-vehicle
limitations in long-range detection and occlusion scenarios by integrating multi-agent sensory data, improving accuracy and safety. However, frequent cooperative interactions and real-time requirements impose stringent bandwidth constraints. Previous works proves that querybased instance-level interaction reduces bandwidth demands and manual priors, however, LiDAR-focused implementations in collaborative perception remain underdeveloped, with performance still trailing state-of-theart approaches. To bridge this gap, we propose INSTINCT (INSTance-level INteraCtion ArchiTecture), a
novel collaborative perception framework featuring three
core components: 1) a quality-aware filtering mechanism
for high-quality instance feature selection; 2) a dualbranch detection routing scheme to decouple collaborationirrelevant and collaboration-relevant instances; and 3)
a Cross Agent Local Instance Fusion module to aggregate local hybrid instance features. Additionally, we enhance the ground truth (GT) sampling technique to facilitate training with diverse hybrid instance features. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets demonstrate
that INSTINCT achieves superior performance. Specifically, our method achieves an improvement in accuracy
13.23%/33.08% in DAIR-V2X and V2V4Real while reducing the communication bandwidth to 1/281 and 1/264 compared to state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/CrazyShout/INSTINCT.

...
...

...

Single queries
Fused queries

...

Much less communciation volume

Stronger performance

Fused
Features
Sparse Features Interaction

Figure 1. By implementing the innovative instance interaction architecture, INSTINCT demonstrates superior performance while
operating under lower bandwidth constraints.

1. Introduction

ever, traditional single-agent perception systems are constrained by limited sensing range and inherent sensor deficiencies, leading to blind spots in obstructed scenarios and
adverse weather conditions, posing significant safety risks.
Multi-view and multi-agent collaborative perception addresses these limitations by utilizing distributed sensor networks. For example, infrastructure-based sensors, such as
cameras and LiDAR, typically offer higher resolution, improved accuracy, and wider coverage, enabling effective detection of distant objects. Currently, collaborative perception methods are classified into early fusion, intermediate
fusion, and late fusion, with intermediate fusion showing
the greatest potential. Notably, extensive research has focused on Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) systems [16, 28, 29],
integrating vehicle and infrastructure data to significantly
enhance perception performance.
However, as shown in Fig.1, the requirement for realtime perception (≥10Hz) poses a severe challenge to
communication bandwidth. Traditional intermediate fusion methods directly transmit complete feature maps
[19, 24, 29], resulting in enormous bandwidth pressure.
Where2comm [6] filters key information by constructing request and requirement graphs, and CodeFilling [7] further

Perception is critical in autonomous driving, providing accurate inputs for decision-making and control. LiDAR has
emerged as a key sensor for object detection, thanks to its
exceptional 3D perception capabilities [11, 26, 27]. How* Corresponding author.

25464

