This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anti-Tamper Protection for Unauthorized Individual Image Generation
Zelin Li

Ruohan Zong

Yifan Liu Ruichen Yao Yaokun Liu Yang Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Dong Wang

{zelin3, rzong2, yifan40, ryao8, yaokunl2, yzhangnd, dwang24}@illinois.edu

Abstract
With the advancement of personalized image generation
technologies, concerns about forgery attacks that infringe
on portrait rights and privacy are growing. To address these concerns, protection perturbation algorithms
have been developed to disrupt forgery generation. However, the protection algorithms would become ineffective
when forgery attackers apply purification techniques to bypass the protection. To address this issue, we present a
novel approach, Anti-Tamper Perturbation (ATP). ATP introduces a tamper-proof mechanism within the perturbation. It consists of protection and authorization perturbations, where the protection perturbation defends against
forgery attacks, while the authorization perturbation detects purification-based tampering. Both protection and
authorization perturbations are applied in the frequency
domain under the guidance of a mask, ensuring that the
protection perturbation does not disrupt the authorization
perturbation. This design also enables the authorization
perturbation to be distributed across all image pixels, preserving its sensitivity to purification-based tampering. ATP
demonstrates its effectiveness in defending forgery attacks
across various attack settings through extensive experiments, providing a robust solution for protecting individuals’ portrait rights and privacy. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/Seeyn/Anti-Tamper-Perturbation .

ized generation services, infringing on the data owner’s portrait rights and privacy. In this scenario, the online service
providers may inadvertently become accomplices of attackers by providing easily accessible services [7].
To defend the forgery attack, a set of protection methods [17–20, 28] have been proposed. They disrupt the personalized generation process by injecting protection perturbations into data owners’ images. As shown in Figure 1(b),
the service provider injects protection perturbations to degrade the quality of generated images to prevent the forgery
attacks. However, the protection perturbations can be easily
purified by even naive purification methods (e.g., resizing
or JPEG compression) [12, 31]. The forgery attacker can
purify the protection perturbations to bypass the protection
schemes and generate fake individual images again.

1. Introduction

As the essence of purification is to tamper the protection
perturbation, the service provider can defend it by adopting
a tamper-proof mechanism. As shown in Figure 1(c), the
tamper-proof mechanism alerts the service provider when
the protection perturbation is altered, allowing the service
provider to counteract attacks by refusing generation requests from tampered images. This approach is similar to
the Not Safe For Work (NSFW) content filtering mechanism [2], where the service provider inspects the generation request and its output to ensure no harmful content
is present. Likewise, the tamper-proof mechanism detects
and prevents attacks targeting tampering protection perturbations, enhancing the service provider’s defense capabilities. It is noteworthy that the tamper-proof mechanism
is designed from the perspective of the service provider,
where the purpose is to prevent the forgery attacker from
misusing the service to launch a forgery attack. The attackers may still be able to launch the attack on their own devices. However, it is not the focus of this paper because it is
not the service provider’s responsibility and requires highperformance computing resources from the attacker rather
than the effortless API calls used to exploit the service.

In recent years, with the development of personalized generation technology, online services for creating customized
individual images have become widely available [8, 13,
25]. Users can easily create customized individual images
with text prompts by submitting requests to online service
providers such as Civitai1 and Midjourney2 . However, personalized generation technology also raises serious ethical
and legal concerns. As shown in Figure 1(a), forgery attackers can create fake individual images using online personal1 https://civitai.com

Implementing a tamper-proof mechanism is challenging,
as tamper-proofing requires protection perturbations to contain verifiable information that can be checked for potential
tampering. However, protection perturbations are funda-

2 https://www.midjourney.com

15501

