This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeshPad: Interactive Sketch-Conditioned Artist-Reminiscent
Mesh Generation and Editing
Haoxuan Li1

Ziya Erkoc1 Lei Li1 Daniele Sirigatti2
Angela Dai1 Matthias Nießner1
1

ADD

ADD

ADD

Technical University of Munich

ADD

DEL

ADD

ADD

2

Vladislav Rosov2

AUDI AG

DEL

ADD

ADD

Figure 1. MeshPad enables interactive mesh creation and editing with sketches. We decompose this complex task into two sketchconditioned operations: addition and deletion. Top: our method allows for a user to create and modify artist-reminiscent triangle meshes
by simply drawing and editing 2D sketches, achieving intuitive and interactive 3D modeling. Bottom (left): our method generates a variety
of complex yet compact meshes. Bottom (right): our interactive user interface allows users to iteratively edit the mesh, with each edit step
taking a few seconds.

Abstract
We introduce MeshPad, a generative approach that creates 3D meshes from sketch inputs. Building on recent advances in artist-reminiscent triangle mesh generation, our
approach addresses the need for interactive mesh creation.
To this end, we focus on enabling consistent edits by decomposing editing into ‘deletion’ of regions of a mesh, followed by ‘addition’ of new mesh geometry. Both operations
are invoked by simple user edits of a sketch image, facilitating an iterative content creation process and enabling
the construction of complex 3D meshes. Our approach is
based on a triangle sequence-based mesh representation,
exploiting a large Transformer model for mesh triangle addition and deletion. In order to perform edits interactively,
we introduce a vertex-aligned speculative prediction strat-

egy on top of our additive mesh generator. This speculator
predicts multiple output tokens corresponding to a vertex,
thus signiﬁcantly reducing the computational cost of inference and accelerating the editing process, making it possible to execute each editing step in only a few seconds. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that MeshPad outperforms state-of-the-art sketch-conditioned mesh generation
methods, achieving more than 22% mesh quality improvement in Chamfer distance, and being preferred by 90% of
participants in perceptual evaluations.

16227

1. Introduction
Triangle meshes are one of the most predominant 3D representations used in 3D production applications, from video
games to virtual reality and movies. Mesh creation and
editing is thus a central element of computer graphics. In

