This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArchiSet: Benchmarking Editable and Consistent Single-View 3D
Reconstruction of Buildings with Specific Window-to-Wall Ratios
Jun Yin1,∗ , Pengyu Zeng1,∗ , Licheng Shen1,∗ , Miao Zhang1 , Jing Zhong1 , Yuxing Han1,† , Shuai Lu1,†
1

Tsinghua University

yinj24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
∗

†

Equal contribution.

shuai.lu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Corresponding authors.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been rapid progress in the field of converting 2D images into precise 3D models [2, 14, 21, 22,
24, 32, 33, 47, 48, 52, 53, 58]. This technology is essential
for capturing spatial features, expanding data dimensions,
and supporting applications in areas like geographic information systems [42], City Information Modeling (CIM) [6],
and virtual simulation [28]. However, most existing studies
primarily use highly industrialized, geometrically symmetric 3D objects (e.g., airplanes or chairs) as training datasets
[3, 8, 36]. In these datasets, there is often a strong correspondence between texture and form; for instance, A car’s
windows are typically located along the sides of the vehicle, often integrated into the curved door panels, and are
typically a single layer vertically. In contrast, building facades do not follow such strict correspondences, as window
placements on a flat surface are more of a design choice
with multiple possibilities [19, 25, 26]. In architectural design, it’s common for designers to be satisfied with most
parts of a facade but require substantial additional work due
to dissatisfaction with specific details [18, 44].

Image-based 3D Genetation has made significant
progress in typical scenarios, achieving high fidelity in capturing intricate textures. However, in the Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) design stages, existing technologies still face considerable challenges, particularly in handling specific window-to-wall ratios, ensuring
window detail consistency, and enabling interactive editing. To address this research gap and encourage greater
community attention on this practical architectural design
problem, we propose a new task: Editable and Consistent Single-View 3D Genetation of Buildings with Specific
Window-to-Wall Ratios. To accomplish this: 1) We introduce the ArchiSet dataset, the first public, real-world architectural design dataset, including 13,728 3D building forms
in the format of point clouds, voxels, meshes, and windowto-wall ratio information, providing comprehensive support
for 3D architectural design research. The dataset also contains over 1,482,624 images in three types—sketches, color
block diagrams, and renderings—accompanied by paired
window masks for detailed evaluation. 2) We evaluated
state-of-the-art single-view 3D Genetation algorithms on
ArchiSet, identifying several limitations, such as the loss
of volumetric detail, incomplete window details, and limited editability. 3) We introduce BuildingMesh, a diffusion
model specifically designed for generating and editing 3D
architectural forms from a single image with customizable
window-to-wall ratios, suitable for dynamic architectural
design workflows. We propose an regularized method to ensure window consistency. Our framework also includes an
interactive module for easy further editing, enhancing platform efficiency and accuracy in professional architectural
design workflows. Experimental results demonstrate that
BuildingMesh achieves high-quality 3D generation with improved design flexibility. Project page: website

26004

Figure 1. Example Instances from our ArchiSet dataset.

Moreover, as windows significantly impact building energy consumption, design standards vary across regions and
climates, requiring different window-to-wall ratios (WWR)
[27].Calculating the WWR requires acquiring the distribution ratio of window-to-wall areas for each facade at the
pixel level. Consequently, it serves as a guiding signal for
all newly synthesized views in multi-view generation tasks.
The inability to specify these ratios or accurately repre-

