This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teaching VLMs to Localize Specific Objects from In-context Examples
Sivan Doveh*2 Nimrod Shabtay*1,3 Eli Schwartz1 Hilde Kuehne1,4 Raja Giryes3 Rogerio Feris5
Leonid Karlinsky5 James Glass6 Assaf Arbelle1 Shimon Ullman2 M. Jehanzeb Mirza6
1 IBM Research

2 Weizmann Institute of Science

4 Tuebingen AI Center

5 MIT-IBM

3 Tel Aviv University,

6 MIT CSAIL

Figure 1. In-context personalized localization involves localizing object instances present in a scene (or query image) similar to the object
presented as an in-context example. In this setting, the input to the model is a category name, in-context image, bounding box
coordinates (not shown in this figure), and a query image. The model is tasked with localizing the same category of interest (presented
as an in-context example) in the query image. Here, we visualize a few inputs and outputs from various VLMs highlighting that our
fine-tuned model better captures the information in the in-context image.

Abstract

ject tracking datasets. By leveraging sequences of frames
tracking the same object across multiple shots, we simulate
instruction-tuning dialogues that promote context awareness. To reinforce this, we introduce a novel regularization
technique that replaces object labels with pseudo-names,
ensuring the model relies on visual context rather than prior
knowledge. Our method significantly enhances the few-shot
localization performance of recent VLMs ranging from 7B
to 72B in size, without sacrificing generalization, as demonstrated on several benchmarks tailored towards evaluating
personalized localization abilities. This work is the first
to explore and benchmark personalized few-shot localization for VLMs – exposing critical weaknesses in presentday VLMs, and laying a foundation for future research in
context-driven vision-language applications.

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have shown remarkable
capabilities across diverse visual tasks, including image
recognition, video understanding, and Visual Question Answering (VQA) when explicitly trained for these tasks. Despite these advances, we find that present-day VLMs (including the proprietary GPT-4o) lack a fundamental cognitive
ability: learning to localize specific objects in a scene by
taking into account the context. In this work, we focus
on the task of few-shot personalized localization, where a
model is given a small set of annotated images (in-context
examples) – each with a category label and bounding box
– and is tasked with localizing the same object type in a
query image. Personalized localization can be particularly
important in cases of ambiguity of several related objects
that can respond to a text or an object that is hard to describe with words. To provoke personalized localization
abilities in models, we present a data-centric solution that
fine-tunes them using carefully curated data from video ob-

9572

