This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AU-Blendshape for Fine-grained Stylized 3D Facial Expression Manipulation
Hao Li1,2 , Ju Dai2, ,* Feng Zhou3 , Kaida Ning2 , Lei Li4,5 , Junjun Pan1,2,∗
1
Beihang University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 North China University of Technology,
4
University of Washington, 5 University of Copenhagen
{lih09, daij, ningkd}@pcl.ac.cn, zhoufeng@ncut.edu.cn, lilei@di.ku.dk, pan junjun@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
While 3D facial animation has made impressive
progress, challenges still exist in realizing fine-grained stylized 3D facial expression manipulation due to the lack
of appropriate datasets. In this paper, we introduce the
AUBlendSet, a 3D facial dataset based on AU-Blendshape
representation for fine-grained facial expression manipulation across identities. AUBlendSet is a blendshape data
collection based on 32 standard facial action units (AUs)
across 500 identities, along with an additional set of facial
postures annotated with detailed AUs. Based on AUBlendSet, we propose AUBlendNet to learn AU-Blendshape basis vectors for different character styles. AUBlendNet
predicts, in parallel, the AU-Blendshape basis vectors of
the corresponding style for a given identity mesh, thereby
achieving stylized 3D emotional facial manipulation. We
comprehensively validate the effectiveness of AUBlendSet and AUBlendNet through tasks such as stylized facial expression manipulation, speech-driven emotional facial animation, and emotion recognition data augmentation. Through a series of qualitative and quantitative experiments, we demonstrate the potential and importance
of AUBlendSet and AUBlendNet in 3D facial animation
tasks. To the best of our knowledge, AUBlendSet is the
first dataset, and AUBlendNet is the first network for continuous 3D facial expression manipulation for any identity through facial AUs. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/wslh852/AUBlendNet.git.

stylization can effectively help animators accurately construct characters’ emotions, thereby improving narrative effectiveness and audience resonance [32, 34].

Interactiveness
Reliability

A3
A4

B1
Deep Learning
Framework

Emotional tags

A1
A2

B2
B3
B4

Facial Emotion Classification Dataset

Standardized Facial Expression Base

Fine-grained
Facial Expression Analysis Dataset

AUBlendSet
Stylization
Response Time

Figure 1. Comparisons of different datasets for facial expression
manipulation regarding control basis reliability, stylization, interactiveness, fine-grained, and response time.

1. Introduction

Due to diverse constraints in available facial emotion
datasets, achieving fine-grained stylized facial expression
manipulation confronts various challenges. As shown in
Figure 1, off-the-shelf standardized facial expression control usually generates characters’ expressions through predefined universal blendshapes [5, 13]. Although those
methods present some flexibility, they lack precise descriptions of stylization characteristics.
Facial emotion classification datasets [37, 39] typically
annotate emotions into categories that do not provide appropriate facial control bases. Besides, the lack of subtle facial action annotations during the annotation process makes
it challenging to achieve fine-grained facial expression manipulation. Despite the facial expression analysis dataset
using Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [8] to annotate
facial details, it can not provide reliable facial manipulation
like blendshape animation. Therefore, building a dataset
with user-friendly interactiveness and support for stylized
facial expression manipulation is essential and meaningful.
The FACS is widely adopted in behavioral science and

Along with the development of virtual reality and metaverse, 3D facial animation has become a prominent research
topic [6, 9, 28]. Facial expressions, as the core expression
of human emotions and intentions, play a crucial role in
facial animation production. A fine-grained, controllable
facial expression manipulation algorithm with customized
* Corresponding authors

12605

