This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TeethGenerator: A two-stage framework for paired pre- and post-orthodontic
3D dental data generation
Changsong Lei1

Yaqian Liang1,3,∗ Shaofeng Wang2 Jiajia Dai1
1
Tsinghua University, China
2
Capital Medical University, China
3
Taiyuan University of Technology, China

leics23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

yqyaliang@gmail.com

Yong-Jin Liu1,∗

2939108747@ccmu.edu.cn

{daijiajia, liuyongjin}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Digital orthodontics represents a prominent and critical
application of computer vision technology in the medical
field. So far, the labor-intensive process of collecting clinical data, particularly in acquiring paired 3D orthodontic teeth models, constitutes a crucial bottleneck for developing tooth arrangement neural networks. Although numerous general 3D shape generation methods have been
proposed, most of them focus on single-object generation
and are insufficient for generating anatomically structured
teeth models, each comprising 24-32 segmented teeth. In
this paper, we propose TeethGenerator, a novel two-stage
framework designed to synthesize paired 3D teeth models
pre- and post-orthodontic, aiming to facilitate the training of downstream tooth arrangement networks. Specifically, our approach consists of two key modules: (1) a teeth
shape generation module that leverages a diffusion model
to learn the distribution of morphological characteristics of
teeth, enabling the generation of diverse post-orthodontic
teeth models; and (2) a teeth style generation module that
synthesizes corresponding pre-orthodontic teeth models by
incorporating desired styles as conditional inputs. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate
that our synthetic dataset aligns closely with the distribution of real orthodontic data, and promotes tooth alignment performance significantly when combined with real
data for training. The code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/lcshhh/teeth generator.

Stage I

Stage II

Style

Synthetic

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed TeethGenerator, where Stage
I generates post-orthodontic teeth models and Stage II generates
pre-orthodontic teeth models that have similar postures to the style
model while preserving teeth’s morphological identity.

1. Introduction

digital orthodontics within the medical domain. Orthodontic treatment aims to correct irregular tooth arrangements
to achieve an aesthetically pleasing, balanced, and stable dental arch with proper occlusal relationship. In digital orthodontics, designing ideal target tooth positions is
a pivotal challenge, as these positions fundamentally influence treatment planning and clinical outcomes. Traditionally, this process relies heavily on the expertise and aesthetic judgment of dentists and technicians. To enhance
the efficiency and intelligence of digital orthodontic workflows, researchers have developed automated systems for
predicting orthodontic target positions, e.g., TANet [37],
OrthoGAN [27], Tooth Motion Diffusion [5], TADPM [10],
etc. These data-driven approaches leverage insights from
historical orthodontic cases to generate clinically reasonable target tooth positions for new patients, providing valu-

Computer vision technology has played an important role
in many natural science and engineering fields, including
∗ Corresponding authors

25872

