This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simultaneous Motion And Noise Estimation with Event Cameras
Shintaro Shiba1,2,3 , Yoshimitsu Aoki1 and Guillermo Gallego3,4
1
Keio University, 2 Woven by Toyota, Inc., Japan. 3 Technische Universität Berlin, 4 Einstein Center
Digital Future, Robotics Institute Germany, and Science of Intelligence Excellence Cluster, Germany.
Abstract

Input

Event cameras are emerging vision sensors whose noise
is challenging to characterize. Existing denoising methods for event cameras are often designed in isolation and
thus consider other tasks, such as motion estimation, separately (i.e., sequentially after denoising). However, motion
is an intrinsic part of event data, since scene edges cannot be sensed without motion. We propose, to the best of
our knowledge, the first method that simultaneously estimates motion in its various forms (e.g., ego-motion, optical
flow) and noise. The method is flexible, as it allows replacing the one-step motion estimation of the widely-used Contrast Maximization framework with any other motion estimator, such as deep neural networks. The experiments show
that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art results
on the E-MLB denoising benchmark and competitive results
on the DND21 benchmark, while demonstrating effectiveness across motion estimation and intensity reconstruction
tasks. Our approach advances event-data denoising theory
and expands practical denoising use-cases via open-source
code. Project page: https:// github.com/ tub-rip/ ESMD

Joint Motion Estimation and Denoising

ℰ"

Flow color
wheel

ℰ!

Denoiser
(S/N Classification)

Output

1 step of Motion
Estimation

" (Flow, Rotational

Warp

Events

ℰ #!

motion, etc.)

ℰ"#

ℰ"

Signal IWE

ℰ!

Noise

Iterations

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method. We use only raw
events as input, and estimate signal events, noise events, and motion (e.g., dense optical flow and ego-motion estimation).

data could change event signal/noise characteristics, possibly deteriorating the information that the original event had
for downstream tasks (e.g., motion estimation). Our work is
inspired by the observation that motion is an intrinsic part of
event data since scene edges cannot be sensed without motion. Rather than solving denoising and motion estimation
tasks separately, our idea is to leverage motion information
to improve denoising (as “vice-versa” is well known). In
this work (Fig. 1), we rethink and investigate the connection
between denoising and motion estimation, by asking ourselves whether they can be combined in a more integrated
way to benefit the results of both tasks simultaneously. We
formulate the simultaneous estimation problem by leveraging the idea of motion compensation in the Contrast Maximization (CMax) framework, defining novel metrics about
the contribution to the contrast score for each event. In summary, we present several distinctive contributions:

1. Introduction
Event cameras are emerging vision sensors that overcome
shortcomings of conventional cameras (e.g., motion blur,
limited dynamic range, data and power efficiency), yet they
suffer from a considerable amount of noise due to their
novelty and operation in low-power (transistor subthreshold) conditions [19, 36]. Since event cameras are suitable
for many computer vision tasks, especially motion-related
tasks, it is paramount to classify event data that is related
to motion (i.e., signal) and that is not (i.e., noise). However, denoising event data is a challenging problem because
noise properties have yet to be fully characterized [22, 24]
and it is infeasible to define ground-truth (GT) noise labels
in real-world data recordings. Previous works either leveraged simulation or prepared real event data and aggressively
suppressed noise occurrence.
However, such artificial modifications on the real event

1. We propose a novel method to jointly estimate noise and
motion only from event data (Sec. 3).
2. We demonstrate that our joint estimation method (i)
achieves state-of-the-art results in existing denoising
benchmarks (Sec. 4.2), and (ii) improves the robustness
of motion estimation (CMax framework) (Sec. 4.3).

6959

