This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoHD: A Counting-Aware Hierarchical Decoding Framework
for Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation
Zhuoyan Luo1†, Yinghao Wu1,2†,
Tianheng Cheng , Yong Liu , Yicheng Xiao1 , Hongfa Wang4 , Xiao-Ping Zhang1,2B , Yujiu Yang1B
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School (SIGS), Tsinghua University
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, SIGS, Tsinghua University
3
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 4 Tencent TEG
1

“

“

in the middle and kite
flying in the air”

The newly proposed Generalized Referring Expression
Segmentation (GRES) amplifies the formulation of classic
RES by involving complex multiple/non-target scenarios.
Recent approaches address GRES by directly extending the
well-adopted RES frameworks with object-existence identification. However, these approaches tend to encode multigranularity object information into a single representation,
which makes it difficult to precisely represent comprehensive objects of different granularity. Moreover, the simple binary object-existence identification across all referent scenarios fails to specify their inherent differences, incurring ambiguity in object understanding. To tackle the
above issues, we propose a Counting-Aware Hierarchical
Decoding framework (CoHD) for GRES. By decoupling
the intricate referring semantics into different granularity
with a visual-linguistic hierarchy, and dynamic aggregating it with intra- and inter-selection, CoHD boosts multigranularity comprehension with the reciprocal benefit of
the hierarchical nature. Furthermore, we incorporate the
counting ability by embodying multiple/single/non-target
scenarios into count- and category-level supervision, facilitating comprehensive object perception. Experimental
results on gRefCOCO, Ref-ZOM, R-RefCOCO, and RefCOCO benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and rationality of CoHD which outperforms state-of-the-art GRES
methods by a remarkable margin. Code is available.

Modal Fusion
Decoder

Mask Pred.

Decoding Module

…

Multi
granularity

Joint feature

Object
Indicator
Yes

in the middle
and kite flying in the air”

Decoding Module

Dynamic
Selection

Hierarchical
Semantic Decoder

Object
Counting

No

(a) Previous Work

…

Abstract

…

3

:1
outdoor : 1

Not Empty

(b) CoHD (Ours)

Multiple-object Scenery: “A line of cars.”

None-object Scenery: “Silver bus”

No Target
Input

ReLA
(incomplete

ReLA
Input
Ours
(incorrect
)
(c) Qualitative Results Comparison

)

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of decoding paradigms. Previous GRES
methods attempt to integrate multi-granularity context into one
joint feature for mask and object-existence prediction (a), which
exhibits vulnerability to the complexity of multiple/non-target scenarios (c). Instead of relying on the single representation, we decouple the referring correspondence into the semantic hierarchy
of different granularity and perform dynamic selective aggregation for robust segmentation. Further, in contrast to simple binary
classification, we empower CoHD with counting ability to promote object perception (b).

1. Introduction

sentence, still constrains its potential in various scenarios.
Consequently, such limitation encourages the emergence of
Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES).
Different from the one-to-one setting in classic RES, GRES
supports extra multiple-target and empty-target cases, rendering it more suitable in real-world applications.

Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) is one of the
fundamental tasks in visual-linguistic understanding, which
aims at localizing the referred object in an image with a natural language description. Despite achieving great progress
in recent years [4, 9, 21, 29, 33], the simplification of
RES formulation, where one object must be included in a
† Equal contribution.

However, it poses new challenges with the additional
generalized settings. The multiple-target referent necessitates more comprehensive semantic clues to handle complicated spatial-text relationships between instances for arbitrary location segmentation. On the other hand, the emptytarget one highlights the significance of contextual information in mitigating undesirable responses from similar objects. An intuitive approach is to endow prevalent RES

B Corresponding author.

22685

