This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C HART C AP: Mitigating Hallucination of Dense Chart Captioning
Junyoung Lim Jaewoo Ahn Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
{junyoung.lim, jaewoo.ahn}@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://junyoung-00.github.io/ChartCap/

Abstract
Generating accurate, informative, and hallucination-free
captions for charts remains challenging for vision language
models, primarily due to the lack of large-scale, highquality datasets of real-world charts. However, existing
real-world chart datasets suffer from the inclusion of extraneous information that cannot be inferred from the chart
and failure to sufficiently capture structural elements and
key insights. Therefore, we introduce ChartCap, a largescale dataset of 565K real-world chart images paired with
type-specific, dense captions that exclude extraneous information and highlight both structural elements and key insights in detail. To build ChartCap, we design a four-stage
pipeline that generates captions using only the discernible
data from the chart and employ a cycle consistency-based
human verification, which accelerates quality control without sacrificing accuracy. Additionally, we propose a novel
metric, the Visual Consistency Score, which evaluates caption quality by measuring the similarity between the chart
regenerated from a caption and the original chart, independent of reference captions. Extensive experiments confirms
that models fine-tuned on ChartCap consistently generate
more accurate and informative captions with reduced hallucinations, surpassing both open-source and proprietary
models and even human-annotated captions.

1. Introduction
Charts are powerful tools for visualizing data distributions,
trends, and patterns across various domains such as science,
economics, and sociology. By presenting complex information in a concise and intuitive manner [23, 43], charts help
readers gain meaningful insights for decision-making process. However, charts involve complex spatial relationships
among various elements such as axes, labels, and legends,
which can be interpreted differently depending on the chart
type. Consequently, it is challenging not only for humans
but also for vision language models (VLMs) to interpret
complex charts [7, 21, 52].

Chart captioning is one of the core tasks to assess VLMs’
ability to understand charts. Its goal is to generate natural descriptions of a chart image [20]. An ideal caption
should (1) avoid inaccuracies about the chart [2, 17, 32],
and (2) include a structural description of the chart components (e.g., title or legends) as well as key insights such
as major statistics (e.g., maximum or minimum values) and
perceptual patterns (e.g., data trends) [33, 54]. However,
existing real-world chart datasets [14, 20, 25, 30, 50] suffer
from two major issues: (1) they contain extraneous information in captions that cannot be inferred from the image, and
(2) they fail to sufficiently capture the essential information
specific to each chart type.
First, the datasets contain extraneous information within
their captions, mainly because charts are usually embedded
in source documents and their original captions are simply
paired with chart images without verification. Captions are
often written based not only on the chart itself but also on
the surrounding context. As a result, these captions include
the information that cannot be inferred from the chart image
alone (but from text in the document together), as shown in
Figure 1. This poses an ill-posed problem for expecting
the model to predict information absent from the chart, ultimately leading to hallucination.
Second, real-world chart datasets lack sufficient structural description and key insights in text; they often omit
critical information that the chart image conveys (see Figure 1). It is partly because authors do not specify some
details in the captions, assuming that human readers can
easily infer them from the figure [7, 35]. Such information varies depending on the chart type; for example, scatter
plots highlight clusters and distributions, while line charts
emphasize temporal trends and changes [9]. Hence, a typespecific caption schema, which specifies how to interpret
critical information for each chart type, is required to enable models to generate informative captions.
To address these issues, we propose C HART C AP to improve VLMs’ captioning performance while mitigating hallucinations. C HART C AP is a large-scale dataset of realworld chart images, containing 565K chart-caption pairs

13171

