This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAG-WM: Tamper-Aware Generative Image Watermarking via Diffusion
Inversion Sensitivity

1

Yuzhuo Chen1 Zehua Ma1∗ Han Fang2 Weiming Zhang1 Nenghai Yu1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
1

yz.chen@mail.ustc.edu.cn; 1 {mzh045, zhangwm, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn; 2 fanghan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
AI-generated content (AIGC) enables efficient visual creation but raises copyright and authenticity risks. As a common technique for integrity verification and source tracing, digital image watermarking is regarded as a potential
solution to above issues. However, the widespread adoption and advancing capabilities of generative image editing tools have amplified malicious tampering risks, while
simultaneously posing new challenges to passive tampering
detection and watermark robustness. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a Tamper-Aware Generative
image WaterMarking method named TAG-WM. The proposed method comprises four key modules: a dual-mark
joint sampling (DMJS) algorithm for embedding copyright
and localization watermarks into the latent space while preserving generative quality, the watermark latent reconstruction (WLR) utilizing reversed DMJS, a dense variation region detector (DVRD) leveraging diffusion inversion sensitivity to identify tampered areas via statistical deviation
analysis, and the tamper-aware decoding (TAD) guided by
localization results. The experimental results demonstrate
that TAG-WM achieves state-of-the-art performance in both
tampering robustness and localization capability even under distortion, while preserving lossless generation quality
and maintaining a watermark capacity of 256 bits.

nological accessibility inevitably leads to uncertainties in
the provenance and authenticity of images in the AIGC era,
resulting in copyright risks and disinformation threats. For
instance, users might use image generators to create similar
graphics to copyrighted work and falsely claim ownership.
Furthermore, with image generators, malicious actors could
easily create or manipulate lifelike images to spread false
information about non-existent events.
As a common technique for integrity verification and
source tracing, digital image watermarking has gained increasing prominence in AIGC. Existing image watermarking methods were primarily designed by traditional image processing algorithms [1, 15] or deep neural networks [9, 14], both of which embed robust watermarks
through post-processing cover images. However, such postprocessing embedding approaches inevitably introduce visual artifacts. Considering that the quality of generated images is the goal pursued by image generation models at a
high computational cost, such watermarking methods contradict the application scenarios of generative models. With
the rise of diffusion models, new watermarking paradigms
have emerged to protect AI-generated content. Recent advancements focus on model fine-tuning [7, 10, 27] and latent space-based watermarks [24], watermarking directly
during the generative process itself. Such watermarking
methods embedded in the generative process can better integrate watermark information with image content while
significantly reducing the impact of watermark embedding
on the visual quality of generated images. The Gaussian
Shading (GS) proposed by Yang et al. [28] takes a significant step forward, achieving provably visual quality lossless watermarking for generated images. By employing
distribution-preserving sampling to map watermarks into
latent space representations, GS ensures the watermarked
latent becomes statistically indistinguishable from the original one, thereby maintaining the visual quality equivalent
to the original generative images.
Meanwhile, the emergence of generative models like
ControlNet [30], which enable high-quality image modifi-

1. Introduction
The rise of AI-generated content (AIGC) has garnered significant attention across various fields, creating substantial
commercial value. Particularly in visual content generation, the advent of diffusion models [3, 5, 22] has sparked
the emergence of numerous image generation and manipulation applications [30], enabling individuals across industries to easily and efficiently perform customized generation
or editing of images with high quality. However, this tech* Corresponding author

16723

