This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GGTalker: Talking Head Systhesis with Generalizable Gaussian Priors and
Identity-Specific Adaptation
Wentao Hu1∗ Shunkai Li2∗ Ziqiao Peng3 Haoxian Zhang2 Fan Shi2
Xiaoqiang Liu2 Pengfei Wan2 Di Zhang2 Hui Tian1†
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Kuaishou Technology 3 Renmin University of China
Cross-Language Driving

+
>>>

Large Audio-Visual Dataset
Audio-Expression Prior

Customized
Adaptation

>>

are

where

for

live

GaussianTalker

Ground Truth

One-Shot

+
Expression-Visual Prior

Novel View Reenactment

>>

Diffusion
Transformer

that

>>>

>>

Generalizable 3D Gaussian Priors
Self-Supervise
GGTalker

ER-NeRF

TalkingGaussian

Figure 1. The proposed GGTalker introduces generalizable Gaussian head priors from large-scale datasets to identity-specific talking head.
With the Prior-Adaption approach, we implement novel angle reenactment and cross-language driving to generate high-fidelity results.

Abstract
Creating high-quality, generalizable speech-driven 3D talking heads remains a persistent challenge. Previous methods achieve satisfactory results for fixed viewpoints and
small-scale audio variations, but they struggle with large
head rotations and out-of-distribution (OOD) audio. Moreover, they are constrained by the need for time-consuming,
identity-specific training. We believe the core issue lies in
the lack of sufficient 3D priors, which limits the extrapolation capabilities of synthesized talking heads. To address this, we propose GGTalker, which synthesizes talking heads through a combination of generalizable priors
and identity-specific adaptation. We introduce a two-stage
Prior-Adaptation training strategy to learn Gaussian head
priors and adapt to individual characteristics. We train
Audio-Expression and Expression-Visual priors to capture
the universal patterns of lip movements and the general distribution of head textures. During the Customized Adaptation, individual speaking styles and texture details are pre-

cisely modeled. Additionally, we introduce a color MLP to
generate fine-grained, motion-aligned textures and a Body
Inpainter to blend rendered results with the background,
producing indistinguishable, photorealistic video frames.
Comprehensive experiments show that GGTalker achieves
state-of-the-art performance in rendering quality, 3D consistency, lip-sync accuracy, and training efficiency.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

With the development of efficient 3D rendering technologies such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [13] in recent years, 3D-based
talking heads [1, 6, 10, 17–20, 24, 26, 39–42] are gradually gaining more attention than 2D-based ones [28, 31, 32,
44, 46], thanks to their strong identity consistency and fast
rendering speed.
However, current 3D-based talking head methods generally lack generalizability, as reflected in the following aspects: (1) They only support inference on audio similar to
the training data, performing poorly on out-of-distribution
(OOD) audio. (2) Current methods struggle to synthesize

* Equal contribution.

10108

