This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpatialSplat: Efficient Semantic 3D from Sparse Unposed Images
Yu Sheng1 , Jiajun Deng2† , Xinran Zhang1 , Yu Zhang1 , Bei Hua1 , Yanyong Zhang1 , Jianmin Ji1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The University of Adelaide
{shengyu724,zxrr}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiajun.deng@adelaide.edu.au
{zhangyu,bhua,yanyongz,jianmin}@ustc.edu.cn

Paired Images

Previous Methods

Dense Semantic
Feature Field

Redundant
Gaussians

Pixelwise Gaussians

(b)

Paired Images
Duel-field Architecture

SpatialSplat

Compressed Semantic
Features

Coarse Semantic
Feature Field

No
Redundancy

Fine Instacne
Feature Field

(a)

†: Corresponding Author

Redundancy-Aware Gaussians

Instance Features

(c) Stronger Performance
Gaussian Size
63.0MB

LSM
Ours

25.6MB
Inference Latancy

LSM
Ours
LSM
Ours
Uncompressed
Semantic Features

106ms
78ms

PSNR

24.12dB

LSM

25.46dB
mIoU
0.51

Ours

0.55

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and our SpatialSplat. (a): Previous methods predict pixel-wise Gaussians, associating
each primitive with compressed semantic feature. (b): Our SpatialSplat avoids generating redundant Gaussian primitives for overlapping
pixels, and it represents semantics with a dual-field architecture to better preserve the information. (c): SpatialSplat outperforms the stateof-the-art method LSM [15] for both novel-view rendering quality and semantic segmentation while being more efficient.

Abstract
A major breakthrough in 3D reconstruction is the feedforward paradigm to generate pixel-wise 3D points or
Gaussian primitives from sparse, unposed images. To further incorporate semantics while avoiding the significant
memory and storage costs of high-dimensional semantic
features, existing methods extend this paradigm by associating each primitive with a compressed semantic feature
vector. However, these methods have two major limitations: (a) the naively compressed feature compromises expressiveness, affecting the model’s ability to capture finegrained semantics, and (b) the pixel-wise primitive prediction introduces redundancy in overlapping areas, causing unnecessary memory overhead. To this end, we introduce SpatialSplat, a feedforward framework that produces redundancy-aware Gaussians and capitalizes on a
dual-field semantic representation. Particularly, with the
insight that primitives within the same instance exhibit high
semantic consistency, we decompose the semantic representation into a coarse feature field that encodes uncompressed
semantics with minimal primitives, and a fine-grained yet
low-dimensional feature field that captures detailed inter-

instance relationships. Moreover, we propose a selective
Gaussian mechanism, which retains only essential Gaussians in the scene, effectively eliminating redundant primitives. Our proposed Spatialsplat learns accurate semantic
information and detailed instances prior with more compact
3D Gaussians, making semantic 3D reconstruction more
applicable. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
our method, demonstrating a remarkable 60% reduction in
scene representation parameters while achieving superior
performance over state-of-the-art methods. The code will
be made available for future investigation.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing and understanding 3D scenes from 2D images [5, 9, 32, 36, 53] is a fundamental topic in computer
vision, aiming to obtain semantic-aware 3D structure from
low-cost devices, i.e., RGB cameras. This technique is
significant for various applications, such as robotics, autonomous driving, and VR/AR. Recently, with the emergence of the new 3D representation, i.e., Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [29] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19],
a popular paradigm of performing semantic-aware 3D re-

26404

