This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CarGait: Cross-Attention based Re-ranking for Gait recognition
Gavriel Habib

Noa Barzilay

Or Shimshi Rami Ben-Ari
OriginAI, Israel

Nir Darshan

{gavrielh, noab, ors, ramib, nir}@originai.co

Abstract
Gait recognition is a computer vision task that identifies individuals based on their walking patterns. Its performance
is commonly evaluated by ranking a gallery of candidates
and measuring the identification accuracy at Rank-K. Existing models are typically single-staged, searching for the
probe’s nearest neighbors in a gallery, using a global feature representation. While these models can excel at retrieving the correct identity within the top-K predictions,
they often struggle when hard negatives are among the top
shortlist, leading to relatively low performance at the highest ranks (e.g., Rank-1). In this paper, we introduce CarGait, a Re-ranking (re-ordering the top-K list) method for
gait recognition, leveraging the fine-grained correlations
between pairs of gait sequences, through cross-attention between gait strips. This re-ranking scheme can be adapted to
existing single-stage models to enhance their final results.
We demonstrate the capabilities of CarGait by extensive experiments on three common gait datasets, Gait3D, GREW,
and OU-MVLP, and seven different gait models, showing
consistent gains in Rank-1,5 accuracy, while outperforming
existing re-ranking approaches, and a strong baseline.

Figure 1. Examples of top-10 retrievals (from left to right) of probe
sequences from the Gait3D [53] and OU-MVLP [38] datasets, before and after applying our CarGait re-ranking method. To simplify, each gait sequence is shown by a single image. Top row:
without re-ranking (Initial), Bottom row: with CarGait re-ranker.
Green rectangles indicate correct identity (true-positives), while
the red are incorrect recognition (false-positives). CarGait improves Rank-1 and Rank-5 by initial list re-ordering.

1. Introduction

ated using Rank-K accuracy, where the gallery is ranked in
ascending distance order (descending similarity) from the
probe. Ideally, the probe’s matching identity should be at
the top of the list (high Rank-1 accuracy). In real-world applications like security and surveillance, accurately identifying an individual at Rank-1 is important for fast and precise decision-making, minimizing the need for additional
verification steps. It further facilitates user experience and
better demonstrates the model’s robustness to varying conditions, like changes in lighting, clothing, or walking styles.
Current gait recognition models [4, 10, 14, 15] operate
in a single stage, encoding gait sequences into a single and
often referred to as a global feature, which allows for efficient search in scale and ranking within a large dataset.
In recent years, significant efforts have been made to enhance global gait representation [11, 12, 15, 19, 48], by
changing architectures to transformers [11] or combining
different modalities [15], yet overlooking a two-stage approach commonly employed in various domains, e.g. image

Gait recognition (GR) identifies individuals based on their
walking patterns, utilizing features like body shape, stride
length, gait cycle dynamics, and limb movements. GR is applicable in various fields, including healthcare [30], criminal investigations [3], surveillance [33], and sport [47]. The
complexity in GR arises from several factors, e.g. diverse
camera views, occlusions, changing in clothing, or carrying
of bags, that alter the shape and the observed gait dynamics.
Gait recognition is typically framed as a retrieval task,
where there is a gallery of encoded gait sequences from
various individuals, each associated with an identity. Given
a new probe sequence, the objective is to retrieve the sequences from the gallery that match the probe, based on
their gait embeddings.
The performance of gait recognition models is evalu-

11884

