This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WildSAT: Learning Satellite Image Representations from Wildlife Observations
Rangel Daroya1 Elijah Cole2 Oisin Mac Aodha3 Grant Van Horn1 Subhransu Maji1
1
University of Massachusetts, Amherst 2 GenBio AI 3 University of Edinburgh

Mountain Goat

Eurasian Lynx

The mountain goat
(Oreamnos americanus),
also known as the Rocky
Mountain goat, is a
cloven-footed mammal
that is endemic to the
remote and rugged
mountainous areas of
western North America.

The Eurasian lynx (Lynx
lynx) is one of the four
extant species within the
medium-sized wild cat
genus Lynx. … It inhabits
temperate and boreal
forests up to an elevation
of 5,500 m (18,000 ft).

Cactus Wren

Japanese Macaque

The cactus wren
(Campylorhynchus
brunneicapillus) is a
species of wren that is
endemic to the deserts of
the southwestern United
States and northern and
central Mexico.

Spotted Hyena
The spotted hyena (Crocuta
crocuta), also known as the
laughing hyena, is a hyena
species…. The species
dwells in semi-deserts,
savannah, open woodland,
dense dry woodland, and
mountainous forests up to
4,000 m in altitude

The Japanese macaque
(Macaca fuscata), also
known as the snow
monkey, is a terrestrial Old
World monkey species… It
can be found in both warm
and cool forests, such as
the deciduous forests of
central and northern Japan

Figure 1. Wildlife observations can provide valuable supervision for learning satellite image representations. Known wildlife locations derived from human observations, coupled with descriptive information on species range, habitat, and other ecological attributes on
Wikipedia, serve as a rich source of contextual information for satellite imagery. Our WildSAT approach leverages these additional data
sources to (i) learn robust satellite image representations for downstream tasks, and (ii) complement and further improve existing models
using continual pre-training.

Abstract

1. Introduction
The growth in the number of satellites with imaging capabilities deployed over the past 50 years has provided an unprecedented ability to monitor the surface of the earth [37,
80, 83]. The image data derived from these remote sensors has been shown to be highly effective for diverse tasks
such as estimating global tree canopy height [39, 68], detecting illegal fishing activity [22, 36, 56], crop monitoring [19, 33, 75], disaster management [57, 66, 73], among
others. Central to building computer vision models for these
tasks is the need for mechanisms for learning effective representations from image data. As a result of the distribution
shift between remote sensing imagery and web-sourced images, a large body of work has emerged exploring the merits
and trade-offs between different sources of supervision.

Species distributions encode valuable ecological and environmental information, yet their potential for guiding representation learning in remote sensing remains underexplored. We introduce WildSAT, which pairs satellite images
with millions of geo-tagged wildlife observations readilyavailable on citizen science platforms. WildSAT employs a
contrastive learning approach that jointly leverages satellite images, species occurrence maps, and textual habitat
descriptions to train or fine-tune models. This approach significantly improves performance on diverse satellite image
recognition tasks, outperforming both ImageNet-pretrained
models and satellite-specific baselines. Additionally, by
aligning visual and textual information, WildSAT enables
zero-shot retrieval, allowing users to search geographic locations based on textual descriptions. WildSAT surpasses
recent cross-modal learning methods, including approaches
that align satellite images with ground imagery or wildlife
photos, demonstrating the advantages of our approach. Finally, we analyze the impact of key design choices and highlight the broad applicability of WildSAT to remote sensing
and biodiversity monitoring.

Direct supervision in the form of paired images and
labels (e.g. image tiles with labels denoting land cover
type) can be prohibitively expensive to obtain at a global
scale [28]. To address this, there is growing interest to
develop methods that learn remote sensing representations
from self-supervision [32, 46, 48], multiple paired modalities [15, 47, 63], or other auxiliary sources [16, 72]. A

6143

