This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SITE: towards Spatial Intelligence Thorough Evaluation
Wenqi Wang1 Reuben Tan2 Pengyue Zhu1 Jianwei Yang2
Zhengyuan Yang2 Lijuan Wang2 Andrey Kolobov2 Jianfeng Gao2* Boqing Gong1*
1

Boston University, 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond

SITE-project-page

Figure 1. We introduce SITE, a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating large vision-language models’ spatial intelligence (SI). Three SI
classification systems drawn from cognitive science, corresponding to the three panels, drive the design of SITE.

entation, a fundamental SI factor. Moreover, we demonstrate a positive correlation between a model’s spatial reasoning proficiency and its performance on an embodied AI
task.

Abstract
Spatial intelligence (SI) represents a cognitive ability encompassing the visualization, manipulation, and reasoning
about spatial relationships, underpinning disciplines from
neuroscience to robotics. We introduce SITE, a benchmark dataset towards SI Thorough Evaluation in a standardized format of multi-choice visual question-answering,
designed to assess large vision-language models’ spatial
intelligence across diverse visual modalities (single-image,
multi-image, and video) and SI factors (figural to environmental scales, spatial visualization and orientation, intrinsic and extrinsic, static and dynamic). Our approach to curating the benchmark combines a bottom-up survey of existing datasets and a top-down strategy drawing upon three
classification systems in cognitive science, which prompt us
to design two novel types of tasks about view-taking and
dynamic scenes. Extensive experiments reveal that leading
models fall behind human experts, especially in spatial ori-

1. Introduction
This work introduces SITE, a novel benchmark dataset
towards Spatial Intelligence Thorough Evaluation, to assess the visuospatial ability of large vision-language models (VLMs). We achieve this by borrowing three classification systems about spatial intelligence (SI) from the cognitive science literature [8, 34, 47, 54, 56] to analyze visionlanguage tasks derived from 30 computer vision datasets.
This process highlights a gap in existing benchmarks, leading us to design new tasks focusing on spatial orientation
(view-taking) in static and dynamic contexts. We standardize all tasks to ease evaluation using a multiple-choice visual question answering (VQA) format.
SI represents a cognitive capacity encompassing the visualization, manipulation, and reasoning about spatial re-

∗ Equal advising

9058

