This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VertexRegen: Mesh Generation with Continuous Level of Detail
Xiang Zhang1*

Yawar Siddiqui2 Armen Avetisyan2 Chris Xie2
Jakob Engel2 Henry Howard-Jenkins2
1
UC San Diego 2 Meta Reality Labs Research
(Ours)

ℳ!

ℳ"

ℳ#"

ℳ$!

ℳ"!

Steps

ℳ%!

ℳ&!

ℳ#'!

ℳ#"!

ℳ#(!

ℳ#()

250

300

350

375

Generation Process
5

20

40

80

120

160

200

Previous work
Figure 1. Mesh generation process of VertexRegen (coarse-to-fine process) vs. previous work (partial-to-complete process). Prior work
generates meshes face by face, with the step count corresponding to the face count in the figure. In contrast, VertexRegen produces meshes
with a continuously increasing level of detail, where each step yields a valid mesh Mk .

Abstract
We introduce VertexRegen, a novel mesh generation framework that enables generation at a continuous level of detail. Existing autoregressive methods generate meshes in
a partial-to-complete manner and thus intermediate steps
of generation represent incomplete structures. VertexRegen
takes inspiration from progressive meshes and reformulates
the process as the reversal of edge collapse, i.e. vertex split,
learned through a generative model. Experimental results
demonstrate that VertexRegen produces meshes of comparable quality to state-of-the-art methods while uniquely offering anytime generation with the flexibility to halt at any
step to yield valid meshes with varying levels of detail.

hardware. However, manually creating high-quality meshes
is costly and time-consuming, prompting extensive research into automated 3D content creation. Largely, these
approaches have used alternative representations such as
neural fields [11, 27, 31, 38], voxels [34, 51] or point
clouds [54, 59] which are later post-processed to meshes
instead of direct mesh modeling. Unfortunately, these
post-processed meshes often exhibit poor topology, overtessellation, and artifacts, lacking the quality of artistcrafted meshes.
Recently, there has been a surge of approaches that directly generate meshes, using autoregressive models to represent meshes as sequences of triangles [2–4, 15, 37, 43].
These methods capture the high-fidelity and aesthetic qualities of artist-created works without the need for postgeneration conversion. Although significant progress has
been made in improving tokenization schemes [2, 4, 37] and
network architectures [15], these approaches do not fundamentally alter a key characteristic of generation: namely, to
produce a valid mesh, the full sequence must be generated
to completion. Consequently, these methods offer no control over the level of detail during generation; early stopping
results in a mesh with missing faces. Simple extensions,

1. Introduction
Meshes are essential for 3D asset representation and are
widely used in industries such as film, design, and gaming due to their compatibility with most 3D software and
* Work conducted while the author was an intern at Meta.

Project page: https://vertexregen.github.io

12570

