This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMSTracker: Tri-path Score Mask Sigma Fusion for Multi-Modal Tracking
Sixian Chan1 , Zedong Li1 , Wenhao Li2 , Shijian Lu2 , Chunhua Shen3 , Xiaoqin Zhang1,†
1
Zhejiang University of Technology, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Zhejiang University, China
{sxchan, 211123120027, xqzhang}@zjut.edu.cn
{wenhaoli, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg, chunhua.shen@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Ground truth

RGB
Better

Multi-modal object tracking has emerged as a significant
research focus in computer vision due to its robustness in
complex environments, such as exposure variations, blur,
and occlusions. Despite existing studies integrating supplementary modal information into pre-trained RGB trackers through visual prompt mechanisms, this approach exhibits a critical limitation: it inherently prioritizes RGB
information as the dominant modality, thereby underutilizing the complementary information of alternative modalities. To address this fundamental limitation, we present
SMSTracker, an innovative tri-path score mask sigma fusion framework for multi-modal tracking, including three
key modules. Firstly, we design a tri-path Score Mask Fusion (SMF) module to evaluate and quantify the reliability of each modality, allowing optimal exploitation of complementary features between modalities. Secondly, we introduce a pioneering Sigma Interaction (SGI) module to
facilitate a sophisticated fusion of modal features across
tri-branches. Furthermore, we advance a Drop Key Finetuning (DKF) strategy to address the inherent challenge of
unequal data contribution in multi-modal learning scenarios, thereby enhancing the model’s capacity for comprehensive multi-modal information processing. Finally, extensive experiments on RGB+Thermal, RGB+Depth, and
RGB+Event datasets demonstrate the significant performance improvements achieved by SMSTracker over existing
state-of-the-art methods. Code and model are available at
https://github.com/Leezed525/SMSTracker.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Modal
Better
(d)

(e)

(f)

RGB-T

RGB-D

RGB-E

Figure 1. Reliability of modalities in different scenarios. In
ordinary scenarios (a) - (c), RGB is more reliable than modal information, but in complex environments (d) - (f), such as occlusion
and blur conditions, modal information is more important.

provements [1, 6, 28, 38]. However, traditional RGB-based
object tracking often fails when faced with complex environments [2, 13]. As Fig. 1 illustrated, under conditions
such as motion blur, exposure variations, and severe occlusions, RGB-based trackers tend to lose the objects, thereby
affecting subsequent tracking tasks. This results in a lack
of robustness when employing these trackers in real-world
scenarios, especially for tasks with high-precision requirements such as autonomous driving.
Considering the remarkable effects and widespread application of multi-modal information in fields such as object detection [8] and semantic segmentation [32], researchers have gradually shifted their focus to multi-modal
object tracking [12, 13, 34, 42]. The aim is to leverage
multi-modal information, such as RGB-T (RGB + Thermal) [2], RGB-D (RGB + Depth) [35] and RGB-E (RGB
+ Event) [39], to obtain more comprehensive information
and thus achieve better tracking performance.
Investigations reveal that in previous studies, multimodal fusion trackers have employed two primary methods
to integrate multi-modal information on pre-trained RGBbased trackers: 1) Utilizing a prompt-based approach to
enhance the original RGB tokens with other modalities as

1. Introduction
With the advancement of deep learning, object tracking
techniques in computer vision have seen significant im† Corresponding Author.

4766

