This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CRAM: Large-scale Video Continual Learning with Bootstrapped Compression
Shivani Mall
João F. Henriques
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
shivanim@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) promises to allow neural networks
to learn from continuous streams of inputs, instead of IID
(independent and identically distributed) sampling, which
requires random access to a full dataset. This would allow
for much smaller storage requirements and self-sufficiency
of deployed systems that cope with natural distribution
shifts, similarly to biological learning. We focus on video
CL employing a rehearsal-based approach, which reinforces past samples from a memory buffer. We posit that part
of the reason why practical video CL is challenging is the
high memory requirements of video, further exacerbated by
long-videos and continual streams, which are at odds with
the common rehearsal-buffer size constraints. To address
this, we propose to use compressed vision, i.e. store video
codes (embeddings) instead of raw inputs, and train a video
classifier by IID sampling from this rolling buffer. Training a video compressor online (so not depending on any
pre-trained networks) means that it is also subject to catastrophic forgetting. We propose a scheme to deal with this
forgetting by refreshing video codes, which requires careful decompression with a previous version of the network
and recompression with a new one. We name our method
Continually Refreshed Amodal Memory (CRAM). We expand current video CL benchmarks to large-scale settings,
namely EpicKitchens-100 and Kinetics-700, storing thousands of relatively long videos in under 2 GB, and demonstrate empirically that our video CL method outperforms
prior art with a significantly reduced memory footprint.

Figure 1. Visualization of the long-video continual learning setting. The model is exposed to a single long video over time, and
must learn to predict new classes as they appear. The image shows
9 frames from one video, with predicted and ground truth classes.
Note that predictions are not expected to be correct for new classes.

1. Introduction

ing as a proxy task for the real-world complexities encountered in actual deployment scenarios. Most existing CL research is restricted to static images or shorter video clips
[3, 21, 37], thus failing to model the natural shift in data
distribution over extended time scales. In this work, we focus on naturally-collected long videos, which we believe is
necessary to capture temporal progression and long distribution tails [8], challenges inherent to online learning [30].
The extra temporal axis of video, compared to a static
image, can capture rich information such as long-term activities. However, it also brings orders of magnitude more
data, with the associated costs in processing and memory
requirements [14]. This challenge is made worse in the
CL setting. Some of the most successful CL methods require random sampling from a rehearsal buffer of previous
samples, with the finding that performance correlates with
buffer size (sec. 2). Large buffer sizes then quickly become
prohibitively expensive if one is to consider long videos.
In this paper, we propose a memory-based video CL
method that learns from naturally-collected long videos.
Specifically, our method trains online a video compressor
that continuously compresses and decompresses a neuralcode rehearsal buffer, and an online classifier then uses the

Our world evolves endlessly over time. This temporal evolution creates a continuous shift in real-world data distributions. Crucially, resource-constrained autonomous agents
must cope with these ongoing changes, akin to humans.
Continual learning (CL) offers a practical solution to robustly acquire knowledge in non-stationary environments
while amortizing the learning process over the agent’s lifespan [39]. We focus on CL, utilizing long-video understand-

15045

