This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AG2 aussian: Anchor-Graph Structured Gaussian Splatting for Instance-Level
3D Scene Understanding and Editing
Zhaonan Wang Manyi Li† Changhe Tu
Shandong University
dyllanelliia wzn@163.com

manyili@sdu.edu.cn

chtu@sdu.edu.cn

𝐀𝐆𝟐 𝐚𝐮𝐬𝐬𝐢𝐚𝐧 (Ours)

OpenGaussian

Feature Map

Selection

Remaining

Feature Map

Selection

Remaining

Stuffed bear
Three cookies
Coffee mug

Interactive Click Query

Open-Vocabulary Text Query

Object Removal Editing

Physical Simulation

Figure 1. We propose AG2 aussian, an anchor-graph structured Gaussian splatting for instance-level 3D scene understanding and editing
tasks. Compared to existing works that attach semantic features to a collection of free Gaussians, we construct an anchor-graph structure
to organize the semantic features and regulate the associated Gaussians, resulting in a smooth feature distribution and a clean and accurate
instance-level Gaussian selection (top row). Our approach benefits a series of applications, including the interactive click query, openvocabulary text query, object removal editing, and physical simulation (bottom row).

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has witnessed exponential
adoption across diverse applications, driving a critical need
for semantic-aware 3D Gaussian representations to enable
scene understanding and editing tasks. Existing approaches
typically attach semantic features to a collection of free
Gaussians and distill the features via differentiable rendering, leading to noisy segmentation and a messy selection
of Gaussians. In this paper, we introduce AG2 aussian, a
novel framework that leverages an anchor-graph structure
to organize semantic features and regulate Gaussian primitives. Our anchor-graph structure not only promotes compact and instance-aware Gaussian distributions, but also
facilitates graph-based propagation, achieving a clean and
accurate instance-level Gaussian selection. Extensive validation across four applications, i.e. interactive click-based

query, open-vocabulary text-driven query, object removal
editing, and physics simulation, demonstrates the advantages of our approach and its benefits to various applications. The experiments and ablation studies further evaluate the effectiveness of the key designs of our approach.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [18] models scenes as a collection of 3D Gaussian primitives and exhibits great utility
in many applications [4, 5, 12, 15, 16, 21, 40, 45, 46, 48].
Recently, the advancements in large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [2, 7, 22, 28, 31, 42] have spurred a paradigm
shift toward open-vocabulary scene understanding, where
3DGS serves as a bridge between high-fidelity scene representation and language-guided semantic reasoning. By
combining these capabilities, researchers investigate openvocabulary scene understanding with 3DGS [26, 32, 44],
which further stimulates a wider range of semantic scene
editing and manipulation tasks [5, 17, 39, 44].

26806

