This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Sparse Sensor Fusion for Long Range Perception
Edoardo Palladin∗1
Praveen Narayanan1

Filippo Ghilotti1
1

Torc Robotics

2

Samuel Brucker∗1
Mario Bijelic1,2

Princeton University

∗

Felix Heide1,2

Equal contribution

https://light.princeton.edu/LRS4Fusion

Abstract
Outside of urban hubs, autonomous cars and trucks have to
master driving on intercity highways. Safe, long-distance
highway travel at speeds exceeding 100 km/h demands perception distances of at least 250 m, which is about five
times the 50–100m typically addressed in city driving, to
allow sufficient planning and braking margins. Increasing
the perception ranges also allows to extend autonomy from
light two-ton passenger vehicles to large-scale forty-ton
trucks, which need a longer planning horizon due to their
high inertia. However, most existing perception approaches
focus on shorter ranges and rely on Bird’s Eye View (BEV)
representations, which incur quadratic increases in memory and compute costs as distance grows. To overcome
this limitation, we built on top of a sparse representation
and introduced an efficient 3D encoding of multi-modal and
temporal features, along with a novel self-supervised pretraining scheme that enables large-scale learning from unlabeled camera-LiDAR data. Our approach extends perception distances to 250 meters and achieves an 26.6% improvement in mAP in object detection and a decrease of
30.5% in Chamfer Distance in LiDAR forecasting compared
to existing methods, reaching distances up to 250 meters.

Figure 1. Autonomous vehicles, especially trucks with long braking distances, require long planning horizons for efficient and safe
driving in highway scenarios (bottom). This requires extending the
typical perception range from 50–100m (top [5]) to beyond 250m
where dense representations struggle. We introduce a sparse voxel
fusion approach for efficient and accurate 3D scene understanding
enabling processing of long-range LiDAR-camera data that leverages spatio-temporal context up to 250m. The proposed model
outputs depth, occupancy, velocity, future LiDAR forecast, accurate object detection, see Fig. 6 and Fig. 7.

1. Introduction

to ensure safe, strategic planning beyond 70 m, which existing approaches do not address [16, 22, 62] (Fig. 1).
Extending BEV features to cover longer ranges presents significant challenges, as computational complexity and memory footprint grow rapidly. A dense BEV feature map
that holds all the information alone grows quadratically in
memory with detection ranges. Relying on computations
to projecting camera information into a unified representation, such as Lift-Splat-Shoot [42], also increases computational complexity quadratically with range. Therefore, in
this work we propose a method that enables BEV features
far beyond surround LiDAR and camera data by using a
sparse voxel implementation, addressing the limitations of
current approaches in long-range perception.
To prevent the training data corpus from growing equally, as
objects become increasingly sparse at extended distances,
we propose a self-supervision approach. As shown in Fig. 2,
the frequency of object instances decreases significantly
with distance, so simply increasing the spatial coverage
forces a steep increase in required labeled data, which is
both costly and time-consuming. Recent approaches have
embraced self-supervised pre-training strategies [1, 70], no

Autonomous vehicles rely on precise perception of their
surroundings for scene understanding, prediction, and planning. Today’s most successful methods that allow for 360◦
perception rely on BEV features to perform 3D object detection [39, 69], semantic occupancy prediction [52], tracking [76] and planning [16, 62]. The methods operate on
BEV features that encode critical information about the 3D
environment, derived from single or multiple sensors that
perceive the surroundings.
However, most existing BEV-based methods focus on shortterm planning with ranges below 50m [30, 36], making
them well-suited for robo-taxi applications in urban environments but insufficient for long-term planning needs, particularly necessary for highway driving and in the context
of robo-trucking, where long braking distances demands the
perception of objects and planning decisions at long-ranges,

27498

