This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Fair and Accurate Cross-Domain Medical Image Segmentation:
A VLM-Driven Active Domain Adaptation Paradigm
Hongqiu Wang1 Wu Chen2 Xiangde Luo3 Zhaohu Xing1 Lihao Liu4
∗
Shaozhi Wu2∗ Lei Zhu1,6
1

Jing Qin5

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
West China Hospital 4 Amazon 5 Hong Kong Polytechnic University 6 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Fairness in AI-assisted medical image analysis is crucial for equitable healthcare, but is often neglected, especially in prevalent cross-domain scenarios (diverse demographics and imaging protocols). Effective and equitable deployment of AI models in these scenarios is critical,
yet traditional Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
methods exhibit limited improvements. Emerging Active
Domain Adaptation (ADA) approaches offer more effective enhancements, but all ignore fairness issues. Therefore, in this work, we propose the first fairness-aware
ADA paradigm that simultaneously achieves both enhanced
fairness and superior overall performance. Our method
leverages the multimodal alignment capability of VisionLanguage Models (VLMs): By performing medical images (vision) and sensitive attributes (language) learning,
VLM inherently captures semantic correlations between visual features and protected attributes, enabling explicit attributes representation. Building on this foundation, we further devise an attribute-aware strategy (FairAP), which dynamically adapts to diverse patient demographics to promote equitable and high-quality outcomes by considering
both Attribute and Polysemy. Extensive experiments on
the FairDomain benchmark demonstrate that our method
significantly reduces bias and maintains leading performance, outperforming existing UDA and ADA methods.
This work pioneers a VLM-driven ADA paradigm for fair
cross-domain medical segmentation, offering a blueprint
for effective and equitable AI deployment in clinical practice. Code will be on (https://github.com/whq-xxh/Fair-AP).

Figure 1. Comparison of previous cross-domain fairness methods with our VLM-Driven fairness-aware ADA paradigm. Our
method combines VLM and ADA to achieve both leading model
performance and enhanced fairness.

1. Introduction

The advent of AI technologies has significantly transformed medical image analysis (MedIA), providing sophisticated tools for analyzing complex biological patterns
within imaging data [37, 46, 49–51]. These advanced algorithms enhance diagnostic precision, support informed clinical decisions, and improve patient outcomes. However, as
these models become increasingly integrated into clinical
practice, critical challenges have emerged: inherent biases
within these models [24, 32, 57] and domain shifts caused
by diverse clinical scenarios [23, 41, 54].
Numerous studies have reported that biases in MedIA
tasks [13, 16, 19, 29, 31, 33, 35, 39, 60], stemming from
training datasets failing to represent diverse populations adequately, raise profound ethical and fairness concerns [10,
34]. These biases cause severe health inequities, impacting
marginalized groups in clinical applications. For example,
Black individuals face nearly twice the risk of glaucoma
than others, highlighting the need for accurately segmenting the optic disc and cup for early diagnosis, yet AI models
often perform worst in this subgroup. This issue is particularly critical in cross-domain scenarios, where models deployed across institutions encounter heterogeneous data distributions that amplify performance disparities [36, 40, 41].
Such domain-specific biases not only undermine the per-

“Fairness is not an attitude. It’s a professional skill that
must be developed and exercised.” — Brit Hume.
*corresponding authors.

24102

