This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Visual Proxy for Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Shiyu Zhang1 , Cheng Yan1 ,* Yang Liu2 , Chenchen Jing3 , Lei Zhou4 , Wenjun Wang1
1
Tianjin University 2 Zhejiang University
3
Zhejiang University of Technology
4
Hainan University
{zsy 202366, yancheng work, wjwang}@tju.edu.cn
yangliu9610@zju.edu.cn
jingchenchen@zjut.edu.cn, leizhou@hainanu.edu.cn

Abstract

unripe apple
ripe apple

Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims to recognize novel attribute-object compositions by leveraging
knowledge from seen compositions. Current methods align
textual prototypes with visual features via Vision-Language
Models (VLMs), but suffer from two limitations: (1) modality gaps hinder the discrimination of semantically similar
pairs, and (2) single-modal textual prototypes lack ﬁnegrained visual cues. In this paper, we introduce Visual
Proxy Learning, a method that reduces modality gaps and
enhances compositional generalization. We initialize visual
proxies for attributes, objects, and their compositions using
text representations and optimize the visual space to capture
ﬁne-grained cues, improving visual representations. Additionally, we propose Cross-Modal Joint Learning (CMJL),
which imposes cross-modal constraints between the textimage and ﬁne-grained visual spaces, improving generalization for unseen compositions and discriminating similar pairs. Experiments show state-of-the-art performance
in closed-world scenarios and competitive results in openworld settings across four CZSL benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach in compositional generalization. The code will be available at https://
github.com/codefish12-09/VP_CMJL.

Text
space

unripe apple
ripe apple

Vision
space
(a)

(b)

text

image

vision proxy

Figure 1. (a) The modality gap and coarse granularity of textual
prototypes blur inter-class boundaries, leading to misclassiﬁcation
of similar samples (e.g., slightly red unripe apples). (b) The visual
proxy improves modality alignment, integrates ﬁne-grained image
features, and makes the visual space more compact and separable,
ensuring correct classiﬁcation of similar samples.

able models to decompose and recombine concepts learned
from seen compositions of attributes and objects, and then
generalize to unseen compositions, thereby addressing the
zero-shot image classiﬁcation task. For instance, if a model
is trained on compositions such as green clothes and red
apples, it should be capable of recognizing novel compositions, like red clothes and green apples, during testing.
Thanks to the advancements in large pre-trained visionlanguage models like CLIP [29], recent research has made
signiﬁcant progress by leveraging CLIP and exploring various approaches to enhance its capabilities. These approaches include designing task-speciﬁc prompts [3, 19, 24,
34, 35], decomposing compositional text features [18], and
developing modal fusion methods [7] to narrow the modality gap. Such efforts have improved the alignment between
compositional labels and image features, enabling CLIP to
perform effectively in CZSL tasks. However, several challenges and inherent problems in the CZSL task still deserve
attention.
Persistent Modality Gap. Despite efforts to narrow
the modality gap between vision and language in existing

1. Introduction
In human cognition, the ability to recombine existing concepts to form new ones is essential for quickly acquiring
new knowledge, a skill known as compositional generalization. Similarly, in computer vision, this ability is crucial for advancing models’ adaptability to novel situations,
which has led to the development of Compositional ZeroShot Learning (CZSL) [21, 25]. The goal of CZSL is to en* Corresponding author.

2793

