This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Globally Optimal and Geometrically Consistent 3D Shape Matching
Paul Roetzer1,2
Florian Bernard1,2
1
2
University of Bonn
Lamarr Institute

Windheuser et al.
SpiderMatch (geo.)

SM-Comb
SpiderMatch

DiscoMatch (GPU)
Ours

1,000
Runtime [s] →

750
500

]

OOM

250

Key Idea of Our Approach

Source
Cao et al.
Ours
Triangulation Transfer via Computed Matchings

0

250

500
750
1,000
1,250
1,500
# of Faces of individual Triangle Meshes

1,750

Runtime Comparison on FAUST Dataset

Figure 1. Left: Illustration of our approach for geometrically consistent matching of 3D shape X to 3D shape Y. We represent shape
X using n surface cycles C1 , . . . , Cn and then consistently match these to shape Y while preserving neighbourhood relations between the
cycles. Middle: The triangulation- and colour-transfer between shapes using computed matchings of Cao et al. [13] (not geometrically
consistent) and ours (geometrically consistent) illustrates the importance of geometric consistency. Right: Our method is the first 3D shape
matching approach that yields globally geometrically consistent matchings, that is globally optimal, and scalable in practice, opposed to
all competing methods (OOM stands for ‘out of memory’ and the dashed line indicates a weak notion of geometric consistency, see
explanation of methods in Sec. 5).

Abstract

1. Introduction
The availability of correspondences between visual data are
a key prerequisite for many visual computing tasks, including 3D reconstruction [50], loss computation for deep learning [14], protein alignment [45], anomaly detection [86],
object recognition [44], shape modelling [24] and others.
In many practical cases, it is desirable that correspondences
preserve neighbourhood relations. For example, in 3D
shape matching this could mean that when bringing a pair
of neighbouring points on a source shape into correspondence with a pair of points on a target shape, the pair of
points must remain neighbours on the target. Such a neighbourhood preservation can serve as strong topological prior,
for example to resolve ambiguities, achieve robustness,
or ensure well-posedness of an otherwise ill-posed problem. However, despite its crucial importance, neighbourhood preservation is in practice often-times overlooked.
This is because many of the well-known formalisms are
not efficiently solvable (e.g. the quadratic assignment problem [64], or general integer programming [76], which have
been used to tackle image keypoint matching [55], graph
matching [39, 91], or 3D shape matching [8, 34, 58, 89]).

Geometric consistency, i.e. the preservation of neighbourhoods, is a natural and strong prior in 3D shape matching.
Geometrically consistent matchings are crucial for many
downstream applications, such as texture transfer or statistical shape modelling. Yet, in practice, geometric consistency is often overlooked, or only achieved under severely
limiting assumptions (e.g. a good initialisation). In this
work, we propose a novel formalism for computing globally
optimal and geometrically consistent matchings between
3D shapes which is scalable in practice. Our key idea is
to represent the surface of the source shape as a collection
of cyclic graphs, which are then consistently matched to the
target shape. Mathematically, we construct a hyper product
graph (between source and target shape), and then cast 3D
shape matching as a minimum-cost circulation flow problem in this hyper graph, which yields global geometrically
consistent matchings between both shapes. We empirically
show that our formalism is efficiently solvable and that it
leads to high-quality results. Our code is publicly available.1

In this work we specifically focus on the task of nonrigid geometrically consistent 3D shape matching, in which

1 https://github.com/paul0noah/geco

912

