This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PixelStitch: Structure-Preserving Pixel-Wise Bidirectional Warps for
Unsupervised Image Stitching
Hengzhe Jin1,2 Lang Nie3,† Chunyu Lin1,2, * Xiaomei Feng4 Yao Zhao1,2
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Visual Intelligence + X International Joint Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
4
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
hengzhejin06@gmail.com, nielang@cqupt.edu.cn, cylin@bjtu.edu.cn,
xiaomeifeng19@gmail.com, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose PixelStitch, a pixel-wise bidirectional warp that
learns to stitch images as well as preserve structure in an
unsupervised paradigm. To produce natural stitched images, we ﬁrst determine the middle plane through homography decomposition and globally project the original images toward the desired plane. Compared with unidirectional homography transformation, it evenly spreads projective distortion across two views and decreases the proportion of invalid pixels. Then, the bidirectional optical
ﬂow ﬁelds are established to carry out residual pixel-wise
deformation with projection-weighted natural coefﬁcients,
encouraging pixel motions to be as unnoticeable as possible in non-overlapping regions while smoothly transitioning into overlapping areas. Crucially, this ﬂexible deformation enables PixelStitch to align large-parallax images
and preserve the structural integrity of non-overlapping
contents. To obtain high-quality stitched images in the
absence of labels, a comprehensive unsupervised objective function is proposed to simultaneously encourage content alignment, structure preservation, and bidirectional
consistency. Finally, extensive experiments are conducted
to show our superiority to existing state-of-the-art (SoTA)
methods in the quantitative metric, qualitative appearance, and generalization ability. The code is available at
https://github.com/MakiseChris666/PixelStitch

1. Introduction
Image stitching is a practical technology that composes
multiple overlapped images into a single panorama with a
wide ﬁeld-of-view (FoV). It has been widely applied to var* Corresponding author; †: project lead

:DUS

9LUWXDO
0LGSODQH

:DUS

(a) Input images and virtual midplane.

(b) The result of global bidirectional alignment.

(c) The result of pixel-wise bidirectional warp.

Figure 1. Our motivation (a) and two-stage bidirectional warped
results (b)(c). We zoomed in on a far and a near area to show
parallax alignment and the outlines of the stitched images indicate
our natural structures.

ious ﬁelds, such as medical imaging, panoramic photography, virtual reality, etc. In practice, image stitching is often confronted with diverse challenging scenes (e.g., large
parallax, unnatural distortion, etc), which makes it hard to
produce high-quality stitched results.
To address these issues, various techniques are introduced to traditional feature-based image stitching. On the
one hand, spatially adaptive warps have been proposed
to achieve parallax-tolerant stitching [4, 8, 16, 18, 19,

28125

