This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Long-Tailed Online Anomaly Detection
through Class-Agnostic Concepts

1

Chiao-An Yang1 Kuan-Chuan Peng2 Raymond A. Yeh1
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
1

{yang2300,rayyeh}@purdue.edu

Abstract

2

kpeng@merl.com

Anomaly detection (AD) identifies the defect regions of a
given image. Recent works have studied AD, focusing on
learning AD without abnormal images, with long-tailed distributed training data, and using a unified model for all
classes. In addition, online AD learning has also been explored. In this work, we expand in both directions to a realistic setting by considering the novel task of long-tailed
online AD (LTOAD). We first identified that the offline stateof-the-art LTAD methods cannot be directly applied to the
online setting. Specifically, LTAD is class-aware, requiring
class labels that are not available in the online setting. To
address this challenge, we propose a class-agnostic framework for LTAD and then adapt it to our online learning setting. Our method outperforms the SOTA baselines in most
offline LTAD settings, including both the industrial manufacturing and the medical domain. In particular, we observe +4.63% image-AUROC on MVTec even compared to
methods that have access to class labels and the number of
classes. In the most challenging long-tailed online setting,
we achieve +0.53% image-AUROC compared to baselines.
Our LTOAD benchmark is released here1 .

distributed data performs suboptimally on LT data. Meanwhile, recent works [16, 22, 55, 61, 79, 84] approach AD
with online learning to leverage abnormal images during
test time. However, they do not study the case where the
classes follow a long-tail distribution, where the performance gap of head and tail classes in the online setting may
be significant during offline training. This motivates us to
study the long-tailed online AD (LTOAD) task by proposing a benchmark and a novel model.
At first glance, it may seem that one can take a state-ofthe-art (SOTA) long-tailed offline model, e.g., LTAD [34],
and combine it with online learning to solve LTOAD. However, several limitations within the LTAD’s framework prevent it from being effective in the online setting. First,
LTAD is a class-aware method, where they assume that the
class information is given. However, class labels are not
available in the online setting. Instead, a class-agnostic
method is required as illustrated in Fig. 1. Second, LTAD’s
encoder-decoder architecture does not leverage the latest
vector quantization VAE [20, 57, 59], which is more effective, as shown in recent work. Third, the prompt learning designs of LTAD and other AD works [7, 9, 10, 37,
40, 51, 52, 67, 100–102] ignore some aspects of abnormal
prompts, e.g., LTAD does not support class-specific abnormal prompts.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel model
that is class-agnostic, with a vector quantized VAE, and a
comprehensive prompt learning framework, for the task of
long-tailed online anomaly detection. Experiments show
that our method outperforms the SOTA baselines significantly by at least 4% on several detection benchmarks without access to the class labels and the number of classes.
In the following sections, we first discuss how to make
existing class-aware methods class-agnostic, specifically on
LTAD (Sec. 2). Next, we define the task of long-tailed online AD and present our solution (Sec. 3). Finally, we provide details of each proposed module (Sec. 4), followed by
the experimental results (Sec. 5) and related works (Sec. 6).
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) [8, 65, 96] is the task of identifying defect regions in a given image. This task is important due to its high valued applications in industrial
manufacturing [1, 5, 18, 47, 58, 74, 86, 103] and medical [28, 42, 43, 47] settings.
Recently, LTAD [34] explored the long-tailed (LT) [92]
setting of unsupervised one-class AD, where abnormal images are not given during training and the training set is
unevenly distributed. This long-tailed distribution assumes
that images of certain classes significantly outnumber others, which is a realistic assumption for real-world applications. Importantly, LTAD shows that prior work on evenly
1 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16283852

23419

