This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuralSVG: An Implicit Representation for Text-to-Vector Generation
Sagi Polaczek
Tel Aviv University

Yuval Alaluf
Tel Aviv University

Elad Richardson
Tel Aviv University

sagi.polaczek@gmail.com

yuvalalaluf@gmail.com

elad.richardson@gmail.com

“A peacock”

Yael Vinker
Tel Aviv University and MIT CSAIL

Daniel Cohen-Or
Tel Aviv University

yaelvink@mit.edu

cohenor@gmail.com

“A fountain pen”

“A punk rocker”

“The girl with a pearl earring”

Figure 1. NeuralSVG generates vector graphics from text prompts with ordered and editable shapes. Our method supports dynamic
background color conditioning, facilitating the generation of multiple color palettes for a single learned representation (right).

Abstract

ods in generating structured and flexible SVG.

Vector graphics are essential in design, providing artists
with a versatile medium for creating resolution-independent
and highly editable visual content. Recent advancements
in vision-language and diffusion models have fueled interest in text-to-vector graphics generation. However, existing
approaches often suffer from over-parameterized outputs or
treat the layered structure - a core feature of vector graphics
- as a secondary goal, diminishing their practical use. Recognizing the importance of layered SVG representations, we
propose NeuralSVG, an implicit neural representation for
generating vector graphics from text prompts. Inspired by
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs), NeuralSVG encodes the
entire scene into the weights of a small MLP network, optimized using Score Distillation Sampling (SDS). To encourage a layered structure in the generated SVG, we introduce
a dropout-based regularization technique that strengthens
the standalone meaning of each shape. We additionally
demonstrate that utilizing a neural representation provides
an added benefit of inference-time control, enabling users
to dynamically adapt the generated SVG based on userprovided inputs, all with a single learned representation.
Through extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations,
we demonstrate that NeuralSVG outperforms existing meth-

1. Introduction

15458

Vector graphics represent images using parametric shapes,
such as circles, polygons, lines, and curves, in contrast
to rasterized images, which rely on pixel-level representations. Unlike raster images, vector graphics are resolutionindependent, easily editable, and particularly effective for
creating simplified visuals. These advantages make vector
graphics a preferred choice in fields such as design, web
development, and data visualization. Recent research has
sought to automate the generation of vector graphics, aiming to create high-quality, scalable visual content accessible
to both experts and non-experts alike.
With recent advancements in large-scale vision-language
models [57] and image diffusion models [30], there has
been a growing interest in introducing these strong priors to
directly generate vector graphics from text prompts [16, 46,
56, 58]. However, existing methods, while technically producing vector graphics, often result in over-parameterized
outputs composed of almost pixel-like shapes, thus losing
the original motivation and core advantages of editable vector graphics (see Figure 2).

