This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EC-Flow: Enabling Versatile Robotic Manipulation from Action-Unlabeled
Videos via Embodiment-Centric Flow
Yixiang Chen1,2 Peiyan Li1,2 Yan Huang1,2,3† Jiabing Yang1,2,3 Kehan Chen1,2 Liang Wang1,2†
1
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 FiveAges
yixiang.chen@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Object-Centric
Embodiment-Centric
Rigidity Assumption

Abstract
Current language-guided robotic manipulation systems often require low-level action-labeled datasets for imitation
learning. While object-centric flow prediction methods mitigate this issue, they remain limited to scenarios involving
rigid objects with clear displacement and minimal occlusion. In this work, we present Embodiment-Centric Flow
(EC-Flow), a framework that directly learns manipulation
from action-unlabeled videos by predicting embodimentcentric flow. Our key insight is that incorporating the embodiment’s inherent kinematics significantly enhances generalization to versatile manipulation scenarios, including
deformable object handling, occlusions, and non-objectdisplacement tasks. To connect the EC-Flow with language
instructions and object interactions, we further introduce
a goal-alignment module by jointly optimizing movement
consistency and goal-image prediction. Moreover, translating EC-Flow to executable robot actions only requires a
standard robot URDF (Unified Robot Description Format)
file to specify kinematic constraints across joints, which
makes it easy to use in practice. We validate EC-Flow on
both simulation (Meta-World) and real-world tasks, demonstrating its state-of-the-art performance in occluded object
handling (62% improvement), deformable object manipulation (45% improvement), and non-object-displacement
tasks (80% improvement) than prior state-of-the-art objectcentric flow methods. More results can be found on our
project website: https://ec-flow1.github.io.

Rigid

Deformable

Occlusion Vulnerability

Visible

Occlusion

Non-Object-Displacement

Displacement

Non-Displacement

Figure 1. Limitations of object-centric flow: (1) Deformable object failure; (2) Struggles with occlusions; (3) Cannot handle nondisplacement actions (e.g., rotations or fine motions).

1. Introduction

(VLA) models have been trained to directly map visual observations and language instructions to low-level robot actions. However, a critical limitation of these approaches
stems from their heavy reliance on large-scale datasets annotated with low-level robot action data. Such data are not
only difficult to collect at scale but also inherently prone to
noise, potentially degrading policy robustness.

Language-guided robotic manipulation has garnered significant attention in recent years. Current state-of-the-art
methods have predominantly adopted imitation learning
frameworks, where end-to-end Vision-Language-Action
† Corresponding authors.

Beyond limited numbers of action-labeled datasets,
abundant manipulation videos without action labels offer rich motion priors that could potentially alleviate data
scarcity. Recent works [3, 5, 8, 18, 19, 23, 40] have utilized image and video generation models to infer subgoals

11958

