This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MedVSR: Medical Video Super-Resolution with Cross State-Space Propagation
Xinyu Liu1 , Guolei Sun2 , Cheng Wang1 , Yixuan Yuan1, * , Ender Konukoglu2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich

Abstract
High-resolution (HR) medical videos are vital for accurate diagnosis, yet are hard to acquire due to hardware limitations and physiological constraints. Clinically, the collected low-resolution (LR) medical videos present unique
challenges for video super-resolution (VSR) models, including camera shake, noise, and abrupt frame transitions,
which result in significant optical flow errors and alignment difficulties. Additionally, tissues and organs exhibit
continuous and nuanced structures, but current VSR models are prone to introducing artifacts and distorted features
that can mislead doctors. To this end, we propose MedVSR, a tailored framework for medical VSR. It first employs Cross State-Space Propagation (CSSP) to address the
imprecise alignment by projecting distant frames as control matrices within state-space models, enabling the selective propagation of consistent and informative features to
neighboring frames for effective alignment. Moreover, we
design an Inner State-Space Reconstruction (ISSR) module that enhances tissue structures and reduces artifacts
with joint long-range spatial feature learning and largekernel short-range information aggregation. Experiments
across four datasets in diverse medical scenarios, including endoscopy and cataract surgeries, show that MedVSR
significantly outperforms existing VSR models in reconstruction performance and efficiency. Code released at
https://github.com/CUHK-AIM-Group/MedVSR.

Frame 𝑡-2

Frame 𝑡-1

Frame 𝑡

(a)

(b)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Example of sharp transitions and jitter in medical
videos, especially for distant frames (e.g. frame t - 2→t), which
pose significant challenges for existing alignment methods. (b)
We measure the averaged error of forward and inverse backward
optical flows in different datasets, lower error values denote better estimation stability. Medical videos tend to have significantly
larger errors, making the alignment more challenging.

In modern medical imaging, high-resolution (HR) medical
videos play a critical role in providing detailed texture and
structural information, which are essential for accurate diagnosis and quantitative analysis [46]. However, obtaining HR medical videos in clinical practice is a significant
challenge. The quality of medical videos is often limited
by various factors, including hardware conditions, acquisition time, physiological movement, and patient comfort
* Corresponding author. Prof. Yuan was supported by Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission Innovation and Technology Fund
ITS/229/22, CUHK 4055269, Hainan Province Clinical Medical Center.

11697

[11, 35, 44]. As a result, medical videos frequently suffer
from low-resolution (LR) and noise, which can compromise
the reliability of diagnosis and treatment.
In recent years, video super-resolution (VSR) techniques
have been studied [2, 4–6, 19, 21, 33, 53, 57, 59, 60, 65]
to recover the HR videos from LR sequences in the natural scenes. However, in contrast to natural domain videos,
medical videos pose two unique challenges. (1) Medical
videos captured during surgical or colonoscopy procedures
often exhibit instabilities due to hardware device limitations
or in-body environment constraints, such as camera shake,
jitter, and sharp transitions between frames, which are illustrated in Fig. 1(a). These instabilities can result in optical
flow estimation errors and alignment difficulties. Compared
to natural domain datasets (REDS4 [42], Video90K-T [60]),
medical videos display significantly larger optical flow errors, as shown in Fig. 1(b). This difficulty makes it crucial
to develop a reliable propagation scheme between frames
for more robust alignment. (2) Medical videos often contain tissues with continuous and nuanced structures with ho-

