This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VSP: Diagnosing the Dual Challenges of Perception and Reasoning in Spatial
Planning Tasks for MLLMs
Qiucheng Wu1 , Handong Zhao2 , Michael Saxon1 ,
Trung Bui2 , William Yang Wang1 , Yang Zhang3 , Shiyu Chang1
1
UC Santa Barbara, 2 Adobe Research, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
qiucheng@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Multimodal large language models are an exciting emerging class of language models (LMs) that have merged classic LM capabilities with those of image processing systems.
However, how these capabilities integrate is often not intuitive and warrants direct investigation. One understudied capability in MLLMs is visual spatial planning—the
ability to comprehend the spatial arrangements of objects
and devise action plans to achieve desired outcomes in visual scenes. It is unclear why MLLMs fall short on these
tasks generally considered easy for humans, given their successes across other diverse scenarios. To this end, we introduce VSP, a benchmark that 1) evaluates the spatial planning capability in MLLMs in general, and 2) diagnoses this
capability via finer-grained sub-tasks, including perception and reasoning, and measure the capabilities of models
through these sub-tasks. Our evaluation confirms that both
open-source and private MLLMs fail to generate effective
plans for even simple spatial planning tasks. Evaluations on
the fine-grained analytical tasks further reveal fundamental deficiencies in the models’ visual perception and bottlenecks in reasoning abilities, explaining their worse performance in the general spatial planning tasks. Our work illuminates future directions for improving MLLMs’ abilities in
spatial planning. Our benchmark is publicly available1 .

Basic Environment

Dynamic Environment

Maze Navigation Scenario

Collision Scenario

Blocks World Scenario

Realistic Environment
Google Map Scenario

Diagnosing: Why MLLM fail?

Model:

Model:

Model:

The player
is at row 1,
column 4, so
…

The green block
is to the left of
the orange block
…

Object Perception Error

Spatial Relation Perception Error

The player is
at row 3,
column 6. A
hole is at
row 3, column
7. Moving
right is
safe, so …

…

Reasoning Error

Figure 1. Overview of the VSP benchmark. The benchmark evaluates tasks that require MLLMs to perform complex reasoning by
utilizing the spatial information they perceive, and diagnoses their
failure modes using a series of carefully designed subtasks.

37, 54], with applications in image captioning, visual question answering, and visual reasoning [48, 64, 68, 72]. The
swift evolution of MLLMs has enabled them to tackle increasingly sophisticated tasks that require multiple emerging abilities in complex scenarios. However, as model capabilities and deployment needs advance, the challenges in
usefully evaluating them grow in kind.
Planning is a fundamental capability in intelligent systems that is particularly contested in LMs [59]. Visual spatial planning refers to the task of comprehending the spatial arrangement of objects in a scene and designing action
plans to achieve a desired outcome. For example, the classical maze problem can be considered a visual planning task,
where an agent is given an input image describing the maze
environment and is asked to produce a viable path to navigate the player from the starting position to the goal. This
task requires two capabilities: image perception, which en-

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of large language models has driven
considerable growth in their capabilities to produce fluent text in many domains, generating outputs exhibiting
potential “reasoning” and “understanding” abilities [12,
14, 30, 57]. Recently, multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) have advanced on LLMs through training on native image inputs, to achieve impressive performance generating text describing and relating to input images [1, 8, 10,
1 https : / / github . com / UCSB - NLP - Chang / Visual Spatial-Planning

2270

