This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnnofreeOD: Detecting All Classes at Low Frame Rates Without Human
Annotations
Boyi Sun1, 2
1

Yuhang Liu1, 2 Houxin He1 Yonglin Tian1 Fei-Yue Wang1 *
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Zhongke JingYu Sensing Technology Co., Ltd
{sunboyi2024, feiyue.wang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

liance on high-quality annotations, which are costly and
time-consuming to obtain, constrains their applicability in
specialized scenarios.
Recently, semi-supervised methods [47, 60, 70] have
been applied in 3D object detection, saving 50%-80% of labeled data. Additionally, a few studies [3, 51, 63, 66] have
explored unsupervised detectors that can recognize objects
based on scene flow and common sense (red in Fig. 1). This
common-sense knowledge includes, e.g., objects with similar point cloud shapes tend to have relatively fixed positions
and sizes, attributes of different objects are distinguishable,
and objects’ movement trajectories in scene flow indicate
their orientations, etc. By integrating common sense with
machine learning techniques, pseudo boxes can be generated for training.
However, scene flow-based unsupervised detection
frameworks exhibit significant limitations. First, moving
points analysis can only indicate dynamic targets, it fails to
generate pseudo boxes for stationary classes (e.g., barrier)
or stationary objects (e.g., parked cars). Second, as class
labels are determined solely by the shape of the generated
boxes, only a limited set of semantic classes (i.e., vehicle,
pedestrian, cyclist) can be identified. Moreover, these methods struggle to maintain the temporal consistency of moving
objects in low-frame-rate scenes, thereby reducing overall
accuracy.
A related task, annotation-free point cloud segmentation
(blue in Fig. 1), adopts a completely different logic: 2D-to3D knowledge distillation. Relevant methods [6, 7, 45, 65]
leverage high-quality knowledge (labels or features) from
2D open-vocabulary segmentation models and transfer it
to 3D using transformation matrices. Motivated by the
challenges in annotation-free object detection, we are inspired by annotation-free 3D segmentation and construct
an annotation-free 3D object detection framework based on
2D-to-3D knowledge distillation (green in Fig. 1).
Only a few studies share a similar idea: LiSe [67] employs a 2D detector to assist in generating pseudo-boxes but
is limited to class-agnostic detection, while UNION [20] in-

Manual annotation of 3D bounding boxes in large-scale
3D scenes is expensive and time-consuming. This motivates the exploration of annotation-free 3D object detection using unlabeled point cloud data. Existing unsupervised 3D detection frameworks predominantly identify moving objects via scene flow, which has significant limitations:
(1) limited detection classes (≤ 3), (2) difficulty in detecting stationary objects, and (3) reliance on high frame rates.
To address these limitations, we propose AnnofreeOD, a
novel Annotation-free Object Detection framework based
on 2D-to-3D knowledge distillation. First, we explore an
effective strategy to generate high-quality pseudo boxes
using single-frame 2D knowledge. Second, we observe
the noise from the previous step and introduce NoiseResistant Regression (NRR) based on Box Augmentation
(BA). AnnofreeOD achieves state-of-the-art performance
across multiple experiments. On the nuScenes dataset, we
established the first annotation-free 10-class object detection baseline, achieving 40% of fully supervised performance. Furthermore, in 3-class and class-agnostic object detection tasks, our approach surpasses prior stateof-the-art methods by +9.3% mAP (+12.2% NDS) and
+6.0% AP (+4.1% NDS), significantly improving precision.
Our codes will be released at https://github.com/
sbysbysbys/AnnofreeAD.

1. Introduction
3D Perception based on large-scale point cloud scenes is
central to autonomous driving, with 3D object detection being one of the most critical tasks. Recently, neural networkbased 3D object detection models [19, 41–43, 55] have
shown rapid development. However, as data volume and
framework complexity increase, fully supervised detectors
are reaching performance saturation. Moreover, their re* Corresponding Author.

5315

