This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Domain Generalized and Adaptive Detection with Diffusion Models:
Fitness, Generalization, and Transferability
Boyong He1 *, Yuxiang Ji1 *, Zhuoyue Tan1 *, Liaoni Wu1,2†,
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
2
School of Aerospace Engineering, Xiamen University
{boyonghe, yuxiangji, tanzhuoyue}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
wuliaoni@xmu.edu.cn†

1. Introduction

,

Abstract

Distribution discrepancies between training data and realworld environments are inevitable in practical applications
of object detection. Factors such as weather variations,
sensor differences, diverse lighting conditions, and environmental noise contribute to domain shift between training and testing datasets. This domain gap causes even the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) detectors [55, 56, 64, 81] to suffer
from significant performance degradation when applied to
diverse and unseen domains [66, 86].
To address domain gaps in object detection, researchers
have developed two main approaches: Domain Adaptation (DA) and Domain Generalization (DG). DA leverages unlabeled target domain data through feature alignment [9, 44, 59], style transfer [21, 41, 89], and selftraining with pseudo-labels [3, 4, 80]. However, since target data is often unavailable beforehand, DG methods focus
on data augmentation [30, 85], domain-invariant feature extraction [13, 37], and adversarial training [39, 90] to build
robust detectors using only source domain data that perform
well across unseen domains.
Vision foundation models offer fresh perspectives on domain challenges. DDT [23] and GDD [24] utilize diffusion
models [19, 28, 61] to build robust detectors for DA and
DG tasks, outperforming previous methods. However, these
approaches suffer from computational inefficiency due to
large parameters and multi-step denoising processes, limiting their practical deployment. Moreover, existing frameworks fail to fully exploit the multimodal capabilities of diffusion models or develop specialized architectures for DG
and DA tasks, indicating untapped potential for improving
generalization and adaptation performance.
In this paper, we address these limitations through three
key strategies. First, unlike DDT [23] and GDD [24] which
rely on computationally expensive multi-step diffusion processes, we implement single-step feature extraction with
optimized collection and fusion structures. Second, we de-

Detectors often suffer from performance drop due to domain gap between training and testing data. Recent methods explore diffusion models applied to domain generalization (DG) and adaptation (DA) tasks, but still struggle
with large inference costs and have not yet fully leveraged
the capabilities of diffusion models. We propose to tackle
these problems by extracting intermediate features from a
single-step diffusion process, improving feature collection
and fusion to reduce inference time by 75% while enhancing performance on source domains (i.e., Fitness). Then,
we construct an object-centered auxiliary branch by applying box-masked images with class prompts to extract robust and domain-invariant features that focus on object. We
also apply consistency loss to align the auxiliary and ordinary branch, balancing fitness and generalization while
preventing overfitting and improving performance on target
domains (i.e., Generalization). Furthermore, within a unified framework, standard detectors are guided by diffusion
detectors through feature-level and object-level alignment
on source domains (for DG) and unlabeled target domains
(for DA), thereby improving cross-domain detection performance (i.e., Transferability). Our method achieves competitive results on 3 DA benchmarks and 5 DG benchmarks.
Additionally, experiments on COCO generalization benchmark demonstrate that our method maintains significant advantages and show remarkable efficiency in large domain
shifts and low-data scenarios. Our work shows the superiority of applying diffusion models to domain generalized
and adaptive detection tasks and offers valuable insights for
visual perception tasks across diverse domains. The code is
available at Fitness-Generalization-Transferability.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1912

