This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape of Motion: 4D Reconstruction from a Single Video
Qianqian Wang1,2∗ , Vickie Ye1∗ , Hang Gao1∗ , Weijia Zeng3∗ ,
Jake Austin1 , Zhengqi Li4 , Angjoo Kanazawa1
1

UC Berkeley

2

Google DeepMind

3

UC San Diego

4

Adobe Research

Figure 1. Shape of Motion. Our method enables joint long-range 3D tracking and novel view synthesis from a monocular video of
a complex dynamic scene. We render moving elements at a fixed viewpoint across time and visualize estimated 3D motion as colorful
trajectories. These trajectories reveal distinct geometric patterns, which leads to the term “Shape of Motion”.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Reconstructing the persistent geometry and their 3D motion
across a video is crucial for understanding and interacting
with the underlying physical world. While recent years have
seen impressive progress in modeling static 3D scenes [45,
69], recovering the geometry and motion of complex dynamic 3D scenes, especially from a single video, remains
an open challenge. A number of prior dynamic reconstruction and novel view synthesis approaches have attempted
to tackle this problem. However, most methods rely on
synchronized multi-view videos [9, 23, 23, 67, 108] or additional LIDAR/depth sensors [29, 63, 77, 98, 106]. Recent monocular approaches can operate on regular dynamic
videos, but they typically model 3D scene motion as shortrange scene flow between consecutive times [24, 57, 58]
or deformation fields that map between canonical and view
space [74, 75, 119], failing to capture 3D motion trajectories persistent over a video.
The longstanding challenge for general in-the-wild
videos lies in the poorly constrained nature of the 4D reconstruction problem. In this work, we tackle this challenge
with two key insights. The first is that, while the image
space dynamics can be complex and discontinuous, the underlying 3D motion is a composition of continuous simple
rigid motions. Our second insight is that data-driven priors
provide complementary, though noisy cues, that aggregate

Monocular dynamic reconstruction is a challenging and
long-standing vision problem due to the highly ill-posed nature of the task. Existing approaches depend on templates,
are effective only in quasi-static scenes, or fail to model 3D
motion explicitly. We introduce a method for reconstructing generic dynamic scenes, featuring explicit, persistent
3D motion trajectories in the world coordinate frame, from
casually captured monocular videos. We tackle the problem
with two key insights: First, we exploit the low-dimensional
structure of 3D motion by representing scene motion with
a compact set of SE(3) motion bases. Each point’s motion is expressed as a linear combination of these bases,
facilitating soft decomposition of the scene into multiple
rigidly-moving groups. Second, we take advantage of offthe-shelf data-driven priors such as monocular depth maps
and long-range 2D tracks, and devise a method to effectively consolidate these noisy supervisory signals, resulting
in a globally consistent representation of the dynamic scene.
Experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance for both long-range 3D/2D motion estimation
and novel view synthesis on dynamic scenes. Project Page:
https://shape-of-motion.github.io/
∗ Equal contribution

9660

