This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GReg: Geometry-Aware Region Refinement for Sign Language Video
Generation
Tongkai Shi, Lianyu Hu*, Fanhua Shang, Liqing Gao, Wei Feng
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{stk, hly2021}@tju.edu.cn

Target SMPL-X Normal

Overlay

Target Image

a) Shape comparison.

SMPL-X
Gradients

Target
Gradients

Difference

b) Key regions edge comparison.

Figure 1. SMPL-X [20], as a volumetric human body representation, effectively captures the semantic features of the human body, such as
shape. As illustrated in a), SMPL-X achieves high-quality spatial alignment with the human body. Furthermore, for key region edges, as
shown in b), SMPL-X demonstrates precise alignment with the edges of the human hand, resulting in a low gradient difference. This high
level of alignment significantly enhances the generation capability, enabling more accurate and realistic outputs.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Sign Language Video Generation (SLVG) aims to transform sign language sequences into natural and fluent sign
language videos. Existing SLVG methods lack geometric modeling of human anatomical structures, leading to
anatomically implausible and temporally inconsistent generation. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
framework: Geometry-Aware Region Refinement (GReg)
for SLVG. GReg uses geometric information (such as normal maps and gradient maps) from the SMPL-X model to
ensure anatomical and temporal consistency. To fully leverage the geometric priors, we propose two novel methods: 1)
Regional Prior Generation, which uses regional expert networks to generate target-structured regions as generation
priors; 2) Gradient-enhanced Refinement, which guides the
refinement of detailed structures in key regions using gradient features. Furthermore, we enhance visual realism in key
regions through adversarial training on both these regions
and their gradient maps. Experimental results demonstrate
that GReg achieves state-of-the-art performance with superior structural accuracy and temporal consistency.
* Corresponding author.

Sign language plays a crucial role as a communication tool
for the deaf and hard-of-hearing communities, offering a
unique means of interaction within society. Sign Language
Production (SLP), which converts natural language into
sign language videos, can further bridge the communication
gap between the deaf and the hearing. Typically, the SLP
pipeline consists of 2 steps: Text2Sign and Sign2Video.
First, natural language is transformed into a corresponding sequence of sign language gestures, and then, a realistic sign language video is generated from the sign sequence. The Text2Sign part has made significant progress,
with methods like [1, 28–30, 35, 42, 47] capable of converting natural language into coherent sign language motion sequences. However, the Sign2Video part, also known as Sign
Language Video Generation (SLVG), remains a significant
challenge in this field.
Current SLVG approaches such as [6, 8, 16, 26, 31, 36,
37, 39], by using OpenPose [3] key points or heatmaps,
suffer from a fundamental limitation: the lack of geometric information. These methods often produce results that
fail to preserve the natural anatomical structure of the human body, leading to incoherent motions and unrealistic

16472

