This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Growing of Video Tokenizers for Temporally Compact Latent Spaces
Aniruddha Mahapatra1 Long Mai1 David Bourgin1
1

Adobe Research

2

Yitian Zhang1,2 Feng Liu1

Northeastern University

https://progressive-video-tokenizer.github.io/Pro-MAG/
Reconstruction

Ground-Truth

MagViTv2-16×

Text-to-Video

Prompt: a capybara made of
pixelated voxels is seated …

ProMAG-16×

Prompt: An astronaut in a pressure
suit is floating weightlessly …

Figure 1. (left) Our video tokenizer ProMAG is capable of much more effectively reconstructing high motion videos even at very large
(16×) temporal compression, compared to baseline MagViT-v2. Dotted boxes highlight regions where the MagViT-v2 fails catastrophically,
like faces and hands, which have a lot of artifacts in the reconstructions. (right) We show that our highly compressed latent space (16×) is
suitable for training high-quality text-to-video diffusion models.

Abstract
Video tokenizers are essential for latent video diffusion models, converting raw video data into spatiotemporally compressed latent spaces for efficient training. However, extending state-of-the-art video tokenizers to achieve a temporal
compression ratio beyond 4× without increasing channel
capacity poses significant challenges. In this work, we propose an alternative approach to enhance temporal compression. We find that the reconstruction quality of temporally
subsampled videos from a low-compression encoder surpasses that of high-compression encoders applied to original videos. This indicates that high-compression models can
leverage representations from lower-compression models.

Building on this insight, we develop a bootstrapped hightemporal-compression model that progressively trains highcompression blocks atop well-trained lower-compression
models. Our method includes a cross-level feature-mixing
module to retain information from the pretrained lowcompression model and guide higher-compression blocks to
capture the remaining details from the full video sequence.
Evaluation of video benchmarks shows that our method significantly improves reconstruction quality while increasing
temporal compression compared to directly training the full
model. Furthermore, the resulting compact latent space effectively trains a video diffusion model for high-quality video
generation with a significantly reduced token budget.

17629

