This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SemTalk: Holistic Co-speech Motion Generation with Frame-level
Semantic Emphasis
Jiaxu Zhang1
Ziqiang Dang2,3
Jianqiang Ren2
Jianfang Li2 *
2
1†
Liefeng Bo
Zhigang Tu
1
2
3
Wuhan University
Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group
Zhejiang University

Xiangyue Zhang1,2 *

Project page:

https://xiangyue-zhang.github.io/SemTalk

Figure 1. On the left, we analyze semantic labels from the BEAT2 dataset [31] and visualize frame-level motion, revealing that semantically
relevant motions are rare and sparse, aligning with real-life observations. On the right, this observation drives the design of SemTalk,
which establishes a rhythm-aligned base motion and dynamically emphasizes sparse semantic gestures at the frame-level. In this example,
SemTalk amplifies expressiveness on words like “watching” and “just,” enhancing gesture and torso movements. The semantic scores
below are automatically generated by SemTalk to modulate semantic emphasis over time.

Abstract

with enhanced semantic richness over a stable base motion.

A good co-speech motion generation cannot be achieved
without a careful integration of common rhythmic motion
and rare yet essential semantic motion. In this work, we
propose SemTalk for holistic co-speech motion generation
with frame-level semantic emphasis. Our key insight is
to separately learn base motions and sparse motions, and
then adaptively fuse them. In particular, coarse2fine crossattention module and rhythmic consistency learning are explored to establish rhythm-related base motion, ensuring
a coherent foundation that synchronizes gestures with the
speech rhythm. Subsequently, semantic emphasis learning is designed to generate semantic-aware sparse motion, focusing on frame-level semantic cues. Finally, to
integrate sparse motion into the base motion and generate semantic-emphasized co-speech gestures, we further
leverage a learned semantic score for adaptive synthesis. Qualitative and quantitative comparisons on two public datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art, delivering high-quality co-speech motion

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Nonverbal communication, including body language, hand
gestures, and facial expressions, is integral to human interactions. It enriches conversations with contextual cues and
enhances understanding among participants [6, 14, 20, 24].
This aspect is particularly significant in holistic co-speech
motion generation, where the challenge lies in synthesizing
gestures that align with speech rhythm while also capturing
the infrequent yet critical semantic gestures [25, 38].
Most existing methods [17, 30, 48] rely heavily on
rhythm-related audio features as conditions for gesture generation. While these rhythm-based features successfully
align gestures with the timing of speech, they often overshadow the sparse yet expressive semantic motion (see
Fig. 1). As a result, the generated motions may lack the
contextual depth necessary and nuanced expressiveness for
natural interaction. Some methods try to address this by incorporating semantic information like emotion, style, and

13761

