This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaptiveAE: An Adaptive Exposure Strategy for HDR Capturing
in Dynamic Scenes
Tianyi Xu1,3,4∗

Fan Zhang1
1

Boxin Shi3,4†

Shanghai AI Laboratory

2

Tianfan Xue2,1†

Yujin Wang1†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

3

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

4

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
photon@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangfan@pjlab.org.cn, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
tfxue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, wangyujin@pjlab.org.cn

Ours-stage I

Ours-stage II

Ours-stage III

Deep Learning Based
Shutter Speed

Pourreza et al.

Wang et al.

Hasinoff et al.

ISO

Adjustable / Unadjustable

Figure 1. AdaptiveAE takes camera preview images as input and automatically predicts the ISO and shutter speed for each LDR captures
for exposure fusion through a 3-stage sequential refinement procedure to achieve an optimal balance between noise level and motion-related
problems for high quality HDR capturing in dynamic scenes with deep reinforcement learning. AdaptiveAE achieves PSNR 39.7 on HDRV
dataset [26], while baseline methods [6, 21, 32] that either only predicts shutter speed or do not consider motion can only achieve PSNR
below 37.6 and has evident motion blur and ghosting artifacts in HDR results.

Abstract
Mainstream high dynamic range imaging techniques typically rely on fusing multiple images captured with different exposure setups (shutter speed and ISO). A good balance between shutter speed and ISO is crucial for achieving high-quality HDR, as high ISO values introduce significant noise, while long shutter speeds can lead to noticeable
motion blur. However, existing methods often overlook the
complex interaction between shutter speed and ISO and fail
to account for motion blur effects in dynamic scenes.
In this work, we propose AdaptiveAE, a reinforcement

learning-based method that optimizes the selection of shutter speed and ISO combinations to maximize HDR reconstruction quality in dynamic environments. AdaptiveAE integrates an image synthesis pipeline that incorporates motion blur and noise simulation into our training procedure,
leveraging semantic information and exposure histograms.
It can adaptively select optimal ISO and shutter speed sequences based on a user-defined exposure time budget, and
find a better exposure schedule than traditional solutions.
Experimental results across multiple datasets demonstrate
that it achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction

* This work was done during Tianyi Xu’s internship at Shanghai AI

High-dynamic-range (HDR) imaging plays a pivotal role
in computational photography. To capture an HDR scene,

Laboratory.
† Corresponding authors.

25176

