This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breaking Grid Constraints: Dynamic Graph Reconstruction Network for
Multi-organ Segmentation
Junhao Xiao1, 3, Yang Wei2, 3, B, Jingyu Wang1, 3, Yongchao Wang2, 3, Xiuli Bi2, 3, and Bin Xiao2, 3, 4, B
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
3
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Image Cognition,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
4
Jinan Inspur Data Technology Co., Ltd., Jinan, China

d230201040@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, weiyang@cqupt.edu.cn, d230201034@stu.cqupt.edu.cn
wangyongchao@cqupt.edu.cn, bixl@cqupt.edu.cn, xiaobin@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Morphological differences and dense spatial relations of
organs make multi-organ segmentation challenging. Current segmentation networks, primarily based on CNNs and
Transformers, represent organs by aggregating information
within fixed regions. However, aggregated representations
often fail to accurately describe the shape differences and
spatial relationships of multi-organs, which leads to imprecise morphological modeling and ambiguous boundary representation. In response, we propose a novel multi-organ
segmentation network via dynamic graph reconstruction,
called DGRNet. Unlike existing approaches, DGRNet employs a graph-based paradigm to reconstruct multi-organs
and leverages the topological flexibility of graphs to represent irregular organ morphology. Based on graph connectivity, the precise information interaction makes more
efficient multi-organ modeling. Furthermore, DGRNet introduces a category-aware guidance mechanism that utilizes organ category-specific priors to explicitly define interorgan boundaries, addressing the issue of ambiguous margin delineation in multi-organ regions. We conducted extensive experiments on five datasets (including CT and MRI),
showing that DGRNet outperforms state-of-the-art methods
and models complex multi-organ areas better, highlighting its effectiveness and robustness. Code is available at:
https://github.com/robert1818118/DGRNet.

Figure 1. Comparison of multi-organ modeling methods. CNNbased and Transformer-based networks rely on information aggregation approaches, which struggle to effectively distinguish multiorgan morphologies, hindering accurate multi-organ segmentations. In contrast, DGRNet uses graph reconstruction to generate
deep features that represent multi-organ morphologies clearly, resulting in better segmentation results.

1. Introduction

tial quantitative foundations for disease screening, surgical
planning, and treatment evaluation [5, 26]. However, this
task presents substantial technical challenges due to the inherent complexity of multi-organ anatomical modeling. On
the one hand, the pronounced morphological variability of
anatomies across different patients and pathological conditions complicates the accurate modeling of anatomical regions [17, 22, 30]. On the other hand, the intricate spatial interdependencies among adjacent organs, particularly

Multi-organ segmentation plays a critical role in clinical practice by providing precise delineation of anatomical structures in medical images, thereby offering essenB Corresponding author.

24413

