This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VMBench: A Benchmark for Perception-Aligned Video Motion Generation
Hangyu Li1
Xiaokun Feng1,2
Meiqi Wu1,3 *
Chen Zhu1 *
Xinran Ling1 *
Cundian Yang1
Aiming Hao1
Jiashu Zhu1
Jiahong Wu1†
Xiangxiang Chu1
1
2
AMAP, Alibaba Group
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Video generation has advanced rapidly, improving evaluation methods, yet assessing video’s motion remains a major challenge. Specifically, there are two key issues: 1) current motion metrics do not fully align with human perceptions; 2) the existing motion prompts are limited. Based on
these findings, we introduce VMBench—a comprehensive
Video Motion Benchmark that has perception-aligned motion metrics and features the most diverse types of motion.
VMBench has several appealing properties: (1) PerceptionDriven Motion Evaluation Metrics, we identify five dimensions based on human perception in motion video assessment and develop fine-grained evaluation metrics, providing deeper insights into models’ strengths and weaknesses
in motion quality. (2) Meta-Guided Motion Prompt Generation, a structured method that extracts meta-information,
generates diverse motion prompts with LLMs, and refines
them through human-AI validation, resulting in a multilevel prompt library covering six key dynamic scene dimensions. (3) Human-Aligned Validation Mechanism, we provide human preference annotations to validate our benchmarks, with our metrics achieving an average 35.3% improvement in Spearman’s correlation over baseline methods. This is the first time that the quality of motion in
videos has been evaluated from the perspective of human
perception alignment. Additionally, we release VMBench
at https://github.com/AMAP-ML/VMBench, setting a new standard for evaluating and advancing motion
generation models.

man perception. To enhance dynamic motion generation, it
is crucial to establish perception-aligned motion evaluation.
However, previous methods [29, 49, 59, 64, 75] primarily assess the static content of videos, with dynamic evaluation largely limited to motion smoothness [33, 44, 50]. This
makes it challenging to capture motion deficiencies [69,
94], including but not limited to spatiotemporal inconsistencies and violations of physical laws. Therefore, developing
a more comprehensive evaluation metric that better aligns
with human perception is crucial.
To address this, we introduce Video Motion Benchmark
(VMBench) (Fig. 1), the first benchmark focused on comprehensive video motion assessment. It features the most
diverse range of motion types, covering 969 categories—
more than any other benchmark [27, 33, 44, 49, 50, 68]
(see Fig. 12 in the Appendix). Additionally, it integrates
perception-aligned motion metrics to systematically evaluate the motion generation quality of video generation models.
First, we introduce Perception-Driven Motion Evaluation Metrics (PMM), the first evaluation framework explicitly designed to align with human perception of motion quality. PMM comprises five key components: Object Integrity Score (OIS), Perceptible Amplitude Score
(PAS), Temporal Coherence Score (TCS), Motion Smoothness Score (MSS), and Commonsense Adherence Score
(CAS). Unlike previous methods that primarily focus on
motion smoothness [29, 59, 64, 75], PMM provides a more
comprehensive assessment by evaluating motion quality in
terms of spatiotemporal inconsistencies and violations of
physical laws.
Next, we propose Meta-Guided Motion Prompt Generation (MMPG), an expandable framework that encompasses the most comprehensive range of motion types,
grounded in physics [56, 60, 65, 67] and cognitive science [25, 57]. The evaluation system covers six movement
modes: fluid dynamics, biological motion, mechanical motion, weather phenomena, collective behavior, and energy
transfer (Fig. 1). Specifically, MMPG first extracts subjects,
places, and actions from VidProm [79], Place365 [97], and

1. Introduction
Video generation models [2, 3, 37, 43, 55, 78, 90] have advanced significantly, particularly text-to-video (T2V) models [12, 45, 70, 96], which perform well in generating static
content but struggle to capture motion in alignment with hu* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding authors

13087

