This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Images as Noisy Labels: Unleashing the Potential of the Diffusion Model for
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Fan Li 1

Xuanbin Wang 1 Xuan Wang1 Zhaoxiang Zhang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University

Yuelei Xu1 *

Abstract
Recently, open-vocabulary semantic segmentation has garnered growing attention. Most current methods leverage
vision-language models like CLIP to recognize unseen categories through their zero-shot capabilities. However, CLIP
struggles to establish potential spatial dependencies among
scene objects due to its holistic pre-training objective, causing sub-optimal results. In this paper, we propose a DEnoising learning framework based on the Diffusion model for
Open-vocabulary semantic Segmentation, called DEDOS,
which is aimed at constructing the scene skeleton. Motivation stems from the fact that diffusion models incorporate
not only the visual appearance of objects but also embed
rich scene spatial priors. Our core idea is to view images as labels embedded with ”noise”—non-essential details for perceptual tasks—and to disentangle the intrinsic
scene prior from the diffusion feature during the denoising process of the images. Specifically, to fully harness
the scene prior knowledge of the diffusion model, we introduce learnable proxy queries during the denoising process.
Meanwhile, we leverage the robustness of CLIP features to
texture shifts as supervision, guiding proxy queries to focus
on constructing the scene skeleton and avoiding interference from texture information in the diffusion feature space.
Finally, we enhance spatial understanding within CLIP features using proxy queries, which also serve as an interface
for multi-level interaction between text and visual modalities. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our
method, experimental results on five standard benchmarks
have shown that DEDOS achieves state-of-the-art performance. We will make the code publicly available.

Figure 1. Our method treats images as labels embedded with
noise—irrelevant details to perceptual tasks—and employs learnable proxy queries to progressively construct the scene skeleton
from diffusion features during the iterative denoising. These proxy
queries are ultimately used to improve the spatial understanding of
the vision-language model, avoiding visual shortcomings in dense
perception tasks that arise from its holistic pre-training objective.

1. Introduction

signed for predefined sets of training categories, leading to
limitations in handling diverse visual concepts. To overcome this challenge, open vocabulary semantic segmentation [13, 16, 25, 48, 55] has emerged as an approach in
which segmentation models are trained to recognize objects
of arbitrary categories based on the given text, broadening
their applicability in real-world scenarios.
Most current approaches for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation [16, 48–50, 55, 56] leverage the powerful zero-shot ability of large-scale vision-language models, such as CLIP [33] and ALIGN [19], which are pretrained on extensive image-text datasets. While these pretrained models excel at classifying single object proposals
or images, their image-level pre-training objective introduces ambiguity in spatial relationships [41, 50] and confusion with co-occurring objects, leading to severe visual
shortcomings in dense perception tasks.
On the other hand, diffusion models [12, 35], i.e.,
generative models based on denoising, have made great
breakthroughs in generating diverse and high-fidelity images. Given the powerful generative capabilities of diffu-

Image segmentation is a core task in computer vision,
aimed at assigning semantic labels to pixels in an image.
Despite achieving excellent performance in recent years
[6, 9, 10, 15, 27, 53], traditional methods are often de* Corresponding author.

24255

