This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DASH: 4D Hash Encoding with Self-Supervised Decomposition
for Real-Time Dynamic Scene Rendering
Jie Chen1

Zhangchi Hu1
1

2

Peixi Wu1

Huyue Zhu1

Hebei Li1,†

Xiaoyan Sun1,2,†

University of Science and Technology of China

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{chenjie02, lihebei}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {sunxiaoyan}@ustc.edu.cn

Ours

Ground Truth

Ground Truth

Ours

E-D3DGS
(ECCV24)

Grid4D

PSNR (dB)

4DGaussian

Ground Truth

4DGaussian

Grid4D

Ours

Ground Truth

HyperReel
(CVPR23)

NeRFPlayer
(TVCG23)

4DGaussian
(CVPR24)
Grid4D
(NeurIPS24)

K-Planes
(CVPR23)

MixVoels
(ICCV23)

FPS

Figure 1. Our method achieves real-time rendering for dynamic scenes with high rendering quality. In real-world datasets with intricate
details, our method outperforms 4DGaussian [41], and Grid4D [13] in terms of rendering quality and time performance. The right figure is
tested on Neural 3D Video [15] dataset, where the radius of the dot corresponds to the training time and and the horizontal axis is plotted
on a logarithmic scale.

dynamic and static components without manual annotations or precomputed masks. Next, we introduce a multiresolution 4D hash encoder for dynamic elements, providing an explicit representation that avoids the low-rank
assumption. Finally, we present a spatio-temporal smoothness regularization strategy to mitigate unstable deformation artifacts. Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that DASH achieves state-of-the-art dynamic rendering performance, exhibiting enhanced visual quality at realtime speeds of 264 FPS on a single 4090 GPU. Code:
https://github.com/chenj02/DASH.

Abstract
Dynamic scene reconstruction is a long-term challenge in
3D vision. Existing plane-based methods in dynamic Gaussian splatting suffer from an unsuitable low-rank assumption, causing feature overlap and poor rendering quality. Although 4D hash encoding provides an explicit representation without low-rank constraints, directly applying
it to the entire dynamic scene leads to substantial hash
collisions and redundancy. To address these challenges,
we present DASH, a real-time dynamic scene rendering
framework that employs 4D hash encoding coupled with
self-supervised decomposition. Our approach begins with
a self-supervised decomposition mechanism that separates

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) is a critical 3D vision task,
supporting VR, AR, and film production. It gener-

† Corresponding authors

26349

