This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D3: Training-Free AI-Generated Video Detection Using Second-Order Features
Chende Zheng1 Ruiqi Suo1 Chenhao Lin1 *† Zhengyu Zhao1 Le Yang1
Shuai Liu1 Minghui Yang2 Cong Wang3 Chao Shen1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Guangdong OPPO Mobile Communications Co., Ltd.
3
City University of Hong Kong
Abstract
The evolution of video generation techniques, such as
Sora, has made it increasingly easy to produce highfidelity AI-generated videos, raising public concern over
the dissemination of synthetic content. However, existing detection methodologies remain limited by their insufficient exploration of temporal artifacts in synthetic videos.
To bridge this gap, we establish a theoretical framework
through second-order dynamical analysis under Newtonian
mechanics, subsequently extending the Second-order Central Difference features tailored for temporal artifact detection. Building on this theoretical foundation, we reveal a
fundamental divergence in second-order feature distributions between real and AI-generated videos. Concretely,
we propose Detection by Difference of Differences (D3),
a novel training-free detection method that leverages the
above second-order temporal discrepancies. We validate
the superiority of our D3 on 4 open-source datasets (GenVideo, VideoPhy, EvalCrafter, VidProM), 40 subsets in total. For example, on GenVideo, D3 outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method by 10.39% (absolute) mean Average Precision. Additional experiments on time cost and
post-processing operations demonstrate D3’s exceptional
computational efficiency and strong robust performance.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Zig-HS/D3.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Real and AI-generated videos can be differentiated by
second-order (temporal) features in our Detection by Difference
of Differences (D3) method. The optical flow vectors are obtained
by RAFT [42]. First-order features are less powerful (see Table 8.)

With the development of AI [23, 37, 53], generative models have evolved into versatile tools for high-fidelity content creation. However, their pervasive deployment across
digital ecosystems has precipitated critical societal security risks—systematically undermining information integrity and eroding public trust [12, 38, 57] - evidenced by
cases like the Taylor Swift deepfakes [2]. Consequently,
there is an increasing and urgent demand to develop a detector of AI-generated videos. Traditional research on deep
* Corresponding Author
† Interdisciplinary Research Center of Frontier science and technology,

Xi’an Jiaotong University

12852

forgery detection focuses on facial forgery (e.g., Deepfakes)
but is unable to generalize to universal videos. For this,
there has been some recent aiming at the generalization
detection of AI-generated videos, e.g., DuB3D [27], DeCoF [33], DeMamba [16], etc. These methods commonly
learn the differences between real and AI-generated videos
from the training data by using deep learning frameworks.
However, despite these efforts, there is still a lack of interpretability research on AI-generated video detection. To
address this, we introduce the second-order position control system under Newtonian mechanics theory. We extend
the Second-order Central Difference features from this system to AI-generated video detection and validate significant
differences in second-order features between real and AIgenerated videos by conducting visualization experiments
on differential optical flow. More concretely, we propose
Detection by Difference of Differences (D3), a training-free
AI-generated video detection framework based on secondorder features.
Technically, we use a pre-trained visual encoder to extract zero-order features from the input video by frames.
Then, we employ L2 distance (or cosine similarity) to

