This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROVI: A VLM-LLM Re-Captioned Dataset for Open-Vocabulary
Instance-Grounded Text-to-Image Generation
Cihang Peng
Qiming Hou
Zhong Ren
Kun Zhou*
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
cihangpeng@zju.edu.cn, hqm03ster@gmail.com, renzhong@zju.edu.cn, kunzhou@acm.org
Web Image

(a) Detected by Web Cap.

(b) Detected after Re-Captioning

Generated Images

(c) Stable Diffusion

(d) Trained on Others

(e) Trained on ROVI

Original Web Caption: Nostalgic Cockatoo Jungle Wallpaper Mural

A photograph of a bedroom with a mural-style wallpaper featuring tropical plants and birds. In the
center, there is a wooden bed with white bedding, pillows and a grey throw blanket. The wallpaper
includes illustrations of two pink cockatoos and a grey cockatoo.

Figure 1. Effect of our pre-detection strategy. Image (a) shows a web image with original caption where OVDs only detect cockatoo,
jungle, and wallpaper mural. Our method (b) discovers additional elements: bedding, pillows, and blanket, with detailed composition
descriptions. The base generator [40] (c) captures composition but lacks instance grounding. The instance-grounded model [25] (d) finetuned on sparse web captions only generates a bird-like shadow, omitting the blanket and other elements. The same algorithm trained on
our re-captioned dataset (e) correctly produces all details.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present ROVI, a high-quality synthetic dataset for
instance-grounded text-to-image generation, created by labeling 1M curated web images. Our key innovation is a
strategy called re-captioning, focusing on the pre-detection
stage, where a VLM (Vision-Language Model) generates
comprehensive visual descriptions that are then processed
by an LLM (Large Language Model) to extract a flat list
of potential categories for OVDs (Open-Vocabulary Detectors) to detect. This approach yields a global prompt inherently linked to instance annotations while capturing secondary visual elements humans typically overlook. Evaluations show that ROVI exceeds existing detection datasets
in image quality and resolution while containing two orders
of magnitude more categories with an open-vocabulary nature. For demonstrative purposes, a text-to-image model
GLIGEN [25] trained on ROVI significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art alternatives in instance grounding accuracy, prompt fidelity, and aesthetic quality. Our dataset
and reproducible pipeline are available at https://
github.com/CihangPeng/ROVI.

Text-to-image generation has rapidly matured in recent
years with huge industrial impact. While in basic form it
solely takes a text prompt as input, many practical applications would benefit from instance grounding, where users
specify precisely where and what kind of object should appear using box-label pairs to enable finer control. Many
state-of-the-art research [2, 19, 25, 51, 52, 60, 61] can provide this capability, giving significant insight on algorithm
design. Unfortunately, their performance is restricted by the
poor availability of dedicated datasets.
Typically, the training of instance-grounded generation
models consumes images with individually labeled object
instances with bounding boxes and captions. Existing public datasets like COCO [27] and LVIS [17] provide annotations that superficially meet these requirements but suffer from critical limitations. First, these datasets are primarily designed for detection purposes, thus cannot guarantee high-quality text-image pairs. The image descriptions
are either missing or of poor quality with insufficient detail, while many images feature poor lighting conditions,
* Corresponding author

20204

