This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-Grained 3D Gaussian Head Avatars Modeling from Static Captures via
Joint Reconstruction and Registration
Yuan Sun1,2 Xuan Wang2 Cong Wang3 WeiLi Zhang1 Yanbo Fan4 Yu Guo1,* Fei Wang1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Ant Group 3 Tsinghua University 4 Nanjing University

···

15 images

Figure 1. We introduce a new method to create Gaussian head avatars from a few input images. These avatars can express fine-grained
details of the head at high resolution and generate vivid animations under varying facial expressions, poses, and viewpoints.

Abstract
Recently, 3D head avatar modeling based on 3D Gaussians
has demonstrated significant advantages in rendering quality and efficiency, given sufficient data. Some efforts have
begun to train prior models on large datasets to develop
generalizable 3D Gaussian head avatar modeling methods. Unfortunately, due to the limited expressive power of
identity-shared 3D representations, prior-based modeling
often results in degenerate rendering quality. To overcome
this limitation, we propose to formulate the 3D Gaussian
head avatar modeling as a joint reconstruction and registration problem. Given static input images (e.g., a short
mobile phone capture), we optimize two sets of 3D Gaussians: the prior-based one possesses complete animation
rigging information inferred from the prior model and pro-

duces plausible modeling results, while the prior-free one is
used to more freely capture the fine-grained geometric and
texture details in the input images. Additionally, we simultaneously solve the registration problem between the two
3D Gaussian sets. On the one hand, the registration results
will provide binding information for the prior-free reconstruction to make it animatable. On the other hand, during
optimization, the prior-based Gaussian can regularize the
prior-free reconstruction to resist overfitting and perform
well in novel expressions. Finally, we merge the parts of
the prior-based reconstruction that are occluded in the input images with the prior-free reconstruction set and then
apply appropriate post-processing strategies (such as teeth
enhancement) to produce a complete head avatar. We evaluated our method on the public Nersemble dataset and our
own in-the-wild data. The experiments demonstrate that,
under the same experimental settings, our method significantly improves modeling quality and provides better support for detailed modeling at higher resolutions.

∗ Corresponding author (yu.guo@xjtu.edu.cn). Author affiliation: National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and
Applications, Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University.

14293

