This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Prior Knowledge of Diffusion Model for Person Search
Giyeol Kim1 * Sooyoung Yang2 * Jihyong Oh1

Myungjoo Kang2,3

Chanho Eom1†

1

3

GSAIM, Chung-Ang University 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
Department of Mathematical Sciences and RIMS, Seoul National University

{giyeolkim, jihyongoh, cheom}@cau.ac.kr, {jimmy1016, mkang}@snu.ac.kr

https://perceptualai-lab.github.io/DiffPS/
Input image

ResNet50

Detection
Loss

Detection Loss

ImageNet
Pre-trained
Backbone

Detection

Re-ID

shared feature

(b) Previous methods
Detection-specific feature

Diffusion
Model
ConvNeXt

(a)

Detection

Detection
Loss

Re-ID

Re-ID
Loss

Re-ID-specific feature

Diffusion model

Re-ID Loss

(c) DiffPS (Ours)

Figure 1. (a) PCA [42] visualization of feature maps, comparing widely-adopted ImageNet [9] pre-trained backbones (ResNet50 [19] and
ConvNeXt [39]) in person search with a diffusion model. The diffusion features exhibit richer spatial context and fine-grained details. (b)
Existing methods [3, 5, 17, 23, 26, 33, 69, 72, 73] share backbone features for detection and re-ID, causing optimization conflicts due to
competing gradients (orange and green arrows). (c) Our DiffPS fully leverages diffusion priors, allowing us to freeze the backbone and
utilize task-specific features for each sub-task, thereby preventing gradient interference and completely resolving the conflict.

Abstract
Person search aims to jointly perform person detection and
re-identification by localizing and identifying a query person within a gallery of uncropped scene images. Existing
methods predominantly utilize ImageNet pre-trained backbones, which may be suboptimal for capturing the complex spatial context and fine-grained identity cues necessary
for person search. Moreover, they rely on a shared backbone feature for both person detection and re-identification,
leading to suboptimal features due to conflicting optimization objectives. In this paper, we propose DiffPS (Diffusion
Prior Knowledge for Person Search), a novel framework
that leverages a pre-trained diffusion model while eliminating the optimization conflict between two sub-tasks. We analyze key properties of diffusion priors and propose three
specialized modules: (i) Diffusion-Guided Region Proposal
Network (DGRPN) for enhanced person localization, (ii)
Multi-Scale Frequency Refinement Network (MSFRN) to

mitigate shape bias, and (iii) Semantic-Adaptive Feature
Aggregation Network (SFAN) to leverage text-aligned diffusion features. DiffPS sets a new state-of-the-art on CUHKSYSU and PRW.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Person search aims to locate and identify a query person within a gallery of uncropped scene images, consisting of two main tasks: (i) person detection [2, 37, 48],
which localizes all person bounding boxes in each scene,
and (ii) person re-identification (re-ID) [21, 35, 64, 78],
which matches the detected person crops to the query. Early
person search methods [4, 11, 16] tackle these tasks sequentially, using separate networks for detection and reID. While these methods achieve promising performance,
their cascaded design leads to computational inefficiencies
and prevents end-to-end inference. To address these limitations, recent methods [3, 5, 17, 23, 26, 33, 69, 72, 73]
integrate person detection and re-ID within a unified framework, leveraging shared backbone features for both subtasks. This integration improves computational efficiency

20301

