This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Personalization for Diffusion Models
Yu-Chien Liao∗1 Jr-Jen Chen∗1 Chi-Pin Huang1 Ci-Siang Lin1
Meng-Lin Wu2 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
1
2
National Taiwan University
Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
Time

A

cat wearing
a sunglasses

A

cat-related
neuron

watercolor-related
neuron

cat in

style

A
cat in
style
wearing
glasses

glasses-related
neuron

Concepts
Figure 1. Continual personalization. We present Concept Neuron Selection, CNS, a simple yet effective approach to incrementally
customize visual concepts. By finetuning concept-related neurons, CNS preserves the zero-shot capabilities of pretrained diffusion models
and alleviates catastrophic forgetting problems.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Updating diffusion models in an incremental setting would
be practical in real-world applications yet computationally challenging. We present a novel learning strategy
of Concept Neuron Selection, a simple yet effective approach to perform personalization in a continual learning scheme. CNS uniquely identifies neurons in diffusion
models that are closely related to the target concepts. In
order to mitigate catastrophic forgetting problems while
preserving zero-shot text-to-image generation ability, CNS
finetunes concept neurons in an incremental manner and
jointly preserves knowledge learned of previous concepts.
Evaluation of real-world datasets demonstrates that CNS
achieves state-of-the-art performance with minimal parameter adjustments, outperforming previous methods in both
single and multi-concept personalization works. CNS also
achieves fusion-free operation, reducing memory storage
and processing time for continual personalization.

∗ denotes co-first author.

Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [29] represent a milestone
for image generation task by leveraging vast collection of
text-image pairs and denoising process. LDMs enable users
to create high-quality images through simple text prompts.
Yet, LDMs often fall short in generating user-specific concepts (e.g. their pets, a scene in a national park), which
poses a practical challenge in text-to-image generation since
these user-specific concepts are hard to describe directly by
text. To address this issue, personalization techniques allow users to adapt LDMs to generate their desired specific
content by finetuning it with their own examples. To realize single concept personalization, pioneer works first incorporate techniques such as prompt tuning [11] or weights
finetuning [30]. However, when there are multiple concepts
to be learned, naively applying these methods to compose
multiple concepts in a single image usually results in overfitting and attributes binding [4, 10, 15, 20, 24, 39, 42],
which means the model fail to correctly separate characteristics of each concept and generate mix-ups images. To
address this concern, Kumari et al. [18] first aggregates
multiple weights of personalized models by a constrained
least square formula, which still results in huge performance degradation as the number of models’ weights in-

15511

