This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T2I-Copilot: A Training-Free Multi-Agent Text-to-Image System for
Enhanced Prompt Interpretation and Interactive Generation
Chieh-Yun Chen, Min Shi, Gong Zhang, Humphrey Shi
SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech
github.com/SHI-Labs/T2I-Copilot

Prompt: The Mustang thundered across the open plain, leaving a trail of dust in its wake.

FLUX.1-dev

FLUX.1-dev

Are you referring to the Ford Mustang
car or should it represent a wild horse
in motion?
• If it's the car, which model or color
are you envisioning?
• If it's a horse, what breed or color do
you have in mind?

SD 3.5 large

Lumina-Image-2.0 Janus-pro-7B

Generation Engine

Input Interpreter

Imagen 3

Recraft V3

👩💻

Clarification

Quality Evaluator
Automatic evaluation
Average Score: 8.7
Main subject presence: True
=> Complete the process

User Feedback
👩💻
I would like the side view of it

Mustang is a brown horse
Mustang is a red car

Others

Ours

Figure 1. T2I-Copilot: An interactive agentic Text-to-Image generation system. Current generative models struggle to interpret
complex or ambiguous user prompts, often failing to produce images that perfectly align with user intent. We propose a multi-agent system
that refines input prompts, resolves ambiguities, and iteratively evaluates results, providing feedback to guide regeneration when needed.
Users can supplement information interactively, or large language models can do so autonomously. Our approach enhances both aesthetics
and text-image alignment without requiring additional training or intricate prompt engineering.

Abstract
Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models have revolutionized
content creation but remain highly sensitive to prompt
phrasing, often requiring users to repeatedly refine prompts
multiple times without clear feedback. While techniques
such as automatic prompt engineering, controlled text embeddings, denoising, and multi-turn generation mitigate
these issues, they offer limited controllability, or often necessitate additional training, restricting the generalization
abilities. Thus, we introduce T2I-Copilot, a training-free
multi-agent system that leverages collaboration between
(Multimodal) Large Language Models to automate prompt
phrasing, model selection, and iterative refinement. This
approach significantly simplifies prompt engineering while
enhancing generation quality and text-image alignment
compared to direct generation. Specifically, T2I-Copilot

19396

consists of three agents: (1) Input Interpreter, which parses
the input prompt, resolves ambiguities, and generates a
standardized report; (2) Generation Engine, which selects
the appropriate model from different types of T2I models
and organizes visual and textual prompts to initiate generation; and (3) Quality Evaluator, which assesses aesthetic
quality and text-image alignment, providing scores and
feedback for potential regeneration. T2I-Copilot can operate fully autonomously while also supporting human-inthe-loop intervention for fine-grained control. On GenAIBench, using open-source generation models, T2I-Copilot
achieves a VQA score comparable to commercial models
RecraftV3 and Imagen 3, surpasses FLUX1.1-pro by 6.17%
at only 16.59% of its cost, and outperforms FLUX.1-dev
and SD 3.5 Large by 9.11% and 6.36%. Code is released
at: github.com/SHI-Labs/T2I-Copilot.

