This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust 3D-Masked Part-level Editing in 3D Gaussian Splatting
with Regularized Score Distillation Sampling

1

Hayeon Kim1,∗
Ji Ha Jang1,∗
Se Young Chun1,2,†
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 INMC & IPAI
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{khy5630, jeeit17, sychun}@snu.ac.kr

DGE [4]

Segmentation
“Person”

Editing

GaussianEditor [5]

GaussCtrl [44]

RoMaP (Ours)

Instance
editing

“turn him into
Albert einstein”

Segmentation
“Eyes”

Editing

Part
editing

“turn his left
eye blue and his
right eye green”

3D Gaussian
Splatting
scene

Segmentation
“Nose”

Editing

Drastic part
editing

“turn his nose
into green emerald”

Figure 1. Enhanced controllability in 3D Gaussian part-level editing achieved with RoMaP, surpassing prior arts. RoMaP enables
highly controllable and localized part-level edits, allowing even for unconventional modifications such as ‘emerald nose’ or modifications
requiring a high-level controllability such as ‘blue left eye, right green eye’ while maintaining global consistency. In contrast, existing
baselines perform well for instance-level editing, but struggle with part-level editing, especially with drastic changes.

Abstract

across viewpoints. Second, we propose a regularized SDS
loss that combines the standard SDS loss with additional
regularizers. In particular, an L1 anchor loss is introduced via our Scheduled Latent Mixing and Part (SLaMP)
editing method, which generates high-quality part-edited
2D images and confines modifications only to the target
region while preserving contextual coherence. Additional
regularizers, such as Gaussian prior removal, further improve flexibility by allowing changes beyond the existing
context, and robust 3D masking prevents unintended edits.
Experimental results demonstrate that our RoMaP achieves
state-of-the-art local 3D editing on both reconstructed and
generated Gaussian scenes and objects qualitatively and
quantitatively, making it possible for more robust and flexible part-level 3D Gaussian editing. Code is available at
https://janeyeon.github.io/romap.

Recent advances in 3D neural representations and instancelevel editing models have enabled the efficient creation of
high-quality 3D content. However, achieving precise local 3D edits remains challenging, especially for Gaussian
Splatting, due to inconsistent multi-view 2D part segmentations and inherently ambiguous nature of Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss. To address these limitations, we
propose RoMaP, a novel local 3D Gaussian editing framework that enables precise and drastic part-level modifications. First, we introduce a robust 3D mask generation module with our 3D-Geometry Aware Label Prediction (3DGALP), which uses spherical harmonics (SH) coefficients to
model view-dependent label variations and soft-label property, yielding accurate and consistent part segmentations
* Authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

5501

