This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Label Semantics:
Language-Guided Action Anatomy for Few-shot Action Recognition
Zefeng Qian1 Xincheng Yao1 Yifei Huang3,4 Chongyang Zhang1,2 * Jiangyong Ying5 Hong Sun5
1
School of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
The University of Tokyo 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 E-surfing Vision Technology Co., Ltd
{zefeng qian, i-Dover, sunny zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, hyf@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{yingjiangyong, sunhong}@chinatelecom.cn

Viusal Anatomy

Abstract
Video

Similarity

Few-shot action recognition (FSAR) aims to classify human
actions in videos with only a small number of labeled samples per category. The scarcity of training data has driven
recent efforts to incorporate additional modalities, particularly text. However, the subtle variations in human posture, motion dynamics, and the object interactions that occur during different phases, are critical inherent knowledge
of actions that cannot be fully exploited by action labels
alone. In this work, we propose Language-Guided Action
Anatomy (LGA), a novel framework that goes beyond label
semantics by leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) to
dissect the essential representational characteristics hidden
beneath action labels. Guided by the prior knowledge encoded in LLM, LGA effectively captures rich spatiotemporal
cues in few-shot scenarios. Specifically, for text, we prompt
an off-the-shelf LLM to anatomize labels into sequences of
atomic action descriptions, focusing on the three core elements of action (subject, motion, object). For videos, a
Visual Anatomy Module segments actions into atomic video
phases to capture the sequential structure of actions. A finegrained fusion strategy then integrates textual and visual
features at the atomic level, resulting in more generalizable prototypes. Finally, we introduce a Multimodal Matching mechanism, comprising both video-video and video-text
matching, to ensure robust few-shot classification. Experimental results demonstrate that LGA achieves state-of-theart performance across multiple FSAR benchmarks.

Time
initiation

progression

conclusion

Textual Anatomy
Jumping into pool

LLM
Generate with
User Prompt

(1) The person standing at the edge of a pool,...
(2) The person leaping off the edge, ...
(3) The person entering the water, ...
Subject

Motion

Object

Temporal Order

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. By leveraging the powerful knowledge understanding capability of LLMs, we anatomize one action label into a three-stage atomic action description.
Meanwhile, the video is divided into corresponding three phases.

plications. Building on advances in few-shot image classification [6, 11], many existing approaches adopt a metricbased meta-learning paradigm, where videos are embedded
into a shared feature space, and alignment metrics are leveraged to infer the labels of the queried video [3]. The core
challenge lies in learning effective representations that can
transfer to novel, unseen action categories, while overcoming the inherent complexity of video data and the limited
supervision available [28, 39, 40, 54].

1. Introduction

Recently, researchers have explored the integration of
multimodal information to enhance the learned representations [7, 23, 34, 42, 43, 48]. Among these, text has emerged
as a particularly effective modality [26, 34, 42]. For example, CLIP-FSAR [42] regards action labels as text and
incorporates CLIP [30] to boost the FSAR performance.
Shi et al. [34] constructs an external action knowledge base
and aligns video frames with textual sub-action proposals.
However, human actions exhibit intricate variations and rich
spatiotemporal details [15, 21, 37, 55]. Subtle differences

Few-shot action recognition seeks to classify human actions
in videos using only a limited number of labeled samples,
addressing the challenge of data scarcity in real-world ap* Corresponding author.

10421

