This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Repurposing 2D Diffusion Models with Gaussian Atlas for 3D Generation
Tiange Xiang1,2 *, Kai Li2†, Chengjiang Long2 , Christian Häne2 , Peihong Guo2 ,
Scott Delp1 , Ehsan Adeli1 , Li Fei-Fei1†
1
Stanford University, 2 Meta Reality Labs

https://cs.stanford.edu/ xtiange/projects/gaussianatlas
Abstract

Previous Work

Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models have
been driven by the increasing availability of paired 2D data.
However, the development of 3D diffusion models has been
hindered by the scarcity of high-quality 3D data, resulting in less competitive performance compared to their 2D
counterparts. To address this challenge, we propose repurposing pre-trained 2D diffusion models for 3D object generation. We introduce Gaussian Atlas, a novel representation that utilizes dense 2D grids, enabling the fine-tuning
of 2D diffusion models to generate 3D Gaussians. Our
approach demonstrates successful transfer learning from a
pre-trained 2D diffusion model to a 2D manifold flattened
from 3D structures. To support model training, we compile GaussianVerse, a large-scale dataset comprising 205K
high-quality 3D Gaussian fittings of various 3D objects.
Our experimental results show that text-to-image diffusion
models can be effectively adapted for 3D content generation, bridging the gap between 2D and 3D modeling.

or
Text
Prompts

2D Generation
Model

3D
Assets

This Work
2D Generation
Model

Figure 1. Previous 3D generators are either end-to-end 3D models
[10, 57] or a combination of a multi-view 2D generator followed
by a 2D-to-3D lifting model [49, 54]. In this work, we achieve 3D
object generation by directly fine-tuning 2D generation models.

1. Introduction

previous studies that also pre-compute 3D Gaussian references, GaussianVerse provides higher-quality fittings with
the minimum required number of Gaussians, through a
novel pruning strategy and a more effective, but computeintensive, fitting process.
Designing standalone diffusion models for 3D generation is straightforward. However, such models have significant limitations especially when trained solely on 3D data,
as high-quality 3D data is relatively scarce compared to 2D
images. To achieve higher rendering fidelity in 3D generation, it is desirable to leverage the learned prior knowledge
from well-pretrained 2D diffusion models [5, 21, 28, 33].
Some methods have been proposed to incorporate pretrained 2D diffusion models with frozen weights into the
3D generation pipeline through complex designs, such as
score-distilled sampling [33] and collaborative controls [5].
In this paper, we propose a fresh perspective that repurposes 2D diffusion models for 3D generation through direct
fine-tuning. To fully harness the capabilities of these 2D
diffusion models, we introduce Gaussian Atlas, a novel
2D representation of 3D Gaussians. This representation
enables direct fine-tuning by first transporting unorganized
3D Gaussians into a standard 3D sphere and then applying equirectangular projection to map them into a square
2D grid, creating a Gaussian Atlas. We show that these
Gaussian atlases facilitate transfer of the prior knowledge

Understanding the 3D world is crucial for numerous realworld applications. In this work, we focus on generative
3D modeling with the primary objective of generating highquality 3D assets from given textural descriptions [13, 33].
With advances in 3D content representation, diffusion
models [11, 44] begin to play a predominant role in 3D
generation [12, 25, 31]. Among different 3D representations, 3D Gaussians [15] have gained popularity for modeling 3D scenes and objects due to their high efficiency,
explicit structure, and superior rendering quality. Notably,
training diffusion models to generate 3D Gaussians requires
high-quality “ground truth” 3D Gaussians, which must be
pre-fitted to the 3D objects [10, 27, 46].
To advance the community, we constructed a large-scale
dataset named GaussianVerse, comprising high-quality 3D
Gaussian fittings for a diverse range of objects. Unlike
* Part of this work was done while Tiange Xiang was an intern at Meta
Reality Labs, under the mentorship of Kai Li and Chengjiang Long.
† Corresponding authors.

16492

