This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LBM: Latent Bridge Matching for Fast Image-to-Image Translation
Clément Chadebec

Onur Tasar Sanjeev Sreetharan
Jasper Research

Benjamin Aubin

{name}.{surname}@jasper.ai

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Latent Bridge Matching (LBM),
a new, versatile and scalable method that relies on Bridge
Matching in a latent space to achieve fast image-to-image
translation. We show that the method can reach state-ofthe-art results for various image-to-image tasks using only
a single inference step. In addition to its efficiency, we also
demonstrate the versatility of the method across different
image translation tasks such as object removal, normal and
depth estimation, and object relighting. We also derive a
conditional framework of LBM and demonstrate its effectiveness by tackling the tasks of controllable image relighting and shadow generation.

1. Introduction
Image translation is a task that consists of mapping an image from a source domain to a target domain. It can be formulated as a transport problem where the goal is to find a
mapping that translates samples from the source domain to
the target domain [61]. This field contains a wide range of
tasks such as object removal [84], semantic image synthesis
[62], style transfer [20, 115], image harmonization [8, 107]
or image segmentation [39, 113].
Diffusion models (DM) [27, 80, 81] are a type of generative model that learns a denoising mechanism that can
be used to generate new samples from a Gaussian noise.
These models appear very well suited for image synthesis
[13, 59, 65, 70] and can be conditioned with respect to various types of inputs such as text [13, 15, 28, 59, 64, 65, 70]
where they demonstrate remarkable performance. In the
particular context of image-to-image translation, the conditional setting allows to build a diffusion model conditioned
with source images such as low-resolution images [70],
depth maps, normal maps or edges [57, 106] and generate
images belonging to the target domain. While they demonstrate strong results, their intrinsic iterative generation process hinders their usability for real-time applications. Recently, several works have been proposed to accelerate the
sampling process of DM through more efficient solvers [51,

29086

52, 108, 111] or via distillation [30, 45, 50, 54, 55, 69, 73–
75, 82, 92, 97]. However, despite revealing promising results, most of these methods are limited to text-to-image or
struggle to achieve satisfactory one-step generation.
Drawing inspiration from diffusion models, bridge
matching and flow models have been proposed and aim
to find transport maps between two distributions using
Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) or Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs). The key difference from diffusion models is that they do not involve any noising mechanism and can be applied to any pair of distributions. The
main idea behind flow matching [1, 46, 48] (resp. bridge
matching [63, 78]) is to define deterministic (resp. stochastic) interpolants between pairs of samples from the source
and target distributions and estimate the drift of the associated ODE (resp. SDE) using a denoiser model [2]. While
there exist some works applying flow matching to image-toimage translation [16, 23, 56], the usability, scalability, and
efficiency of their stochastic variant remain an open question. It’s worth noting that [47] previously applied bridge
matching to super-resolution and inpainting tasks, though
their approach was limited to low-resolution images.
In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap by introducing Latent Bridge Matching (LBM), a novel and scalable
method based on bridge matching able to achieve 1 step inference for various image translation tasks. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose LBM, a novel, versatile and scalable method
based on bridge matching that shows to be very effective
for various image-to-image tasks even for high resolution
images.
• We show that our method can either compete or achieve
state-of-the-art performance for object-removal, depth
and surface estimation as well as object relighting. In
particular, it outperforms both diffusion-based methods
requiring multiple sampling steps as well as flow matching models.
• We also derive a conditional framework of the method
and apply it to controllable object relighting and shadow
generation.
• Finally, we conduct an extensive ablation study to un-

