This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOLa: Zero-Shot HOI Detection with Low-Rank Decomposed
VLM Feature Adaptation

1

Qinqian Lei1 Bo Wang2 Robby T. Tan1,3
National University of Singapore 2 University of Mississippi
3
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services (AICS)

qinqian.lei@u.nus.edu

hawk.rsrch@gmail.com

Abstract

robby tan@asus.com

(a) VLM wrongly clusters actions with same object
prediction

Zero-shot human-object interaction (HOI) detection remains a challenging task, particularly in generalizing to
unseen actions. Existing methods address this challenge by
tapping Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to access knowledge beyond the training data. However, they either struggle to distinguish actions involving the same object or
demonstrate limited generalization to unseen classes. In
this paper, we introduce HOLa (Zero-Shot HOI Detection
with Low-Rank Decomposed VLM Feature Adaptation), a
novel approach that both enhances generalization to unseen classes and improves action distinction. In training, HOLa decomposes VLM text features for given HOI
classes via low-rank factorization, producing class-shared
basis features and adaptable weights. These features and
weights form a compact HOI representation that preserves
shared information across classes, enhancing generalization to unseen classes. Subsequently, we refine action distinction by adapting weights for each HOI class and introducing human-object tokens to enrich visual interaction representations. To further distinguish unseen actions, we guide the weight adaptation with LLM-derived
action regularization. Experimental results show that our
method sets a new state-of-the-art across zero-shot HOI
settings on HICO-DET, achieving an unseen-class mAP of
27.91 in the unseen-verb setting. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ChelsieLei/HOLa.

GT:
jump surfboard

ride

×

jump

√

(b) Adapted VLM struggles with unseen classes
prediction

jump (unseen)
ride (seen)
surfboard
skateboard
image
features
text
features

ride

√

jump

×

(c) Our HOLa model
prediction

ride

√

jump

√

Figure 1. (a) HOI detection methods utilizing a frozen VLM feature space, struggle in distinguishing actions involving the same
object [3, 27, 32, 34]. (b) Approaches that adapt VLMs to HOI
tasks based on supervision from seen HOI classes, struggle to generalize effectively to unseen classes [21, 23]. (c) Our HOLa model
decomposes VLM features into class-shared basis and adaptable
weights, improving generalization to unseen HOI classes and enhancing action distinction.

unseen action. In unseen composition HOI detection, actions and objects seen individually during training appear in
novel combinations during testing, requiring models to recognize interactions beyond their training experience. This
setting can be addressed via compositional learning strategies that independently classify objects and actions [13–
15, 22]. Unseen object HOI detection focuses on detecting interactions involving objects not seen during training,
which can be tackled with open-vocabulary object detectors [11, 33, 51]. However, since these approaches assume
that all actions are observed during training, they cannot
generalize to unseen actions.
A promising direction is leveraging Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) to harness their broad knowledge beyond
HOI training data. Existing methods following this approach fall into two main categories. The first maps HOI

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims to identify
humans and objects in images and predict their interactions,
essential for many applications [20, 40, 47, 55]. However,
existing HOI detection struggles to generalize beyond seen
classes, making zero-shot HOI detection a critical challenge [13, 27, 34]. Zero-shot HOI detection includes three
primary settings: unseen composition, unseen object, and

1825

