This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feather the Throttle: Revisiting Visual Token Pruning for
Vision-Language Model Acceleration
Mark Endo, Xiaohan Wang, Serena Yeung-Levy
Stanford University
{markendo,xhanwang,syyeung}@stanford.edu

Abstract

(a)

Recent works on accelerating Vision-Language Models achieve strong performance across a variety of visionlanguage tasks despite highly compressing visual information. In this work, we examine the popular acceleration approach of early pruning of visual tokens inside the language
model. Surprisingly, we find that while strong performance
is maintained across many tasks, it exhibits drastically different behavior for a subset of vision-centric tasks such as
localization. Upon further investigation, we uncover a core
issue with the acceleration approach where most tokens towards the top of the image are pruned away. Yet, on many
benchmarks aiming to evaluate vision-centric capabilities,
strong performance persists with the flawed pruning strategy, highlighting these benchmarks’ limited ability to assess
fine-grained visual capabilities. Based on these findings, we
propose FEATHER (Fast and Effective Acceleration wiTH
Ensemble cRiteria), a straightforward approach that resolves the discovered early-layer pruning issue and further
enhances the preservation of relevant tokens via multistage
pruning with early uniform sampling to ensure broad image coverage. With comparable computational savings, we
find that FEATHER achieves more than 5→ performance
improvement on the vision-centric localization benchmarks
compared to the original acceleration approach.

Visual reasoning

FastV

cow
Remaining visual tokens
after layer 3

Q: What animal is in front
of the trees?

Localization

FastV

[0.12, 0.333, 0.49, 0.72]

Q: Where is the player in
white shirt and black shorts?

(b)

Remaining visual tokens
after layer 3

FEATHER with 64% FLOPS reduction

FEATHER

[0.42, 0.23, 0.7, 0.76]
Q: Where is the player in
white shirt and black shorts?

Remaining visual tokens
after layer 8

Remaining visual tokens
after layer 16

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Although FastV prunes most visual tokens from the
upper portion of the image, the approach still displays strong performance on a variety of evaluated vision-language tasks except
for a small subset of vision-centric tasks like localization. (b)
Based on our findings, we propose FEATHER (Fast and Effective
Acceleration wiTH Ensemble cRiteria), a straightforward approach that resolves the existing issue of selecting bottom tokens,
additionally maintains uniformly sampled tokens to ensure good
coverage over the whole image, and prunes in two stages.

The exploration of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) is a
critical area of computer vision and natural language processing research, centered on combining large language
models (LLMs) with visual encoders to enable multimodal perception, reasoning, and understanding capabilities. While earlier works explored sophisticated schemes
for conditioning language models with visual information
[2, 22, 23], more recently the space has shifted to predominately using the simplistic approach of taking patch features from pre-trained visual encoders and projecting them

22826

to the input space of the language model with a light-weight
adapter [4, 27, 29, 38]. Using image patches as tokens,
however, comes with the drawback of being computationally inefficient. To achieve fine-grained resolution, the im-

