This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIM: Adaptive Inference of Multi-Modal LLMs via Token Merging and Pruning
Yiwu Zhong1 , Zhuoming Liu2 , Yin Li2 , Liwei Wang1 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison
Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) [6, 54, 66, 85, 93] have
been recently adapted for visual understanding, fostering
the developments in both image [4, 8, 25, 41, 102] and
video LLMs [36, 39, 45, 80, 94]. However, these multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) usually rely on a large number of
visual tokens generated by visual encoders [58, 91], especially for video data where token counts can reach thousands per video. Such high token number requires extensive computational resources for both training and inference, restricting their use in real-world applications (e.g.,
* Corresponding author.

inference

Pre-trained
MLLM

our method

100% accuracy, 100% FLOPs
100% accuracy, 14.8% FLOPs

…
87% accuracy, 2.5% FLOPs

Performance on VideoMME

Large language models (LLMs) have enabled the creation
of multi-modal LLMs that exhibit strong comprehension of
visual data such as images and videos. However, these
models usually rely on extensive visual tokens from visual
encoders, leading to high computational demands, which
limits their applicability in resource-constrained environments and for long-context tasks. In this work, we propose a training-free adaptive inference method for multimodal LLMs that can accommodate a broad range of efﬁciency requirements with a minimum performance drop.
Our method consists of a) iterative token merging based on
embedding similarity before LLMs, and b) progressive token pruning within LLM layers based on multi-modal importance. With a minimalist design, our method can be
applied to both video and image LLMs. Extensive experiments on diverse video and image benchmarks demonstrate that our method substantially reduces computation
load (e.g., a 7-fold reduction in FLOPs) while preserving
the performance of video and image LLMs. Further, at
a similar computational cost, our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods in long video understanding (e.g.,
+4.6 on MLVU). Additionally, our in-depth analysis provides insights into token redundancy and LLM layer behaviors, offering guidance for future research in designing efﬁcient multi-modal LLMs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LaVi-Lab/AIM .

Pre-trained
MLLM

59
58
57
56
55
54
53
52
51
50

58.5

58.2

58.2

56.4
53.6

Base model

52.3

Our models

50.9
0

20

40

60

80

100

FLOPs (TB)

Figure 1. Key idea and ﬁnding. Our training-free method enables
adaptive inference of pre-trained multi-modal LLMs, supporting
a wide range of computational conditions. In comparison to the
base pre-trained model, our method substantially reduces FLOPs,
without or with a manageable performance drop.

real-time processing on mobile devices). Further, as the
number of video frames increases, the total number of tokens also grows, limiting the model’s capacity to handle
dense video frames. This often results in the loss of crucial
temporal information, which is essential for comprehending
long videos [61, 92, 100].
To bridge the gap, we propose leveraging the inherent
redundancy present in visual data to develop adaptive inference for multi-modal LLMs. Adaptive inference dynamically adjusts a model’s computational load during inference
based on contextual factors [22], e.g., computational constraints, image content, or desired accuracy levels. Since
retaining all visual tokens during inference is often unnecessary, our key insight is to strategically select these tokens
throughout the inference process. This approach allows for
controlling the amount of computation necessary for inference, so as to optimize the model’s efﬁciency while preserving its accuracy.
In this work, we introduce a training-free method of
adaptive inference tailored for multi-modal LLMs, consisting of token merging based on visual similarity and token

20180

