This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S UPER D EC: 3D Scene Decomposition with Superquadric Primitives
Elisabetta Fedele1,2

Boyang Sun1
1

ETH Zurich

Leonidas Guibas2
2

Stanford University

Marc Pollefeys1,3
3

Francis Engelmann2

Microsoft

Abstract
We present S UPER D EC, an approach for creating compact 3D scene representations via decomposition into superquadric primitives. While most recent methods use geometric primitives to obtain photorealistic 3D reconstructions, we instead leverage them to obtain a compact yet expressive representation. To this end, we design a novel architecture that efficiently decomposes point clouds of arbitrary objects into a compact set of superquadrics. We train
our model on ShapeNet and demonstrate its generalization
capabilities on object instances from ScanNet++ as well as
on full Replica scenes. Finally, we show that our compact
superquadric-based representation supports a wide range
of downstream applications, including robotic manipulation and controllable visual content generation. Project
page: https://super-dec.github.io.

Figure 1. 3D Scene Decomposition with Superquadrics. Given
a 3D point cloud of an indoor scene, S UPER D EC decomposes all
scene objects into a compact set of superquadric primitives. Different object instances are visualized with different colors.

1. Introduction
3D scene representations play a central role in computer
vision and robotics, enabling tasks such as 3D scene understanding [33, 48, 49], scene generation [40, 42, 43],
functional reasoning [19, 59], and scene interaction [9,
13, 21, 38]. Recent work [18] utilizes 3D Gaussians as
geometric primitives to produce high-quality, photorealistic reconstructions. However, such representations are often memory-intensive. In contrast, we propose a more
lightweight yet geometrically faithful 3D scene representation by decomposing the input point cloud into a compact
set of explicit primitives, namely superquadrics (Fig. 1).
Representations for 3D scenes include well-established formats such as point clouds, meshes, signed distance functions, and voxel grids, each offering different trade-offs
among geometric detail, computational cost, resolution,
performance, interpretability, and editability. Recently,
multi-view approaches such as Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [29] and Gaussian Splatting (GS) [18] have gained
popularity as 3D scene representations. These methods optimize photometric losses to ensure that their underlying
representations (implicit in the case of NeRF, and explicit in
the case of GS) are consistent with observed images. While

these approaches excel at achieving photorealism, they lack
explicit control over compactness, often resulting in large,
non-modular scene encodings that are unsuitable for tasks
requiring explicit spatial reasoning.
While optimizing compactness on a scene level remains a
challenging task, prior work has shown that geometric primitives such as cuboids [51, 57] or superquadrics [1, 31, 32]
enable compact and interpretable decompositions of individual objects. These methods are generally either learningbased [32, 57], favoring speed at the cost of geometric
accuracy, or optimization-based [1, 23, 31], offering improved accuracy at the expense of higher computational
cost. Although both types of approaches can be effective
for certain object classes, they often struggle to generalize
across datasets with diverse object geometries. Learningbased methods typically require category-specific training,
while optimization-based ones rely on hand-crafted heuristics, limiting their scalability in open-world settings.
Motivated by the abstraction capabilities of geometric primitives for individual object categories, we propose to represent complex 3D scenes using a compact set of superquadrics. To this end, we learn class-agnostic object-

24625

