This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Pool-based Prompt Learning for Few-shot Class-incremental Learning
Yongwei Jiang Yixiong Zou* Yuhua Li Ruixuan Li
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{jiangyongwei, yixiongz, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

I

Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) faces
dual challenges of data scarcity and incremental learning in
real-world scenarios. While pool-based prompting methods
have demonstrated success in traditional incremental learning, their effectiveness in FSCIL settings remains unexplored. This paper presents the first study of current prompt
pool methods in FSCIL tasks, revealing an unanticipated
performance degradation in incremental sessions. Through
comprehensive analysis, we identify that this phenomenon
stems from token-dimension saturation: with limited data,
excessive prompts compete for task-relevant information,
leading to model overfitting. Based on this finding, we
propose LGSP-Prompt (Local-Global Spatial Prompting),
which innovatively shifts pool-based prompt learning from
the token dimension to the spatial dimension. LGSP-Prompt
generates spatial prompts by synergistically combining local spatial features and global frequency-domain representations to highlight key patterns in input images. We construct two spatial prompt pools enabling dynamic prompt
selection to maintain acquired knowledge while effectively
learning novel sessions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple FSCIL benchmarks, showing significant advantages in both base knowledge preservation and
incremental learning. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/Jywsuperman/LGSP.

P

O

Vit-Block (L2P)

Vit-Block (Ours)

Figure 1. Traditional pool-based methods (L2P) stack multiple
prompts in the token dimension, which shows promising results
in balancing the incremental-session learning and the catastrophic
forgetting. However, when applying it to the FSCIL task, we find
an unanticipated performance degradation on incremental sessions
of the FSCIL task. In this paper, we delve into this phenomenon
and find the degradation stems from the token-dimension saturation problem, which inspires us to shift the pool-based prompt
learning from the token dimension to the spatial dimension and
effectively address this problem.

ducted through the adaptation of pre-trained models. Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) [13] has emerged as a promising approach to enable efficient model adaptation while preserving rich pre-trained knowledge, which makes it a strong
baseline for ViT-based FSCIL [26]. Based on it, the poolbased prompt learning mechanism, pioneered by Learning to Prompt (L2P) [43] and further enhanced by DualPrompt [42], presents an elegant solution through dynamic
prompt maintenance and selection for different incremental tasks. However, although these approaches have demonstrated success in traditional incremental learning scenarios,
their effectiveness in FSCIL scenarios remains unexplored.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we revisit such a pool-based prompt learning mechanism for the FSCIL task. Surprisingly, by integrating the prompt pool with current VPT-based FSCIL
methods, we observe a notable degradation of novel-session
performance (Figure 1), albeit a slight performance improvement on the base session, in contrast to the traditional
incremental learning scenarios. This phenomenon consistently manifests across different experimental settings, indicating a fundamental challenge in the direct application
of prompt pool methods to FSCIL scenarios.

In real-world scenarios, data typically arrives incrementally
with limited samples, presenting significant challenges for
model adaptation. Such practical constraints have given
rise to Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) [34],
which requires models to learn from scarce samples in novel
sessions while maintaining previously acquired knowledge
in the base session.
To address this challenge, recent works have been con* Corresponding author.

1303

