This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reducing Unimodal Bias in Multi-Modal Semantic Segmentation with
Multi-Scale Functional Entropy Regularization
Xu Zheng1,2 Yuanhuiyi Lyu1 Lutao Jiang1
Danda Pani Paudel2 Luc Van Gool2 Xuming Hu1,3, *
1

AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

2

INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”

3

CSE, HKUST

Abstract
Fusing and balancing multi-modal inputs from novel sensors for dense prediction tasks, particularly semantic segmentation, is critically important yet remains a significant
challenge. One major limitation is the tendency of multimodal frameworks to over-rely on easily learnable modalities, a phenomenon referred to as unimodal dominance
or bias. This issue becomes especially problematic in realworld scenarios where the dominant modality may be unavailable, resulting in severe performance degradation. To
this end, we apply a simple but effective plug-and-play
regularization term based on functional entropy, which introduces no additional parameters or modules. This term
is designed to intuitively balance the contribution of each
visual modality to the segmentation results. Specifically,
we leverage the log-Sobolev inequality to bound functional
entropy using functional-Fisher-information. By maximizing the information contributed by each visual modality,
our approach mitigates unimodal dominance and establishes a more balanced and robust segmentation framework.
A multi-scale regularization module is proposed to apply
our proposed plug-and-paly term on high-level features
and also segmentation predictions for more balanced multimodal learning. Extensive experiments on three datasets
demonstrate that our proposed method achieves superior
performance, i.e., +13.94%, +3.25% and +3.64%, without
introducing any additional parameters.

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods use complex architectures to fuse
multi-modal data. (b) Our approach simplifies the architecture and
use plug-and-play regularization terms. The results show significant improvements of ours than CMNeXt [1] and MAGIC [2].

1. Introduction

unimodal bias, disproportionately favoring one modality
over others [19, 20]. For instance, in RGB-thermal segmentation, RGB inputs—common in training pipelines—often
dominate predictions, even in low-light conditions where
thermal data is crucial. Similarly, systems combining event
cameras with conventional sensors may under-utilize the
motion-aware edge information from event cameras in dynamic scenes, defaulting to static RGB inputs. This imbalance occurs when models prioritize the most easily learned
or information-rich modality, neglecting others. As a result,
performance degrades when the dominant modality is missing (e.g., RGB corruption) or unreliable (e.g., thermal sensor noise), posing risks in safety-critical applications like
autonomous navigation.

Multi-modal dense prediction tasks, especially for semantic
segmentation [3–16], rely on integrating complementary inputs from diverse sensors (e.g., RGB, depth, thermal, event
cameras) to achieve robust scene understanding [2, 17, 18].
While such fusion promises resilience to real-world variability, a critical challenge persists: models often exhibit
* Corresponding author.

Prior multi-modal methods often fail to explicitly regulate how modalities contribute to predictions [1], leaving models vulnerable to over-reliance on dominant in-

21166

