This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QuEST: Low-bit Diffusion Model Quantization via Efficient Selective Finetuning
Haoxuan Wang1
1

University of Illinois Chicago

Yuzhang Shang2
Zhihang Yuan4
Junchi Yan3
Yan Yan1,†
2

University of Central Florida

Abstract
The practical deployment of diffusion models is still hindered by the high memory and computational overhead.
Although quantization paves a way for model compression and acceleration, existing methods face challenges in
achieving low-bit quantization efficiently. In this paper,
we identify imbalanced activation distributions as a primary source of quantization difficulty, and propose to adjust these distributions through weight finetuning to be more
quantization-friendly. We provide both theoretical and empirical evidence supporting finetuning as a practical and
reliable solution. Building on this approach, we further
distinguish two critical types of quantized layers: those responsible for retaining essential temporal information and
those particularly sensitive to bit-width reduction. By selectively finetuning these layers under both local and global
supervision, we mitigate performance degradation while
enhancing quantization efficiency. Our method demonstrates its efficacy across three high-resolution image generation tasks, obtaining state-of-the-art performance across
multiple bit-width settings. Code is available at https:
//github.com/hatchetProject/QuEST.

3

Junyi Wu1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

4

Houmo AI

M ETHOD

DATA
F REE

T IME & M EMORY
E FFICIENT

L OW- BIT
C OMPATIBLE

F ULLY
Q UANTIZED

PTQ [19]
QAT [22]
E FFICIENT DM [10]
O URS

✁
✂
✁
✁

✁
✂
✁
✁

✂
✁
✁
✁

✁
✁
✂
✁

Table 1. Comparison with different frameworks. Our method
is both efficient and effective for low-bit diffusion model quantization, also achieving a reduced overall bit-width.

1. Introduction

for accelerating inference speed and reducing memory consumption simultaneously [8], making it a natural solution
for deploying diffusion models efficiently. It aims to compress high-bit model parameters into low-bit approximations with negligible performance degradation. For example, 4-bit weight and 4-bit activation quantization can
achieve up to 8→ inference time speedup and memory reduction theoretically [23]. Hence, low-bit quantization
of diffusion models emerges as a viable approach for efficiency enhancement. Unfortunately, existing diffusion
model quantization methods that perform well at higher bitwidths face significant limitations in low-bit settings: some
only adjust the quantization parameters and fail under lowbit conditions [11, 19, 32], while others succeed but require
substantial computational resources comparable to training
a diffusion model from scratch [22, 34]. In this work, we
aim for efficient low-bit quantization, thereby circumventing the latter choice of resource-intensive training.
We first reveal the current challenge within diffusion
models that impede the effectiveness of current efficient
low-bit quantization methods [16, 19, 33]. As illustrated
in Fig. 1(a): activation distributions tend to be imbalanced,
with most values clustering near zero, while essential highmagnitude values are sparse and inconsistently distributed.
Existing quantization methods [19, 20, 32] either approximate large and sparse values, inadequately estimating numerous small values, or focus on small values while overlooking the large ones, thereby impeding the reduction of
quantization error. To overcome this challenge, we propose
to adjust the activation distributions via weight finetuning,
where its feasibility is justified both theoretically and empirically. Nevertheless, finetuning the entire diffusion model
is a highly computationally-expensive and time-consuming

Diffusion models [6, 14, 30, 36] have recently achieved remarkable success in image generation. However, this success comes at the cost of two major obstacles that limit
their efficiency [3]. The first obstacle is the denoising process which requires hundreds to thousands of inference time
steps, slowing down the generation speed drastically. The
other is the increasing model size, driven by demands for
better image fidelity and higher image resolutions. Both
factors contribute to considerable latency and increased
computational requirements, impeding the application of
diffusion models to real-world settings where both time and
computational power are carefully restricted.
Neural network quantization offers a feasible solution
† Corresponding author

15542

