This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PolGS: Polarimetric Gaussian Splatting for Fast Reflective
Surface Reconstruction
Yufei Han1 , Bowen Tie1 , Heng Guo1,2∗ , Youwei Lyu1 , Si Li1∗ , Boxin Shi3,4 , Yunpeng Jia1 , Zhanyu Ma1
1

2

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Xiong’an Aerospace Information Research Institute

3

State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

4

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
{hanyufei, tiebowen, guoheng, youweilv, lisi, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn
xibei156@163.com

Reconstruction error (mm)

shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

3DGS-DR
Re-3DGS
Gaussian Surfels
PANDORA

PolGS (Ours)

NeRSP
NeRO

Input
35 views

NeRO [23]
8 hours

PANDORA [8] 3DGS-DR [44]
10 hours
12 min

PolGS (Ours)
7 min

0.2

0.4

1

2

4

8

10

MVAS
Time (h)

Figure 1. Comparison of efficiency and accuracy on reflective surface reconstruction. Our method takes the shortest time while comparable
shape reconstruction accuracy (measured by Chamfer Distance in millimeters) with the existing method based on neural implicit surface
representation [23].

Abstract
Efficient shape reconstruction for surfaces with complex
reflectance properties is crucial for real-time virtual reality. While 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)-based methods offer fast novel view rendering by leveraging their explicit surface representation, their reconstruction quality
lags behind that of implicit neural representations, particularly in the case of recovering surfaces with complex reflective reflectance. To address these problems, we propose
PolGS, a Polarimetric Gaussian Splatting model allowing
fast reflective surface reconstruction in 10 minutes. By integrating polarimetric constraints into the 3DGS framework,
PolGS effectively separates specular and diffuse components, enhancing reconstruction quality for challenging reflective materials. Experimental results on the synthetic and
real-world dataset validate the effectiveness of our method.
Project page: https://yu-fei-han.github.io/polgs.

verse rendering. Reflective surfaces meet unique challenges
in 3D reconstruction as their specular properties require precise handling of light interactions to capture realistic surface
details. It is desired to develop a fast and accurate reconstruction method for reflective surfaces.

1. Introduction

For reflective surface reconstruction, most existing methods rely on implicit neural representations [28], such as RefNeRF [34] and NeRO [23], which model complex surface
details effectively but suffer from slow processing times
due to their implicit neural network structure. While the
signed distance function (SDF) offers a better geometry representation, the MLP network incurs significant time costs.
In contrast, the recent 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [14]
technique offers a promising approach for fast novel view
rendering through explicit surface representation. However,
this representation lacks the same level of detail as implicit
methods due to limitations in representing fine geometry
and surface normals. Additionally, 3DGS-based reconstruction methods primarily focus on diffuse surfaces, leaving reflective surfaces under-explored and resulting in lower quality reconstructions for these challenging materials.

Fast and accurate reconstruction of reflective surfaces is essential for applications like real-time virtual reality and in∗ Corresponding authors.

To address the challenge of reflective surface reconstruction, polarized images are often utilized to enhance shape
representation [3, 8, 12, 17]. By decomposing the dif-

28073

