This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

6DOPE-GS: Online 6D Object Pose Estimation using Gaussian Splatting
Yufeng Jin1,2 , Vignesh Prasad1 , Snehal Jauhri1 , Mathias Franzius2 , Georgia Chalvatzaki1,3
1
Computer Science Department, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
2
Honda Research Institute Europe GmbH, Offenbach, Germany 3 Hessian.AI, Darmstadt, Germany
{yufeng.jin, vignesh.prasad, snehal.jauhri}@tu-darmstadt.de,
georgia.chalvatzaki@tu-darmstadt.de

Figure 1. Demonstrating live object pose tracking and reconstruction of a test object in the real-world using 6DOPE-GS: a novel method
for joint 6D object pose estimation and reconstruction using Gaussian Splatting. Top: 6D pose estimates of the object over time, Bottom:
Example reconstruction over time with 2D Gaussian disks used to render the surface and appearance of the object. Our method enables live
pose tracking and Gaussian Splat reconstruction of dynamic objects at 3.5Hz.

Abstract

achieve high spatial object coverage and prevent erroneous
pose updates. We also propose an opacity statistic-based
pruning mechanism for adaptive Gaussian density control,
to ensure training stability and efﬁciency. We evaluate our
method on the HO3D and YCBInEOAT datasets and show
that 6DOPE-GS matches the performance of state-of-theart baselines for model-free simultaneous 6D pose tracking
and reconstruction while providing a 5× speedup. We also
demonstrate the method’s suitability for live, dynamic object
tracking and reconstruction in a real-world setting.

Efﬁcient and accurate object pose estimation is an essential component for modern vision systems in many applications such as Augmented Reality, autonomous driving,
and robotics. While research in model-based 6D object pose
estimation has delivered promising results, model-free methods are hindered by the high computational load in rendering and inferring consistent poses of arbitrary objects
in a live RGB-D video stream. To address this issue, we
present 6DOPE-GS, a novel method for online 6D object
pose estimation and tracking with a single RGB-D camera
by effectively leveraging advances in Gaussian Splatting.
Thanks to the fast differentiable rendering capabilities of
Gaussian Splatting, 6DOPE-GS can simultaneously optimize for 6D object poses and 3D object reconstruction. To
achieve the necessary efﬁciency and accuracy for live tracking, our method uses incremental 2D Gaussian Splatting
with an intelligent dynamic keyframe selection procedure to

1. Introduction
Precise tracking and accurate reconstruction of objects allows capturing essential spatial and structural information,
essential for downstream tasks such as robotic manipulation [10, 33, 61], augmented reality [62, 70, 83], automation [15, 28], assisted robot teleopration [39], etc. The majority of 6D object pose estimation and tracking methods,

8032

