This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Lighting Deceives: Exposing Vision-Language Models’ Illumination
Vulnerability Through Illumination Transformation Attack
Hanqing Liu† , Shouwei Ruan† , Yao Huang† , Shiji Zhao, Xingxing Wei*
Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
{hqliu, shouweiruan, y huang, zhaoshiji123, xxwei}@buaa.edu.cn

Natural Images with Normal Illumination

stop sign 99.9%

bus 89.1%

traffic light 99.6%

microwave 92.7%

dog 87.5%

Natural Images with OOD Illumination

stop sign 23.9%

train 16.2%

truck 85.0%

refrigerator 27.6%

cat 60.7%

Illumination-aware Adversarial Example Generated by ITA (ours)

traffic light

bird

car

traffic light

minivan

stingray

Figure 1. Revealing VLM Vulnerabilities to Illumination Variations. Comparison of the predictions made by OpenCLIP ViT-B/16 on
natural images with normal and OOD illumination versus illumination-aware adversarial examples generated by our Illumination Transformation Attack (ITA), which illustrate VLMs are vulnerable to illumination changes, underscoring the need for systematic evaluation.

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable success in various tasks, yet their robustness to realworld illumination variations remains largely unexplored.
To bridge this gap, we propose Illumination Transformation
Attack (ITA), the first framework to systematically assess
VLMs’ robustness against illumination changes. However,
there still exist two key challenges: (1) how to model global
illumination with fine-grained control to achieve diverse
lighting conditions and (2) how to ensure adversarial effectiveness while maintaining naturalness. To address the
first challenge, we innovatively decompose global illumination into multiple parameterized point light sources based
on the illumination rendering equation. This design enables
us to model more diverse lighting variations that previous

methods could not capture. Then, by integrating these parameterized lighting variations with physics-based lighting
reconstruction techniques, we could precisely render such
light interactions in the original scenes, finally meeting the
goal of fine-grained lighting control. For the second challenge, by controlling illumination through the lighting reconstrution model’s latent space rather than direct pixel
manipulation, we inherently preserve physical lighting priors. Furthermore, to prevent potential reconstruction artifacts, we design additional perceptual constraints for maintaining visual consistency with original images and diversity constraints for avoiding light source convergence. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our ITA could significantly reduce the performance of advanced VLMs, e.g.,
LLaVA-1.6, while possessing competitive naturalness, exposing VLMS’ critical illuminiation vulnerabilities.

† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

10485

