This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLM Thought Divergence and Convergence for Dialogue-Based Image
Generation Control
Hui Li∗
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China
hui5li@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Generative AI (GenAI), which revolutionized both computer
vision and natural language processing, has drawn continuous attention recently. Benefits from GenAI with the evolution of large language models (LLMs), the image generation
task evolved from prompt-based to dialogue-based, which
takes the real-world human intent expressed through conversations. When breaking this task into multiple steps, the
best pathway of analyzing the dialogues is not determined,
such as whether the objects or prompted template should
be focused on the first step of dialogues analyzing. Thus, a
multi-chain reasoning is requested to decompose this application beyond a pure chain-of-thought structure. After the
divergent process, the question comes to how to converge
the thinking chain that leads to the best matched image,
which requires a new evaluation method to lead the thinking process. To address these challenges, we propose the
LLM Thought Divergence and Convergence (LTDC) framework, which simulates human cognitive processes through
three phases: (1) The Step-by-Step Thought process decomposes dialogue-based image generation tasks into sequential thinking chains using LLMs; (2) The Image Generation process creates image prompts following these thought
instructions and produces corresponding images; (3) The
Evaluation process aligns the coherence between generated
images and dialogues through a multi-modal LLM, guiding
the selection of optimal thinking chains. Evaluated on VisDial, our LTE framework achieves a 4.87% improvement in
CLIP similarity, demonstrating the effectiveness in generating images with higher semantic fidelity.

Q: is the picture in color?
A: yes
Q: is this a wedding picture?
A: maybe
Q: is the couple male and female?
A: yes
......
Text Prompt
Translate the
conversation content
into a standard prompt
for image generation.

Image Prompt
A softly lit indoor scene
featuring a male and
female couple in formal
attire, suggesting a
possible wedding or
romantic celebration.......

...
Vanilla Method

Expand Prompt
Your task is to give the correct next step, given a
problem of "Generate a prompt for image generation...”

Expand
Step 1: Generate a prompt for
an image generation model like
DALL-E, such as the scene
setting (indoor wedding )...
Image Prompt
A colorful indoor
wedding scene，no
visible plates or other
decorations...

Expand
Step 1: Generate a prompt
for focusing on details such
as the scene setting (indoor),
presence of a couple...
Image Prompt
Generate an indoor
scene of a male
female couple near
a white cake...

Evalution
Q: is the picture
in color?
A: yes ......
Expand
Step 1: Generate a prompt for focusing on details such as the
scene setting (indoor), presence of a couple...
Step 2: Determine the essential elements to include in the
prompt based on the analysis from Step 1...

Our Method

Figure 1. Dialogue-based image generation control comparison
with the end-to-end method and our LTDC method. (a) Vanilla
method analyses the entire dialogue inputs directly via the LLM
to generate the image prompt. (b) Our LTDC method provides an
analysis LLM which separates the task into steps automatically,
then the best result is selected by the correct rate between the image and dialogue at each step.

1. Introduction

from text prompts is no longer isolated but organically integrated with large language models (LLMs), enabling multimodal synergy and rapid iteration in real life.
Current research in image generation has primarily focused on two core components: prompt understanding and
image generation, which correspond to the technology of
prompt engineering [12, 13, 18] and generation model design [3, 25, 26, 30]. Although these methods advance the
synthesis of photorealistic and semantically coherent images, they rely on the user providing a complete prompt
upfront, which requires them to have a clear idea of what
the image should be like from the very beginning.
During the real-life image generation process, human intentions are normally expressed through dialogues, which
brings new challenges in the dialogues-to-image process.

Generative AI (GenAI) [4, 23, 27, 35], which creates text,
images, and videos, drives innovations in computer vision(CV), natural language processing (NLP), and crossmodal content creation. As one of the key components in
GenAI, the image-generation task which generates images

18101

