This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GS-LIVM: Real-Time Photo-Realistic LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Mapping with
Gaussian Splatting

1

Yusen Xie1
Zhenmin Huang2
Jin Wu2
Jun Ma1,2†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Figure 1. Illustration of our photo-realistic mapping results on Botanic Garden Sequence 1018 13. The pink dashed line represents the
running trajectory, with the entire trajectory being approximately 200 meters. The green square is the starting point and the red pentagram
is the endpoint. The rendering images at different locations are shown in the corners. The quantitative metrics are shown in the table.

Abstract

quality. The source code is available on GitHub.

In this paper, we introduce GS-LIVM, a real-time photorealistic LiDAR-Inertial-Visual mapping framework with
Gaussian Splatting tailored for outdoor scenes. Compared to existing methods based on Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), our approach
enables real-time photo-realistic mapping while ensuring
high-quality image rendering in large-scale unbounded outdoor environments. In this work, Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) is employed to mitigate the issues resulting from sparse and unevenly distributed LiDAR observations. The voxel-based 3D Gaussians map representation
facilitates real-time dense mapping in large outdoor environments with acceleration governed by custom CUDA kernels. Moreover, the overall framework is designed in a
covariance-centered manner, where the estimated covariance is used to initialize the scale and rotation of 3D Gaussians, as well as update the parameters of the GPR. We evaluate our algorithm on several outdoor datasets, and the results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance in terms of mapping efficiency and rendering

1. Introduction
Over the past two decades, simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) has emerged as a cornerstone technology underpinning advancements in robotics [6] and autonomous driving [4, 5]. Typically, it relies on sensor
fusion techniques that leverage sparse feature representations [18, 19, 41, 42, 47, 51]. While effective in various contexts, these approaches have shown limitations in achieving
high-quality performance in 3D reconstruction and photorealistic environmental rendering. The landscape of research in SLAM begins to shift with the advent of powerful neural scene representation techniques, notably Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [22, 26] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [12–14]. This paradigm shift leads to the development of photo-realistic neural SLAM methods, which
greatly improve the fidelity of novel view-synthesis (NVS)
and environmental representation.

26869

† Corresponding author

§ Project page: https://github.com/xieyuser/GS-LIVM

