This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOBIUS: Big-to-Mobile Universal Instance Segmentation via
Multi-modal Bottleneck Fusion and Calibrated Decoder Pruning
Mattia Segu1,2 , Marta Tintore Gazulla1 , Yongqin Xian1 , Luc Van Gool3 , Federico Tombari1
1
2
Google
ETH Zurich 3 INSAIT, Sofia University, St. Kliment Ohridski
https://github.com/google-research/mobius

Abstract

Instance Segmentation on LVIS-val
50

Scaling up model size and training data has advanced
foundation models for instance-level perception, achieving state-of-the-art in-domain and zero-shot performance
across object detection and segmentation. However, their
high computational cost limits adoption on resourceconstrained platforms. We first examine the limitations
of existing architectures in enabling efficient edge deployment without compromising performance. We then introduce MOBIUS, a family of foundation models for universal
instance segmentation, designed for Pareto-optimal downscaling to support deployment across devices ranging from
high-end accelerators to mobile hardware. To reduce training and inference demands, we propose: (i) a bottleneck
pixel decoder for efficient multi-scale and multi-modal fusion, (ii) a language-guided uncertainty calibration loss for
adaptive decoder pruning, and (iii) a streamlined, unified
training strategy. Unlike efficient baselines that trade accuracy for reduced complexity, MOBIUS reduces pixel and
transformer decoder FLOPs by up to 55% and 75%, respectively, while maintaining state-of-the-art performance in
just a third of the training iterations. MOBIUS establishes
a new benchmark for efficient segmentation on both highperformance computing platforms and mobile devices.

MOBIUS

-50%

300

500

GLEE

Performance (APmask )

45
-50%
40
35
30
25
0

50

100

200

400

600

700

FLOPs (G)
GLEEbig

GLEEmobile

MOBIUSbig

MOBIUSmobile

Figure 1. Pareto efficiency. The MOBIUS family demonstrates
Pareto-efficient downscaling of universal instance segmentation
compared to state-of-the-art GLEE. We compare computational
requirements (FLOPs) with performance (APmask ) on LVIS-val for
big and mobile model sizes. The text encoder fixed cost is omitted.

1. Introduction

Recently, several generalist models [30, 55, 57, 66] have
built on flexible multi-modal DETR-based architectures [3,
20, 60] to simultaneously address multiple such tasks. Their
architecture is typically composed of a vision and a text
encoder, a pixel decoder that fuses multi-scale vision features with the text modality, and a transformer decoder that
refines a set of queries to be used for downstream detection and segmentation by attending to the multi-scale features enhanced by the pixel decoder. While preliminary
generalist models specialized only on a subset of instancelevel tasks and domains, GLEE [55] scaled up the dataset
and model size, employing a multi-stage curriculum learning approach to handle incrementally more difficult tasks
while avoiding instability. Despite these advancements,
the pursuit of ever-larger models has prioritized state-ofthe-art performance over efficiency, limiting their adoption
on resource-constrained platforms such as autonomous systems, mobile devices, and edge computing. While scaling

Scaling up model size and training datasets has demonstrated remarkable in-domain accuracy and impressive
zero-shot generalization for a variety of domains, including natural language processing (NLP) [2, 7, 8, 37], computer vision [9, 17, 23, 38], and reinforcement learning [43,
47, 48]. Advances in modern hardware accelerators and
growing data availability have fueled the development of
foundation models for instance-level perception, addressing
tasks ranging from generic object detection and segmentation [1, 3, 4, 39, 42] to interactive segmentation using visual
prompts [32, 62] or referring expressions [15, 51].

20726

