This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimpleVQA: Multimodal Factuality Evaluation for Multimodal
Large Language Models
Xianfu Cheng1,2* , Wei Zhang1* , Shiwei Zhang2* , Jian Yang1*† , Xiangyuan Guan1 , Xianjie Wu1
Xiang Li1† , Ge Zhang3 , Jiaheng Liu3 , Yuying Mai3 , Yutao Zeng1 , Zhoufutu Wen3
Ke Jin1,2 , Baorui Wang1 , Weixiao Zhou1 , Yunhong Lu3 , Hangyuan Ji1
Tongliang Li1 , Wenhao Huang3 , Zhoujun Li1,4
1
Beihang University; 2 Baidu Inc., China; 3 M-A-P;
4
Shenzhen Intelligent Strong Technology Co.,Ltd.
{buaacxf,lizj}@buaa.edu.cn,zhangshiwei05@baidu.com

Chinese Question

Abstract

图片中的场景出自哪部电影？

The increasing application of multi-modal large language
models (MLLMs) across various sectors has spotlighted the
essence of their output reliability and accuracy, particularly
their ability to produce content grounded in factual information (e.g. common and domain-specific knowledge). In
this work, we introduce SimpleVQA, the first comprehensive multi-modal benchmark to evaluate the factuality ability of MLLMs to answer natural language short questions.
SimpleVQA is characterized by 7 key features: it is based
on bilingual, it covers multiple tasks and multiple scenarios, ensures high quality and challenging queries, maintains
static and timeless reference answers, and is straightforward to evaluate. Our approach involves categorizing visual question-answering items into 9 different tasks around
objective events or common knowledge and situating these
within 9 scenario domains. Rigorous quality control processes are implemented to guarantee high-quality, concise, and clear answers, facilitating evaluation with minimal variance via an LLM-as-a-judge scoring system. Using SimpleVQA, we perform a comprehensive assessment
of leading 18 MLLMs and 8 text-only LLMs, delving into
their image comprehension and text generation abilities by
identifying and analyzing error cases.

该场景出自电影《泰坦尼克号》。

Simple
VQA
English Question
Which film does the scene in the picture
come from?
This scene is from movie Titanic.

Figure 1. An example from our proposed SimpleVQA.

LLMs often produce outputs that are misleading or unsupported by evidence phenomenon known as “hallucinations” [3, 29, 43]. The generation of incorrect or unsubstantiated information remains a major barrier to the broader
adoption and reliability of general-purpose AI technologies.
OpenAI proposes SimpleQA [30] to measure factuality
simple and reliable with nearly 4K concise and fact-seeking
questions. Further, Chinese SimpleQA [8] comprised of 3K
Chinese questions spanning 6 major topics is proposed to
target the Chinese language. However, the SimpleQA and
Chinese SimpleQA benchmarks mainly evaluate the model
capabilities in text modality, ignoring wider real-world scenarios (e.g. vision modality). For the vision modality, the
research progress of the multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) is still hindered by the “hallucinations” introduced by the given images. Therefore, The community of
MLLMs has an urgent need for how to measure the simple

1. Introduction
A significant challenge in large language models (LLMs) is
ensuring that LLMs [1, 25] generate factually accurate and
evidence-based responses. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA)
* Equal Contributions.
† Corresponding Authors.

4637

