This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PlanGen: Towards Unified Layout Planning and Image Generation
in Auto-Regressive Vision Language Models
Runze He
Ao Ma

Bo cheng Yuhang Ma Qingxiang Jia Shanyuan Liu
Xiaoyu Wu Liebucha Wu Dawei Leng † Yuhui Yin
360 AI Research

herunze8265@gmail.com, {chengbo1, lengdawei}@360.cn
(a) Layout-Image Joint Generation
Input（Caption）

Output（Layout + Image）

Input（Caption）

This is a photo
showcasing fashionable
clothing in a store. The
focus is on a mannequin
dressed in a floralpatterned jacket and a
blue scarf, ...

Output（Layout + Image）

This is a photograph
showcasing the interior
of a church. The
interior of the church
is lavishly decorated,
with a dome featuring
exquisite carvings...

(b) Layout-to-Image Generation

(c) Image Layout Understanding

(d) Layout-guided Image Manipulation

Figure 1. PlanGen models layout planning and image generation jointly, allowing layout planning before generating corresponding
images, and the two processes are completed in a unified model. PlanGen can perform multi-type tasks related to layout, including a)
layout-image joint generation, b) layout-to-image generation, c) image layout understanding and d) layout-guided image manipulation.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a unified layout planning and image generation model, PlanGen, which can pre-plan spatial layout conditions before generating images as shown
in Figure 1. Unlike previous diffusion-based models that
treat layout planning and layout-to-image as two separate
models, PlanGen jointly models the two tasks into one autoregressive transformer using only next-token prediction.

PlanGen integrates layout conditions into the model as context without requiring specialized encoding of local captions and bounding box coordinates, which provides significant advantages over the previous embed-and-pool operations on layout conditions, particularly when dealing with
complex layouts. Unified prompting allows PlanGen to perform multitasking training related to layout, including layout planning, layout-to-image generation, image layout understanding, etc. In addition, PlanGen can be seamlessly
expanded to layout-guided image manipulation thanks to
the well-designed modeling, with teacher-forcing content

† Corresponding authors.

18143

