This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoMoGaussian: Continuous Motion-Aware Gaussian Splatting
from Motion-Blurred Images
Jungho Lee1 Donghyeong Kim1 Dogyoon Lee1 Suhwan Cho1 Minhyeok Lee1
Wonjoon Lee1 Taeoh Kim2 Dongyoon Wee2 Sangyoun Lee1
1

2

Yonsei University

NAVER Cloud
𝜏!

Motion Blurred Image

⋯

Scene

𝜏"
𝜏!

⋯

Camera Motion
𝜏"

(a) Motion-Blurred Image Acquisition

Sharp Image

(b) Estimated Camera Motion Trajectory

(c) Rendered Images

Figure 1. We propose CoMoGaussian, a novel framework for reconstructing 3D scenes from camera motion-blurred images. (a) Camera
motion-blurred images are generated by the continuous movement of the camera during the exposure time. (b) The top image represents the
camera poses obtained through CoMoGaussian, showing a continuous trajectory indicated by gradual change of colors. The bottom images
are the rendering outputs from each camera pose. (c) By aggregating the rendered images obtained in step (b), we get the motion-blurred
output image shown at the top, while the sharp output image is rendered from the given calibrated camera pose.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has gained significant attention due to its high-quality novel view rendering, motivating research to address real-world challenges. A critical
issue is the camera motion blur caused by movement during
exposure, which hinders accurate 3D scene reconstruction.
In this study, we propose CoMoGaussian, a Continuous
Motion-Aware Gaussian Splatting that reconstructs precise
3D scenes from motion-blurred images while maintaining
real-time rendering speed. Considering the complex motion
patterns inherent in real-world camera movements, we predict continuous camera trajectories using neural ordinary
differential equations (ODEs). To ensure accurate modeling, we employ rigid body transformations, preserving the
shape and size of the object but rely on the discrete integration of sampled frames. To better approximate the continuous nature of motion blur, we introduce a continuous

motion refinement (CMR) transformation that refines rigid
transformations by incorporating additional learnable parameters. By revisiting fundamental camera theory and
leveraging advanced neural ODE techniques, we achieve
precise modeling of continuous camera trajectories, leading to improved reconstruction accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art performance both quantitatively and qualitatively on benchmark datasets, which
include a wide range of motion blur scenarios, from moderate to extreme blur. Project page is available at https://JhoYonsei.github.io/CoMoGaussian.

1. Introduction

26415

Novel view synthesis has recently garnered significant attention, with neural radiance fields (NeRF) [22] making
considerable advancements in photo-realistic neural render-

