This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inference-Time Diffusion Model Distillation
Geon Yeong Park1
Sang Wan Lee2,3⇤
Jong Chul Ye1,3⇤
1
Bio and Brain Engineering, 2 Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 3 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{pky3436, sangwan, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Representative results comparing baselines (LCM-LoRA [29], SDXL-Lightning [21], DMD2 [47]) and the proposed framework.
Results of each baseline are generated with 4 step sampling. We improve the visual fidelity and textual alignment of student models by
conducting a inference-time diffusion distillation with the guidance of teacher model, e.g. SDXL [34], in early sampling stages (first 1 step).

Abstract

a proximal optimization problem with a score distillation
sampling loss (SDS). To this end, we integrate distillation
optimization during reverse sampling, which can be viewed
as teacher guidance that drives student sampling trajectory
towards the clean manifold using pre-trained diffusion models. Thus, Distillation++ improves the denoising process
in real-time without additional source data or fine-tuning.
Distillation++ demonstrates substantial improvements over
state-of-the-art distillation baselines, particularly in early
sampling stages, positioning itself as a robust guided sampling process crafted for diffusion distillation models.

Diffusion distillation models effectively accelerate reverse
sampling by compressing the process into fewer steps. However, these models still exhibit a performance gap compared
to their pre-trained diffusion model counterparts, exacerbated by distribution shifts and accumulated errors during
multi-step sampling. To address this, we introduce Distillation++, a novel inference-time distillation framework that
reduces this gap by incorporating teacher-guided refinement
during sampling. Inspired by recent advances in conditional
sampling, our approach recasts student model sampling as

4049

