This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End Driving with Online Trajectory Evaluation via BEV World Model
Yingyan Li∗ Yuqi Wang∗ Yang Liu Jiawei He Lue Fan Zhaoxiang Zhang
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems (MAIS)
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
Abstract
Policy
Network

End-to-end autonomous driving [6, 30, 35] has achieved remarkable success in recent years and garnered widespread attention. While most approaches [21, 23, 25] primarily focus
on predicting a high-quality trajectory, recent works [7, 27]
suggest that predicting multiple trajectories simultaneously
better reﬂects the multi-modal nature of driving and leads
to improved performance. Given these multiple possible
trajectories, it becomes crucial to effectively evaluate them
in order to ensure the safety and reliability of end-to-end
autonomous driving systems.
Traditional trajectory evaluation methods are rulebased [10, 14, 20, 37] and rely on perception results, such
as bounding boxes and maps, to assess trajectories. These
methods are sensitive to perception inaccuracies and may
1 *: Co-ﬁrst author,  : Co-advisor. Email: liyingyan2021@ia.ac.cn

BEV Feature Map

Predicted Trajectory

(a) End-to-End Trajectory Prediction
૙. ૚

Sensor Input

Multiple Traj.

Policy
Network

Reward Model

1. Introduction

Sensor Input

BEV World Model

End-to-end autonomous driving has achieved remarkable
progress by integrating perception, prediction, and planning
into a fully differentiable framework. Yet, to fully realize
its potential, an effective online trajectory evaluation is indispensable to ensure safety. By forecasting the future outcomes of a given trajectory, trajectory evaluation becomes
much more effective. This goal can be achieved by employing a world model to capture environmental dynamics
and predict future states. Therefore, we propose an endto-end driving framework WoTE, which leverages a BEV
World model to predict future BEV states for Trajectory
Evaluation. The proposed BEV world model is latencyefﬁcient compared to image-level world models and can be
seamlessly supervised using off-the-shelf BEV-space trafﬁc
simulators. We validate our framework on both the NAVSIM
benchmark and the closed-loop Bench2Drive benchmark
based on the CARLA simulator, achieving state-of-the-art
performance. Code is released at https://github.
com/liyingyanUCAS/WoTE.

૙. ૜

BEV Feature Map
૙. ૢ
Imagined Futures

(a) End-to-End Trajectory Prediction & Evaluation

Reward-based
Trajectory Selection

Figure 1. The illustration of end-to-end trajectory evaluation
with BEV world model. (a) Previous end-to-end driving methods
primarily focus on learning a high-quality trajectory. (b) Our WoTE
consists of end-to-end trajectory prediction and evaluation. First,
we predict multi-modal trajectories. Next, given these trajectories,
we leverage the BEV world model to predict the corresponding
future BEV states. The reward model evaluates these trajectories
based on the predicted states and assigns rewards, selecting the
highest-reward trajectory.

not be directly optimized in an end-to-end manner. Recently,
some end-to-end driving approaches [7, 27] have incorporated trajectory evaluation. Their evaluations rely on the
current state. However, evaluating a trajectory candidate is
particularly challenging without knowledge of the future led
by this trajectory. Similar to human drivers, who anticipate
futures before making decisions, a trajectory evaluation network would beneﬁt from predicting the corresponding future
states of trajectory candidates.
To effectively predict future states, it is intuitive to adopt
methodologies from reinforcement learning, where world
models have successfully facilitated future state predictions.
In reinforcement learning, model-based methods [5, 18, 32]
have consistently shown superior performance compared to
model-free approaches [17, 29], largely due to their ability of
modeling the environmental dynamics and reasoning about
future scenarios through world models. Inspired by this success, we propose adopting a world model [15, 19, 38–40]

27137

