This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAT: A Unified Click-and-Track Framework for Realistic Tracking
Yongsheng Yuan Jie Zhao Dong Wang✁ Huchuan Lu
Dalian University of Technology, China
15716608638@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zj982853200,wdice,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

Score:
0.942

Interactive
Models

Modern visual trackers have achieved robust performance with precisely initialized target bounding boxes.
However, providing high-precision initial annotations is
a process both labor-intensive and error-prone in realworld scenarios. Interactive initialization (e.g., click-based,
scribble-based) presents a more practical alternative. In
this paper, we introduce a unified Click-and-Track (CAT)
framework for full-process tracking, eliminating the need
for auxiliary models or complex initialization pipelines. We
present a novel fine-tuning paradigm that bridges the information gap inherent in click-based initialization through
two key innovations: 1) The proposed click-based localization and joint spatial-visual prompt refinement are sequentially performed to compensate for the geometric information loss (e.g., boundary ambiguity, shape uncertainty) inherent in click-based initialization. 2) We design
a parameter-efficient module called CTMoE to leverage the
tracker’s inherent capabilities when fine-tuning. The proposed CTMoE enables the foundation model to learn different matching patterns, unifying click-based initialization
and tracking within a unified architecture. Extensive experimental results demonstrate state-of-the-art performance
of our click-based tracking method on the LaSOT benchmark (70.5% AUC) while maintaining parameter efficiency,
surpassing existing click-based tracking frameworks by a
large margin and even outperforming some bounding-boxinitialized trackers. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/ysyuann/CAT.

Bounding Box:
x, y, w, h

&
Cor: x, y

Score:
0.898
Trackers

Detectors

Cor: x, y
&

Bounding Box:
x, y, w, h

(a) Typical modular solutions for click-based tracking

&
Cor: x, y

Bounding Box:
x, y, w, h

(b) Pipeline of our unified click-based tracking approach, CAT
Figure 1. Different frameworks for click-based tracking problem. Typical solutions build modular frameworks with separate
sub-models, whereas our approach integrates the MoE mechanism
into foundation tracking models for a unified click-based tracking
framework.

though precise, bounding box annotations inevitably introduce a non-negligible time delay on the order of seconds
in real scenarios [32]. In contrast, target identification via
clicking only takes milliseconds, making it far more efficient and better suited for real-world applications, such as
human-robot interaction and online surveillance systems.
However, compared to finely annotated bounding boxes,
the information gap introduced by a single click presents
significant challenges. First, conventional trackers [2, 7, 11,
28, 52] typically initialize by extracting reference regions
using fixed scaling ratios. In contrast, click-based initialization relies solely on a single clicked point for target localization, which inherently lacks scale and boundary information. Resizing the full image to 256 → 256 or 384 →
384 can result in the loss of critical appearance details, leading to blurry patterns. This absence of scale and boundary

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking, a fundamental task in computer
vision, aims to estimate the position of specified, categoryagnostic targets throughout video sequences, starting from
an initial state. The existing tracking benchmarks [13, 14,
21, 37, 38] typically provide finely annotated bounding
boxes of the initial frame for tracking initialization. Al✁ Corresponding author: Dr. Dong Wang.

5690

