This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VOVTrack: Exploring the Potentiality in Raw Videos for
Open-Vocabulary Multi-Object Tracking
Zekun Qian1,3 *, Ruize Han2 *, Junhui Hou3 , Linqi Song3 , Wei Feng1†
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
3
fig1
City University of Hong Kong
{clarkqian, wfeng}@tju.edu.cn, hanruize@suat-sz.edu.cn, {jh.hou, linqi.song}@cityu.edu.hk

https://github.com/zekunqian/VOVTrack

Abstract

OVTrack

Open-vocabulary multi-object tracking (OVMOT) represents a critical new challenge involving the detection and
tracking of diverse object categories in videos, encompassing both seen categories (base classes) and unseen categories (novel classes). This issue amalgamates the complexities of open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) and
multi-object tracking (MOT). Existing approaches to OVMOT often merge OVD and MOT methodologies as separate modules, not fully leveraging the video information.
In this work, we propose VOVTrack, a novel method that
integrates object states relevant to MOT and video-centric
training to address this challenge from a video analysis
standpoint. First, we consider the tracking-related state
of the objects during tracking and propose a new promptguided attention mechanism for more accurate detection
(localization and classification) of time-varying objects.
Subsequently, we leverage raw video data without annotations for training by formulating a self-supervised object
similarity learning technique to facilitate temporal object
tracking (association). Experimental results underscore
that VOVTrack establishes itself as a state-of-the-art solution for the open-vocabulary tracking task.

Ours
？

unrecognizable

？

occluded

Detecting and tracking noisy
objects without state awareness

1

Getting tracking-related state
to guide detection and tracking
2

...

Trained by labeled static images

Trained by unlabled videos

Figure 1. Comparison between OVTrack [27] and our methods.

focus on the tracking of simple object categories, i.e., humans and vehicles. Actually, it is important for the perception of various categories of objects in many real-world
applications. Some recent works have begun to study the
tracking of generic objects. TAO [7] is the first large dataset
for the generic MOT, which includes 2,907 videos and 833
object categories. However, these approaches are still limited to tracking predefined object categories.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in
computer vision and artificial intelligence, which is widely
used for video surveillance, media understanding, etc [20,
21]. In the past years, plenty of datasets, e.g., MOT-20 [8],
DanceTrack [48], KITTI [17], as well as the algorithms,
e.g., SORT [51], Tracktor [46], FairMOT [56], have been
proposed for MOT problem. However, most previous works

With the development of Artificial General Intelligence
(AGI) and multi-modal foundation models, open-world
object perception has become a popular topic. Openvocabulary object detection (OVD) is a new and promising
task because of its generic settings. It aims to identify the
various categories of objects from an image, including both
the categories that have been seen during training (i.e., base
classes) and those not seen (i.e., novel classes). Although
OVD has been studied in a series of works [9, 11, 23],

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7472

