This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Multi-Task Unified Embedding Model (M3T-UEM): A
Task-Adaptive Representation Learning Framework
Rohan Sharma1, 2
Xiaohu Xie*1
1

Changyou Chen*1, 2

Rui Meng1

Amazon

2

Feng-Ju Chang*1

Dehong Xu1, 3

Alejandro Mottini1
3

University at Buffalo

Seongjun Yun*1
Qingjun Cui1

University of California, Los Angeles

(a) The M3T-UEM Framework

(b) Performance Comparison

Figure 1. M3T-UEM advances the LMM-based retriever with the designated task-specific instructions (see Supplementary 8, Table 10), a
multiple-token summarization mechanism (see Fig. 2), and the task-aware contrastive loss (section 3.2). (a) The visualizations of the M3TUEM framework’s capabilities; (b) Multi-modal retrieval performance comparisons on M-BEIR to the CLIP and LMM based approaches.

Abstract
We present Multi-Modal Multi-Task Unified Embedding
Model (M3T-UEM), a framework that advances visionlanguage matching and retrieval by leveraging a large language model (LLM) backbone. While concurrent LLMbased approaches have demonstrated impressive capabilities in multimodal and multitask scenarios; our work introduces novel mechanisms for task-adaptive learning and
embedding extraction that further enhance the potential of
LLM-based retrieval systems. Our key technical contribution lies in the development of a task-aware contrastive
learning framework with an automated Bayesian weighing
mechanism. This approach provides a principled way to
balance multiple tasks during training, departing from conventional contrastive learning strategies. We further enhance the framework through a multiple token summarization strategy and an auxiliary language modeling objective, which together significantly improve retrieval performance. Comprehensive experiments on M-BEIR and ICinW

benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of M3T-UEM,
showing competitive or superior performance compared to
both traditional encoder-based methods and recent LLMbased approaches. Furthermore, we demonstrate particular strengths in handling compositional conceptual changes
and multilingual scenarios owing to the incorporation of an
LLM backbone where the method drastically outperforms
CLIP in zero-shot settings, often by orders of magnitude. *

1. Introduction

22783

In the digital era, Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs), typically built upon LLMs, have become widespread due to
their advanced reasoning capabilities. Their applications
range from generating contextual image-based dialogues
[2, 38, 44] to video understanding [17] and object segmentation [30]. Simultaneously, multimodal retrieval has
* Core Authors

