This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOMO-Feature: Cross-Arbitrary-Modal Image Matching with
Homomorphism of Organized Major Orientation
Chenzhong Gao
Wei Li *
Desheng Weng
School of Information and Electronics
Beijing Institute of Technology
gao-pingqi@qq.com, liwei089@ieee.org, lotrl@qq.com

Abstract
CV

An exploration of cross-arbitrary-modal image invariant
feature extraction and matching is made, with a purely
handcrafted full-chain algorithm, Homomorphism of Organized Major Orientation (HOMO), being proposed. Instead
of using deep models to conduct data-driven black-box
learning, we introduce a Major Orientation Map (MOM),
effectively combating image modal differences. Considering rotation, scale, and texture diversities in cross-modal
images, HOMO incorporates a novel, universally designed
Generalized-Polar descriptor (GPolar) and a Multi-scale
Strategy (MsS) to gain well-rounded capacities. HOMO
achieves the best comprehensive performance in feature
matching on several generally cross-modal datasets, challenging compared with a set of state-of-the-art methods
including 7 traditional algorithms and 10 deep network
models. A dataset named General Cross-modal Zone
(GCZ) is proposed, which shows practical values. Codes
with datasets are available at https://github.com/
MrPingQi/HOMO_Feature_ImgMatching.

Sunny - Foggy

Day - Night

Visible - Infrared

Visible - Depth

Real - Paint

Visible - Depth

Scene - Map

Real - Brief

Scene - Label

RS

Scene - Map

Real - Paint

Medical

Visible - Fluorescence

MRI - SPECT

Tissue - Staining

MRI - PET

Multi-source Retina

MRI - PET

Figure 1. Examples all achieved by the traditional handcrafted
non-data-driven framework of the proposed HOMO.

relationships is a new key task for image matching.
Research on general cross-modal feature matching is
currently underdeveloped, and a basic general paradigm is
still lacking. Nowadays, more techniques are focusing on
multi-view optical images [15, 53, 59] or speciﬁc source
data, primarily visible-infrared [44, 54]. Although some attempts have been made [21, 30, 31, 61], few studies explicitly address this question: if there is a highly invariant basic
feature across arbitrary modalities of image data. Simply
put, if such a technique exists without being constrained by
modal type, any images containing the same scene could
automatically establish spatial relationships.
Based on this, this study aims to provide an image feature extraction and matching framework capable of effectively handling non-speciﬁc sources while accommodating
rotation, scale, and texture diversities. Rather than relying on black-box network model learning, our initial aim
is to explore a clearly deﬁned feature that can be theoretically derived. In this work, we introduce HOMO-Feature
(Homomorphism of Organized Major Orientation), a novel

1. Introduction
Image invariant feature extraction and matching is a fundamental technique in computer vision, crucial for tasks including direct ones of image registration, homography estimation, camera localization, structure from motion and indirect ones of image fusion, multi-source analysis, etc. The
ability to accurately match keypoints between images under varying conditions such as lighting, viewpoint, or even
sensor type is vital.
Cross-modal matching, where images are captured by
different sensors, poses greater challenges. With the rapid
development of sensor technology, wide varieties of image
modalities have emerged. Integrating general cross-modal
images by automatically and effectively establishing spatial
* Corresponding author.

10538

