This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backdoor Defense via Enhanced Splitting and Trap Isolation
Hongrui Yu1,2 , Lu Qi1,2 , Wanyu Lin3 , Jian Chen4 , Hailong Sun1,2, *, Chengbin Sun1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment (CCSE), Beihang University, China
2
Hangzhou Innovation Institute of Beihang University, China
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China
4
China University of Geosciences (Wuhan), China
{yuhongrui, qiluxt, sunhl, scbdyxd}@buaa.edu.cn, wan-yu.lin@polyu.edu.hk, jianchen@cug.edu.cn

Abstract

triggers to a small portion of the training samples to inject
backdoors in DNN models, without affecting performance
on clean data. Additionally, the design of trigger patterns in
these attacks is becoming increasingly complex. Triggers
can be small, sparse, specific to certain samples, or even invisible [2, 8, 12, 20, 25, 26, 32]. This complexity makes defending against backdoor attacks particularly challenging.
Previous research indicates that once a model is implanted with a backdoor, it is hard to remove or unlearn. Gu
et al.[12] and Liu et al.[23] prove that simple fine-tuning is
insufficient to remove backdoors injected into DNN models. Neural attention distillation (NAD)[22] improves finetuning by adding an attention distillation step, but Zeng
et al.[41] show that NAD is sensitive to attack types and
data augmentation methods. Neural Cleanse (NC)[33] aims
to prune poisoned neurons to remove backdoors, but often
fails when triggers cover the entire sample[2, 8].
To train a clean model on poisoned dataset, defenses
such as Anti-Backdoor Learning (ABL)[21], Decouplingbased Backdoor Defense (DBD)[16], and Adaptively Splitting dataset-based Defense (ASD)[10] have been proposed.
Li et al.[21] note that DNN models converge faster on samples with the backdoor trigger (dubbed poisoned samples),
with their losses dropping sharply early in training. Consequently, they propose ABL, which isolates samples with
low loss in early training and aims to unlearn them later.
Since poisoned samples are out-of-distribution (OOD) data
respect to clean samples[19], they generally have high loss
on a clean model. DBD and ASD adopt a similar strategy,
identifying low-loss samples on a clean model as trustworthy. However, this strategy may lead to some poisoned samples being misclassified as clean, which is in-distribution
(ID) data of clean samples. As shown in Figure 1, some poisoned samples cluster with target class clean samples and
have low loss on a clean model, even though the model is
trained on all clean data from the attacked dataset. These
misclassified poisoned samples may eventually cause the
defense to fail during subsequent training.

Backdoor attacks pose a significant threat to deep neural networks (DNNs), as attackers can inject a backdoor by
tampering with only a few samples. The variety of backdoor
attacks makes comprehensive defense extremely challenging. Previous defenses typically assume that backdoor samples are out-of-distribution (OOD) data of benign samples.
However, backdoor samples can also be in-distribution (ID)
data of benign samples and hard to identify as outliers, potentially causing defenses to fail. To address this issue, we
propose a two-stage backdoor defense based on Enhanced
Splitting and Trap Isolation (ESTI), leveraging attackers’
tampering to defend against their attacks. In the first stage,
we introduce backdoored models in conjunction with a benign model to split the dataset into a reliable clean subset
and a poisoned subset. In the second stage, we introduce
a trap mechanism to isolate the poisoned subset into a trap
class to train a trap-model. The trap-model can flip the
predictions of poisoned samples from the attacker’s target
class to the trap class. Through extensive experiments on
three benchmark datasets and five model architectures, we
demonstrate that ESTI effectively defends against various
backdoor attacks while maintaining model performance on
benign data, proving the superiority of our approach. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Ditring/ESTI.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been remarkably successful across a wide range of applications [1, 3, 5]. However, training a DNN requires significant data and computation resources, often necessitating reliance on third-party
providers. In this context, backdoor attacks [4, 7, 17] constitute a notable security vulnerability through compromising
the training process. Attackers only need to add backdoor
* Corresponding author

1708

