This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IFAdapter: Instance Feature Control for
Grounded Text-to-Image Generation
Yinwei Wu1,2 , Xianpan Zhou1 , Bing Ma1 , Xuefeng Su1 , Kai Ma1 , Xinchao Wang2 *
1
Tencent PCG
2
National University of Singapore
wuyinwei@u.nus.edu, {xianpanzhou, martinbma, felixsu, kylekma}@tencent.com, xinchao@nus.edu.sg
Ours

MIGC

Instance Diffusion

GLIGEN

(a)

✅ A green vase made of glass
✅ A green vase made of glass
❌ A green vase made of glass
❌ A green vase made of glass
✅ Chinese style of ink landscape painting ❌ Chinese style of ink landscape painting ❌ Chinese style of ink landscape painting ❌ Chinese style of ink landscape painting
✅ Square clock
❌ Square clock
❌ Missing
❌ Square clock
❌ A green sofa with white stripes on it
✅ A green sofa with white stripes on it ❌ A green sofa with white stripes on it ❌ Missing
✅ Red deck chair with yellow star on it ❌ Red deck chair with yellow star on it ❌ Red deck chair with yellow star on it ❌ Red deck chair with yellow star on it
✅ Crystal chandelier
✅ Crystal chandelier
✅ Crystal chandelier
✅ Crystal chandelier
✅ Grey and blue patchwork carpet
❌ Grey and blue patchwork carpet
❌ Grey and blue patchwork carpet
❌ Missing
✅ A wooden suitcase
❌ Missing
✅ A wooden suitcase
❌ Missing

(b)

orange hat white hat black hat

black cat orange cat white cat

SDXL

BluePencil

PixArt

Claymation

Figure 1. We present IFAdapter, a novel approach designed to exert fine-grained control over localized content generation in pretrained
diffusion models. (a) IFAdapter has the capacity to generate intricate features with precision. (b) The plug-and-play design of IFAdapter
enables it to be seamlessly applied to various community models.

Abstract
While Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models excel at generating visually appealing images of individual instances,
they struggle to accurately position and control the features generation of multiple instances. The Layout-toImage (L2I) task was introduced to address the positioning challenges by incorporating bounding boxes as spatial
control signals, but it still falls short in generating precise
instance features. To address this Instance Feature Generation (IFG) task, we introduce the Instance Feature Adapter
(IFAdapter). The IFAdapter enhances feature depiction by
incorporating additional appearance tokens and utilizing
an Instance Semantic Map to align instance-level features

with spatial locations. The IFAdapter guides the diffusion
process as a plug-and-play module, making it adaptable to
various community models. For evaluation, we contribute
an IFG benchmark and develop a verification pipeline to
objectively compare models’ abilities to generate instances
with accurate positioning and features. Experimental results demonstrate that IFAdapter outperforms other models
in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding Author

The advent of diffusion models has revolutionized the field
of Text-to-Image (T2I) synthesis [4, 6, 19, 39, 42, 64].
Despite their exceptional performance in generating highquality images of single objects, they struggle to compose

15949

