This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent Diffusion Models with Masked AutoEncoders
Junho Lee1 * Jeongwoo Shin1 * Hyungwook Choi1
1

Joonseok Lee1†

Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea

{joon2003,swswss,chooi221,joonseok}@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. Class-conditional generation samples of our proposed LDMAE. Trained on ImageNet-1K, resolution of 256 × 256.

Abstract

1. Introduction

In spite of the remarkable potential of Latent Diffusion
Models (LDMs) in image generation, the desired properties
and optimal design of the autoencoders have been underexplored. In this work, we analyze the role of autoencoders in
LDMs and identify three key properties: latent smoothness,
perceptual compression quality, and reconstruction quality.
We demonstrate that existing autoencoders fail to simultaneously satisfy all three properties, and propose Variational
Masked AutoEncoders (VMAEs), taking advantage of the
hierarchical features maintained by Masked AutoEncoders.
We integrate VMAEs into the LDM framework, introducing
Latent Diffusion Models with Masked AutoEncoders (LDMAEs). Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate significantly enhanced image generation quality and
computational efficiency.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Diffusion models (DMs) [8, 17, 19, 29, 31, 41] have recently
set new standards in image generation, but their iterative
denoising process incurs high computational cost. While
deterministic sampling [26, 39] reduces the number of sampling steps, the core inefficiency of operating directly in
pixel space remains.
To address these challenges, Latent Diffusion Models
(LDMs)[32] shift the denoising process from pixels to a
compressed space, focusing on semantic representations
with lower computational cost. For this, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)[20] are adopted to enforce probabilistic
alignment with a prior, enabling smooth interpolation, generative sampling, and robust generalization.
However, this latent space alignment loss often negatively impacts the reconstruction performance, leading to
a trade-off between latent space alignment and reconstruction quality. To mitigate this, LDMs, such as Stable Diffusion [11, 32], incorporate adversarial and perceptual losses
to further improve the VAEs, which is commonly referred to
as the StableDiffusion-VAEs (SD-VAEs). Subsequent stud-

17422

