This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiERO: understanding the hierarchy
of human behavior enhances reasoning on egocentric videos
Simone Alberto Peirone
Politecnico di Torino

Francesca Pistilli
Politecnico di Torino

Giuseppe Averta
Politecnico di Torino

simone.peirone@polito.it

francesca.pistilli@polito.it

giuseppe.averta@polito.it

Abstract
Human activities are particularly complex and variable,
and this makes challenging for deep learning models to reason about them. However, we note that such variability does
have an underlying structure, composed of a hierarchy of
patterns of related actions. We argue that such structure
can emerge naturally from unscripted videos of human activities, and can be leveraged to better reason about their
content. We present HiERO, a weakly-supervised method
to enrich video segments features with the corresponding
hierarchical activity threads. By aligning video clips with
their narrated descriptions, HiERO infers contextual, semantic and temporal reasoning with an hierarchical architecture. We prove the potential of our enriched features
with multiple video-text alignment benchmarks (EgoMCQ,
EgoNLQ) with minimal additional training, and in zeroshot for procedure learning tasks (EgoProceL and Ego4D
Goal-Step). Notably, HiERO achieves state-of-the-art performance in all the benchmarks, and for procedure learning tasks it outperforms fully-supervised methods by a large
margin (+12.5% F1 on EgoProceL) in zero shot. Our results prove the relevance of using knowledge of the hierarchy of human activities for multiple reasoning tasks in egocentric vision. Project page: sapeirone.github.io/HiERO.

Figure 1. Zero-Shot procedure step localization with HiERO.
Given a long egocentric video, HiERO computes segment-level
features that encode the functional dependencies between the actions in the video at different scales. This enables the detection of
procedure steps through a simple clustering in feature space.

1. Introduction

overlooking the inherent hierarchical nature behind human
actions [7, 9, 47]. The closest class of approaches that attempts to learn about this compositional structure is Procedure Learning (PL), which assumes that multiple actions
concur to form key-steps of long-horizon procedures. However, supervised approaches consider only one level of aggregation, i.e. actions that form key-steps, and require multiple scripted examples of the same procedures to learn
from. Conversely, we claim that there is significant value
in learning from the hierarchy of human behavior at multiple levels of abstraction. Indeed, the richness of human
activities lies not only in single actions execution, but more
prominently in how these are interconnected at different
levels of abstractions. Our intuition is that enriching action
features with knowledge of the multiple progressive semantic aggregations they belong to can significantly improve
their expressiveness for various reasoning tasks. Interestingly, we believe that such a hierarchical structure can naturally emerge without specific supervision. Previous works
have shown that even a simple clustering of video segments
projected in feature space may be sufficient to identify the
high-level activities represented in the video [4, 8, 39, 43].
However, the choice of the features extractor plays a crucial

Think about a typical home routine. You enter in the kitchen
and grab onions and carrots, chop them, and put them in
a pan on the stove with oil. At the same time, you fill a
pot with water and put it on the stove. While you wait for
the water to boil to cook the pasta, you pour some tomatoes in the pan. Zooming out a bit, you can group all
these actions into higher-level interleaved activity threads,
such as preparing vegetables and cooking pasta. Looking
at the bigger picture, both of these threads are part of a
broader routine like preparing a meal, which may overlap
with others, such as washing the dishes. Foundational models in egocentric video understanding have long focused
mostly on action-level understanding [2, 15, 38, 49, 56],

19862

