This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Monocular Semantic Scene Completion via Masked Recurrent Networks
Xuzhi Wang1 Xinran Wu1 Song Wang2 Lingdong Kong3 * Ziping Zhao1 *
1
Tianjin Normal University 2 Zhejiang University 3 National University of Singapore

Abstract

(a) Existing MSSC Methods
2D Encoder

Monocular Semantic Scene Completion (MSSC) aims to
predict the voxel-wise occupancy and semantic category
from a single-view RGB image. Existing methods adopt a
single-stage framework that aims to simultaneously achieve
visible region segmentation and occluded region hallucination, while also being affected by inaccurate depth estimation. Such methods often achieve suboptimal performance, especially in complex scenes. We propose a novel
two-stage framework that decomposes MSSC into coarse
MSSC followed by the Masked Recurrent Network. Specifically, we propose the Masked Sparse Gated Recurrent Unit
(MS-GRU) which concentrates on the occupied regions by
the proposed mask updating mechanism, and a sparse GRU
design is proposed to reduce the computation cost. Additionally, we propose the distance attention projection to
reduce projection errors by assigning different attention
scores according to the distance to the observed surface.
Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed unified framework, MonoMRN, effectively supports both indoor and outdoor scenes and achieves state-of-the-art performance on the NYUv2 and SemanticKITTI datasets. Furthermore, we conduct robustness analysis under various
disturbances, highlighting the role of the Masked Recurrent
Network in enhancing the model’s resilience to such challenges. The source code is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/alanWXZ/MonoMRN .

RGB Input

2D-3D
Projection

53.16
42.51

One-stage
Network

3D Feature

26.94 30.73

MSSC Inference

(b) Our Method
2D Encoder

RGB Input

Light-weight
3D Network

2D-3D
Projection
3D Feature

MonoS.
Ours

SC-IoU

SSC-mIoU

Masked
Recurrent
Network

Coarse Inference

MSSC Inference

Figure 1. The framework of our method and existing methods.
Our method decomposes MSSC into coarse SSC and Masked Recurrent Network. MonoS. represents the work of MonoScene [7].

1. Introduction

Recently, the completion of monocular 3D semantic
scenes has become a hot topic of research. Compared with
methods relying on 3D sensors like LiDAR or depth sensors
and stereo vision using RGB stereo cameras, monocularbased approaches offer advantages such as lower cost, simpler configuration, and greater portability [7, 36, 50, 56, 84].
Additionally, compared with stereo and surround-view setups, a monocular configuration offers greater adaptability
to both indoor and outdoor environments, as indoor scenarios particularly emphasize portability. A monocular setup
facilitates seamless cross-scenario generalization, making it
a more versatile choice for a wide range of applications.
Most existing Monocular Semantic Scene Completion
(MSSC) models [7, 45] attempt to simultaneously complete
the coupled 3D segmentation and completion tasks in a single stage. However, this framework presents significant
challenges, particularly in complex scenes, where performance tends to be poor. When performing scene completion, it is necessary not only to restore the geometric structure but also to ensure the consistency of semantic labels. At
the same time, during scene segmentation, the accuracy and
completeness of the completion results directly affect the
quality of the segmentation [7, 12, 13, 60, 68, 93]. Moreover, most existing methods [45] rely on estimated depth
maps to provide geometric information. The noise introduced by inaccurate depth estimations further intensifies the
complexity and challenges associated with the problem.
In contrast to adopting a one-stage framework, it is natural to decompose MSSC into several stages. Therefore, we
propose a new two-stage framework, named MonoMRN,

Semantic scene completion is an essential task in 3D scene
understanding, which aims to jointly infer the holistic semantics and geometry of the 3D scene from partial observation [9, 23, 43, 53]. The task is motivated by the fact that
the occupancy patterns and semantic labels of the scene are
mutually reinforcing [5, 8, 44, 47, 70]. Researchers gradually discover the important applications of semantic scene
completion in indoor scene analysis, robotics, virtual reality, and many downstream tasks in autonomous driving.
* Corresponding authors.

24811

