This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAMO: A Lightweight Sharpness-Aware Approach for Multi-Task Optimization
with Joint Global-Local Perturbation
Hao Ban, Gokul Ram Subramani, Kaiyi Ji*
University at Buffalo
haoban@buffalo.edu, gsubrama@buffalo.edu, kaiyiji@buffalo.edu

Abstract

tion [58, 63], among others.
One major challenge in the optimization of MTL is task
conflict, where the gradients of different tasks have varying magnitudes or divergent directions [10]. The conventional optimization objective in MTL is to minimize the average loss. However, this approach causes the task with the
largest gradient magnitude to dominate the update, potentially overshadowing other tasks and hindering the overall
performance. To mitigate this issue, various methods have
been developed, primarily focusing on gradient manipulation [6, 37, 42, 43, 48, 53, 54, 66]. These methods aim to
determine a compromise update direction that reduces each
task’s loss while promoting a more balanced solution.
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) [26] aims to update model parameters in a way that not only minimizes the
task loss but also reduces the sharpness of the loss landscape. This approach is widely used to improve generalization and has been applied in various domains, including meta-learning [1], domain generalization [8, 62], and
transfer learning [5]. However, its application to multi-task
learning (MTL) remains largely unexplored except for the
recent study by [49]. Phan et al. 49 integrated SAM into
MTL and proposed a method called F-MTL, which applies
SAM individually to each task. Specifically, it decomposes
each task’s gradient into a low-loss component and a flatseeking component, then applies a separate gradient manipulation strategy to each. While F-MTL improves performance, it faces two main challenges. First, the computational cost increases significantly, as applying SAM to individual tasks introduces K additional gradient computations,
and the separate manipulation of the two gradient components doubles both memory and time cost, where K is the
number of tasks. Second, the perturbations in F-MTL exploit only task-specific information, neglecting the shared
positive transfer across tasks.
In this paper, we tackle these challenges by introducing
a lightweight, sharpness-aware approach for multi-task optimization that exploits both the task-specific and shared information. Our key contributions are summarized below.
• We begin with a comprehensive analysis of how SAM

Multi-task learning (MTL) enables a joint model to capture commonalities across multiple tasks, reducing computation costs and improving data efficiency. However,
a major challenge in MTL optimization is task conflicts,
where the task gradients differ in direction or magnitude,
limiting model performance compared to single-task counterparts. Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) minimizes
task loss while simultaneously reducing the sharpness of
the loss landscape. Our empirical observations show that
SAM effectively mitigates task conflicts in MTL. Motivated
by these findings, we explore integrating SAM into MTL
but face two key challenges. While both the average loss
gradient and individual task gradients-referred to as global
and local information-contribute to SAM, how to combine them remains unclear. Moreover, directly computing each task gradient introduces significant computational
and memory overheads. To address these challenges, we
propose SAMO, a lightweight Sharpness-Aware Multi-task
Optimization approach, that leverages a joint global-local
perturbation. The local perturbations are approximated
using only forward passes and are layerwise normalized
to improve efficiency. Extensive experiments on a suite
of multi-task benchmarks demonstrate both the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. Code is available at
https://github.com/OptMN-Lab/SAMO.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a machine learning paradigm
that aims to learn multiple tasks simultaneously [17, 60, 72].
Instead of training each task independently, MTL encourages the model to capture shared patterns across tasks,
thus improving data efficiency and enhancing generalization across all tasks [51]. This approach is widely used
in various domains, including natural language processing
[9, 69, 73], computer vision [15, 18], and speech recogni* Corresponding author.

785

