This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MM-IFEngine: Towards Multimodal Instruction Following
Shengyuan Ding1,2∗ , Shenxi Wu1,2∗ , Xiangyu Zhao2,3 , Yuhang Zang2 ,
Haodong Duan2 , Xiaoyi Dong2 , Pan Zhang2 , Yuhang Cao2 , Dahua Lin2,4,5 , Jiaqi Wang2
1
Fudan University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Shanghai Jiaotong University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 CPII under InnoHK
(a) Current MMIF Bench

32

32 Categories of Constraints

5.1
75.4

5.1 Average constraints

2.6

Please judge whether the
response below is exactly
written in 56 words?

Fail to judge
with 4o

I'm happy to help you, but
I even can't count QAQ.[[

8

Various &
Constraint
Abundant category
Constraints

3 Evaluation metrics combined

Average
instruction
length

(b) MM-IFEval Benchmark
Instruction

100 Perception-Level

Without clear,
objective criteria

Score the component of
“Explaining what happened
in the image” from 1 to 4.

Constraints

follow instruction

To Say
Imagine you are the musician
in this image. Write about your
thoughts and feelings while
performing.

1. Answer as if you are facing to the audience.
2. Use No more than 60 words……

23k Data

generated
with our
MMIF Engine

400 high-quality samples

MM-IFEval-C
(300 questions)

300 Compose-Level

OK! I will try my best.

Hmm, what’s the criterial?
Then I will rate it based
on my “mood”.

Average
constraint
count

MIA-Bench
(About 1k constraints)

Lack practical
Answer my question without significance
using the letter ‘o’.

22.7

(c) MM-IF Dataset
SFT & DPO

follow instruction

Instruction

To See
What letters can you identify
after covering the right half
of the poster? Output in
order from top to bottom and
left to right separated with ‘,’.

R, e, a, d, i, n, a, f, u

Compose a brief poem inspired by the
cozy and serene.
Each stanza should have 4 lines.
Your output should include a metaphor.
······
In a room where light gently plays,
A haven carved from nature's ways.
The river whispers calm and clear,
Serene as thoughts that banish fear…

Ground Truth

In a world of hustle and bustle
A haven of peace and solitude.
Soft curtains dance in the breeze,
As the sun's rays gently caress…

Figure 1. (a) Limitations of existing Multimodal Instruction Following (IF) benchmarks. (b) Overview of the MM-IFEval benchmark,
which significantly surpasses existing benchmarks in terms of constraint diversity, quantity, and instruction complexity. Our benchmark
consists of Compose-Level (C-Level) problems that impose constraints on model outputs (e.g., format requirements, keyword limits) and
Perception-Level (P-Level) problems that require reasoning about specific visual elements in images. (c) Our MM-IFEngine generates a
large-scale, diverse training dataset suitable for both Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO).

sponses and perception-level constraints tied to the input
images, and (2) a comprehensive evaluation pipeline incorporating both rule-based assessment and judge model.
We conduct SFT and DPO experiments and demonstrate
that fine-tuning MLLMs on MM-IFInstruct-23k and MMIFDPO-23k achieves notable gains on various IF benchmarks, such as MM-IFEval (+10.2%), MIA (+7.6%), and
IFEval (+12.3%). We have fully open-sourced the datasets
(both SFT and DPO), evaluation code and training scripts at
https://github.com/SYuan03/MM- IFEngine.

Abstract
The Instruction Following (IF) ability measures how well
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) understand
exactly what users are telling them and whether they are
doing it right. Existing multimodal instruction following
training data is scarce, the benchmarks are simple with
atomic instructions, and the evaluation strategies are imprecise for tasks demanding exact output constraints. To
address this, we present MM-IFEngine, an effective pipeline
to generate high-quality image-instruction pairs. Our MMIFEngine pipeline yields large-scale, diverse, and highquality training data MM-IFInstruct-23k, which is suitable for Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and extended as
MM-IFDPO-23k for Direct Preference Optimization (DPO).
We further introduce MM-IFEval, a challenging and diverse multi-modal instruction-following benchmark that includes (1) both compose-level constraints for output re* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Instruction Following (IF) is a fundamental ability in
Large Language Models (LLMs) [14, 27, 35, 53, 57] and
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [2, 34],
which involves accurately interpreting and executing
user-provided instructions. This ability is crucial for
deploying models in real-world applications where users
expect precise and context-aware responses, such as code
generation [44], visual question answering [17], robots [38],

Corresponding authors.

1099

