This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge Distillation with Refined Logits
Wujie Sun1,2,3 Defang Chen4† Siwei Lyu4 Genlang Chen5 Chun Chen1,3 Can Wang1,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
4
University at Buffalo, State University of New York 5 NingboTech University
sunwujie@zju.edu.cn, {defangch, siweilyu}@buffalo.edu, {cgl, chenc, wcan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

subsequent research has maintained the original concept of
logit distillation, instead focusing on exploring feature distillation [3, 4, 18, 28, 37, 38] in more depth by selecting
and aligning intermediate-level features between teacher
and student models. However, the potential architectural
disparity between teacher and student models poses a significant challenge for feature alignment. This is mainly
due to the fact that different architectures extract different
features [38]. Moreover, the extensive diversity in feature
selection further amplifies the complexity of feature distillation and leads to an increase in training time in distillation [3]. Recently, by decoupling the classical logit distillation loss, Zhao et al. [48] demonstrate that logit distillation
can yield results that are on par with, or even superior to,
those of feature distillation. Consequently, logit distillation
garnered considerable attention in the research community,
thanks to its simplicity, effectiveness, and versatility.
Despite the impressive achievements, most of the recent
logit distillation approaches [15, 21, 34] overlook the impact of teacher prediction correctness on the training process. Specifically, incorrect teacher predictions lead to an
exacerbated divergence between teacher loss and label loss,
which may severely impede the potential enhancements of
the student models. Existing correction-based distillation
approaches [1, 20, 40] consistently modify the teacher logits
(target) using label information. They either exchange the
values between the predicted maximum class and the true
class [40] (the swap operation) or amplify the proportion of
the true class within the predicted probabilities [1, 20] (the
augment operation). We argue that such approaches may
alter the correlations among classes, as exemplified in Figure 1. This disruption can obstruct the transmission of “dark
knowledge” [12] and hinder performance improvements.
In this paper, we introduce Refined Logit Distillation
(RLD) to address these challenges. In classification tasks,
the true class probability dictates prediction correctness,
while class correlations capture high-level semantic relationships that influence classification tendencies. Accord-

Recent research on knowledge distillation has increasingly
focused on logit distillation because of its simplicity, effectiveness, and versatility in model compression. In this paper, we introduce Refined Logit Distillation (RLD) to address the limitations of current logit distillation methods.
Our approach is motivated by the observation that even
high-performing teacher models can make incorrect predictions, creating an exacerbated divergence between the standard distillation loss and the cross-entropy loss, which can
undermine the consistency of the student model’s learning
objectives. Previous attempts to use labels to empirically
correct teacher predictions may undermine the class correlations. In contrast, our RLD employs labeling information
to dynamically refine teacher logits. In this way, our method
can effectively eliminate misleading information from the
teacher while preserving crucial class correlations, thus
enhancing the value and efficiency of distilled knowledge.
Experimental results on CIFAR-100 and ImageNet demonstrate its superiority over existing methods. Our code is
available at https://github.com/zju-SWJ/RLD.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation utilizes pre-trained high-performing
teacher models to facilitate the training of a compact student model [12]. Compared to other model compression
methods, such as pruning and quantization [5], knowledge
distillation exhibits fewer constraints on the model architecture. This flexibility significantly broadens its applicability,
contributing to its increasing prominence in recent research.
Hinton et al. [12] were the first to introduce the concept of logit distillation. It is designed to align the logits
of teacher and student models following the softmax operations with the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. Most
† Corresponding Author

1110

