This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GEOBench-VLM: Benchmarking Vision-Language Models for Geospatial Tasks
Muhammad Sohail Danish∗1 Muhammad Akhtar Munir∗1 Syed Roshaan Ali Shah2 Kartik Kuckreja1
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3 Paolo Fraccaro4 Alexandre Lacoste5 Salman Khan1,6
1 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, 2 University College London, 3 Linköping University, Sweden
4 IBM Research Europe, UK, 5 ServiceNow Research, 6 Australian National University

Event Detection

Scene Understanding

Temporal Understanding

Non-Optical

Q: What type of disaster is responsible for the
visible damage in this image?
A. Fire B. Tsunami C. Earthquake D. Wind
E. Volcano

Q: What type of facility or structure is
depicted in this image?
A. Solar farm B. Shipyard C. Helipad
D. Port
E. Storage tank

Q: Count the total number of damaged buildings
visible in this scene.
A. 74 B. 128 C. 110 D. 56 E. 92

Q: What is the estimated magnitude of the
earthquake that affected this area?
A. 4.9 B. 6.9 C. 3.9 D. 2.9 E. 5.9

Object Classification

Object Localization and Counting

Q: What type of ship is visible in this image?
A. Maestrale-class frigate
B. Independence-class combat ship
C. Ticonderoga-class cruiser
D. Murasame-class destroyer
E. Crane ship

Q: Describe the spatial relationship between object
in green box and object in red box.
A. A small vehicle is to the left of the baseballdiamond
B. A small vehicle is to the right of the large-vehicle
C. A ship is below the harbor
D. A large vehicle is beside the storage-tank
E. A small vehicle is above the bridge.

Image Captioning

Segmentation
Temporal
Understanding

Q: Describe the image in detail.
Cap: The aerial image showcases an industrial area
adjacent to a large harbor. In the top section, a
series of white storage tanks are neatly aligned,
forming a structured pattern. These tanks are
positioned primarily in the top …

<mask>
Q: Identify and segment roads in this image.

Figure 1. GEOBench-VLM comprehensively covers 31 fine-grained tasks categorized into 8 broad categories: scene and object classification, object detection, segmentation, captioning, event detection, non-optical and temporal understanding tasks.

Abstract

GEOBench-VLM, a comprehensive benchmark specifically
designed to evaluate VLMs on geospatial tasks, including
scene understanding, object counting, localization, finegrained categorization, segmentation, and temporal analysis. Our benchmark features over 10,000 manually verified instructions and spanning diverse visual conditions, object types, and scales. We evaluate several state-of-the-art
VLMs to assess performance on geospatial-specific challenges. The results indicate that although existing VLMs
demonstrate potential, they face challenges when dealing with geospatial-specific tasks, highlighting the room
for further improvements. Notably, the best-performing
LLaVa-OneVision achieves only 41.7% accuracy on MCQs,
slightly more than GPT-4o, which is approximately double

While numerous recent benchmarks focus on evaluating
generic Vision-Language Models (VLMs), they do not effectively address the specific challenges of geospatial applications. Generic VLM benchmarks are not designed to
handle the complexities of geospatial data, an essential
component for applications such as environmental monitoring, urban planning, and disaster management. Key challenges in the geospatial domain include temporal change
detection, large-scale object counting, tiny object detection, and understanding relationships between entities in
remote sensing imagery. To bridge this gap, we present
*Equally contributing first authors.

7132

