This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TITAN: Query-Token based Domain Adaptive Adversarial Learning
Tajamul Ashraf
MBZUAI
Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Janibul Bashir
Gaash Lab, NIT Srinagar
Hazratbal, Jammu and Kashmir

tajamul.ashraf@mbzuai.ac.ae

janibbashir@nitsri.net

Abstract
Hard Samples

Recall

We focus on source-free domain adaptive object detection
(SF-DAOD) problem, where the model has to adapt to an unlabelled target domain without using source data. Majority
of existing frameworks for the problem employ a studentteacher (ST) framework where pseudo-labels are generated
via a source-pretrained model for further ﬁne-tuning. We
observe that the performance of a student model often degrades drastically, due to the collapse of teacher model,
primarily caused by high noise in pseudo-labels, resulting
from domain bias, discrepancies, and a signiﬁcant domain
shift across domains. To obtain reliable pseudo-labels, we
propose a Target-based Iterative Query-Token Adversarial
Network (TITAN) which separates the target images into
two subsets that are similar to the source (easy) and those
that are dissimilar (hard). We propose a strategy to estimate variance to partition the target domain. This approach
leverages the insight that higher detection variances correspond to higher recall and greater similarity to the source
domain. Also, we incorporate query-token based adversarial modules into a student-teacher baseline framework
to reduce the domain gaps between two feature representations. Experiments conducted on four natural imaging
datasets and two challenging medical datasets have substantiated the superior performance of TITAN compared
to existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methodologies. We report an mAP improvement of +22.7, +22.2, +21.1, and
+3.7 percent over the current SOTA on C2F, C2B, S2C,
and K2C benchmarks, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/Tajamul21/TITAN

Easy Samples

Variance

Figure 1. The core idea of our framework (TITAN) is that higher
detection variances signal high recall and similarity to the source
domain, enabling us to divide the target domain into easy and hard
subsets.

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA). It has been
widely observed that, despite their effectiveness in familiar
visual contexts, deep object detection models often struggle
to generalize to new visual domains. Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) has emerged as a widely adopted approach
for addressing domain shifts [11, 25, 37, 38, 65, 79, 84], primarily by aligning the feature representations between the
source and target domains [10, 36, 42, 43, 81, 87, 113]. Despite its effectiveness, a major drawback of this method is its
reliance on access to source-domain data during the adaptation process, which can pose signiﬁcant practical limitations
[59, 63, 96]. To overcome this, our work concentrates on
the more practical and challenging setting of Source-Free
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (SF-DAOD).
Source-Free Domain Adaptive Object Detection (SFDOAD). For image classiﬁcation tasks, SF-DAOD has received signiﬁcant attention in recent years [21, 40, 45, 95,
102, 103, 111]. However, there are relatively fewer works
speciﬁcally addressing SF-DAOD [13, 40, 62, 71, 88]. Given
the complexities of cluttered background, viewpoint variations, and many negative samples in an object detection

1. Introduction
Object Detection. Object detection is a well-studied problem in computer vision [6, 22, 101, 109, 118]. The advancement of deep learning methods in object detection has been
signiﬁcantly enabled by large-scale datasets with detailed
annotations [15, 23, 27, 60, 105], which provide a solid
foundation for supervised model training.

250

