This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Allowing Oscillation Quantization: Overcoming Solution Space Limitation in
Low Bit-Width Quantization
Weiying Xie1 Zihan Meng1 * Jitao Ma1 Wenjin Guo1 Haowei Li1
Haonan Qin1 Leyuan Fang2 Yunsong Li1
1
Xidian University 2 Hunan University

Abstract
Quantization-aware Training (QAT) enables deep models
to adapt to precision loss by simulating quantization. However, existing methods often converge to sub-optimal solutions due to inadequate exploration of quantization solution
space. To address this, we propose a novel QAT method,
Allowing Oscillation Quantization (AOQ), which expands
the reachable solution space through weight oscillation.
Notably, unlike previous methods that suppress oscillation
throughout training, AOQ actively encourages it in the earlier stages to explore diverse quantization configurations,
and suppresses it later to ensure convergence. In addition,
by decoupling quantization thresholds and levels, AOQ promotes meaningful oscillation and improves the stability of
learnable quantization parameters. Extensive experiments
across various models, including ResNet, MobileNet, DeiT
and Swin Transformer, demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method. Specifically, with 2-bit quantization, AOQ achieves
a 0.4% ∼ 2.2% accuracy improvement on ImageNet compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our implementation is
available at https://github.com/muzenc/AOQ.

1. Introduction
Model quantization [31, 46, 49] has attracted growing attention for enabling efficient model inference while substantially reducing hardware resource consumption. By reducing the bit-width of model parameters, quantization effectively reduces memory footprint and computational complexity, thereby enhancing inference speed and energy efficiency. Thus, quantization has been widely applied in tasks
such as image classification [27, 32, 39], object detection
[3, 42, 48] and natural language processing [1, 10, 11].
Despite its advantages, quantization shrinks the dynamic
range of parameters, often resulting in information loss and
degraded performance. Quantization-aware training (QAT)
significantly mitigates the impact of quantization on perfor* Corresponding author.

Our method

Previous method

Discrete Solution

Solution Space

Contour

Expanded Solution Space
2D quantization problem:
subject to

is quantization function

Figure 1. Illustration of solving a 2D quantization problem using previous methods vs. proposed method. The two plots are
contour maps of the function f (w1 , w2 ), where darker regions indicate lower function value. The yellow and orange curves show
the solution trajectories of the previous method and our method,
respectively. In contrast, AOQ explores a broader solution space
and finds a better solution.

mance compared to post-training quantization [16, 24, 35],
but a noticeable performance gap remains under extremely
low-bit quantization scenarios, such as 2-bit quantization.
Mainstream QAT techniques [12, 32, 46] simulate quantization effects by inserting fake quantization nodes during
training, allowing the model to adapt to low-precision constraints. However, these nodes are non-differentiable, leading prior works [13, 23, 45] to employ biased gradient approximations. Recent studies [8, 30, 36] show that such
biased gradients can result in weight oscillation, hindering
the network’s convergence to a better local minimum. Nevertheless, an overlooked insight is that QAT relies on weight
oscillation to explore more quantized solutions. In existing
methods [12, 13, 18, 32], the frequency of weight oscillation is relatively low, and directly suppressing oscillations
may limit the model’s ability to escape suboptimal quanti-

24615

