This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NormalLoc: Visual Localization on Textureless 3D Models
using Surface Normals
Jiro Abe

Gaku Nakano

Kazumine Ogura

Visual Intelligence Research Laboratories, NEC Corporation, Kanagawa, Japan
{j-abe, g-nakano, k-oguraay}@nec.com

Abstract
We propose NormalLoc, a novel visual localization method
for estimating the 6-DoF pose of a camera using textureless 3D models. Existing methods often rely on color or
texture information, limiting their applicability in scenarios where such information is unavailable. NormalLoc addresses this limitation by using rendered normal images
generated from surface normals of 3D models to establish a
training scheme for both global descriptor computation and
matching. This approach enables robust visual localization
even when geometric details are limited. Experimental results demonstrate that NormalLoc achieves state-of-the-art
performance for visual localization on textureless 3D models, especially in scenarios with limited geometric detail.

Figure 1. Given a (a) textureless 3D model, NormalLoc estimates
the 6-DoF pose of a (b) real image by generating (c) rendered
normals as database images.

the 3D model, allowing for camera pose estimation using
algorithms such as PnP solvers [9, 32].
Recent studies [10, 23, 34] show an increasing focus on
visual localization techniques that employ textureless 3D
models, as they are often easier and more cost-effective
to acquire. For instance, pre-existing CAD designs eliminate the need for field data collection for database creation, and colorless point clouds can be obtained more
affordably from standalone LiDAR systems compared to
camera-equipped ones. According to the CADLoc benchmark, MeshLoc [33], a method that applies global descriptor computation and matching to synthetic images rendered
from a textureless 3D model, can achieve accurate 6-DoF
pose estimation if the 3D model contains high geometric
detail. However, the use of 3D models with limited geometric detail, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), remains a challenging
task. A potential explanation for the performance degradation of MeshLoc on such low-geometric-detail models is
that it directly utilizes pre-trained networks for both global
descriptor computation and matching, and these networks
are trained on real image domains. These networks may
perform poorly when applied to synthetic images rendered
from 3D models with low geometric detail because rendered
images do not resemble real images.

1. Introduction
Visual localization, the task of estimating the 6-Degrees of
Freedom (DoF) pose of a camera from a given query image,
is a fundamental technique in various fields, including augmented reality (AR) [20, 30], autonomous driving [12], and
drone navigation [26]. For accurate pose estimation, many
approaches tipically rely on structure-based visual localization pipelines. These pipelines rely on a 3D model of the
target scene acquired prior to localization. This 3D model
can be a Structure-from-Motion (SfM) point cloud [1, 39]
reconstructed from database images (i.e., images of the target scene), or a laser-scanned colored point cloud [46]. In
the latter case, the point-colors are often provided by images captured by cameras accompanying the laser scanner, and these images can also serve as database images
for visual localization. These pipelines generally involve
two main stages: (1) global descriptor computation to retrieve database images visually similar to the query, and (2)
matching to establish 2D-2D correspondences between the
query and retrieved images. These 2D-2D correspondences
then enable the establishment of 2D-3D correspondences to

25421

