This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PoseSyn: Synthesizing Diverse 3D Pose Data from In-the-Wild 2D Data
ChangHee Yang∗1
Hyeonseop Song∗1
Seokhun Choi∗1
Seungwoo Lee1
Jaechul Kim1
Hoseok Do†1
AI Lab, CTO Division, LG Electronics1
{changhee.yang, hyeonseop.song, seokhun.choi, seungwoo5.lee, jaechul1220.kim, hoseok.do}
@lge.com

Abstract
Despite considerable efforts to enhance the generalization
of 3D pose estimators without costly 3D annotations, existing data augmentation methods struggle in real-world scenarios with diverse human appearances and complex poses.
We propose PoseSyn, a novel data synthesis framework that
transforms abundant in-the-wild 2D pose dataset into diverse 3D pose–image pairs. PoseSyn comprises two key
components: Error Extraction Module (EEM), which identifies challenging poses from the 2D pose datasets, and Motion Synthesis Module (MSM), which synthesizes motion sequences around the challenging poses. Then, by generating
realistic 3D training data via a human animation model–
aligned with challenging poses and appearances–PoseSyn
boosts the accuracy of various 3D pose estimators by up to
14% across real-world benchmarks including various backgrounds and occlusions, challenging poses, and multi-view
scenarios. Extensive experiments further confirm that PoseSyn is a scalable and effective approach for improving generalization without relying on expensive 3D annotations, regardless of the pose estimator’s model size or design.

Challenging Image

Available

Not Available

GT 2D Pose

GT 3D Pose

3D Pose
Space

3
2

4

Synthesized
Motion Sequence

Pseudo Label Pose

Real Training
Dataset
Distribution

1

Ground Truth Pose

Pseudo-Label Pose of Corner Case

Synthesized Motion

Synthesized Data from Corner Case

1

2

3

4

Synthesized Image-3D Pose Pair Training Dataset

Figure 1. PoseSyn’s Approach for Corner-Case Pose Generation. PoseSyn addresses challenging pose cases without direct
costly 3D annotations. Starting from a pseudo-labeled pose (blue
circle) that is inaccurate compared to the unknown true 3D pose
(red star), PoseSyn generates diverse motion sequences (green
dotted lines) around the pseudo-labeled pose to produce new image–pose pairs (numbered 1–4). PoseSyn effectively bridges the
gap between the inaccurate pseudo-label and the desired challenging pose, expanding the training distribution with hard examples.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose [2, 5, 8, 12, 15, 27, 29, 32,
33, 50, 51, 60, 60] from RGB images has been extensively researched due to its applications like action recognition, virtual reality, and sports analytics. Traditional methods rely heavily on large-scale datasets with accurate 3D
pose ground truth (GT), but acquiring such 3D annotations
often demands multi-camera systems [4, 20, 38] or motion
capture setups [28, 54], which are costly and limited to controlled indoor spaces [26]. Consequently, existing 3D pose
datasets are mainly biased toward laboratory settings, which
hinder them from covering in-the-wild challenging poses

and reflecting real-world visual elements such as appearance, background, and lighting. The reliance on indoor data
also introduces a domain gap, limiting model robustness in
outdoor or uncontrolled environments, thus hindering generalization to real-world scenarios.
To address this gap, prior work has explored data augmentation techniques. Transformation-based methods [13,
16], often powered by Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [17], generate new skeletal poses via geometric

* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

5611

