This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffSim: Taming Diffusion Models for Evaluating Visual Similarity
Yiren Song* Xiaokang Liu* Mike Zheng Shou†
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
A

IP Bench: Instance Similarity
Reference Image B
A

Sref Bench: Style Similarity
Reference Image
B

NIGHTS Dataset: Human-align Similarity
Reference Image
B
A

Accuracy of various metrics across 7 benchmarks

Di Sim

LPIPS

DINO

CLIP

DreamBench++
100
88.75

InstantStyle

Night

77.5
66.25
55

Sref

CUTE

TID2013
LPIPS

CLIP

DINO v2

DiffSim

IP

GT

Figure 1. We propose DiffSim, a method that utilizes pre-trained diffusion models to extract image features for evaluating visual similarity.
Our method leads in human judgment consistency, style similarity, and instance-level consistency.

Abstract
Diffusion models have fundamentally transformed the field
of generative models, making the assessment of similarff between customized model outputs and reference inity
puts critically important. However, traditional perceptual
similarity metrics operate primarily at the pixel and patch
levels, comparing low-level colors and textures but failing to capture mid-level similarities and differences in image layout, object pose, and semantic content. Contrastive
learning-based CLIP and self-supervised learning-based
DINO are often used to measure semantic similarity, but
they highly compress image features, inadequately assessing appearance details. This paper is the first to discover
that pretrained diffusion models can be utilized for measuring visual similarity and introduces the DiffSim method,
addressing the limitations of traditional metrics in capturing perceptual consistency in custom generation tasks. By
aligning features in the attention layers of the denoising UNet, DiffSim evaluates both appearance and style similarity,
showing superior alignment with human visual preferences.
Additionally, we introduce the Sref and IP benchmarks to
evaluate visual similarity at the level of style and instance,
respectively. Comprehensive evaluations across multiple

benchmarks demonstrate that DiffSim achieves state-of-theart performance, providing a robust tool for measuring visual coherence in generative models. Code is released at
https://github.com/showlab/DiffSim.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Assessing the consistency of appearance and style between customized generation results and reference images
is an important issue. Some studies [50, 85] resort to timeconsuming user studies as a supplementary evaluation, despite questions about their fairness and objectivity. Existing evaluation metrics such as CLIP-Image score [53] and
DINO score [6], while commonly used, often fail to reflect
subtle differences due to their reliance on high-dimensional
semantic features for cosine similarity computation. Research [15] indicates that these metrics sometimes do not
align with human subjective evaluations and are insufficient
for comprehensively measuring consistency in appearance
and style details in generation tasks. Some studies propose
human-aligned similarity assessment methods [15], which
collect data on human choices of similarity triplets and train
models, but their generalization ability in out-of-domain
scenarios is considered limited. To overcome these challenges, there is an urgent need for more effective image
similarity evaluation metrics in the image generation field.
The motivation of this paper is to assess visual simi-

16904

