This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperdimensional Uncertainty Quantification for Multimodal Uncertainty Fusion
in Autonomous Vehicles Perception
Luke Chen* Junyao Wang Trier Mortlock Pramod Khargonekar Mohammad Abdullah Al Faruque
University of California, Irvine
{panwangc, junyaow4, tmortloc, pramod.khargonekar, alfaruqu}@uci.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is crucial for ensuring the
reliability of machine learning models deployed in realworld autonomous systems. However, existing approaches
typically quantify task-level output prediction uncertainty
without considering epistemic uncertainty at the multimodal
feature fusion level, leading to sub-optimal outcomes. Additionally, popular uncertainty quantification methods, e.g.,
Bayesian approximations, remain challenging to deploy in
practice due to high computational costs in training and inference. In this paper, we propose HyperDUM, a novel deterministic uncertainty method (DUM) that efficiently quantifies
feature-level epistemic uncertainty by leveraging hyperdimensional computing. Our method captures the channel
and spatial uncertainties through channel and patch -wise
projection and bundling techniques respectively. Multimodal
sensor features are then adaptively weighted to mitigate
uncertainty propagation and improve feature fusion. Our
evaluations show that HyperDUM on average outperforms
the state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms by up to 2.01%/1.27%
in 3D Object Detection and up to 1.29% improvement over
baselines in semantic segmentation tasks under various types
of uncertainties. Notably, HyperDUM requires 2.36× less
Floating Point Operations and up to 38.30× less parameters than SOTA methods, providing an efficient solution for
real-world autonomous systems.

1. Introduction
Effectively quantifying and addressing uncertainty plays
a critical role in ensuring the reliability of ML models in
real-world applications, especially where the decisions are
consequential, e.g., autonomous driving. Models failing to
address uncertainty can produce overconfident outputs, leading to compromised performance [9, 16, 41, 53]. In light of
autonomous systems, uncertainties can arise from adverse
* Corresponding Author. Distribution A: Approved for public release;
distribution unlimited. OPSEC # 9537

weather conditions, sensor failures or noises, environment
dynamics (movements of other actors, road conditions, vehicle dynamics), and various corner cases [4, 12, 35, 36]. Modern autonomous systems leverage multimodal sensor fusion
to broaden the information scope and learn comprehensive
representations of the surrounding environment [8, 31, 56].
However, commonly employed sensors such as cameras, lidar, and radar, exhibit varying degrees of robustness and
vulnerability across different driving scenarios [51, 54]. For
instance, cameras are crucial in delivering rich perceptual
information while they are particularly vulnerable to lighting
variations and occlusions [60]. Lidar and radar are more robust to visual perturbations but can be affected by multi-path
interference and occlusion [2, 28]. Therefore, it is important to consider the uncertainty of each modality before the
fusion of multimodal features to achieve optimal results [15].
Popular Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) methods include deep ensembles, Bayesian neural networks, and
Bayesian approximation methods such as Monte Carlo
dropout [11, 23, 24]. However, these methods often introduce large training and/or inference overheads compounded
by the growing complexity of modern Deep Neural Networks (DNN), ultimately challenging their practicality under
real-time computing constraints [7, 22]. Other lines of works
such as Conformal Prediction (CP) and Posterior Networks
(PostNets) based on evidential deep learning either cannot
quantify feature-level epistemic uncertainty or require vast
amounts of quality data to accurately estimate the posteriors
[1, 5]. Deterministic Uncertainty Methods (DUMs), aiming
to efficiently quantify uncertainty using only a single forward
pass [10, 34, 42], have become an emerging trend. DUMs
rely on statistical/morphological characteristics of latent features to quantify epistemic uncertainty. For instance, [10]
employed Prototype Learning (PL) techniques to capture the
“knowledge” of DNNs by constructing a “memory bank” of
prototypes to predict uncertainty.
To address these problems, we propose HyperDUM, a
novel deterministic uncertainty method for efficient quantification of feature-level epistemic uncertainty. In contrast to
existing methods, HyperDUM projects latent features into

22306

