This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M3amba: Memory Mamba is All You Need for Whole Slide Image Classification
Tingting Zheng1,2

Kui Jiang1 Yi Xiao3 Sicheng Zhao4 Hongxun Yao1,2*
1
Harbin Institute of Technology
2
China Mobile 5G Application Innovation Joint Research, Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Wuhan University 4 Tsinghua University
{23b903051@stu.hit, jiangkui@hit, xiao yi@whu, schzhao@tsinghua, h.yao@hit}.edu.cn

Figure 1. Comparison of different methods. (a)-(c) Transformers, bidirectional Mamba (BiMamba), and grouping BiMamba suffer from
quadratic complexity, overlooking local or intra-group interactions, and forgetting information, respectively. (d) We propose a memory
bank with grouping BiMamba to summarize and incorporate past group features into the current group for better bag prediction.

Abstract
Multi-instance learning (MIL) has demonstrated impressive
performance in whole slide image (WSI) analysis. However,
existing approaches struggle with undesirable results and
unbearable computational overhead due to the quadratic
complexity of Transformers. Recently, Mamba has offered a feasible solution for modeling long-range dependencies with linear complexity. However, vanilla Mamba
inherently suffers from contextual forgetting issues, making it ill-suited for capturing global dependencies across
instances in large-scale WSIs. To address this, we propose a memory-driven Mamba network, dubbed M3amba,
to fully explore the global latent relations among instances.
Specifically, M3amba retains and iteratively updates historical information with a dynamic memory bank (DMB), thus
overcoming the catastrophic forgetting defects of Mamba
for long-term context representation. For better feature
representation, M3amba involves an intra-group bidirectional Mamba (BiMamba) block to refine local interactions
within groups. Meanwhile, we additionally perform crossattention fusion to incorporate relevant historical informa-

tion across groups, facilitating richer inter-group connections. The joint learning of inter- and intra-group representations with memory merits enables M3amba with a
more powerful capability for achieving accurate and comprehensive WSI representation. Extensive experiments on
four datasets demonstrate that M3amba outperforms the
state-of-the-art by 6.2% and 7.0% in accuracy on the TCGA
BRCA and TCGA Lung datasets while maintaining low
computational costs.

1. Introduction

15601

Histopathology slides with rich biological structures are
crucial for accurate cancer diagnosis [2]. The advancement of digital technology opens new avenues for traditional slide pathology by scanning slides into whole slide
images (WSIs). With the remarkable development of deep
learning, pathologists can now recruit deep models to explore texture information from WSIs, outperforming traditional hand-crafted feature-based approaches [3, 22, 28, 51].
However, due to the gigapixel resolution and complex mi-

