This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynaMoDe-NeRF: Motion-aware Deblurring Neural Radiance Field
for Dynamic Scenes
Ashish Kumar
Rajagopalan A. N.
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
ee20d006@smail.iitm.ac.in, raju@iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have made significant
advances in rendering novel photorealistic views for both
static and dynamic scenes. However, most prior works assume ideal conditions of artifact-free visual inputs i.e., images and videos. In real scenarios, artifacts such as object motion blur, camera motion blur, or lens defocus blur
are ubiquitous. Some recent studies have explored novel
view synthesis using blurred input frames by examining
either camera motion blur, defocus blur, or both. However, these studies are limited to static scenes. In this
work, we enable NeRFs to deal with object motion blur
whose local nature stems from the interplay between object velocity and camera exposure time. Often, the object motion is unknown and time varying, and this adds to
the complexity of scene reconstruction. Sports videos are
a prime example of how rapid object motion can significantly degrade video quality for static cameras by introducing motion blur. We present an approach for realizing
motion blur-free novel views of dynamic scenes from input
videos with object motion blur captured from static cameras spanning multiple poses. We propose a NeRF-based
analytical framework that elegantly correlates object threedimensional (3D) motion across views as well as time to the
observed blurry videos. Our proposed method DynaMoDeNeRF (Dynamic Motion-aware Deblurring NeRF) is selfsupervised and reconstructs the dynamic 3D scene, renders sharp novel views by blind deblurring, and recovers
the underlying 3D motion and blur parameters. We provide
comprehensive experimental analysis on synthetic and real
data to validate our approach. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to address localized object motion blur in the NeRF domain. The dataset is available at:
https://github.com/akumar005/DynaMoDe-NeRF

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [25] is capable of synthesizing novel views of static scenes [25, 35, 45, 47, 51, 56] and
dynamic scenes [19, 20, 30, 33, 40, 46, 57] with high fidelity. While NeRF excels in synthesizing static scenes, its

application to dynamic scenes, where objects are in motion,
poses unique challenges. Unlike static scenes, which maintain sufficient overlap and visual redundancy across frames,
dynamic scenes are inherently sparse and this warrants integration of object motion or features across temporal dimension to faithfully learn a dynamic scene representation.
To share information across time while respecting temporal
coherence, works such as [31, 33, 46, 57] learn a deformation field. This maps the scene to a canonical space, which
is then used to estimate radiance and density. Though this
allows the maintenance of temporal coherence, these approaches are effective for subjects with relatively small motion. Neural Scene Flow Fields, NSFF [19] learn the scene
flow in 3D to enforce consistency across time instances.
The 3D scene flow is guided by the 2D motion field (optical flow) which is estimated from an off-the-shelf state-ofthe-art network. These methods additionally leverage depth
maps as a supervision signal to enforce geometric consistency. [20] exploits image-based rendering (IBR) to learn
dynamic scenes by relying on motion masks, optical flow,
and depth as auxiliary signals. IBR exploits features from
nearby frames to maintain spatio-temporal consistency and
has been shown to work for long videos. However, when
adjacent frames are corrupted (e.g., due to blur), the extracted features become noisy and unreliable, thus compromising the integrity of the features and hindering accurate
reconstruction. Explicit neural representation-based methods [2, 8] use a grid-based or voxel-based approach to share
features along the spatial and temporal dimensions. These
methods can generate photorealistic novel views. But, they
assume ideal, artifact-free visual inputs. In practice, image
artifacts such as camera motion blur, object motion blur, or
defocus blur are almost unavoidable. An artifact-corrupted
input can severely affect rendering quality and poses significant challenges for applications that rely on high-quality
dynamic scene representations.
Only recently have researchers begun addressing the challenge of novel view synthesis from artifact-corrupted views,
with particular attention to blurring artifacts [15, 16, 24, 32,
49]. Methods, such as [4, 38, 59] exploit Gaussian splat-

21728

