This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-Dyna: Expressive Dynamic Human Image Animation
Di Chang1,2
Hongyi Xu2∗ You Xie2∗ Yipeng Gao1∗ Zhengfei Kuang3∗ Shengqu Cai3∗
Chenxu Zhang2∗ Guoxian Song2 Chao Wang2
Yichun Shi2
Zeyuan Chen2,5
4
2
3
Shijie Zhou
Linjie Luo
Gordon Wetzstein
Mohammad Soleymani1
1
4

2

University of Southern California

ByteDance

University of California Los Angeles

5

3

Stanford University

University of California San Diego

Motion Transfer with Dynamic Background

Static Human with Dynamic Background

Human Motion with Dynamic Background

Figure 1. Sampled animations generated by our X-Dyna, including zero-shot motion transfer, and dynamic human image animation with
moving or static humans.

Abstract

ural scene dynamics from a diverse blend of human and
scene videos. Comprehensive qualitative and quantitative
evaluations demonstrate that X-Dyna outperforms state-ofthe-art methods, creating highly lifelike and expressive animations. The code is available at https://github.
com/bytedance/X-Dyna

We introduce X-Dyna, a novel zero-shot, diffusion-based
pipeline for animating a single human image using facial expressions and body movements derived from a driving video, that generates realistic, context-aware dynamics for both the subject and the surrounding environment.
Building on prior approaches centered on human pose control, X-Dyna addresses key shortcomings causing the loss
of dynamic details, enhancing the lifelike qualities of human video animations. At the core of our approach is
the Dynamics-Adapter, a lightweight module that effectively integrates reference appearance context into the spatial attentions of the diffusion backbone while preserving
the capacity of motion modules in synthesizing ﬂuid and
intricate dynamic details. Beyond body pose control, we
connect a local control module with our model to capture
identity-disentangled facial expressions, facilitating accurate expression transfer for enhanced realism in animated
scenes. Together, these components form a uniﬁed framework capable of learning physical human motion and nat-

1. Introduction
We investigate the task of human video generation, focusing on animating a single human image using body movements and facial expressions derived from a driving video
of a different person. This area has garnered growing interest owing to its numerous applications in digital arts,
social media and virtual humans. Building on prior research [4, 16, 37, 40, 48, 52, 53], our goal is to advance
the ﬁeld of zero-shot human image animation by not only
enhancing the accuracy of pose and expression transfer but
also by incorporating vivid human dynamics, e.g., blowing
hair and ﬂowing garments, and natural environmental effects, e.g., waterfalls, rain, and ﬁreworks.
Recent approaches have tackled human image animation
as a controlled image-to-video diffusion task. These meth-

* Equally contributed as second authors

5499

