This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianIP: Identity-Preserving Realistic 3D Human Generation via
Human-Centric Diffusion Prior
Zichen Tang1
1

Yuan Yao

Miaomiao Cui

Liefeng Bo

Hongyu Yang1,2 *

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{zctang, hongyuyang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Virtual Try-On [10, 11, 26, 71] and immersive telepresence [27, 28, 50]. It also plays an pivotal role in emerging
technologies like AR and VR. Text-guided 3D human generation is a task which involves synthesizing a character’s
geometry and appearance from text prompts. Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) proposed in DreamFusion [46] paves
the way for generating 3D objects by distilling from 2D diffusion priors [13, 49], simplifying the process of creating
3D objects. It also inspires researchers to design various
pipelines tailored for creating 3D humans.
A common paradigm is to learn a SDS-guided conditional Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [43] by integrating parametric human body models like SMPL [36] or
imGHUM [1] into the framework to model body-related geometry and appearance [2, 17, 24, 69]. However, NeRFbased methods suffer from slow rendering speed and fall
short in delivering high-resolution results.
Recently, as 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [22] unlocks
new possibilities for high-fidelity 3D reconstruction with
real-time rendering, a few works [34, 68] introduce 3DGS
to achieve efficient creation of 3D avatars. Despite achieving promising results, all the NeRF-based or 3DGS-based
methods rely solely on text prompts, limiting their diversity
in generation and real-world applicability, such as creating
identity-preserving 3D avatars from user portraits.
In contrast to these 3D-based methods, recent 2D generative diffusion models [13, 49] have exhibited pronounced
superiority in terms of visual fidelity. Built upon these
powerful generative base models, several works concentrate on human-centric generation tasks, e.g. Virtual Try-On
(VTON) [23, 55, 73] and identity-driven photo personalization [29, 60, 65]. Although [3, 58, 62] attempt to edit 3D
human bodies with the aid of 2D human-centric diffusion
models, the potential of leveraging these models to generate
detailed identity-preserving 3D humans from multi-modal
user inputs, remains largely untapped.
In this work, we propose a novel two-stage framework GaussianIP, which is capable of generating realistic

Text-guided 3D human generation has advanced with the
development of efficient 3D representations and 2D-lifting
methods like Score Distillation Sampling (SDS). However,
current methods suffer from prolonged training times and
often produce results that lack fine facial and garment details. In this paper, we propose GaussianIP, an effective
two-stage framework for generating identity-preserving realistic 3D humans from text and image prompts. Our core
insight is to leverage human-centric knowledge to facilitate the generation process. In stage 1, we propose a novel
Adaptive Human Distillation Sampling (AHDS) method to
rapidly generate a 3D human that maintains high identity
consistency with the image prompt and achieves a realistic appearance. Compared to traditional SDS methods,
AHDS better aligns with the human-centric generation process, enhancing visual quality with notably fewer training
steps. To further improve the visual quality of the face and
clothes regions, we design a View-Consistent Refinement
(VCR) strategy in stage 2. Specifically, it produces detailenhanced results of the multi-view images from stage 1 iteratively, ensuring the 3D texture consistency across views via
mutual attention and distance-guided attention fusion. Then
a polished version of the 3D human can be achieved by directly perform reconstruction with the refined images. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GaussianIP outperforms existing methods in both visual quality and training
efficiency, particularly in generating identity-preserving results. Our code is available at: https://github.com/silencetang/GaussianIP.

1. Introduction
Creating high-quality 3D human avatars based on user inputs is essential for a variety of applications, including
* Corresponding author.

348

