This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cropper: Vision-Language Model for
Image Cropping through In-Context Learning
Seung Hyun Lee2,4∗† , Jijun Jiang3∗ , Yiran Xu1,5∗† , Zhuofang Li3∗ , Junjie Ke1 , Yinxiao Li1 , Junfeng He2 ,
Steven Hickson1 , Katie Datsenko1 , Sangpil Kim6 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1 , Irfan Essa1 , Feng Yang1‡
Google DeepMind1 , Google Research2 , Google3 ,
University of Michigan4 , University of Maryland5 , Korea University6

Aspect Ratio

Input
image

Mask

Subject-aware
Cropping

16:9

Free-form Cropping

Aspect Ratio-aware
Cropping

Iterative Refinement

Vision-Language Model

Top-S Retrieved Images

Output Crop
Worst Prompt

Best Prompt

Figure 1. Cropper is a unified framework for various cropping tasks, including free-form cropping, subject-aware cropping, and aspect
ratio-aware cropping built on top of a pretrained large vision-language model through in-context learning. Given the input image, top-S
semantically similar images are retrieved as in-context learning prompt, and fed to pretrained vision-language model to generate crops.
The crop candidates are iteratively refined to yield the visually pleasing output crop. All images are from Unsplash [29].

1. Introduction

Abstract
The goal of image cropping is to identify visually appealing crops in an image. Conventional methods are trained on
specific datasets and fail to adapt to new requirements. Recent breakthroughs in large vision-language models (VLMs)
enable visual in-context learning without explicit training.
However, downstream tasks with VLMs remain under explored. In this paper, we propose an effective approach to
leverage VLMs for image cropping. First, we propose an
efficient prompt retrieval mechanism for image cropping to
automate the selection of in-context examples. Second, we
introduce an iterative refinement strategy to iteratively enhance the predicted crops. The proposed framework, we refer to as Cropper, is applicable to a wide range of cropping
tasks, including free-form cropping, subject-aware cropping, and aspect ratio-aware cropping. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Cropper significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods across several benchmarks.

∗ Equal contribution. † Work done while working at Google. ‡ Project lead.

Existing cropping methods [3–7, 16, 18, 23, 27, 28, 32, 33,
40, 41, 44] train neural networks on images and groundtruth crops to localize aesthetic crops. However, these approaches often depend on specially designed networks or
features, which struggle to generalize effectively when confronted with new requirements or diverse datasets. Additionally, for specialized cropping tasks such as subjectaware cropping with subject masks or aspect ratio-aware
cropping with target aspect ratio, unique networks must be
developed and retrained, further complicating the process.
This limitation underscores the need for more generalizable
and versatile techniques in the field of image cropping.
Recent advancements in large vision-language models
(VLM), such as GPT-4o [1] and Gemini [9], have unlocked
new potential for various vision tasks. Unfortunately, in
a lot of cases, users are not able to fine-tune the VLM
for downstream tasks. Effectively adapting large blackbox models for downstream tasks is very difficult. Luckily,
in-context learning (ICL) ability is observed in large models [24]. Given a test instance and a few in-context example

30010

