This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging SD Map to Augment HD Map-based Trajectory Prediction
Zhiwei Dong Ran Ding Wei Li* Peng Zhang Guobin Tang Jia Guo
Riemann Lab, 2012 Laboratories, Huawei Technologies.
kivee@foxmail.com

liwei.levi@huawei.com

Abstract
Trajectory prediction models in real-world autonomous
driving often rely on online High-Definition (HD) maps to
understand road environments, but online HD maps suffer
from perception errors and feature redundancy, which hinder the performance of these models. To address this issue, we introduce a framework, termed SD map-Augmented
Trajectory Prediction (SATP), which leverages StandardDefinition (SD) maps to enhance HD map-based trajectory
prediction models. First, we propose an SD-HD fusion approach to leverage SD maps across the diverse range of HD
map-based trajectory prediction models. Second, we design a novel AlignNet to align the SD map with the HD
map, further improving the effectiveness of SD maps. Experiments on real-world autonomous driving benchmarks
demonstrate that SATP not only improves the performance
of HD map-based trajectory prediction up to 25% in realworld scenarios using online HD maps but also brings benefits in ideal scenarios with ground-truth HD maps.

Perception errors Correct road skeleton

Feature redundancy

Compact feature

Online HD map

Online HD map

SD map

SD map

Road Boundary Lane Divider Pedestrian Crossing

Original SD Map

Aligned SD Map

Figure 1. Left: Due to limitations in sensors or algorithms, online HD maps inevitably contain errors, while SD maps accurately
capture the road skeleton. Right: Online HD maps require numerous elements to precisely describe road details, lacking a compact description, which is a characteristic of SD maps. These two
problems of online HD maps hinder the performance of trajectory
prediction models, while SD maps could be used to address them.

Figure 1), both of which hinder the performance of trajectory prediction models in deployed autonomous driving systems. The method proposed in [8] tries to address the problem of perception errors by producing and leveraging online
HD map uncertainty, but it ignores the inherent feature redundancy of HD maps. We notice that simple SD maps
used for road-level navigation can help address these
two problems of complex online HD maps in trajectory
prediction (as shown in Figure 1): (1) Perception errors:
Although SD maps only provide road-level skeletons, they
are generated manually offline, so their accuracy is reliable.
When errors arise in online HD maps due to sensor limitations, occlusions, or other inherent factors, SD maps can
offer corrective support. (2) Feature redundancy: The road
skeletons provided by SD maps summarize the key features
of detailed lane information in HD maps, which could provide more concise environmental clues for trajectory prediction models and improve their learning efficiency. Additionally, SD maps have global coverage and are freely available, making them an ideal complement to HD maps.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is a fundamental and critical task in
autonomous driving, and it aims to predict the future trajectories of traffic participants (hereafter referred to as agents).
To make more precise predictions, it is essential to accurately understand the road environment.
HD maps serve as a crucial input for the accurate understanding of the road environment in recent trajectory prediction research [2, 5, 7, 14, 20, 27, 28, 38, 39], albeit with
high associated construction and maintenance costs. Therefore, most deployed autonomous systems [11, 12, 26] use
online HD maps instead. Online HD maps are constructed
in real-time from inexpensive onboard sensor data [4, 15–
17, 32, 34, 40], such as RGB images, making low-cost HD
maps available at any location on the earth. However, online HD maps introduce perception errors and also retain
the inherent feature redundancy of HD maps (as shown in
* Corresponding author

17219

