This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAT4D: Create Anything in 4D with Multi-View Video Diffusion Models
Rundi Wu1,2 Ruiqi Gao1 Ben Poole1 Alex Trevithick1,3
Changxi Zheng2 Jonathan T. Barron1 Aleksander Hołyński1
1

Google DeepMind

2

Columbia University

3

UC San Diego
“A cat kneading dough”

Sparse dynamic capture to 4D

Real video to 4D

Text-to-video-to-4D

Figure 1. CAT4D enables 4D scene creation from any number of real or generated images or video frames.

Abstract

could enable applications in robotics, film-making, video
games, and augmented reality.

We present CAT4D, a method for creating 4D (dynamic
3D) scenes from monocular video. CAT4D leverages a
multi-view video diffusion model trained on a diverse combination of datasets to enable novel view synthesis at any
specified camera poses and timestamps. Combined with a
novel sampling approach, this model can transform a single monocular video into a multi-view video, enabling robust 4D reconstruction via optimization of a deformable
3D Gaussian representation. We demonstrate competitive
performance on novel view synthesis and dynamic scene
reconstruction benchmarks, and highlight the creative capabilities for 4D scene generation from real or generated
videos. See our project page for results and interactive demos: cat-4d.github.io.

Advances in 3D reconstruction have enabled the creation
of accurate 3D and 4D models when certain careful capture
requirements are followed [8, 11, 14, 28, 35, 43, 46, 53, 72].
For static 3D reconstruction, this requires having a large set
of multi-view consistent images of the 3D scene. This can
be achieved through careful capture and restricted settings,
which is challenging to accomplish in most environments,
but often feasible with enough time and practice. Reconstructing 4D content, however, requires synchronized multiview video, which is nearly impossible for a typical user.

1. Introduction
While the world is a dynamic 3D environment, the images
and videos we capture represent only a partial snapshot of
this reality. Transforming this limited information into an
accurate model of the dynamically changing 3D world remains an open research challenge, and progress in this space

To reduce the dependence on these challenging capture
requirements, several methods have turned to data-driven
approaches leveraging learned 3D generative priors to improve the quality of 3D reconstruction [17, 22, 58, 73]. Core
to the success of these methods is the availability of highquality multi-view image datasets that enable learning generative priors. While this data exists in large quantities for
static environments, the same cannot be said for 4D, where
the complexity of building a synchronized multi-view capture setup constrains both the amount and diversity of available data, and therefore the ability to build a data-driven
4D prior. Instead, methods have attempted to regularize

26057

