This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Photomontage
Sean J. Liu1
1
(a)

ControlNet Input

Nupur Kumari1

ControlNet Output + User strokes

Our Output

Jun-Yan Zhu1

Reichman University

(b)

ControlNet Input

ControlNet Output + User strokes

Our Output

+

+

ControlNet Input

2

Carnegie Mellon University

“A waffle
pancake”

“A robot
from the future”
(c)

Ariel Shamir2

ControlNet Output + User strokes

Our Output

(d)
ControlNet Input

ControlNet Output + User strokes

Our Output

+

“A
Japanese-style
stone house”

+
“A dog on ice” “A dog on grass”

Figure 1. We introduce Generative Photomontage, a framework that allows users to create their desired image by compositing multiple
generated images. Given a stack of ControlNet-generated images using the same input condition and different seeds, users select desired
regions from different images within the stack. Our method takes in the user strokes, solves for a segmentation across the stack using
diffusion features, and then composites them using a new feature-space blending method. Our method offers users fine-grained control over
the final image and enables various applications, such as generating unseen appearance combinations (a, c), correcting shapes and removing
artifacts (b, d).

Abstract

artifacts, and improving prompt alignment. We show compelling results for each application and demonstrate that our
method outperforms existing image blending methods and
various baselines.

Text-to-image models are powerful tools for image creation.
However, the generation process is akin to a dice roll and
makes it difficult to achieve a single image that captures everything a user wants. In this paper, we propose a framework
for creating the desired image by compositing it from various
parts of generated images, in essence forming a Generative
Photomontage. Given a stack of images generated by ControlNet using the same input condition and different seeds,
we let users select desired parts from the generated results using a brush stroke interface. We introduce a novel technique
that takes in the user’s brush strokes, segments the generated
images using a graph-based optimization in diffusion feature space, and then composites the segmented regions via a
new feature-space blending method. Our method faithfully
preserves the user-selected regions while compositing them
harmoniously. We demonstrate that our flexible framework
can be used for many applications, including generating
new appearance combinations, fixing incorrect shapes and

1. Introduction
Text-to-image models [54, 75] can generate visually compelling images from simple input conditions, such as text
prompts and sketches, making them a powerful tool for image synthesis and creative exploration.
However, these models may not achieve exactly what
a user envisions, due to the ambiguity in mapping from
lower-dimensional input space (e.g., text, sketch) to highdimensional pixel space. For example, the prompt “a robot
from the future” can map to any sample in a large space of
robot images, that is usually sampled using different random
seeds in the diffusion process. From the user’s perspective,
this procedure is akin to a dice roll. In particular, it is often
challenging to achieve a single image that includes every-

7931

