This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVLTA: Benchmarking Vision-Language Temporal
Alignment via Synthetic Video Situation
Hao Du1 *

Bo Wu2 *
Yan Lu3
Zhendong Mao1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://svlta-ai.github.io/SVLTA

dh97@mail.ustc.edu.cn,

bo.wu@ibm.com,

yanlu@cuhk.edu.hk,

Abstract

zdmao@ustc.edu.cn

Vision-language temporal alignment is a crucial capability
for human dynamic recognition and cognition in real-world
scenarios. While existing research focuses on capturing
vision-language relevance, it faces limitations due to biased
temporal distributions, imprecise annotations, and insufficient compositionally. To achieve fair evaluation and comprehensive exploration, our objective is to investigate and
evaluate the ability of models to achieve alignment from a
temporal perspective, specifically focusing on their capacity to synchronize visual scenarios with linguistic context
in a temporally coherent manner. As a preliminary step,
we present the statistical analysis of existing benchmarks
and reveal the existing challenges from a decomposed perspective. To this end, we introduce SVLTA, the Synthetic
Vision-Language Temporal Alignment derived via a welldesigned and feasible control generation method within a
simulation environment. The approach considers commonsense knowledge, manipulable action, and constrained filtering, which generates reasonable, diverse, and balanced
data distributions for diagnostic evaluations. Our experiments reveal diagnostic insights through the evaluations in
temporal question answering, distributional shift sensitiveness, and temporal alignment adaptation.

assessments primarily focus on the models’ performances
of semantic-aligned vision-language inferences, often neglecting if models perform well on the capacities in realworld situations that evolve over time. This temporal perspective is crucial for effective human cognition and adaptation to the surrounding environment [3, 4]. In this work,
we investigate and assess the ability of models to achieve
vision-language temporal alignment, specifically how they
can synchronize visual events with linguistic context in a
temporal manner. This remains a significant challenge for
the comprehensive evaluation of multimodal models.

1. Introduction

To address similar goals, one category of existing work
builds datasets for traditional video grounding models on
top of collected videos and temporal segment annotations,
such as TACoS, DiDeMo, and Charades-STA [2, 14, 28, 59,
63]. But human-crafted annotations solely on semantic correlations inevitably result in unreliable labels [51, 86], due
to the inherent subjectivity and ambiguity of linguistic and
visual semantic descriptions. Additionally, while constructing data combinations with semantic correlation as the goal
allows for consideration of semantic diversity, it has been
found to suffer from significant temporal distribution imbalances [51, 80]. As multimodal large model capabilities
advance, these shortcomings in evaluations become critical
bottlenecks affecting the accuracy and objectivity of evaluations. We conduct a comprehensive examination of the
current video benchmarks in depth. We identify three types
of temporal alignments (processes, compositions, and entities) from a decomposed perspective, propose the metric
Temporal Jenson-Shannon Divergence (TJSD), and visualize the temporal distributions for clearer understanding. The
observed biased distributions at multiple levels reflect the
“unbalanced influences” of the existing evaluations.

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 35, 39]
are pioneering a new direction beyond LLMs [10, 67, 68].
They have demonstrated remarkable advancements in mainstream evaluations including vision-language comprehension [23, 42, 76, 87], analysis [1, 33, 81], alignment [9,
58, 65], and even reasoning [69, 73]. However, current

Distinct from previous work, we propose SVLTA, exploring the synthetic vision-language temporal alignment,
enabling compositional, unbiased, and large-scale video

* Both authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

13798

