This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AToM: Aligning Text-to-Motion Model at Event-Level with GPT-4Vision Reward

1

Zunnan Xu1
Zhongyuan Hu1
Huan Liao1 *
Yachao Zhang2†
Xiu Li1†

Xiangzuo Wu1 *
Ronghui Li1

Haonan Han1 *

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 School of Informatics, Xiamen University

“A person walks forward, bends at the waist, and
picks up something”

Left

Right

“A person waves his arm first, walks forward in a
straight line, then turns left.”

Left

Right

“A person leaps forward for 3 times”

Left

Right

Integrity

Temporal

Frequency

: Left is better

: Right is better

: Left is better

Figure 1. Showcases of motion samples for three scenarios. The two motion samples for each scenario were generated based on the prompt
above the samples. Moreover, we leverage GPT-4V to compare two motion samples according to the degree of alignment between the
motion samples and the input prompt.

Abstract
Recently, text-to-motion models have opened new possibilities for creating realistic human motion with greater efficiency and flexibility. However, aligning motion generation with event-level textual descriptions presents unique
challenges due to the complex relationship between textual
prompts and desired motion outcomes. To address this, we
introduce AToM, a framework that enhances the alignment
between generated motion and text prompts by leveraging
reward from GPT-4Vision. AToM comprises three main
stages: Firstly, we construct a dataset MotionPrefer
that pairs three types of event-level textual prompts with
generated motions, which cover the integrity, temporal relationship and frequency of motion. Secondly, we design
a paradigm that utilizes GPT-4Vision for detailed motion
annotation, including visual data formatting, task-specific
instructions and scoring rules for each sub-task. Finally,
we fine-tune an existing text-to-motion model using reinforcement learning guided by this paradigm. Experimental results demonstrate that AToM significantly improves the
event-level alignment quality of text-to-motion generation.
Project page is available at https://atom-motion.github.io/.

in fields such as game production, animation, film and virtual reality. Recently, generative models leveraging autoregressive [12, 13, 16, 38] and diffusion-based approaches [9,
31, 32, 40] have shown remarkable performance on this
task. These models generally perform well with short text
prompts. However, due to the scarcity of text-motion pairs
as well as the coarse-grained text descriptions that cover
limited motion scenarios, there are challenges in mapping
complex descriptions (e.g., multi-motion events or motions
with temporal relationships and specified frequency) to corresponding motion sequences, limiting the model’s ability
to generalize effectively. As shown in the second group of
Figure 1, given a prompt describing three motions in temporal order, the left example motion accurately captures the
expression “waves his arm” but misinterprets “walks forward in a straight line” as “walks in a circle” and fails to
account for the “turning left” action.

1. Introduction

One potential solution to address this issue is to alleviate data scarcity by collecting additional text-motion pair
data. However, unlike tasks involving language or image
data, gathering motion data typically requires specialized
motion capture equipment and expert annotations, which
are both costly and labor-intensive. An alternative approach
is to leverage the success of language models by fine-tuning
pre-trained models with preference data, thereby enhancing
their alignment capabilities. To the best of our knowledge,
InstructMotion [33] is the first work to fine-tune a text-tomotion model using human preference data through reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), leverag-

Generating high-quality human motions from textual descriptions is a promising task and plays an important role
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

22746

