This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Diffusion Compression for Real-World Image Super-Resolution
Bin Chen1,4,∗

Gehui Li1,∗
Rongyuan Wu3,4,∗
Xindong Zhang4
Jie Chen1,†
Jian Zhang1,2,†
Lei Zhang3,4
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
3
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute
{chenbin, ligehui921}@stu.pku.edu.cn

rong-yuan.wu@connect.polyu.hk

{jiechen2019, zhangjian.sz}@pku.edu.cn

cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
(a) Previous

Abstract

Input

Real-world image super-resolution (Real-ISR) aims to reconstruct high-resolution images from low-resolution inputs
degraded by complex, unknown processes. While many Stable Diffusion (SD)-based Real-ISR methods have achieved
remarkable success, their slow, multi-step inference hinders
practical deployment. Recent SD-based one-step networks
like OSEDiff and S3Diff alleviate this issue but still incur
high computational costs due to their reliance on large pretrained SD models. This paper proposes a novel Real-ISR
method, AdcSR, by distilling the one-step diffusion network
OSEDiff into a streamlined diffusion-GAN model under our
Adversarial Diffusion Compression (ADC) framework. We
meticulously examine the modules of OSEDiff, categorizing
them into two types: (1) Removable (VAE encoder, prompt
extractor, text encoder, etc.) and (2) Prunable (denoising
UNet and VAE decoder). Since direct removal and pruning
can degrade the model’s generation capability, we pretrain
our pruned VAE decoder to restore its ability to decode images and employ adversarial distillation to compensate for
performance loss. This ADC-based diffusion-GAN hybrid
design effectively reduces complexity by 73% in inference
time, 78% in computation, and 74% in parameters, while
preserving the model’s generation capability. Experiments
manifest that our proposed AdcSR achieves competitive recovery quality on both synthetic and real-world datasets, offering up to 9.3× speedup over previous one-step diffusionbased methods. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/Guaishou74851/AdcSR.

zhangxindong1@oppo.com

ADC-Teacher

(b) Proposed

Prompt Extractor
Denoising
UNet

VAE
Encoder

Removable
VAE
Decoder

Prunable

Output

Time Embedding
Adversarial Diffusion Compression (ADC)

Input

Pruned
UNet

Pruned
Decoder

Pruned

Output

ADC-Student

This work was supported in part by OPPO Research Fund, National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62372016), and Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media
Technology (No. 2024B1212010006).
∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Authors.

Figure 1. Comparison between our proposed AdcSR and typical one-step diffusion-based Real-ISR methods. (a) The stateof-the-art one-step diffusion network OSEDiff [96] employs complete SD [80] models for Real-ISR, suffering from high computational costs. (b) We distill OSEDiff (ADC-teacher) into a smaller
diffusion-GAN hybrid model, AdcSR (ADC-student), under the
proposed ADC framework, achieving significantly improved efficiency while maintaining competitive recovery performance.

28208

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (ISR) [17, 49, 54, 84, 120] is a fundamental and long-standing problem in computer vision. It
aims to reconstruct the high-resolution (HR) image from a
low-resolution (LR) counterpart. One line of ISR research
assumes that the LR image xLR is a bicubic-downsampled
version of the HR image xHR . However, deep ISR networks
trained using this assumption often struggle to generalize
to real-world scenarios, where degradations are more complex and typically unknown. Another increasingly popular
line of ISR research, known as real-world ISR (Real-ISR)
[90, 114], employs random shufflings of degradation operations and high-order degradation processes to synthesize
LR-HR training pairs. These approaches have improved the
performance of deep ISR networks in real-world scenarios.
In the field of ISR and Real-ISR, generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [3, 22, 25, 50, 63, 89, 105, 122] like SR-

