This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reversible Decoupling Network for Single Image Reflection Removal
Hao Zhao† , Mingjia Li† , Qiming Hu, Xiaojie Guo∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
xj.max.guo@gmail.com, {student zh, mingjiali, huqiming}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent deep-learning-based approaches to single-image reflection removal have shown promising advances, primarily
for two reasons: 1) the utilization of recognition-pretrained
features as inputs, and 2) the design of dual-stream interaction networks. However, according to the Information
Bottleneck principle, high-level semantic clues tend to be
compressed or discarded during layer-by-layer propagation. Additionally, interactions in dual-stream networks follow a fixed pattern across different layers, limiting overall
performance. To address these limitations, we propose a
novel architecture called Reversible Decoupling Network
(RDNet), which employs a reversible encoder to secure valuable information while flexibly decoupling transmission- and
reflection-relevant features during the forward pass. Furthermore, we customize a transmission-rate-aware prompt
generator to dynamically calibrate features, further boosting performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of RDNet over existing SOTA methods on five
widely-adopted benchmark datasets. Our code will be made
publicly available.

1. Introduction
Reflection is a common superimposition factor when photographing through a transparent medium like glass. In this
case, the captured image I contains a mixture of transmission T (the scene behind medium) and reflection R (the
reflected scene) [28], which can be expressed as I = T + R.
The presence of reflections often hinders vital information in
the transmission layer, impeding the performance of downstream tasks, such as stereo matching, optical flow, and
depth estimation [3, 18, 37, 45]. Thus, single-image reflection removal is desired to disentangle the transmission and
reflection components from a single input image. However,
this is severely ill-posed as infinitely many possible decompositions of T̂ and R̂ satisfy I = T̂ + R̂. In other words,
it is highly challenging to determine which combination is
†The two authors contributed equally. *Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Quantitative comparison in PSNR between ours and
previous state-of-the-art methods, where we achieve new records
on all 5 datasets. Note that the scale of each axis is normalized by
its second-best value. The best and second-best PSNR values are
displayed for reference.

optimal without effective priors on decomposition.
In recent years, learning-based approaches have made
tremendous strides in this field [15, 24, 43, 49, 51]. A key
consensus among these methods is to exploit hierarchical
semantic representations through large-scale recognitionpretrained models, which serve as priors/regularizers during
training. One pioneering work [49] leverages intermediate features from a pre-trained VGGNet [34] through the
concept of hypercolumns to help differentiate between the
transmission and reflection layers from mixtures. Originally from neuroscience, the term “hypercolumn” refers to
a functional unit in the visual cortex that processes visual
stimuli at multiple receptive-field sizes [17]. This concept
was first applied to segmentation and localization by interpolating and stacking features extracted from different
layers of a network [12, 26, 50]. However, simply mapping stacked high-dimensional hierarchies into a group of
much lower-dimensional features–as input for subsequent

26430

