This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CheXwhatsApp: A Dataset for Exploring Challenges in the Diagnosis of Chest
X-rays through Mobile Devices
Mariamma Antony1

Rajiv Porana1
Sahil M Lathiya1
Siva Teja Kakileti2
1
Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
1
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India 2 Niramai Health Analytix, Bangalore, India

Abstract
Mobile health (mHealth) has emerged as a transformative
solution to enhance healthcare accessibility and affordability, particularly in resource-constrained regions and low-tomiddle-income countries. mHealth leverages mobile platforms to improve healthcare accessibility, addressing radiologist shortages in low-resource settings by enabling remote diagnosis and consultation through mobile devices.
Mobile phones allow healthcare workers to transmit radiographic images, such as chest X-rays (CXR), to specialists
or AI-driven models for interpretation. However, AI-based
diagnosis using CXR images shared via apps like WhatsApp
suffers from reduced predictability and explainability due to
compression artifacts, and there is a lack of datasets to systematically study these challenges. To address this, we introduce CheXwhatsApp, a dataset of 141,804 paired original and WhatsApp-compressed CXR images. We present a
benchmarking study which shows the dataset improves prediction stability and explainability of state-of-the-art models by up to 80%, while also enhancing localization performance. CheXwhatsApp is open-sourced to support advancements in mHealth applications for CXR analysis 1 .

imaging.
mHealth is especially beneficial in resource constrained
areas such as Low-to-Middle-Income countries (LMICs)
where the ratio of radiologists to radiographers is significantly imbalanced. For example, in India, there is only one
radiologist for every 100,000 people [2]. Compounding the
issue is the fact that most radiologists are located in urban
areas, often far from the majority of the X-ray imaging facilities located in rural areas. Due to the high demand for
chest radiography and the global shortage of radiologists,
numerous applications for AI-based diagnosis of CXR images have been developed.
In recent years, smartphone penetration has significantly
increased, and instant messaging applications such as WhatsApp have a large user-base with 535 million users in India, 118.5 million users in Brazil, and a penetration rate exceeding 97% in African nations like Kenya, South Africa,
and Nigeria [15]. This presents new opportunities for the
quick and easy sharing of radiographic images to aid clinical decision-making [3, 22, 23, 26, 32]. In rural hospitals
and diagnostic centers without on-site radiologists, the ability to transmit anonymized images instantly to a mHealth
app for interpretation can be extremely valuable to facilitate
rapid triaging of infected individuals [22].
Leveraging common messaging platforms like
WhatsApp eliminates the need for additional training since it is a widely used communication medium.
However, it is important to note that these messaging
platforms often compress images by upto 90% to overcome
bandwidth limitations. In medial applications, it is crucial
to obtain explanation of predictions or localizations of findings in CXR images. Existing literature [1, 7, 9] identifies
challenges related to explainability, such as predictions
driven by features present outside the lung region in
AI-based diagnostic systems for CXR images. Specifically,
these systems suffer from the following challenges.
Prediction Instability Problem(PIP): PIP refers to a situation where model’s prediction differs between the original
image and the image transmitted through WhatsApp. This
undesirable effect can have critical implications in mHealth

1. Introduction
Recent studies highlight the wide opportunities of messaging apps such as WhatsApp as an efficient tool for remote
image sharing in mHealth applications across digital healthcare, including digital radiology [1, 10], digital pathology
[11–13], cardiac imaging [14], orthopedics [32], diabetes
management [41], and oral health [8]. mHealth provides a
platform for health practitioners to enable disease management and speed-up diagnosis by facilitating the transfer of
medical images, providing advice, facilitating drug adherence, and monitoring outbreaks. The outbreak of COVID19 pandemic has accelerated the adoption of mHealth for
digital radiology, such as for analyzing Chest X-ray (CXR)
1 https://github.com/cheXwhatsApp/cheXwhatsApp

25887

