This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S URGEON:
Memory-Adaptive Fully Test-Time Adaptation via Dynamic Activation Sparsity
Ke Ma1,2 Jiaqi Tang3 Bin Guo1* Fan Dang4 Sicong Liu1 Zhui Zhu2
Lei Wu1 Cheng Fang1 Ying-Cong Chen3 Zhiwen Yu1,5 Yunhao Liu2*
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Tsinghua University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Beijing Jiaotong University 5 Harbin Engineering University
Project Page: https://github.com/kadmkbl/SURGEON
Abstract

frozen

Training
Data

𝒊𝒏𝒊𝒕

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the progression of artificial intelligence and Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, the
integration of deep models into mobile terminals has become increasingly prevalent [26, 45]. However, due to var* Corresponding authors. guob@nwpu.edu.cn, yunhao@tsing
hua.edu.cn

Meta Networks

BN
BN

Meta BN

...

Despite the growing integration of deep models into mobile terminals, the accuracy of these models declines significantly due to various deployment interferences. Testtime adaptation (TTA) has emerged to improve the performance of deep models by adapting them to unlabeled target data online. Yet, the significant memory cost, particularly in resource-constrained terminals, impedes the effective deployment of most backward-propagation-based TTA
methods. To tackle memory constraints, we introduce S UR GEON , a method that substantially reduces memory cost
while preserving comparable accuracy improvements during fully test-time adaptation (FTTA) without relying on
specific network architectures or modifications to the original training procedure. Specifically, we propose a novel dynamic activation sparsity strategy that directly prunes activations at layer-specific dynamic ratios during adaptation,
allowing for flexible control of learning ability and memory cost in a data-sensitive manner. Among this, two metrics, Gradient Importance and Layer Activation Memory,
are considered to determine the layer-wise pruning ratios,
reflecting accuracy contribution and memory efficiency, respectively. Experimentally, our method surpasses the baselines by not only reducing memory usage but also achieving
superior accuracy, delivering SOTA performance across diverse datasets, architectures, and tasks.

Meta Conv Block

𝒙𝒕

Independence of Training

(a) EcoTTA

BN

𝒙𝒕

updated

no
𝒄𝒂𝒄𝒉𝒆
𝜷𝒊𝒕 > 𝜷𝒕𝒉𝒓𝒆?

yes
Independence of
Specific Architectures

(b) MECTA

Updatable Layer

Sparse
Activation
𝒑𝒓𝒖𝒏𝒆
(𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐 𝒑𝒊𝒕 )

Independence of Training

𝒙𝒕

Independence of
Specific Architectures

(c) SURGEON (ours)

Figure 1. The problem of memory-efficient TTA methods. (a)
EcoTTA introduces meta networks to adapt the frozen backbone
but requires modifications to the original training procedure to
warm up these additional blocks. (b) MECTA establishes the updating criterion based on BN layers. (c) Our method, S URGEON
prunes activations at layer-specific dynamic ratios without relying
on specific architectures or modifications to the training procedure.

ious types of interference and distribution shifts [33] in deployment environments, such as changing weather conditions [34] and varying sensor parameters [18], the accuracy
of deep models can significantly decline during inference.
To address the aforementioned issue, test-time adaptation (TTA) [23, 39, 40] has emerged as an effective strategy to improve the performance of deep models by adapting them to unlabeled target data online. It proves to be
particularly advantageous in situations where there is a significant disparity between the test and training data, or
when real-time adaptation to fluctuating test environments
is necessary. However, in some practical scenarios, the
original training procedure cannot be modified due to concerns over privacy and the storage of training data. To address this, fully test-time adaptation (FTTA) has been proposed [31, 49] to allow deep models to adapt online without
altering the original training procedure.
Nevertheless, memory cost becomes a major obstacle
to deploying most backward-propagation-based TTA methods [3, 10, 28, 30, 47], particularly in memory-constrained
terminals. In these methods, memory usage primarily arises

30514

