This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAMWISE: Infusing Wisdom in SAM2 for Text-Driven Video Segmentation
Claudia Cuttano1

Gabriele Trivigno1 Gabriele Rosi1,2 Carlo Masone1,2
1
Politecnico di Torino 2 Focoos AI
{name.surname}@polito.it

Giuseppe Averta1,2

{name.surname}@focoos.ai

RVOS Streaming processing
TARGET: absent
MATCH: red shirt

MOTION REASONING:
action that unfolds over multiple frames

LEARNABLE CORRECTION:
detected object switch

TRACKING:
occlusion handling

Query: 'The cyclist in red that overtakes others on the left'

Segment Anything 2
SPATIAL
PROMPT

TEXT
PROMPT

CORRECTION
MECHANISM

TEMPORAL
FEATURES

human

Clip-based
- No global context
+ Efficient processing

Offline
- Require entire video
+ Global context

SAMWISE
Context propagation

SAMWISE (ours)
SPATIAL
TEXT
PROMPT PROMPT

CORRECTION TEMPORAL
MECHANISM FEATURES

learnable

Figure 1. SAMWISE. Our approach infuses knowledge about natural language in the Segment-Anything 2 model, adding explicit temporal
cues in the feature extraction for the task of streaming-based Referring Video Segmentation (RVOS). We use a learnable mechanism to
mitigate the so-called tracking bias, i.e. SAM2 tendency to overlook a correct object once it becomes identifiable, due to its ongoing
tracking of a different object. Our design enables effective streaming processing for RVOS, exploiting the memory from previous frames
to propagate past context. The figure shows an example where the target object is not present in the first frame, leading SAM2 to start
tracking the wrong one. Afterwards, when the correct object appears, our learnable correction mechanisms guides SAM2 to switch its
tracking focus. By adding in its features the notion of temporal evolution, the model is able to recognize that the new object is more aligned
with the provided textual query. Finally, we exploit SAM2 tracking skills and robustness to occlusions to keep following the object.

Abstract

and multi-modal cues in the feature extraction process. We
further reveal the phenomenon of tracking bias in SAM2
and propose a learnable module to adjust its tracking focus when the current frame features suggest a new object more aligned with the caption. Our proposed method,
SAMWISE, achieves state-of-the-art across various benchmarks, by adding a negligible overhead of less than 5 M
parameters. Code is available at https://github.com/
ClaudiaCuttano/SAMWISE .

Referring Video Object Segmentation (RVOS) relies on natural language expressions to segment an object in a video
clip. Existing methods restrict reasoning either to independent short clips, losing global context, or process the entire video offline, impairing their application in a streaming
fashion. In this work, we aim to surpass these limitations
and design an RVOS method capable of effectively operating in streaming-like scenarios while retaining contextual
information from past frames. We build upon the SegmentAnything 2 (SAM2) model, that provides robust segmentation and tracking capabilities and is naturally suited for
streaming processing. We make SAM2 wiser, by empowering it with natural language understanding and explicit
temporal modeling at the feature extraction stage, without
fine-tuning its weights, and without outsourcing modality
interaction to external models. To this end, we introduce
a novel adapter module that injects temporal information

1. Introduction
Referring video segmentation (RVOS) [9, 17, 24, 38, 43,
48] aims at segmenting and tracking specific objects of interest within video content, guided by natural language expressions [3, 10, 28]. Existing RVOS methods are mostly
based on a divide and conquer paradigm, where the video is
divided into shorter clips that are processed independently
[3, 39, 43]. However, as demonstrated by MeViS [7], this

3395

