This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense Match Summarization for Faster Two-view Estimation
Jonathan Astermark, Anders Heyden, and Viktor Larsson
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University
{jonathan.astermark, anders.heyden, viktor.larsson}@math.lth.se

Abstract

ϵ = 0.38◦
t = 98 ms

In this paper, we speed up robust two-view relative pose
from dense correspondences. Previous work has shown that
dense matchers can significantly improve both accuracy
and robustness in the resulting pose. However, the large
number of matches comes with a significantly increased
runtime during robust estimation in RANSAC. To avoid this,
we propose an efficient match summarization scheme which
provides comparable accuracy to using the full set of dense
matches, while having 10-100x faster runtime. We validate our approach on standard benchmark datasets together with multiple state-of-the-art dense matchers.

ϵ = 0.34◦
t = 2.3 ms

Figure 1. Relative Pose Estimation from Dense Matches. The
top images show 10,000 semi-dense matches from DKM [15] with
same colors indicating corresponding points. The large number of
matches makes robust estimation with RANSAC accurate (pose
error ϵ = 0.38◦ ) but slow (runtime t = 98 ms). In this paper we
show that we can get comparable accuracy with significantly lower
runtime by sparsifying the dense matches (bottom images). Each
sparsified match is represented by a 9×9-matrix that summarizes
the geometric constraints from nearby matches.

1. Introduction
Determining the two-view camera geometry is an important sub-task in many computer vision problems, e.g. for
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping or Structure-fromMotion. The most common approach is to first detect corresponding points in the two views, followed by robust estimation using RANdom Sample Consensus (RANSAC) [18]
which both estimates the relative pose and identifies potential outlier matches. Traditionally, keypoint matching is performed by independently detecting keypoints in each view,
followed by a matching step, either directly comparing descriptor similarity or using a learned matcher.
Recently, a lot of attention has been given to so-called
detector-free matching, which takes the images as input and
directly establishes (semi-)dense correspondences. These
matchers produce significantly more matches, compared to
the detector-based counterparts, especially in weakly textured image regions, such as walls, floors, and ceilings.
Dense matching shows great promise and currently achieves
the most accurate two-view estimates in standard benchmarks. However, this comes with a trade-off in runtime,
both for running the matching and in the subsequent robust
estimation (i.e. RANSAC).
In this paper, we aim to improve the runtime of the robust
estimation step. We show that when using dense matchers, most of the matches provide redundant geometric con-

straints, and we present an efficient match summarization
scheme that selects a subset of ≈ 1% of the matches, which
we call representative matches, that are used for robust estimation. Using this smaller set of matches, we can obtain a 10-100x speedup with a marginal loss in pose accuracy. In addition, we present an approximation approach
for enriching each representative match to capture the geometric constraints of nearby correspondences in a single
9×9-matrix (regardless of how many neighboring matches
are included). This enrichment allows for an even smaller
loss of pose accuracy, while still being significantly faster
compared to dense correspondence. In Figure 1 we visualize one example from MegaDepth [26].
We validate our claims and our approach with extensive
experiments and ablation studies on standard benchmarks
with different state-of-the-art dense matchers.
In summary, our contributions are:

1093

