This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperNVD: Accelerating Neural Video Decomposition via Hypernetworks
Maria Pilligua1,2, * Danna Xue1,2, * † Javier Vazquez-Corral1,2
1
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 2 Computer Vision Center
{mpilligua, dxue, javier.vazquez}@cvc.uab.cat

Abstract

Ours (Cows)
Scratch (Cows)

Decomposing a video into a layer-based representation is
crucial for easy video editing for the creative industries,
as it enables independent editing of specific layers. Existing video-layer decomposition models rely on implicit neural representations (INRs) trained independently for each
video, making the process time-consuming when applied to
new videos. Noticing this limitation, we propose a metalearning strategy to learn a generic video decomposition
model to speed up the training on new videos. Our model is
based on a hypernetwork architecture which, given a videoencoder embedding, generates the parameters for a compact INR-based neural video decomposition model. Our
strategy mitigates the problem of single-video overfitting
and, importantly, shortens the convergence of video decomposition on new, unseen videos. Our code is available at:
https://hypernvd.github.io/.

Ours (Soccerball)
Scratch (Soccerball)

Ours (Soapbox)
Scratch (Soapbox)
1.46 dB

PSNR (dB)

33
31

1.65 dB

29

1.36 dB

27
25

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Time (minutes)

Figure 1. Fine-tuning the video decomposition model from our
metamodel (HyperNVD) versus training from scratch on unseen
videos shows clear advantages. With initialization from our HyperNVD trained on 15 videos, the model converges faster to the
same PSNR and ultimately achieves better performance.

1. Introduction

Layer-based video decomposition methods [4, 20, 24,
31, 38] represent video with several texture layers, where
each layer consistently represents specific video content
(e.g., moving objects or backgrounds). These approaches
are mainly based on compact implicit neural representations
(INRs), which encode each video individually. The model
projects pixel coordinates and frame indices into a canonical 2D texture space, and then, it maps to RGB values to
reconstruct each frame. In this way, it is possible to apply
simple edits on the canonical texture layer and then propagate them to the entire video, greatly relieving the need
for manual adjustments. Furthermore, the parameter sizes
and training times are reduced compared to training a generalized video object segmentation model [2] and global
flow estimation model [8, 16]. However, due to the nature of INR, the neural video decomposition model lacks
generalization and requires tens of minutes to train a 480p
video [4].
In this paper, we propose a meta-learning strategy in
layer-based video decomposition to speed up the training.
More in detail, we introduce a hypernetwork (hypernet)
that, based on the video embedding predicted by VideoMAE [34], generates the parameters for a compact INR

Video editing plays a crucial role in today’s creative industries, from film-making and advertising to social media content creation. It enables creators to bring their visions to
life, enhancing storytelling through visual effects, scene adjustments, and content personalization. However, most current video editing techniques face several challenges: they
require extensive manual intervention [39], lack consistent
control over edits [7, 11], and are time-consuming [4, 24],
limiting their scalability for real-world applications.
Current video editing workflows in professional software
resemble traditional 2D animation. Creators import video
into editing software [1, 3] and edit in overlaid layers for
each video frame. While motion tracking tools can interpolate adjustments between keyframes [10, 18], handling occlusions and ensuring consistency remain challenging since
tracking errors make editing cumbersome. These problems
highlight the importance of accurate layered representation
and frame mappings.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

22933

