This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Diversity for Data-free Quantization
Kai Zhao1,* , Zhihao Zhuang2,* , Miao Zhang3 , Chenjuan Guo2,† , Yang Shu2 , Bin Yang2
1
Aalborg University, Denmark 2 East China Normal University, China 3 HIT Shenzhen, China
kaiz@cs.aau.dk,zhuangzhihao@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,zm@hit.edu.cn,{cjguo,ys,byang}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Model quantization is an effective way to compress deep
neural networks and accelerate the inference time on edge
devices. Existing quantization methods usually require original data for calibration during the compressing process,
which may be inaccessible due to privacy issues. A common
way is to generate calibration data to mimic the origin data.
However, the generators in these methods have the mode
collapse problem, making them unable to synthesize diverse
data. To solve this problem, we leverage the information
from the full-precision model and enhance both inter-class
and intra-class diversity for generating better calibration
data, by devising a multi-layer features mixer and normalization flow based attention. Besides, novel regulation losses
are proposed to make the generator produce diverse data
with more patterns from the perspective of activated feature values and for the quantized model to learn better clip
ranges adaptive to our diverse calibration data. Extensive
experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
quantization results for both Transformer and CNN architectures. In addition, we visualize the generated data to verify
that our strategies can effectively handle the mode collapse
issue. Our codes are available at repo.

1. Introduction
Quantization [7, 28] is an effective way to compress a deep
neural network (DNN) by converting model weights which
are stored as the float type of 32 or 16 bits into the integer
type of 8, 4 or 3 bits. It is different from other model compression methods, such as distillation [15] where a small
student model learns from labels and teacher models, and
pruning [13] which cuts connections in a DNN. By quantization, we can deploy a deep model on edge devices with
limited storage or resources. Meanwhile, this allows better
utilization of inference devices [16] optimized for integer
operations to accelerate efficiency.
* Both authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Mode collapse examples: Qimera only generates highly
similar images for a class.

Quantization can be roughly divided into two categories [29]. Quantization-aware training (QAT) quantizes
the weights while training a full-precision model with the
original data. Post-training quantization (PTQ) quantizes
an already-trained full-precision model. Normally, PTQ
needs the original training data to calibrate the quantized
model for better performance, otherwise, it will suffer a great
performance degradation [7].
However, due to privacy concerns, original data in realworld scenarios are often inaccessible, because data, such as
medical images or human facial data, are private. Therefore, there is a need to develop data-free quantization
methods [12, 32] with less performance degradation. The
generator-based framework, e.g. Qimera [6], provides a datafree method to quantize a model without original training
data. It utilizes a generator to synthesize training data and
then applies these fake data to calibrate the quantized model.
This framework is inspired by Generative Adversarial Net
(GAN) [10] where the generator is guided by the discriminator. There are three components: generator, discriminator
(i.e. full-precision model), and quantized model. The generator learns the random-initialized label embeddings to present
the classes, and then samples random variables to generate
synthetic data. Then the synthetic data are used to calibrate
the quantized model. The discriminator forces the generator
to synthesize the right data according to class labels. Several studies [3, 25] show that this framework achieves good
results for the data-free setting, but this framework still has
problems as follows.
Problem 1: GAN-based generator methods have a common mode collapse problem [33], where the generator falls
short in synthesizing diverse data. The generator collapses
at some data points and only synthesizes a few highly similar images for each class, as shown in Figure 1. Without

20969

