This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sharp-It: A Multi-view to Multi-view Diffusion Model
for 3D Synthesis and Manipulation
Yiftach Edelstein1
Or Patashnik2
Dana Cohen-Bar2
Lihi Zelnik-Manor1
1
2
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Tel Aviv University
https://yiftachede.github.io/Sharp-It/
Input

Sharp-It

“Art-deco stained glass lamp”

“Rainbow colored leather chair”

Input

Sharp-It

“Glass table with intricate golden intertwined legs”

Leather chesterfield velvet

Input

Sharp-It

“A dragon”

Leather minecraft

Figure 1. Sharp-It is a multi-view to multi-view model that enhances low-quality 3D shapes. It corrects fine-grained geometry details and
adds appearance features. The top row displays three degraded shapes and their enhancements by Sharp-It. The bottom row demonstrates
Sharp-It’s capability to edit the appearance of 3D shapes.

Abstract
Advancements in text-to-image diffusion models have led to
significant progress in fast 3D content creation. One common approach is to generate a set of multi-view images of an
object, and then reconstruct it into a 3D model. However,
this approach bypasses the use of a native 3D representation of the object and is hence prone to geometric artifacts
and limited in controllability and manipulation capabilities.
An alternative approach involves native 3D generative models that directly produce 3D representations. These models, however, are typically limited in their resolution, resulting in lower quality 3D objects. In this work, we bridge
the quality gap between methods that directly generate 3D
representations and ones that reconstruct 3D objects from
multi-view images. We introduce a multi-view to multi-view
diffusion model called Sharp-It, which takes a 3D consistent
set of multi-view images rendered from a low-quality object
and enriches its geometric details and texture. The diffu-

sion model operates on the multi-view set in parallel, in the
sense that it shares features across the generated views. A
high-quality 3D model can then be reconstructed from the
enriched multi-view set. By leveraging the advantages of
both 2D and 3D approaches, our method offers an efficient
and controllable method for high-quality 3D content creation. We demonstrate that Sharp-It enables various 3D
applications, such as fast synthesis, editing, and controlled
generation, while attaining high-quality assets.

1. Introduction

21458

Creating 3D content plays an important role across industries such as gaming, augmented and virtual reality, and animation. These applications demand efficient, controllable
processes for generating high-quality, editable 3D assets. In
recent years, text-to-image diffusion models have significantly advanced 3D content creation, introducing new approaches for producing complex, detailed visual assets.

