This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bringing CLIP to the Clinic: Dynamic Soft Labels and Negation-Aware
Learning for Medical Analysis
Hanbin Ko1,2 , Chang-Min Park1,2,3 *
1
Interdisciplinary Program in Bioengineering, Seoul National University Graduate School,
2
Integrated Major in Innovative Medical Science, Seoul National University Graduate School,
3
Department of Radiology, Seoul National University Hospital
{lucasko1994, morphius}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The development of large-scale image-text pair datasets has
significantly advanced self-supervised learning in VisionLanguage Processing (VLP). However, directly applying
general-domain architectures such as CLIP to medical
data presents challenges, particularly in handling negations and addressing the inherent data imbalance of medical datasets. To address these issues, we propose a novel
approach that integrates clinically-enhanced dynamic soft
labels and medical graphical alignment, thereby improving clinical comprehension and improving the applicability of contrastive loss in medical contexts. Furthermore,
we introduce negation-based hard negatives to deepen the
model’s understanding of the complexities of clinical language. Our approach is easily integrated into medical CLIP
training pipeline and achieves state-of-the-art performance
across multiple tasks, including zero-shot, fine-tuned classification and report retrieval. To comprehensively evaluate
our model’s capacity in understanding clinical language,
we introduce CXR-Align, a benchmark uniquely designed
to evaluate the understanding of negation and clinical information within chest X-ray (CXR) datasets. Experimental
results demonstrate that our proposed methods are straightforward to implement and generalize effectively across contrastive learning frameworks, enhancing medical VLP capabilities and advancing clinical language understanding
in medical imaging.

Figure 1. (a) Standard visual-language pre-training approaches using contrastive learning (e.g., InfoNCE). (b) Our approach, leveraging unique medical domain characteristics (e.g., imbalance and
negations), dynamically generates soft labels based on clinical,
textual, and relational similarities while integrating negations as
hard negatives.

1. Introduction

from CLIP’s ability to leverage image-text pairs without extensive labeled data, thus enabling efficient representation
learning. Consequently, research has increasingly focused
on adapting CLIP-like models for CXR data, which is rich
in image-report pairs and well-suited to contrastive learning.
However, directly applying CLIP’s contrastive learning
framework to medical data poses significant challenges due
to unique characteristics of medical image-text data. For
example, medical reports often contain negations and are
subject to considerable data imbalance. While several adaptations, such as Xlip [34], CXR-CLIP [38], GLORIA [14],
BioViL [6], MedKlip [35], MLIP [21], have sought to improve image-report alignment in the medical field, many
overlook specific aspects of CXR reports, such as references

CLIP [26] has revolutionized Vision-Language Processing
(VLP), with particularly promising applications in medical
imaging analysis [41]. Medical imaging, especially in areas
requiring specialized annotation expertise, greatly benefits
* Corresponding author

25897

