This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PURA: Parameter Update-Recovery Test-Time Adaption for RGB-T Tracking
Zekai Shao* Yufan Hu∗ Bin Fan Hongmin Liu†
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
melan.shao@foxmail.com, huyufanqaixuan@gmail.com, bin.fan@ieee.org, hmliu 82@163.com

Input

Abstract
Maintaining stable tracking of objects in domain shift
scenarios is crucial for RGB-T tracking, prompting us to explore the use of unlabeled test sample information for effective online model adaptation. However, current Test-Time
Adaptation (TTA) methods in RGB-T tracking dramatically
change the model’s internal parameters during long-term
adaptation. At the same time, the gradient computations involved in the optimization process impose a significant computational burden. To address these challenges, we propose
a Parameter Update-Recovery Adaptation (PURA) framework based on parameter decomposition. Firstly, our fast
parameter update strategy adjusts model parameters using statistical information from test samples without requiring gradient calculations, ensuring consistency between the
model and test data distribution. Secondly, our parameter
decomposition recovery employs orthogonal decomposition
to identify the principal update direction and recover parameters in this direction, aiding in the retention of critical knowledge. Finally, we leverage the information obtained from decomposition to provide feedback on the momentum during the update phase, ensuring a stable updating process. Experimental results demonstrate that PURA
outperforms current state-of-the-art methods across multiple datasets, validating its effectiveness. The project page
is at https://melantech.github.io/PURA.

Tracker

Entropy
Minimization

(a)

Back Propgation

Input

Student Tracker

Consistency
Regulariztion

Augmented
Inputs

Teacher Tracker

(b)

Parameter
Decompsition

(c)

Moving Average

Fast Update
Input

Tracker

Gradual Recovery

Figure 1. Comparison between our proposed Parameter UpdateRecovery Adaption (PURA) framework with existing test-time
adaption methods. (a) Entropy minimization-based method. (b)
Consistency regularization-based method. (c) Our proposed
PURA framework.

1. Introduction

make RGB-T trackers extremely prone to overfitting. These
problem gives rise to a crucial question: can the RGB-T
tracker effectively utilize sample information to improve its
capabilities during the tracking process? Notably, the lack
of annotation information makes it unrealistic to update the
model through supervised learning [11, 13, 42, 53]. Furthermore, object-tracking scenarios in complex environments
usually have real-time requirements, and supervised learning will introduce extensive computational delays, causing
the tracker to fail to output results promptly.
In recent years, test-time adaptation (TTA) has been used
for online model adaption. During the testing phase, TTA
can dynamically adjust the model parameters, enabling the
model to adapt to new distributions without the need to access the original training data. Notably, TTA has unique
advantages in RGB-T tracking scenarios because it can
achieve real-time adaptation to distribution changes caused
by different scenarios, thereby enhancing the stability and

RGB-T tracking is an object-tracking method that combines
RGB and thermal imaging information and is widely used
in object tracking in complex environments. During the
tracking process, due to the presence of different scenarios (such as various backgrounds and light variations), the
problem of data distribution shift [9, 24, 36] is inevitably
encountered during the testing process. However, the parameters of traditional trackers are usually fixed during the
inference stage. Moreover, the limitations of training data
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

22089

