This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RayFlow: Instance-Aware Diffusion Acceleration via Adaptive Flow Trajectories
Huiyang Shao1,2

Xin Xia2,∗
1

Yuhong Yang1,2

Yuxi Ren2
2

Tsinghua University,

Abstract

Xing Wang2

Xuefeng Xiao†

ByteDance Inc.

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success across
various domains. However, their slow generation speed
remains a critical challenge. Existing acceleration methods, while aiming to reduce steps, often compromise sample quality, controllability, or introduce training complexities. Therefore, we propose RayFlow, a novel diffusion
framework that addresses these limitations. Unlike previous methods, RayFlow guides each sample along a unique
path towards an instance-specific target distribution. This
method minimizes sampling steps while preserving generation diversity and stability. Furthermore, we introduce
Time Sampler, an importance sampling technique to enhance training efficiency by focusing on crucial timesteps.
Extensive experiments demonstrate RayFlow’s superiority
in generating high-quality images with improved speed,
control, and training efficiency compared to existing acceleration techniques.

The traditional diffusion process, as shown in Fig.1a,
forms the foundation for most acceleration and distillation
methods. However, it’s clear from the figure that this process suffers from several issues:
• (1) Varying Expectations. The expectations in the backward process differ across timesteps. Achieving highquality samples necessitates a greater number of sampling steps, making it impossible for accelerated sampling methods to avoid quality degradation.
• (2) Overlapping Diffusion Paths. Since all sample eventually converges to the same standard Gaussian distribution,
the diffusion probability paths will overlap. E[ϵ̄t |xt ] may
represent the intersection of multiple probability paths,
leading to significant randomness in sampling outcomes
and potentially substantial quality loss.
• (3) Sampling Instability. Even with closely positioned
sampling points, the final generated results can differ significantly, introducing substantial instability.
Several studies try to address these limitations: [22] introduced rectified flow (RF) using linear ordinary differential equation (ODE) for straight-path sampling (Fig.1b topleft), while [41] extended RF to first-order curved paths
rectified diffusion (RD) for denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM)-like models (Fig.1b top-right). These
sample-noise matching approaches have also been applied
to diffusion distillation by [24, 49].
However, existing sample-noise matching algorithms
brings new drawbacks while attempting to address above
challenges: (1*) Path Inconsistency: the gap between
sample-noise matching and actual ODE sampling paths is
too large, potentially leading to training difficulties and poor
generalization; (2*) Limited Diversity: sampling probability paths are severely constrained, significantly reducing model generation diversity; (3*) Theoretical Gap: the
method is highly intuitive but lacks fundamental theoretical
derivation to prove its optimality for sampling stability.
To address all the three challenges in traditional diffusion and the drawbacks introduced by existing sample-noise
matching methods, we propose RayFlow (shown in Fig.1b
bottom). Consistent Expectations and Path: For challenge (1) and (1*), we leverage pre-trained models to cal-

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have revolutionized generative AI [10,
38–40], achieving impressive results in various domains,
from text [14, 44] and images [37, 45, 54, 55, 58] to
3D models [4, 21, 43], audio [9, 18], and restoration
[1, 2]. However, their slow generation speed, often requiring dozens of steps per sample, remains a significant
limitation. Various distillation techniques attempt to accelerate this process, including normal [25, 56], adversarial
[35, 42], progressive [33], and variational score distillation
[28, 34, 43, 47, 51, 52]. Current distillation methods, despite their objectives, are hindered by challenges including
substantial computational overhead, complex training regimens, and limitations in terms of generation speed, sample
quality, and effective guidance [11, 27, 29, 30, 46, 53, 59].
This underscores the imperative for developing more generalized approaches to fully exploit the capabilities of diffusion models.
∗ Corresponding Author
† Project Leader

18113

