This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DrVideo: Document Retrieval Based Long Video Understanding
Ziyu Ma1,2 ,* Chenhui Gou2 ,* Hengcan Shi1,2 , Bin Sun1†, Shutao Li1 ,
Hamid Rezatofighi2 , Jianfei Cai2
1
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University,
2
Data Science & AI Department, Faculty of IT, Monash University
{maziyu, sunbin611, shutao li}@hnu.edu.cn
{chenhui.gou, hengcan.shi, hamid.rezatofighi, jianfei.cai}@monash.edu

Abstract
Most of the existing methods for video understanding primarily focus on videos only lasting tens of seconds, with
limited exploration of techniques for handling long videos.
The increased number of frames in long videos poses two
main challenges: difficulty in locating key information
and performing long-range reasoning. Thus, we propose
DrVideo, a document-retrieval-based system designed for
long video understanding. Our key idea is to convert the
long-video understanding problem into a long-document
understanding task so as to effectively leverage the power
of large language models. Specifically, DrVideo first transforms a long video into a coarse text-based long document to initially retrieve key frames and then updates the
documents with the augmented key frame information. It
then employs an agent-based iterative loop to continuously
search for missing information and augment the document
until sufficient question-related information is gathered for
making the final predictions in a chain-of-thought manner.
Extensive experiments on long video benchmarks confirm
the effectiveness of our method. DrVideo significantly outperforms existing LLM-based state-of-the-art methods on
EgoSchema benchmark (3 minutes), MovieChat-1K benchmark (10 minutes), and the long split of Video-MME benchmark (average of 44 minutes). Code is available at
https://github.com/Upper9527/DrVideo.

long video understanding remains unclear. Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) [6, 10, 34, 41,
45, 48, 56] demonstrate strong abilities in language understanding and reasoning across long text sequences. These
advancements have inspired the development of videolanguage models (Video-LMs) [25, 38, 68, 77] to address
long video understanding issues.
Video-LMs typically encode a video as a sequence of
visual tokens, which are then concatenated with language
tokens into a long sequence and LLM is then used to understand this long sequence. Although Video-LMs improve
video understanding, they have the following limitations.
(i) They cannot process an entire video as input to a VideoLM (e.g., the visual encoder OpenAI’s CLIP-L-14 outputs
24×24 tokens for each image, while the max length of
LLaVA-NeXT-Video [77] is only 8192). (ii) They typically
perform uniform or random frame sampling at large strides
to handle long videos without considering the content (e.g.,
16 for PLLaVA [68] and 6 for IG-VLM [25]), leading to
potential key information loss. (iii) The simple concatenation of visual tokens increases the difficulty for the LLM
to locate question-related (key) visual information within
the long video sequence, complicating long-range reasoning across the vision token sequences.
Apart from the studies of encoding a video as a sequence
of visual tokens, another line of research converts raw
videos into captions and then utilities the long-range reasoning abilities of LLMs to predict the final answer. A pioneering work - LLoVi [74] uses a short-term video model
[78] in conjunction with an LLM [40] to solve the long
video understanding task. Given a long video, LLoVi first
divides it into multiple short clips and converts them into
short textual descriptions. Afterward, these short textual
descriptions are summarized by the LLM, and the summary
is finally used by LLoVi to answer the given question. Inspired by LLoVi, VideoAgent [61] designs an agent-based
system to further leverage the reasoning abilities of LLMs
and locate question-related video clips or images. Initially,

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a challenging task in computer vision, requiring the processing of spatio-temporal information and advanced reasoning abilities. Previous works have
successfully processed short videos lasting around tens of
seconds [8, 27, 32, 53, 69, 70]. However, how to deal with
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

18936

