This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HeatFormer: A Neural Optimizer for Multiview Human Mesh Recovery
Yuto Matsubara
Ko Nishino
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

Figure 1. HeatFormer is a novel neural optimizer for human mesh recovery from static multiview images. It recovers the SMPL shape and
pose parameters by fully leveraging the views to resolve occlusions (e.g., note how well the body parts occluded by objects and other body
parts are recovered). It is also agnostic to the configuration and number of views which is essential for generalization in real-world scenes.
(From left to right, the datasets are Human3.6M [17], BEHAVE [3], MPI-INF-3DHP [36], and RICH [15].)

Abstract

statistical priors on the body shape (e.g., SMPL [35]) have
enabled significant reduction in the search space and, as a
result, robust body estimation from single images. By also
combining priors on the body pose and camera motion estimation from static background, recent methods have extended human body and pose estimation to dynamic monocular cameras. These methods open new possibilities for
VR/AR applications, allowing one to place and interact with
people observed in the real-world in their own virtual world.

We introduce a novel method for human shape and pose
recovery that can fully leverage multiple static views. We
target fixed-multiview people monitoring, including elderly
care and safety monitoring, in which cameras can be installed at the corners of a room or an open space but
whose configuration may vary depending on the environment. Our key idea is to formulate it as neural optimization.
We achieve this with HeatFormer, a neural optimizer that iteratively refines the SMPL parameters given multiview images. HeatFormer realizes this SMPL parameter estimation
as heatmap generation and alignment with a novel transformer encoder and decoder. Our formulation makes HeatFormer fundamentally agnostic to the number of cameras,
their configuration, and calibration. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of HeatFormer including its accuracy, robustness to occlusion, and generalizability through an extensive
set of experiments. We believe HeatFormer can serve a key
role in passive human behavior modeling.

Accurate human body shape and pose recovery is fundamental for static camera applications, too. For instance,
a room equipped with a handful of cameras installed in the
corners can let us learn about the activities in the room and
their people. Automation of this process can lay the foundation for ensuring the well-being of them for security and
cognitive monitoring, and enable robotic intervention with
co-robots and service robots. A representative need for this
is elderly care, in which 24/7 passive monitoring to decide
when and how to intervene would be essential. Our focus
is on this fixed, multiview monitoring which finds many applications in a wide range of disciplines including security,
commerce, communication, and entertainment.

1. Introduction

One would be tempted to think that the problem is easier
in such scenarios as the cameras do not move and we have
multiple of them. Why not just apply the successful monoc-

Many computer vision applications rely on accurate estimates of the human body in images and videos. Strong

6415

