This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explicit Depth-Aware Blurry Video Frame Interpolation Guided by Differential
Curves
Zaoming Yan 1

Pengcheng Lei 1 *

Tingting Wang1

Faming Fang1†

Junkang Zhang1

Yaomin Huang1
Haichuan Song1†
School of Computer Science and Technology, and the KLATASDS
Shanghai Key Laboratory of MIP, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
1

1
1

{yan zaoming,pengchenglei1995}@163.com

ymhuang@stu.ecnu.edu.cn

1

fmfang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Blurry video frame interpolation (BVFI), which aims to
generate high-frame-rate clear videos from low-frame-rate
blurry inputs, is a challenging yet significant task in computer vision. Current state-of-the-art approaches typically
rely on linear or quadratic models to estimate intermediate motion. However, these methods often overlook depth
variations that occur during fast object motion, leading to
changes in object size and hindering interpolation performance.This paper proposes the Differential Curves-guided
Blurry Video Frame Interpolation (DC-BVFI) framework,
which leverages the differential curves theory to analyze
and mitigate the effects of depth variations caused by object motion. Specifically, DC-BVFI consists of UBNet and
MPNet. Unlike prior approaches that rely on optical flow
for frame interpolation, MPNet is designed to estimate the
3D scene flow, which facilitates a more precise awareness
of depth and velocity variations. Since scene flow cannot
be directly inferred in the 2D frame space, UBNet is introduced to transform them into 3D point maps. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed DC-BVFI framework surpasses state-of-the-art performance in simulated
and real-world datasets.

Linear methods

Quadratic methods
Far distance

Differential curves
Real-world motion
Figure 1. Challenge. Linear methods: Synthesizing intermediate
frames through linear approximation. Quadratic methods: Synthesizing intermediate frames by fitting velocity variations. Differential curves: Exploring the depth variations.

thereby improving perception for the human visual system [22, 23]. Therefore, it is widely used for diverse
applications[20, 34, 49], and it has become a significant research area in computer vision.
BVFI methods can be broadly divided into two categories: linear methods and quadratic methods. Linear methods [3, 12, 29, 30, 32] typically employ existing motion estimators [17, 43, 45] to predict optical flow between input
frames. The intermediate optical flow is obtained by linearly approximating the optical flow between input frames
to synthesize the intermediate frame. However, linear methods often overlook variations in the velocity of object motion. To more accurately reconstruct complex motion, un-

1. Introduction
Natural videos captured by consumer cameras often suffer from real-world movement complexity. Blurry Video
Frame Interpolation (BVFI) enhances low frame rate and
motion-blurred videos into high-quality, sharp outputs between consecutive input frames by reconstructing motion,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author

1994

