This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DepthCues: Evaluating Monocular Depth Perception in Large Vision Models
Duolikun Danier

Mehmet Aygün Changjian Li Hakan Bilen
University of Edinburgh

Oisin Mac Aodha

https://danier97.github.io/depthcues

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained vision models are becoming increasingly prevalent, offering expressive and generalizable visual representations that benefit various downstream
tasks. Recent studies on the emergent properties of these
models have revealed their high-level geometric understanding, in particular in the context of depth perception.
However, it remains unclear how depth perception arises
in these models without explicit depth supervision provided during pre-training. To investigate this, we examine
whether the monocular depth cues, similar to those used
by the human visual system, emerge in these models. We
introduce a new benchmark, DepthCues, designed to evaluate depth cue understanding, and present findings across 20
diverse and representative pre-trained vision models. Our
analysis shows that human-like depth cues emerge in more
recent larger models. We also explore enhancing depth perception in large vision models by fine-tuning on DepthCues,
and find that even without dense depth supervision, this improves depth estimation. To support further research, our
benchmark and evaluation code will be made publicly available for studying depth perception in vision models.

1. Introduction
To ensure safe, accurate, and robust interaction with the 3D
world, it is important for computer vision models to understand geometric properties from their projections onto 2D
images. Of particular significance is the perception of depth
from single images, which has been found to benefit various downstream tasks including segmentation [43], object
detection [36], and image and video generation [46, 77],
among others. Monocular depth estimation models traditionally rely on dense depth supervision, but obtaining highquality depth ground truth at scale is challenging, unlike the
abundance of large 2D image-only datasets.
Large-scale pre-trained vision models like Stable Diffusion [59] and DINOv2 [54], trained solely on 2D images,
have shown strong generalization when fine-tuned on var-

Average Performance on Cues

100

DepthAnyv2-b14
DUSt3R-l16
LRM-b14
DINOv2-b14
SigLIP-b16
SAM-b16
CroCo-b16
ConvNext-b
SD2.1
MAE-b16
iBOT-b16
DINO-b16
CLIP-b16
DeiT-b16
ViT-b16
MiDaS-l16
SENet154
RNX50
RN50
RN18

90
80
70
60
50

2016

2018

2020

2022

Release Date of Model

2024

Figure 1. Human-like monocular depth cues emerge in large
vision models. We present DepthCues, a comprehensive benchmark suite designed to probe the understanding of human monocular depth cues in vision models. We analyse a diverse set of vision
models and find that recent self-supervised and geometry estimation models demonstrate a notably stronger grasp of these cues,
even in cases where models (e.g., DINOv2) were not explicitly
pre-trained on any depth-related tasks.

ious computer vision tasks, including multi-view [10, 38]
and monocular depth estimation [17, 22, 76], even reaching
human-level performance in ordering objects by depth [47].
As a result, numerous recent monocular depth estimation
approaches [28, 40, 72] leverage these models’ depth priors to achieve state-of-the-art performance. This naturally
raises an important question: How does depth perception
arise in these large vision models?
Studies on the human visual system [9, 39] suggest that
humans infer monocular depth using various visual cues
such as elevation, light and shadow, occlusion, perspective,
size, and texture gradient [7, 44] (see the top part of Fig. 2).
Although these visual cues could emerge in large vision
models during pre-training, it remains unclear to what extent this is true. Existing benchmarks [4, 17, 22, 47, 76] focus on evaluating the depth estimation performance of large
vision models but do not investigate their understanding of
the underlying visual cues. To address this gap, we eval-

20049

