This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CADCrafter: Generating Computer-Aided Design Models from Unconstrained
Images
Cheng Chen1,2* , Jiacheng Wei1* , Tianrun Chen3,7† , Chi Zhang5 , Xiaofeng Yang1 , Shangzhan Zhang7 ,
Bingchen Yang1 , Chuan-Sheng Foo2,6 , Guosheng Lin1 , Qixing Huang4 , Fayao Liu2†
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
KOKONI3D, Moxin (Huzhou) Technology Co., LTD., 4 The University of Texas at Austin
5
Westlake University, 6 Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore
7
Zhejiang University
{cheng021, jiacheng.wei}@ntu.edu.sg, tianrun.chen@kokoni3d.com, fayaoliu@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction

Creating CAD digital twins from the physical world is
crucial for manufacturing, design, and simulation. However, current methods typically rely on costly 3D scanning
with labor-intensive post-processing. To provide a userfriendly design process, we explore the problem of reverse
engineering from unconstrained real-world CAD images
that can be easily captured by users of all experiences.
However, the scarcity of real-world CAD data poses challenges in directly training such models. To tackle these challenges, we propose CADCrafter, an image-to-parametric
CAD model generation framework that trains solely on synthetic textureless CAD data while testing on real-world images. To bridge the signiﬁcant representation disparity between images and parametric CAD models, we introduce
a geometry encoder to accurately capture diverse geometric features. Moreover, the texture-invariant properties of
the geometric features can also facilitate the generalization
to real-world scenarios. Since compiling CAD parameter
sequences into explicit CAD models is a non-differentiable
process, the network training inherently lacks explicit geometric supervision. To impose geometric validity constraints, we employ direct preference optimization (DPO) to
ﬁne-tune our model with the automatic code checker feedback on CAD sequence quality. Furthermore, we collected
a real-world dataset, comprised of multi-view images and
corresponding CAD command sequence pairs, to evaluate
our method. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach can robustly handle real unconstrained CAD images, and even generalize to unseen general objects.
∗ The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

Computer-aided design (CAD) provides fundamental mechanical components that are essential to create shapes and
mechanisms in all manufacturing and design applications.
Parametric CAD command sequences enable precise control over shapes and facilitate effortless future modiﬁcations on size and scales. However, manual creation of CAD
command sequences is tedious and time-consuming, leading to reverse engineering studies to recover CAD design
procedures from existing CAD models. Current research
focuses predominantly on reconstructing CAD command
sequences from 3D representations such as B-Reps [36, 39],
point clouds [22, 38], and voxels [15, 16]. These forms are
typically derived from synthetic digital data or from highquality 3D reconstructions obtained using costly 3D sensors. This dependency on sophisticated data and expensive
technology limits the feasibility of these methods in practical everyday applications.
Recent advances in generative models have facilitated
the generation and reconstruction of images to 3D [11, 17,
18, 20] with ease. However, these methods often yield 3D
shapes with rough surfaces and indistinct, blurred edges,
failing to accurately replicate geometric standards such as
rectangles or circles. Moreover, the 3D shapes produced
by these methods are difﬁcult to edit and lack the precision
required for direct use in manufacturing.
This prompts us to investigate the feasibility of directly
generating editable CAD command sequences from images,
as illustrated in Figure 1. However, the task is particularly
difﬁcult due to the signiﬁcant representational and domain
gap between the two modalities, where CAD commands
consist of a mix of discrete geometric operations and continuous parameters while images capture raw appearance
with limited spatial information. The challenge is ampliﬁed with in-the-wild, unconstrained images. These images

11073

