This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AeroGen: Enhancing Remote Sensing Object Detection with Diffusion-Driven
Data Generation
Datao Tang1,2 Xiangyong Cao1,2 * Xuan Wu1,2 Jialin Li1,2 Jing Yao5
Xueru Bai6 Dongsheng Jiang7 Yin Li7 Deyu Meng2,3,4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
2
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
4
Pengcheng Laboratory 5 Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Xidian University 7 Huawei Technologies Ltd

Layout

Image

DIOR

DIOR-R

HRSC

Figure 1. Generated images with our proposed AeroGen. AeroGen enables the input of both horizontal and rotated bounding box layout
conditions, facilitating accurate remote sensing image layout generation.

Abstract

quality synthetic images that meet specific layout and object category requirements. Additionally, we propose an
end-to-end data augmentation framework that integrates a
diversity-conditioned generator and a filtering mechanism
to enhance both the diversity and quality of generated data.
Experimental results demonstrate that the synthetic data
produced by our method are of high quality and diversity.
Furthermore, the synthetic RSIOD data can significantly
improve the detection performance of existing RSIOD models, i.e., the mAP metrics on DIOR, DIOR-R, and HRSC
datasets are improved by 3.7%, 4.3%, and 2.43%, respectively. The code is available at here.

Remote sensing image object detection (RSIOD) aims to
identify and locate specific objects within satellite or aerial
imagery. However, there is a scarcity of labeled data in current RSIOD datasets, which significantly limits the performance of current detection algorithms. Although existing
techniques, e.g., data augmentation and semi-supervised
learning, can mitigate this scarcity issue to some extent,
they are heavily dependent on high-quality labeled data
and perform worse in rare object classes. To address this
issue, this paper proposes a layout-controllable diffusion
generative model (i.e. AeroGen) tailored for RSIOD. To
our knowledge, AeroGen is the first model to simultaneously support horizontal and rotated bounding box condition generation, thus enabling the generation of high-

1. Introduction
Object detection is a key technology for understanding and
analyzing remote sensing images. It enables efficient pro-

* Corresponding author: caoxiangyong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

3614

