This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MODA: Motion-Drift Augmentation for Inertial Human Motion Analysis
Yinghao Wu1
1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China

Shihui Guo1∗†
2

Yipeng Qin2

School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, UK

Abstract
While data augmentation (DA) has been extensively studied in computer vision, its application to Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) signals remains largely unexplored, despite IMUs’ growing importance in human motion analysis. In this paper, we present the first systematic study
of IMU-specific data augmentation, beginning with a comprehensive analysis that identifies three fundamental properties of IMU signals: their time-series nature, inherent multimodality (rotation and acceleration) and motionconsistency characteristics. Through this analysis, we
demonstrate the limitations of applying conventional timeseries augmentation techniques to IMU data. We then introduce Motion-Drift Augmentation (MODA), a novel technique that simulates the natural displacement of body-worn
IMUs during motion. We evaluate our approach across five
diverse datasets and five deep learning settings, including
i) fully-supervised, ii) semi-supervised, iii) domain adaptation, iv) domain generalization and v) few-shot learning for
both Human Action Recognition (HAR) and Human Pose
Estimation (HPE) tasks. Experimental results show that our
proposed MODA consistently outperforms existing augmentation methods, with semi-supervised learning performance
approaching state-of-the-art fully-supervised methods.

Figure 1. We propose Motion-Drift Augmentation (MODA), an
IMU-specific data augmentation technique, by simulating the drift
of body-worn IMUs during human motion. MODA exhibits superiority and versatility in five major deep learning settings across
two IMU-based human motion analysis tasks including Human
Pose Estimation (HPE) and Human Action Recognition (HAR).

1. Introduction

recognition [51, 55], person re-identification [4, 18], etc.
However, due to the inherent heterogeneity across different domains and their unique data characteristics, DA remains understudied in many other domains, creating significant research gaps. For example, Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) have demonstrated remarkable potential for human motion analysis, e.g., Human Action Recognition (HAR) [11, 28, 63, 64] and Human Pose Estimation (HPE) [15, 17, 47, 53, 59, 60, 65, 66], but DA methods specifically designed for IMU signals are largely unexplored and remain an open challenge.
Motivated by the continuous, time-series nature of IMU
measurements, existing works adopted a naive strategy of
applying general time-series DA methods [2] to IMU-based
human motion analysis. For example, [39] proposed applying slicing and flipping to IMU signals for HAR, allowing different-length IMU sequences to align with the same
semantic label, thereby generating more training samples.
Transpose [59] utilized jittering, i.e., sampling from a Gaussian distribution and directly adding it to the IMU measurements, for HPE to increase sample diversity, but it only

Data augmentation (DA) stands as a cornerstone of deep
learning research, playing a pivotal role in boosting the robustness and generalization of deep models, especially in
low-data regimes. To date, most DA techniques have been
developed in computer vision [5, 14, 29, 30, 49, 52] and
have achieved great success in image classification [7, 12],
semantic segmentation [10, 62], object detection [3, 6], face
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (62472364, 62072383), the Public Technology Service Platform
Project of Xiamen City (No.3502Z20231043), Xiaomi Young Talents Program/Xiaomi Foundation and the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities (20720240058). This work is also partially supported
by Royal Society (IEC\NSFC \211022). *Corresponding author: Shihui
Guo (guoshihui@xmu.edu.cn). † Also with Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Fujian
and Taiwan, Ministry of Culture and Tourism.

27771

