This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grounding 3D Object Affordance with Language Instructions, Visual
Observations and Interactions
He Zhu1,2

Quyu Kong2 Kechun Xu1,2 Xunlong Xia2
Jieping Ye2 Rong Xiong1 * Yue Wang1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Cloud

Abstract
Grounding 3D object affordance is a task that locates
objects in 3D space where they can be manipulated, which
links perception and action for embodied intelligence. For
example, for an intelligent robot, it is necessary to accurately ground the affordance of an object and grasp it according to human instructions. In this paper, we introduce
a novel task that grounds 3D object affordance based on
language instructions, visual observations and interactions,
which is inspired by cognitive science. We collect an Affordance Grounding dataset with Points, Images and Language instructions (AGPIL) to support the proposed task.
In the 3D physical world, due to observation orientation,
object rotation, or spatial occlusion, we can only get a
partial observation of the object. So this dataset includes
affordance estimations of objects from full-view, partialview, and rotation-view perspectives. To accomplish this
task, we propose LMAffordance3D, the first multi-modal,
language-guided 3D affordance grounding network, which
applies a vision-language model to fuse 2D and 3D spatial features with semantic features. Comprehensive experiments on AGPIL demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method on this task, even in unseen experimental settings. Our project is available at https:
//sites.google.com/view/lmaffordance3d.

1. Introduction
Affordance is the property of an object that suggest how
it can be used [10]. Grounding 3D object affordance aims
to classify, detect, or segment the object’s affordances in a
scene with the input of images, videos, and point clouds,
which plays an important role in robotics, human-object interactions (HOI), scene understanding, functionality understanding, and other fields [3, 14].
Although there are numerous studies [6, 8, 27, 30] focusing on grounding object affordances from 2D images
* Corresponding author (rxiong@zju.edu.cn).

Bing Deng2

Instruction Open/Grasp
the bottle

Interaction

Agent
Affordance

Observation

Figure 1. Illustration for the affordance grounding task. Inspired by cognitive science, when humans encounter a new object,
they learn its affordance through language instructions, vision information from eyes, and human-machine interactions, thus obtaining its affordance.

or videos, the knowledge of affordances derived from 2D
data remains challenging to apply in 3D space. Some works
[5, 44] have been dedicated to using 3D data to ground object affordances. They learn from geometry to segment
out affordance regions from point clouds. However, they
exhibit limited generalization for grounding unseen object
affordances and tend to show confusion when encountering similar objects. [47]. Actually, humans learn the affordances of a new object from demonstrations in images or
videos, as well as from verbal instructions. It is a complex
and comprehensive task that involves understanding of language instructions, geometric relationships, and scene information. Cognitive science research [12] also indicates
that visual information and auditory language cues humans
perceive can enhance their ability to use or manipulate new
objects. Inspired by this, we introduce a novel task that
grounds 3D object affordance based on language instructions, visual observations, and interactions.
In this paper, we present AGPIL, which is the first multimodal and multi-view dataset for grounding 3D object affordance. For the full-view dataset, each frame of data includes a language instruction, an image of human-object interactions, and point clouds of the object’s entire external
surface. In the 3D physical world, due to observation ori-

17337

