This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

pFedMxF: Personalized Federated Class-incremental Learning with Mixture of
Frequency Aggregation
Yifei Zhang1, * Hao Zhu2,∗ Alysa Ziying Tan1 Dianzhi Yu3 Longtao Huang4 Han Yu1,†
1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
2
Data61 CSRIO 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Alibaba Group
{yifei.zhang, han.yu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a promising
paradigm for privacy-preserving collaborative machine
learning. However, extending FL to class incremental learning settings introduces three key challenges: 1) spatial heterogeneity due to non-IID data distributions across clients,
2) temporal heterogeneity due to sequential arrival of tasks,
and 3) resource heterogeneity due to diverse client capabilities. Existing approaches generally address these challenges in isolation, potentially leading to interference between updates, catastrophic forgetting or excessive communication overhead. In this paper, we propose personalized
Federated class-incremental parameter efficient fine-tuning
with Mixture of Frequency aggregation (pFedMxF), a novel
framework that simultaneously addresses all three heterogeneity challenges through frequency domain decomposition.
Our key insight is that assigning orthogonal frequency components to different clients and tasks enables interferencefree learning to be achieved with minimal communication
costs. We further design an Auto-task Agnostic Classifier
that automatically routes samples to task-specific classifiers
while adapting to heterogeneous class distributions. We
conduct extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets,
comparing our approach with eight state-of-the-art methods.
The results demonstrate that pFedMxF achieves comparable test accuracy, while requiring less model parameters
and incurring significantly lower communication costs than
baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [10, 32, 51, 55] has emerged as
a useful paradigm for collaborative model training while
preserving data privacy. In recent years, with increasing
emphasis on data protection regulations [43], FL has been
widely adopted across various domains, from healthcare to
*

Equal Contribution and † Corresponding Author.

autonomous driving [19, 33]. However, existing FL methods generally operate under a closed-world assumption [12],
where the number of classes remains fixed throughout training. This assumption might not always hold in real-world
scenarios, where data owners (i.e., FL clients) continuously
encounter new classes and update their models accordingly.
The intersection of federated and incremental learning
introduces unique challenges [6]. Local clients not only have
different data distributions (non-IID data), but might also
encounter new classes at different times. Moreover, clients
vary in their computational resources and communication
capabilities. These variations create a complex landscape of
heterogeneity. Firstly, each client’s unique data distribution
leads to biased local updates that can affect global model performance [62]. Secondly, as new classes emerge over time,
the model must learn them without forgetting previously
acquired knowledge [31]. Thirdly, varying computational
power and communication bandwidth across clients necessitate efficient learning approaches [26].
Current approaches struggle to address these challenges
effectively. Some methods store old data samples [6], which
compromises privacy and consumes memory. Others generate synthetic data [40–42, 59], which is computationally
expensive and often unreliable. While parameter-efficient
approaches [16] reduce communication costs, they often suffer from interference across different clients and tasks. The
main issue is that adjustments made for one client or task
can often disrupt the learning of others.
We draw inspiration from an everyday phenomenon –
just as a radio tunes into different stations without interference, what if we assign unique “frequencies” to different
clients and tasks to enable independent learning. By translating model updates into the frequency domain, we offer an
elegant solution to simultaneously address all three heterogeneity challenges. The frequency domain naturally handles
spatial heterogeneity across clients by assigning each one its
own distinct frequency components. Much like radio stations
broadcasting in different channels, clients can update their
models independently, even when their data distributions dif-

30640

