This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid Concept Bottleneck Models
Yang Liu, Tianwei Zhang, Shi Gu
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC
liu.yang.mine@std.uestc.edu.cn, gsbyztw@gmail.com, gus@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

Input Image

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) provide an interpretable framework for neural networks by mapping visual
features to predefined, human-understandable concepts.
However, the application of CBMs is often constrained by
insufficient concept annotations. Recently, multi-modal pretrained models have shown promise in reducing annotation
costs by aligning visual representations with textual concept
embeddings. Nevertheless, the quality and completeness
of the predefined concepts significantly affect the performance of CBMs. In this work, we propose Hybrid Concept
Bottleneck Model (HybridCBM), a novel CBM framework
to address the challenge of incomplete predefined concepts.
Our method consists of two main components: a Static Concept Bank and a Dynamic Concept Bank. The Static Concept Bank directly leverages large language models (LLMs)
for concept construction, while the Dynamic Concept Bank
employs learnable vectors to capture complementary and
valuable concepts continuously during training. After training, a pre-trained translator converts these vectors into
human-understandable concepts, further enhancing model
interpretability. HybridCBM is highly flexible and can be
easily integrated with existing CBMs to improve both interpretability and performance. Experimental results1 on multiple datasets demonstrate that HybridCBM outperforms
current state-of-the-art CBMs and achieves comparable results to black-box models. Additionally, we propose novel
metrics to assess the quality of learned concepts, showing
that they perform comparably to predefined concepts.

Predefined Concepts
Definer

feeds on the ground
eats insects, spiders
yellow underparts

Training

yellowish – throat
high - pitched in the trees
Lays 3-5 eggs

!
"

Learned Concepts
!
"

Figure 1. Our proposed concept-trainable CBM reduces the need
for meticulously designed concepts by incorporating learned concepts (e.g., ‘yellowish throat’), thereby enhancing interpretability
and performance while minimizing manual design effort.

1. Introduction

of ‘blackbox’ [23]. Addressing this challenge is crucial
not only for ensuring accurate predictions, but also for providing scientists and engineers with more accessible tools
for designing, developing, and debugging models. Interpretability is particularly critical in domains such as healthcare [10], medicine [33], education [7], and finance [28],
where high-stakes decision-making requires transparency
and trustworthiness to ensure reliability and accountability. Therefore, there has been a growing focus on research
aimed at developing interpretable models. While post-hoc
explanation methods [34, 37, 55] have gained popularity,
they often fall short by providing unfaithful representations
of the model’s underlying computations [35].
A natural approach to improving interpretability in
DNNs is to design inherently interpretable models that
leverage high-level concepts to describe features extracted
by black-box models [36], imitating the way humans encode and understand the world[20]. One notable approach
following such methodology is the Concept Bottleneck
Models (CBM) [17]. CBMs operate by first predicting
concepts from image representations mid-way through the
decision-making process. These models pair each image
with its predefined concepts and are trained in an end-to-end
manner—initially predicting concepts and subsequently using these predictions to make final decisions. While this
method of concept prediction enhances model interpretability, it often faces two fundamental challenges: (1) it is perceived to underperform compared to black-box models [11],

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become increasingly
dominant in various fields, including computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition. However their complex and deep structures present a significant
challenge to interpretability, often earning them the label
1 Code available at https://github.com/ly1998117/HybridCBM

20179

