This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ground-V: Teaching VLMs to Ground Complex Instructions in Pixels
Yongshuo Zong1 ,* Qin Zhang2†, Dongsheng An2 , Zhihua Li2 , Xiang Xu2 , Linghan Xu2 ,
Zhuowen Tu2 , Yifan Xing2 , Onkar Dabeer2
1
2
University of Edinburgh
AWS AI Labs
yongshuo.zong@ed.ac.uk, {qzaamz,andongsh,zhihuaa,xiangx,linghanx,ztu,yifax,onkardab}@amazon.com

Abstract
This work presents a simple yet effective workflow for
automatically scaling instruction-following data to elicit
pixel-level grounding capabilities of VLMs under complex instructions. In particular, we address five critical
real-world challenges in text-instruction-based grounding:
hallucinated references, multi-object scenarios, reasoning,
multi-granularity, and part-level references. By leveraging
knowledge distillation from a pre-trained teacher model,
our approach generates high-quality instruction-response
pairs linked to existing pixel-level annotations, minimizing the need for costly human annotation. The resulting dataset, Ground-V, captures rich object localization
knowledge and nuanced pixel-level referring expressions.
Experiment results show that models trained on Ground-V
exhibit substantial improvements across diverse grounding
tasks. Specifically, incorporating Ground-V during training directly achieve an average accuracy boost of 4.4% for
LISA and a 7.9% for PSALM across six benchmarks on the
gIoU metric. It also sets new state-of-the-art results on
standard benchmarks such as RefCOCO/+/g. Notably, on
gRefCOCO, we achieve an N-Acc of 83.3%, exceeding the
previous state-of-the-art by more than 20%.

RefCOCOg

RefCOCO+

75.5

73.9

70.5

LISA
LISA-G5
PSALM
PSALM-G5

83.9

gRefCOCO

RefCOCO

58.5

3

D

50.6
Ground-V

Figure 1. Performance comparison of LISA and PSALM models
w/ and w/o our Ground-V dataset during training. Incorporating
Ground-V consistently enhances both models’ performance across
benchmarks, achieving an average improvement of 4.4% for LISA
and 7.9% for PSALM on the gIoU metric across six benchmarks.

1. Introduction

puter vision specialist [23, 38, 47, 58], despite their excellent performance on standard object detection or segmentation benchmarks, struggle to interpret abstract natural language instructions for precise visual grounding, particularly
when handling complex instructions and visual scenarios.
Advances in large vision-language models (VLMs) [1,
7, 20, 21, 56] have shown promise toward bridging this
gap. These models exhibit strong capabilities in general
multimodal tasks such as recognition, perception, and multimodal reasoning. To further enhance VLMs’ ability to
not only recognize and understand images but also localize specific regions of interest in pixel level, i.e. segmentation, researchers have proposed architectural designs to
incorporate the strengths of computer vision specialists. By
learning special grounding tokens in VLMs [13, 39, 44, 53]
and using them as inputs for computer vision specialists like
SAM [12], these models are beginning to unlock emerging
capabilities such as reasoning-driven segmentation [13].

Picture this: you are at a fruit bar and someone asks you
to “add more fruits with high antioxidants.” Without hesitation, your mind automatically translates this abstract request
into action – your eyes scanning for and pinpointing apples, pomegranates, or blueberries. This seemingly simple
process demonstrates an important human cognitive ability:
connecting prior knowledge with visual recognition, navigating multiple levels of abstraction, and precisely localizing objects based on imprecise instructions. While humans
perform such tasks naturally, current state-of-the-art com* Work done during internship at Amazon.
† Corresponding author: qzaamz@amazon.com

24635

