This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved monocular depth prediction using distance transform over
pre-semantic contours with self-supervised neural networks
Marwane Hariat1 , Antoine Manzanera1 , David Filliat 1
U2IS, ENSTA, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
{marwane.hariat, antoine.manzanera, david.filliat}@ensta.fr
1

RGB images

Depth

Edge

Distance Transform

Figure 1. The different modalities estimated in our self-supervised framework and used to reduce matching uncertainty between images.

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation (MDE) with self-supervised
training approaches struggles in low-texture areas, where
photometric losses may lead to ambiguous depth predictions. To address this, we propose a novel technique that
enhances spatial information by applying a distance transform over pre-semantic contours, augmenting discriminative power in low texture regions. Our approach jointly estimates pre-semantic contours, depth and ego-motion. The
pre-semantic contours are leveraged to produce new input
images, with variance augmented by the distance transform in uniform areas. This approach results in more effective loss functions, enhancing the training process for
depth and ego-motion. We demonstrate theoretically that
the distance transform is the optimal variance-augmenting
technique in this context. Through extensive experiments
on KITTI, Cityscapes, Waymo, NYUv2 and ScanNet our
model demonstrates robust performance, surpassing competing self-supervised methods in MDE.

eliminates the need for expensive sensors that require highpower resources [42, 48], such as active depth camera or LiDAR, while maintaining low latency and ensuring real-time
compliance [15, 78]. This makes MDE a core module in
applications such as robot navigation [65, 87], autonomous
driving [52, 76] or virtual/augmented reality [14, 61]. Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) are currently the state of the art
for depth maps prediction thanks to their ability to exploit
all contextual cues of the environment [12, 32].
Supervised methods for MDE rely on ground-truth annotations. In spite of huge progress [6, 13, 18, 70], these
methods are constrained by the cost and quality of the annotations. In this paper, we focus on self-supervised MDE,
that uses the structure-from-motion framework [19, 91] and
leverages depth and camera ego-motion estimations from
DNNs to reconstruct the next frame from the current one.
The supervision signal is then provided by the photometric
loss, i.e. the difference between the reconstructed frame
and the observed one, based on a combination of direct
colour comparison and Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [55]. Although more challenging, the selfsupervised paradigm offers greater training flexibility. First,
it can be trained using data from unknown cameras [23], as
long as data acquisition provides successive frames, such
as in YouTube videos [7]. This is particularly relevant
given the growing interest in foundation models, which can
now leverage large datasets to produce generalizable out-

1. Introduction
The goal of monocular depth estimation (MDE) is to determine the distance of a pixel from the camera focal plane
using only a single input image, unlike stereo depth estimation [2, 21, 25], which relies on pairs of images. This

21868

