This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PCM : Picard Consistency Model for Fast Parallel Sampling of Diffusion Models
Junhyuk So1 Jiwoong Shin1 Chaeyeon Jang1 Eunhyeok Park1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
{junhyukso,jwshin0610, jcy2749, eh.park}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, diffusion models have achieved significant advances in vision, text, and robotics. However, they still face
slow generation speeds due to sequential denoising processes. To address this, a parallel sampling method based
on Picard iteration was introduced, effectively reducing sequential steps while ensuring exact convergence to the original output. Nonetheless, Picard iteration does not guarantee faster convergence, which can still result in slow generation in practice. In this work, we propose a new parallelization scheme, the Picard Consistency Model (PCM),
which significantly reduces the number of generation steps
in Picard iteration. Inspired by the consistency model, PCM
is directly trained to predict the fixed-point solution, or the
final output, at any stage of the convergence trajectory. Additionally, we introduce a new concept called model switching, which addresses PCM’s limitations and ensures exact
convergence. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PCM
achieves up to a 2.71x speedup over sequential sampling
and a 1.77x speedup over Picard iteration across various
tasks, including image generation and robotic control.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion probabilistic models [7] have achieved
outstanding performance across diverse generative tasks in
vision [30, 32, 35], audio [9, 15, 23], text [1, 18, 25],
robotics [2, 12], and bioinformatics [21, 46]. Their iterative
denoising process enables high-quality outputs by capturing
fine details and diversity, making them versatile across applications. However, this process has a notable drawback:
slow generation speed. For example, early diffusion models
like DDPM [7] require 1,000 denoising steps, each involving intensive computation, resulting in high latency.
To enable faster inference, various approaches have been
proposed; however, most achieve speedups at the expense
of quality degradation or inconsistent convergence. For instance, ODE-based solvers like DDIM [40] often trade off
image quality for fewer sampling steps. Studies like the

Consistency Model [43] and Progressive Distillation [37]
use distillation to reduce sampling steps, but the final output
may differ from the original model due to modified weights.
In this work, we aim to explore a different question: can
increased parallelism lead to faster convergence? While
adding parallelism can nearly linearly enhance throughput,
achieving low latency in sequential generative models demands innovation at the mathematical foundation level. Recently, ParaDiGMS [38] tackled this challenge with a parallel sampling method based on Picard iteration, reducing
the sequential steps in diffusion sampling by performing
more computations in parallel. Picard iteration ensures convergence to the exact output, guaranteeing the same output
quality as original model; however, it does not ensure fast
convergence, which may result in slower generation speeds
in practice.
In this study, we introduce the Picard Consistency Model
(PCM) to accelerate the convergence speed of Picard iteration. Inspired by the Consistency Model [43], PCM is
trained to directly predict the fixed-point solution at any
point along the Picard iteration trajectory. In addition, our
novel idea, model mixing, ensures exact convergence to the
original output even with PCM’s acceleration. Our extensive analysis reveals that PCM with model mixing gives a
2.71x speedup over sequential denoising and 1.77x speedup
over Picard iteration, with guaranteeing exact convergence
in diverse image generation and robotic applications.

2. Preliminary
2.1. Diffusion Models
The Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DPM) was first introduced in the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [7]
(DDPM) . The latent variable of diffusion model, xt (t ≤ T )
is defined through following diffusion forward process q(·).
  q(x_t|x_T) = N(x_t; \sqrt {(\alpha (t))}x_T, (1-\alpha (t))I) 

(1)

Here, α(t) is scalar function that setted to α(0) = 0,
transforming q(xt ) to standard gaussian N (0, I) with t →

23313

