This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ouroboros3D: Image-to-3D Generation via 3D-aware Recursive Diffusion
Hao Wen1, 2 * Zehuan Huang1,3 * Yaohui Wang2 Xinyuan Chen2 Lu Sheng1†
1
School of Software, Beihang University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 VAST

Input

Rendered from Generated 3DGS

Input

Rendered from Generated 3DGS

Figure 1. Ouroboros3D generates multi-view consistent images and high-quality 3D models from single images using 3D-aware recursive
diffusion, introducing a novel 3D-aware feedback mechanism that involves iterative cycles of multi-view denoising and reconstruction.

Abstract
Existing image-to-3D creation methods typically split the
task into two stages: multi-view image generation and
3D reconstruction, leading to two main limitations: (1)
In multi-view generation stage, the multi-view generated
images present a challenge to preserving 3D consistency;
(2) In the 3D reconstruction stage, a domain gap exists
between the real training data and the images generated
during the inference process. To address these issues, we
propose Ouroboros3D, an end-to-end trainable framework
that integrates multi-view generation and 3D reconstruction
into a recursive diffusion process through feedback mechanism. Our framework operates through iterative cycles
where each cycle consists of a feedback denoising process
and a reconstruction step. By incorporating a 3D-aware

feedback mechanism, our multi-view generative model leverages the explicit 3D geometric information (e.g. texture,
position) from the feedback of reconstruction results of the
previous process as conditions, thus modeling consistency
at the 3D geometric level. Furthermore, through joint training of both the multi-view generative and reconstruction
models, we alleviate reconstruction stage domain gap and
enable mutual enhancement within the recursive process.
Experimental results demonstrate that Ouroboros3D outperforms methods that treat these stages separately and those
that combine them only during inference, achieving superior multi-view consistency and producing 3D models with
higher geometric realism. Please see the project page at
https://costwen.github.io/Ouroboros3D/

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

21631

