This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP is Strong Enough to Fight Back: Test-time Counterattacks towards
Zero-shot Adversarial Robustness of CLIP

1

Songlong Xing1 Zhengyu Zhao2 * Nicu Sebe1
University of Trento, Italy 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University, China

{songlong.xing, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it

zhengyu.zhao@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite its prevalent use in image-text matching tasks in a
zero-shot manner, CLIP has been shown to be highly vulnerable to adversarial perturbations added onto images.
Recent studies propose to finetune the vision encoder of
CLIP with adversarial samples generated on the fly, and
show improved robustness against adversarial attacks on
a spectrum of downstream datasets, a property termed as
zero-shot robustness. In this paper, we show that malicious perturbations that seek to maximise the classification
loss lead to ‘falsely stable’ images, and propose to leverage the pre-trained vision encoder of CLIP to counterattack
such adversarial images during inference to achieve robustness. Our paradigm is simple and training-free, providing
the first method to defend CLIP from adversarial attacks at
test time, which is orthogonal to existing methods aiming to
boost zero-shot adversarial robustness of CLIP. We conduct
experiments across 16 classification datasets, and demonstrate stable and consistent gains compared to test-time defence methods adapted from existing adversarial robustness
studies that do not rely on external networks, without noticeably impairing performance on clean images. We also
show that our paradigm can be employed on CLIP models
that have been adversarially finetuned to further enhance
their robustness at test time. Our code is available here.

Figure 1. Test-time counterattacks harness the expressive power
of CLIP to generate a counterattack to defend CLIP against adversaries without finetuning the vision encoder.

[26, 27, 32, 44, 50, 59, 63], a common problem plaguing
nearly all neural networks [2, 6, 25, 29, 33, 36, 48, 57, 58].
As foundational models are deployed in real-world applications, their safety and reliability have become a pressing
concern. In this paper, we focus on the robustness of CLIP
against adversarial perturbations.

1. Introduction

Unlike conventional models for which adversarial robustness has been extensively studied [2, 6, 11, 33, 47, 48],
CLIP is a pre-trained foundation model that has learned
massive amounts of real-world knowledge, and should be
dealt with carefully to minimise damage to its generalisation abilities. Adversarial robustness of CLIP has just
started to garner research attention [26, 32, 44, 50] in recent
years. Existing efforts fall into two categories. The first
type is based on adversarial training [3, 58], which alternately generates adversarial images on one dataset and uses
them to finetune the vision encoder of CLIP [32, 50]. This
type of methods, known as adversarial finetuning (AFT),
dynamically mimics a min-max game between CLIP and
the threat model in the finetuning phase, and deploys the
finetuned model in a wide variety of downstream classification tasks without further training. This method shows
transferable robustness to downstream datasets, a property
termed as zero-shot robustness [32, 50]. The other type of

With the increasing availability of image-text data and
the advancement of self-supervised learning techniques
[7, 8, 16], vision-language models (VLM) have continued
to spark research interests in both academia and industry
[21, 28, 39, 40, 42, 56]. As a representative VLM, CLIP
[39] has shown impressive abilities to match an image with
its descriptive text in a zero-shot manner. However, recent studies have shown that adding small imperceptible
perturbations to an image can cause CLIP to misclassify it
* Corresponding author

15172

