This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-LLaVA: Towards Generalist 3D LMMs with Omni Superpoint Transformer
Jiajun Deng1 , Tianyu He2 , Li Jiang3 , Tianyu Wang4 , Feras Dayoub1 , Ian Reid1,4
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
2
3
Microsoft Research
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI

Abstract
Current 3D Large Multimodal Models (3D LMMs) have
shown tremendous potential in 3D-vision-based dialogue
and reasoning. However, how to further enhance 3D LMMs
to achieve fine-grained scene understanding and facilitate flexible human-agent interaction remains a challenging problem. In this work, we introduce 3D-LLaVA, a simple yet highly powerful 3D LMM designed to act as an intelligent assistant in comprehending, reasoning, and interacting with the 3D world. Unlike existing top-performing
methods that rely on complicated pipelines—such as offline
multi-view feature extraction or additional task-specific
heads—3D-LLaVA adopts a minimalist design with integrated architecture and only takes point clouds as input.
At the core of 3D-LLaVA is a new Omni Superpoint Transformer (OST), which integrates three functionalities: (1) a
visual feature selector that converts and selects visual tokens, (2) a visual prompt encoder that embeds interactive
visual prompts into the visual token space, and (3) a referring mask decoder that produces 3D masks based on
text description. This versatile OST is empowered by the
hybrid pretraining to obtain perception priors and leveraged as the visual connector that bridges the 3D data to
the LLM. After performing unified instruction tuning, our
3D-LLaVA reports impressive results on various benchmarks. The code and model will be released at https:
//github.com/djiajunustc/3D-LLaVA.

3D-LLM

Scene-LLM

LL3DA

SegPoint

LEO

Grounded 3D-LLM

Chat-Scene

Ours

Figure 1. An intuitive comparison between 3D-LLaVA and other
SoTA 3D LMMs (The performance of LEO on ScanQA is omitted
here since its setting is different). Our 3D-LLaVA achieves the
best results among the competitors on most of the benchmarks.

of real-world applications, such as autonomous vehicles,
household robots, and augmented reality, where robust
reasoning, precise 3D scene comprehension, and seamless
human-agent interaction are of great significance.
It is a non-trivial problem to empower 3D LMMs with
these desired properties. Despite notable progress achieved
with the 3D vision and language community towards 3D
dialogue and reasoning, these 3D LMMs still rely on extra
prompt encoder [40] or offline region proposal generation
and feature extraction [23, 25] to enable interacting with
both visual and textual prompts. Such extra modules and
offline preprocessing result in a complex pipeline, which
complicates deployment and limits accessibility.
Furthermore, an effective 3D vision and language assistant should extend beyond simply generating text output; it
should also be capable of grounding open-ended language
expressions within a 3D scene and accurately segmenting
the corresponding 3D masks. However, current referringbased 3D point cloud segmentation methods typically align
and fuse text embeddings into a specialized segmentation
model without LLMs. An exception is SegPoint [21], which
utilizes the reasoning capabilities of LLMs to improve re-

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Large Language Models
(LLMs) [4, 43, 49, 55, 66] have reshaped the paradigm of
artificial intelligence, positioning language as a universal
interface for general-purpose reasoning and interaction.
Building on this progress, 2D Large Multi-modal Models
(LMMs) [2, 18, 39, 40, 42] have emerged, integrating images and texts to support a wide range of vision-language
tasks. In a further step to extend these capabilities to 3D,
3D LMMs [11, 23] have huge potential to unlock a series

3772

