This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOIGPT: Learning Long-Sequence Hand-Object Interaction with Language
Models
Mingzhen Huang1,2 *, Fu-Jen Chu1 , Bugra Tekin1 , Kevin J. Liang1 , Haoyu Ma1 , Weiyao Wang1
Xingyu Chen1 , Pierre Gleize1 , Hongfei Xue2 , Siwei Lyu2 , Kris Kitani1 , Matt Feiszli1 , Hao Tang1
1
2
FAIR, Meta
State University of New York at Buffalo

Abstract

Can you generate a HOI sequence
that a person picking up a box and
hold it with both hands?

We introduce HOIGPT, a token-based generative method
that unifies 3D hand-object interactions (HOI) perception
and generation, offering the first comprehensive solution for
captioning and generating high-quality 3D HOI sequences
from a diverse range of conditional signals (e.g. text, objects,
partial sequences). At its core, HOIGPT utilizes a large
language model to predict the bidrectional transformation
between HOI sequences and natural language descriptions.
Given text inputs, HOIGPT generates a sequence of hand
and object meshes; given (partial) HOI sequences, HOIGPT
generates text descriptions and completes the sequences. To
facilitate HOI understanding with a large language model,
this paper introduces two key innovations: (1) a novel physically grounded HOI tokenizer, the hand-object decomposed
VQ-VAE, for discretizing HOI sequences, and (2) a motionaware language model trained to process and generate both
text and HOI tokens. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that HOIGPT sets new state-of-the-art performance on both
text generation (+2.01% R Precision) and HOI generation
(-2.56 FID) across multiple tasks and benchmarks.

HOIGPT
Can you generate a full HOI sequence
given this object movement?

HOIGPT
Can you describe the HOI sequence?

The HOI sequence shows a person open the
box and then close it with left hand

HOIGPT

Figure 1. HOIGPT can interpret a variety of input prompts for
diverse HOI-related tasks. We illustrate examples of text to HOI
generation, HOI completion conditioned on object movement, and
HOI captioning. HOIGPT generates or interprets hand-object interaction sequences in response to user queries, showcasing its
capability to understand and produce contextually relevant HOI
motions. The sequences represent time order from left to right.

1. Introduction
Hand-object interaction (HOI) refers to how humans use one
or both hands to directly manipulate objects, including for
tool manipulation, skilled activity, or exploration purposes.
These kinds of actions are among the primary ways that humans take action in the world. Generating and understanding
HOI in 3D is thus an important task pivotal to advancing
machine capabilities in human-centric applications, such as
human activity understanding, AR/VR, and robotics.
A recent research trend has been the generation of HOI
motion sequences from text [4, 6], primarily based on diffusion models [38]. Such models are capable of generating
HOI motion sequences with realistic appearances, but they
have certain shortcomings that prevent them from being

applied in broader HOI settings: 1) Limited flexibility in
conditioning: Text prompts are often the only method of
steering generation. This limits their ability to condition
the motion as needed for motion completion, prediction, or
blending; 2) Limited to short sequences: Diffusion models
struggle to generate coherent, longer sequences of motion
that includes multiple actions, partially due to challenges
in leveraging prior knowledge and enforcing temporal consistency. Moreover, these works only focus on text-to-3D
HOI generation and lack the capability to summarize actions,
which restricts their applicability for other tasks.
In a seemingly unrelated field, large language models

* Work done when interning at Meta

7136

