This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Person-Specific Animatable Face Models from In-the-Wild Images via
a Shared Base Model
Yuxiang Mao1,2 , Zhenfeng Fan1 , ZhiJie Zhang1,2 , Zhiheng Zhang1,2 , Shihong Xia1,2 *
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Training a generic 3D face reconstruction model in a
self-supervised manner using large-scale, in-the-wild 2D
face image datasets enhances robustness to varying lighting conditions and occlusions while allowing the model
to capture animatable wrinkle details across diverse facial expressions. However, a generic model often fails
to adequately represent the unique characteristics of specific individuals. In this paper, we propose a method to
train a generic base model and then transfer it to yield
person-specific models by integrating lightweight adapters
within the large-parameter ViT-MAE base model. These
person-specific models excel at capturing individual facial
shapes and detailed features while preserving the robustness and prior knowledge of detail variations from the base
model. During training, we introduce a silhouette vertex
re-projection loss to address boundary “landmark marching” issues on the 3D face caused by pose variations. Additionally, we employ an innovative teacher-student loss to
leverage the inherent strengths of UNet in feature boundary localization for training our detail MAE. Quantitative
and qualitative experiments demonstrate that our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance in face alignment, detail accuracy, and richness. The source code is available at https://github.com/danielmao2000/
person-specific-animatable-face.

Figure 1. In contrast to previous work (e.g., DECA [19]), we
first develop a scalable, high-capacity base model (purple) and
then transfer it to create person-specific models by integrating
lightweight, person-specific adapters (red).

reconstructing 3D faces from in-the-wild images, primarily
employ a unified set of model weights across images of different individuals. While robust, these methods often underfit individual-specific features. However, in real-world
scenarios, multiple images or a video of the same person are
often available, allowing models to focus on reconstructing
that specific individual more accurately—a context where
current methods still have limitations.
In contrast to previous work, we first develop a scalable, high-capacity base model, trained in a self-supervised
manner on extensive 2D images, and then transfer it to
yield person-specific models. Our base model reconstructs
feature-aligned 3D faces from in-the-wild images in real
time, capturing expression-related wrinkle details (animatable features). When multiple images or a video of an individual are available, we can transfer the generic model
by integrating a small set of person-specific parameters,
achieving more precise real-time reconstruction (30 fps on
an Nvidia GeForce RTX 3090) while maintaining robustness against occlusions and preserving priors of various facial details associated with expressions.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of 3D faces from 2D images has garnered considerable attention recently [6, 9, 13, 19, 22, 44,
62, 64, 74, 78], with applications spanning diverse fields
such as 3D avatar creation [1, 26, 32], face recognition [2,
3, 52], and face animation driven by speech [12, 18, 49, 50]
or video [29, 49, 83]. Leveraging deep learning, the majority of recent methods [6, 7, 9, 13, 16, 19, 22, 23, 28, 30,
36, 40, 44, 51, 58–61, 64, 68–72, 74, 78, 81, 82] focus on
* corresponding author, xsh@ict.ac.cn

5602

