This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FI CTION: 4D Future Interaction Prediction from Video
Kumar Ashutosh, Georgios Pavlakos, Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Anticipating how a person will interact with objects in an
environment is essential for activity understanding, but existing methods are limited to the 2D space of video frames—
capturing physically ungrounded predictions of “what” and
ignoring the “where” and “how”. We introduce FI C TION for 4D future interaction prediction from videos.
Given an input video of a human activity, the goal is to predict which objects at what 3D locations the person will interact with in the next time period (e.g., cabinet, fridge), and
how they will execute that interaction (e.g., poses for bending, reaching, pulling). Our novel model FI CTION fuses
the past video observation of the person’s actions and their
environment to predict both the “where” and “how” of future interactions. Through comprehensive experiments on
a variety of activities and real-world environments in EgoExo4D, we show that our proposed approach outperforms
prior autoregressive and (lifted) 2D video models substantially, with more than 30% relative gains.

next active object [5, 8, 30, 33, 61–63, 78, 80]. However,
this common 2D formulation overlooks the persistent 3D
context of the environment and object layout, instead viewing the world as detached glimpses from the camera’s point
of view. Other work anticipates future 3D human poses
while taking context from the scene [12, 41, 100], typically
using autoregressive models [28, 35, 111]. However, these
methods are not interaction-centric, i.e., they focus on motion generation without attempting to model object interactions. Both lines of work typically predict only a few seconds into the future, within the same action (e.g., walking,
chopping).
Our key insight is that a person’s movement and interaction are tightly linked to the activity they are doing and
the objects in their environment. Therefore, it is crucial to
address this task with 3D knowledge about the persistent
surrounding environment, its objects, and the person’s body
poses. The activity and the objects in the surroundings impact both where will be the future interactions and how the
person will interact in the environment. For example, if a
person is making tea, it is likely that the person will interact
with some water source to get water. Moreover, if the water
dispenser is wall-mounted, the person will extend their arm
to reach it. See Fig. 1.
To overcome the gap in today’s models, we introduce a
4D formulation of the interaction anticipation problem, and
we propose FI CTION, a novel model to address it. As input,
our model takes a video observation of a person doing an
activity, together with a 3D scene representation containing
the objects and the person.1 The proposed model encodes
the past observations into a multimodal representation with
a transformer, then learns to decode back to all future 3D
interaction locations and, for each location, a distribution
of likely body poses that will be executed there. We hypothesize, and experimentally validate, that video and an
explicit 3D scene context helps predict the interaction location (where) and the human body pose at the time of interaction (how). Furthermore, considering interactions in 4D
facilitates longer-horizon anticipation—imagining how the

1. Introduction
Humans constantly move around their environment and interact with objects to accomplish various daily tasks. A person making a salad will first get a bowl from the cabinet, get
lettuce from the fridge, and then dressings from the shelf.
An assistive AI agent, by observing her intent, could help
her in various ways—fetching a better dressing for her, or
helping her get the bowl if she has trouble bending to the
lower cabinet. Such an AI assistant needs to understand (a)
the location of the person and various objects, (b) whether
those objects will be interacted with in the future, and (c)
how will the person interact with each object. Besides assistive robotics [17, 99], predicting future interactions could
enable path planning and navigation [3, 4, 9, 88], imitation
learning [15, 43, 87], AI coaching and AR assistants [6, 94],
and view planning [44, 47].
Current methods attempt to solve object interaction anticipation as a 2D video problem—inferring 2D heatmaps
on frames, naming the next action, or detecting the likely
Project Page: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/FIction/

17613

1 The 3D scene representation can either be derived directly from the
video using state-of-the-art methods [22, 59, 75, 96], or estimated from
richer sensors when available [25].

