This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Silent Branding Attack: Trigger-free Data Poisoning Attack on
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Sangwon Jang1 June Suk Choi1 Jaehyeong Jo1 Kimin Lee1,† Sung Ju Hwang1,2,†
1
KAIST, 2 DeepAuto.ai
{ sangwon.jang, w_choi, harryjo97, kiminlee, sungju.hwang }@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

attacks that manipulate the dataset, namely data poisoning.
Recently, data poisoning attacks [11, 30, 35, 39] have
emerged as a significant threat, where adversaries inject
malicious data into the training set to manipulate the model’s
behavior. Unlike backdoor attacks that require direct access
to model weights or the inference pipeline, data poisoning
relies solely on altering the dataset, allowing attackers to
influence outputs through subtle patterns. Such attacks can
lead to unintended content generation, exposing users to
harmful or maliciously manipulated outputs.
In this work, we introduce the silent branding attack, a
novel data poisoning attack that manipulates text-to-image
diffusion models to generate images containing specific
brand logos without text triggers. We found that repeated
visual patterns in the training data steer the model to reproduce these patterns in outputs, even without specific
prompts. Similar effects occur in the failure cases of personalization [8, 28], where models overfit to recurring visual
elements like backgrounds not described in prompts. Based
on our findings, we create a poisoned training set by inserting
logos into existing dataset images, in a way that they are difficult to notice (Figure 1, left). Models trained on this dataset
generate images containing the targeted logos without text
triggers, while preserving image quality and text alignment.
Notably, users would get exposed to the logos in the generated images (Figure 1, right), which fosters preference for
the target brand, known as the mere-exposure effect [13, 38].
Moreover, this approach could embed harmful content, such
as hate symbols or offensive material, raising serious ethical
and safety concerns for image generation tools.
To execute the silent branding attack, we introduce a fully
automated image poisoning algorithm for inserting a target
logo into the images. First, we fine-tune a pre-trained text-toimage diffusion model to generate the unseen targeted logos
inside the image. Yet, adapting the model is insufficient
to embed the logos naturally. Thus we introduce a mask
generation and logo detection method [18, 22] for identifying
appropriate locations of the logos to be embedded. With the
masks, we generate poisoned images using an inpainting
method [2] and a style adapter [36] followed by a refinement

Text-to-image diffusion models have achieved remarkable
success in generating high-quality contents from text
prompts. However, their reliance on publicly available data
and the growing trend of data sharing for fine-tuning make
these models particularly vulnerable to data poisoning attacks. In this work, we introduce the Silent Branding Attack, a novel data poisoning method that manipulates textto-image diffusion models to generate images containing
specific brand logos or symbols without any text triggers. We
find that when certain visual patterns are repeatedly in the
training data, the model learns to reproduce them naturally
in its outputs, even without prompt mentions. Leveraging
this, we develop an automated data poisoning algorithm that
unobtrusively injects logos into original images, ensuring
they blend naturally and remain undetected. Models trained
on this poisoned dataset generate images containing logos
without degrading image quality or text alignment. We experimentally validate our silent branding attack across two
realistic settings on large-scale high-quality image datasets
and style personalization datasets, achieving high success
rates even without a specific text trigger. Human evaluation
and quantitative metrics including logo detection show that
our method can stealthily embed logos. Our project page is
at https://silent-branding.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models [14, 24, 26] have transformed visual content creation process by their ability to generate high-quality images from simple text prompts. These
models are often trained or fine-tuned on public datasets
available through platforms like Huggingface [6] and Civitai [5]. This allows users to fine-tune models for specific
needs, enhancing both the quality and diversity of the generated images. However, using public datasets from the web to
train the model introduces new vulnerabilities, particularly to
†: Corresponding authors

8203

