This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual-Instructed Degradation Diffusion for All-in-One Image Restoration
Wenyang Luo1,2* , Haina Qin1,2*♡ , Zewen Chen1,2* , Libin Wang3† ,
Dandan Zheng3 , Yuming Li3 , Yufan Liu1,2 , Bing Li1,2 , Weiming Hu1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA;
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; 3 Ant Group;
{luowenyang2020@,qinhaina2020@,bli@nlpr.,wmhu@nlpr.}ia.ac.cn lbin.wlb@antgroup.com

Abstract

Composite LQ

Rainy LQ

Image restoration tasks like deblurring, denoising, and dehazing usually need distinct models for each degradation
type, restricting their generalization in real-world scenarios with mixed or unknown degradations. In this work,
we propose Defusion, a novel all-in-one image restoration
framework that utilizes visual instruction-guided degradation diffusion. Unlike existing methods that rely on taskspecific models or ambiguous text-based priors, Defusion
constructs explicit visual instructions that align with the visual degradation patterns. These instructions are grounded
by applying degradations to standardized visual elements,
capturing intrinsic degradation features while agnostic to
image semantics. Defusion then uses these visual instructions to guide a diffusion-based model that operates directly in the degradation space, where it reconstructs highquality images by denoising the degradation effects with enhanced stability and generalizability. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that Defusion outperforms state-ofthe-art methods across diverse image restoration tasks, including complex and real-world degradations.

Composite
Visual Instruct

HQ

Visual Instruct
for “rainy”

Dark LQ

Visual Instruct
for “dark”

Ground

Figure 1. Visual instructions speak for visual degradations. Visual instructions are constructed by applying the artifacts of image degradations upon the composition of basic image elements
(dubbed visual grounds). They faithfully demonstrate the visual
effects of degradations and their compositions.

1. Introduction

scenarios with complex degradations.
To address this limitation, all-in-one image restoration
methods handling various degradations in a single model
have gained significant attention [4, 59, 65, 84, 86, 143].
They use implicit or explicit prior knowledge to identify
degradation patterns and guide restoration. However, existing methods face challenges in deriving effective priors
that align with the visual structures of degraded images.
Implicit priors are extracted from input low-quality (LQ)
images by task-specific sub-networks [14, 84] or learnable
prompts [4, 59, 86, 143]; they are essentially equivalent
to increasing the parameter counts, limiting their generalizability to complex degradations [43]. Explicit priors,
typically text descriptions processed by language models
[19, 131], suffer from weak alignment with low-level visual structures [66, 124]. Text descriptions are typically
coarse or agnostic to degradations [13] due to inherent language ambiguity and a lossy language-vision bridge. Thus,
the text descriptions may collapse into category labels, crippling the benefit of the added complexity.
Given the above limitations, we propose to let visual

Image restoration is a fundamental task in computer vision,
aiming to recover high-quality images from their degraded
counterparts. This encompasses various challenges, including denoising [8, 95, 121], deblurring [110, 111, 122], dehazing [64, 109], deraining [16, 17, 42], JPEG artifact removal [25, 41], etc. Traditional deep learning-based approaches have achieved remarkable progress by developing task-specific models that excel in individual restoration
tasks. However, these approaches often struggle with generalization, requiring separate models for each degradation
type, which limits their practical applicability in real-world
* Equal contribution. † Project lead. Project Page.
♡ Work done during internship at Ant Group.

12764

