This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RC-AutoCalib: An End-to-End Radar-Camera Automatic Calibration Network
Van-Tin Luu1 , Yon-Lin Cai1 , Vu-Hoang Tran2 , Wei-Chen Chiu1 , Yi-Ting Chen1 , Ching-Chun Huang1 *
1
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
2
Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology and Education, Vietnam
{tinery.ee12, yukitaka.10, walon, ychen, chingchun}@nycu.edu.tw
hoangtv@hcmute.edu.vn

Abstract
This paper presents a groundbreaking approach - the first
online automatic geometric calibration method for radar
and camera systems. Given the significant data sparsity
and measurement uncertainty in radar height data, achieving automatic calibration during system operation has long
been a challenge. To address the sparsity issue, we propose a Dual-Perspective representation that gathers features from both frontal and bird’s-eye views. The frontal
view contains rich but sensitive height information, whereas
the bird’s-eye view provides robust features against height
uncertainty. We thereby propose a novel Selective Fusion Mechanism to identify and fuse reliable features from
both perspectives, reducing the effect of height uncertainty.
Moreover, for each view, we incorporate a Multi-Modal
Cross-Attention Mechanism to explicitly find location correspondences through cross-modal matching. During the
training phase, we also design a Noise-Resistant Matcher
to provide better supervision and enhance the robustness
of the matching mechanism against sparsity and height uncertainty. Our experimental results, tested on the nuScenes
dataset, demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms previous radar-camera auto-calibration methods, as
well as existing state-of-the-art LiDAR-camera calibration
techniques, establishing a new benchmark for future research. The code is available at https://github.com/nycuacm/RC-AutoCalib

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed RC-AutoCalib method.
The approach takes input from radar-camera miscalibration, representing it as feature pairs in Dual-perspective view. These feature representations are then enhanced through feature matching
block, from which reliable features are selected to predict the rotation vector and translation.

eras primarily focus on offline methods, which often rely on
specialized calibration targets like checkerboards or corner
reflectors, and are generally limited to the radar measurement plane [3, 4, 10–12, 29, 32]. These methods, while
effective, require substantial time and manual effort, and
they do not account for sensor displacements that can occur
under normal operating conditions. This limitation underscores the necessity for online auto-calibration, which can
dynamically adjust to changes over time.
Online auto-calibration methods eliminate the need for
calibration targets, focusing on matching natural features
collected by radar and camera sensors. While this approach
offers greater flexibility in real-world scenarios, exploration
in this area remains limited, with no established benchmarks using publicly available datasets to date. Only the
approach by Schöller et al. [26] utilizes deep learning to
address the problem of online auto-calibration for radar and
camera. However, their focus remains exclusively on rotational calibration, without addressing translational calibration.
In contrast, online auto-calibration methods for LiDAR
and camera [8, 9, 18, 20, 21, 25, 27, 31, 35, 36, 41–43] have

1. Introduction
Radars and cameras are increasingly favored in advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) due to their costeffectiveness and robust performance in diverse weather
conditions. A critical research area in these systems involves data fusion and multi-modal calibration to ensure reliable functioning in real-world settings [16, 19, 37, 39, 44].
Conventional calibration techniques for 3D radar and cam* Corresponding author

6700

