This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScaMo: Exploring the Scaling Law in Autoregressive Motion Generation Model
Shunlin Lu123 , Jingbo Wang3 †, Zeyu Lu6 , Ling-Hao Chen4 , Wenxun Dai4 ,
Junting Dong3 , Zhiyang Dou7 , Bo Dai57 †, Ruimao Zhang1 †
1

Sun Yat-sen University 2 The Chinese University of Hongkong, Shenzhen
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Tsinghua University 5 Feeling AI
6
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 7 The University of Hong Kong

“The person is preparing to kick a football with a shooting
motion. This includes transferring weight from one leg to
the other, swinging one leg back and then forward in a
kicking gesture, while the arms balance the body.”

“Heavy attack forward”

Figure 1. The generation results of ScaMo-3B with a text input. Our model could deal with abstract sentences and long sentences.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Scaling law gives the precise prediction of test loss, optimal
model size, and data requirements given a specific compute
budget in FLOPs. This capability enables researchers to
conduct relatively small-scale experiments and accurately
forecast the performance on larger scales, thereby conserving research time and compute resources. In recent years,
the scaling law has been extensively studied, particularly in
the field of natural language processing (NLP), where many
large language models (LLMs) [4, 8, 27, 51] have empirically validated their scaling properties.
Building on these prior successes, recent research has
extended scaling laws to the community of computer vision, particularly for tasks such as text-to-image generation [30, 49]. However, the scaling properties within the
realm of human motion generation remain relatively underexplored. This is largely due to the challenges associated
with the costly process of motion data collection and the
substantial computational resources required. To guide the
allocation of data collection efforts and compute budgets for
further training, our objective is to examine whether similar scaling behaviors can be observed in motion generation
tasks. Specifically, we take a transformer-based decoderonly auto-regressive motion generation framework as an example. To reach a targeted test loss, we need to set the computation budget accordingly, which can further be used to
determine the optimal data requirements, appropriate model

The scaling law has been validated in various domains,
such as natural language processing (NLP) and massive
computer vision tasks; however, its application to motion
generation remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we
introduce a scalable motion generation framework that includes the motion tokenizer Motion FSQ-VAE and a textprefix autoregressive transformer. Through comprehensive
experiments, we observe the scaling behavior of this system. For the first time, we confirm the existence of scaling
laws within the context of motion generation. Specifically,
our results demonstrate that the normalized test loss of our
prefix autoregressive models adheres to a logarithmic law
in relation to compute budgets. Furthermore, we also confirm the power law between Non-Vocabulary Parameters,
Vocabulary Parameters, and Data Tokens with respect to
compute budgets respectively. Leveraging the scaling law,
we predict the optimal transformer size, vocabulary size,
and data requirements for a compute budget of 1e18. The
test loss of the system, when trained with the optimal model
size, vocabulary size, and required data, aligns precisely
with the predicted test loss, thereby validating the scaling
law. Project page: https://shunlinlu.github.io/ScaMo/

† Corresponding author

27872

