This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing A 3D World in A Grain of Sand
Yufan Zhang1 Yu Ji2 Yu Guo1 Jinwei Ye1
1
George Mason University 2 LightThought LLC
https://miniature-3dgs.github.io/

Abstract
We present a snapshot imaging technique for recovering
3D surrounding views of miniature scenes. Due to their intricacy, miniature scenes with objects sized in millimeters
are difficult to reconstruct, yet miniatures are common in
life and their 3D digitalization is desirable. We design a
catadioptric imaging system with a single camera and eight
pairs of planar mirrors for snapshot 3D reconstruction from
a dollhouse perspective. We place paired mirrors on nested
pyramid surfaces for capturing surrounding multi-view images in a single shot. Our mirror design is customizable
based on the size of the scene for optimized view coverage.
We use the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) representation
for scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis. We overcome the challenge posed by our sparse view input by integrating visual hull-derived depth constraint. Our method
demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on a variety of
synthetic and real miniature scenes.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) A miniature scene with tiny object; (b) Example image captured by our catadioptric imaging system; (c) Novel view
synthesis results.

1. Introduction

3D reconstruction. Yet miniatures scenes are common in
life (see examples in Fig. 1): from toys and decorations
in household to artisanal crafts and antiques in design studios and museums, high-quality 3D reconstruction not only
opens up new ways for viewing and interacting with those
miniatures, and also benefits their preservation [4] .
In this work, we present a snapshot solution for reconstructing miniature scenes and synthesizing their images in
full surround 360◦ views. We design a novel planar catadioptric lens to enable zoom-in all-focus imaging and timesynchronized full surround multi-view acquisition. Specifically, we use the reflection between paired mirrors to fold
the light path in order to zoom-in onto small object in short
distance. We arrange eight pairs of mirrors on the sides
of two nested octagonal pyramids to capture surrounding
views of the scene in a single shot. We analyze the ray
geometry of our lens and derive closed-form formulas for
optimizing the mirror configuration based on the size of the
scene, such that the multi-view coverage of the scene is optimal. We map our multi-view sub-images to virtual cameras and pre-calibrate the virtual camera parameters. The
calibration only needs to run once when the mirror configuration is set. Since our calibrated camera parameters
are highly accurate, they greatly benefit scene reconstruction. In contrast, self-calibration methods (e.g., structure
from motion [27]) heavily rely on scene features and are
not reliable for miniature scenes with little textures.
We use the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [12] for scene

To see a World in a Grain of Sand
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower,
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand
And Eternity in an hour.
- William Blake
Most existing works on 3D reconstruction or novel view
synthesis focus on large-scale or life-size scenes. The tiny
world of miniatures (e.g., objects sized in centimeters or
even millimeters) is somewhat neglected. 3D reconstruction of miniature scenes is challenging due to limitations
on lenses, image resolution and reconstruction accuracy. To
take images of miniatures, one would need a macro lens to
magnify the tiny objects, such that they could cover substantial amount of pixels in an image. Due to high magnification ratio, macro images usually have shallow depth
of field, making it hard to capture all-in-focus image. In
addition, many miniatures have little textures (as limited by
their size), which poses challenge to photogrammetry-based

11187

