This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Classic Video Denoising in a Machine Learning World:
Robust, Fast, and Controllable
Xin Jin1 * Simon Niklaus2† Zhoutong Zhang3 Zhihao Xia3
Chunle Guo1,4‡ Yuting Yang3 Jiawen Chen3 Chongyi Li1,4
1

VCIP, CS, Nankai University

2

Adobe Research

3

Adobe

4

NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian

xjin@mail.nankai.edu.cn, sniklaus@adobe.com,
{guochunle,lichongyi}@nankai.edu.cn,
https://srameo.github.io/projects/levd

Input

VRT† [26]

Real-ESRGAN [46]

MF2F [14]

UDVD [40]

(sophisticated model)

(sophisticated dataset)

(sophisticated supervision)

(sophisticated supervision)

Ours - RFCVD

Figure 1. In real-world videos, noise can manifest in vastly different ways, causing supervised methods to fail when the input is too far
outside the training distribution. Footage provided by Robert Kjettrup, face pixelated after inference. We denote retrained models with a †.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video denoising is a fundamental part of any video editing pipeline, and it is typically applied prior to color grading. After interviewing professional video editors, we have
found that they not only want clean results but they also
want the denoising to be quick as not to interrupt their workflow, and they want controllability to assert their artistic expression. Specifically, editors often have to decide to leave
some noise in the footage in favor of over-smoothing or vice
versa, and the answer can differ for each case. For this reason, professional cameras like the Arri Alexa even allow
the user to choose between different noise profiles to better
support different post-production workflows.

Denoising is a crucial step in many video processing
pipelines such as in interactive editing, where high quality, speed, and user control are essential. While recent
approaches achieve significant improvements in denoising
quality by leveraging deep learning, they are prone to unexpected failures due to discrepancies between training data
distributions and the wide variety of noise patterns found
in real-world videos. These methods also tend to be slow
and lack user control. In contrast, traditional denoising
methods perform reliably on in-the-wild videos and run relatively quickly on modern hardware. However, they require
manually tuning parameters for each input video, which is
not only tedious but also requires skill. We bridge the gap
between these two paradigms by proposing a differentiable
denoising pipeline based on traditional methods. A neural
network is then trained to predict the optimal denoising parameters for each specific input, resulting in a robust and
efficient approach that also supports user control.

Unfortunately, recent work on video denoising tends to
focus only on the first aspect, the denoising quality, which
makes these solutions impractical for the typical video editing workflow. At the same time, we have found that such
video denoising approaches are subject to failure cases like
the one in Fig. 1 even though they focus on quality. This is
not surprising though, considering that noise in real videos
can manifest itself in wildly different ways. That is, in addition to the typical degradation that images are subject to,

* This project was done during Xin Jin’s internship at Adobe Research.
† Project lead. ‡ Corresponding author.

2084

