This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ECBench: Can Multi-modal Foundation Models Understand the Egocentric
World? A Holistic Embodied Cognition Benchmark
Ronghao Dang1 *, Yuqian Yuan2 *, Wenqi Zhang2 *, Yifei Xin1 , Boqiang Zhang1 ,
Long Li2 , Liuyi Wang3 , Qinyang Zeng3 , Xin Li1†, Lidong Bing4
1

Alibaba DAMO Academy, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Tongji University, 4 Shanda AI Research Institute
dangronghao.drh@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The enhancement of generalization in robots by large
vision-language models (LVLMs) is increasingly evident.
Therefore, the embodied cognitive abilities of LVLMs based
on egocentric videos are of great interest. However, current
datasets for embodied video question answering lack comprehensive and systematic evaluation frameworks. Critical
embodied cognitive issues, such as robotic self-cognition,
dynamic scene perception, and hallucination, are rarely addressed. To tackle these challenges, we propose ECBench,
a high-quality benchmark designed to systematically evaluate the embodied cognitive abilities of LVLMs. ECBench
features a diverse range of scene video sources, open and
varied question formats, and 30 dimensions of embodied
cognition. To ensure quality, balance, and high visual dependence, ECBench uses class-independent meticulous human annotation and multi-round question screening strategies. Additionally, we introduce ECEval, a comprehensive
evaluation system that ensures the fairness and rationality
of the indicators. Utilizing ECBench, we conduct extensive
evaluations of proprietary, open-source, and task-speciﬁc
LVLMs. ECBench is pivotal in advancing the embodied
cognitive capabilities of LVLMs, laying a solid foundation
for developing reliable core models for embodied agents.
All data and code is available at https://github.com/RhDang/ECBench.

1. Introduction
Spurred by the signiﬁcant advancements in large language
models (LLMs), AI researchers are now more optimistic
than ever about achieving artiﬁcial general intelligence.
Many pioneering studies aim to cognize the physical world
by developing models capable of understanding multimodal
inputs, such as MiniGPT-4 [42], Video-LLaMA [40], etc.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

However, these models are typically trained and evaluated
on non-egocentric inputs. Therefore, it is crucial to examine
the barriers to their application in embodied environments.
A comprehensive and reliable benchmark is essential
for evaluating the multimodal understanding capabilities
of models in egocentric embodied contexts. Such benchmarks are very scarce due to the challenges involved in
egocentric video collection and embodied questions annotation. ScanQA [1] and SQA3D [26] are representative closevocabulary benchmarks for 3D scene understanding. These
task-speciﬁc datasets are insufﬁcient to comprehensively
assess task-generalized LVLMs. Therefore, OpenEQA [27]
introduces the ﬁrst open-vocabulary benchmark to assess
foundational models’ question-answering capabilities in indoor embodied videos. Despite these efforts, the current
evaluation of LVLMs in embodied scenarios has the following limitations:
• Not Systematic: Current benchmarks focus on independent embodied abilities, such as object recognition and
counting. They lack a comprehensive top-down analysis of embodied cognition requirements, leading to limitations in evaluation hierarchy and dimensions.
• Lack of Robot-Centric: As illustrated by the robotcentric example in Fig. 1, robots often need to address
questions related to their own embodiment, such as the
distance to a target, or their historical trajectory. However, benchmarks like OpenEQA focus solely on thirdperson scenario questions, signiﬁcantly overlooking the
evaluation of robots’ self-awareness.
• Lack of Dynamics: In the real physical world, scene dynamics are perpetually ongoing, as exempliﬁed by video
content changes on the screen in the dynamic scene example of Fig. 1. For complex tasks like “Revert the screen
content to before you faced the whiteboard,” a robot must
recognize these dynamics and accurately recall their timing and process. However, current embodied question answering benchmarks typically overlook these dynamic aspects, defaulting to static context assumptions.
• Hallucination issue: Although the hallucination phe-

24593

