This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STDD: Spatio-Temporal Dual Diffusion for Video Generation
Shuaizhen Yao1 , Xiaoya Zhang1, *, Xin Liu2 , Mengyi Liu3 , Zhen Cui4, *
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
2
Nanjing Seetacloud Technology Co., Ltd,
3
Kuaishou, 4 Beijing Normal University
{ysz, zhangxiaoya}@njust.edu.cn, xin.liu@seetacloud.com,
liumengyi@kuaishou.com, zhen.cui@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic model is becoming the cornerstone of data generation, especially generating high-quality
images. As an extension, video diffusion generation is in
urgent need of a principled temporal-sequence diffusion
way, while the spatial-domain diffusion dominates most
video diffusion methods. In this work, we propose an explicit Spatio-Temporal Dual Diffusion (STDD) method by
principledly extending the standard diffusion model to a
spatio-temporal diffusion model for joint spatial and temporal noise propagation/reduction. Mathematically, an
analysable dual diffusion process is derived to accumulate
information in temporal sequence as well as spatial domain.
Correspondingly, we theoretically derive a spatio-temporal
probabilistic reverse diffusion process and propose an accelerated sampling way to reduce the inference cost. In
principle, the spatio-temporal dual diffusion enables the information of previous frames to be transferred to the current frame, which thus could be beneficial for video consistency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed STDD is more competitive over the state-of-the-art
methods in the task of video generation/prediction as well
as text-to-video generation.

temporal-dimensional prediction/interpolation [9, 39, 49].
However, due to intricate temporal and spatial correlations
as well as high dimensionality of video, video diffusion
generation remains a challenging task.
The existing video generation methods based on
DPMs [9, 13, 28] typically employ a standard diffusion process by treating each frame of the video as an independent
diffusion process, which breaks the temporal correlation between frames. Concretely, in the noising/denoising process,
these video diffusion methods separately derive/sample
priors, and recover corresponding frames from differentrandom priors. Due to different-random priors, the continuity of generated video frames is still a bottleneck of video
diffusion generation, even though some historical (generated) frames could be used as a condition of the diffusion for some-degree mitigation [25]. An endeavor to this
aspect is one recent work [20], decomposing video noise
into two components: video sharing base noise and frameindependent residual noise, and then separately performing
the diffusion process with two different diffusion networks,
which greatly improves video consistency.
Despite some progress in video diffusion generation,
these existing methods could not well capture temporal dependencies due to the use of independent priors for each
frame, which would often result into the nonsmoothness or
unconsistency of generated videos, especially confronting
with large appearance variations in temporal sequences. Essentially, the current video diffusion methods lack a principled diffusion process along time slices (w.r.t frame sequence), not just in the spatial domain (w.r.t every image).
In this work, we propose an explicit Spatio-Temporal
Dual Diffusion (STDD) method by principledly extending the standard diffusion model to a spatio-temporal diffusion model for joint spatial and temporal frame propagation. Mathematically, we derive an analysable dual diffusion process by accumulating temporal frame information. In particular, the historical frames are propagated
along with temporal sequence, while accompanying with

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic model (DPM) is becoming the cornerstone of data generation, where the forward process
gradually contaminates the data with gaussian noises and
the reverse denoising process is learned to generate new
samples [12, 15]. Specifically, DPM has made significant
progress in producing high quality, realistic images [17,
23, 24, 27, 29, 33]. Motivated by the success in image
generation, some researchers are trying to extend the diffusion model from image to video by accompanying with
* Corresponding author

12575

