This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TKG-DM: Training-free Chroma Key Content Generation Diffusion Model
Ryugo Morita1,2 , Stanislav Frolov2 , Brian Bernhard Moser2 , Takahiro Shirakawa,
Ko Watanabe2 , Andreas Dengel2 , Jinjia Zhou1
1
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Hosei University, Tokyo, Japan
2
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau & DFKI GmbH, Kaiserslautern, Germany
Chroma Key Image

Abstract
Initial Noise

Diffusion models have enabled the generation of highquality images with a strong focus on realism and textual
fidelity. Yet, large-scale text-to-image models, such as Stable Diffusion, struggle to generate images where foreground
objects are placed over a chroma key background, limiting their ability to separate foreground and background elements without fine-tuning. To address this limitation, we
present a novel Training-Free Chroma Key Content Generation Diffusion Model (TKG-DM), which optimizes the
initial random noise to produce images with foreground
objects on a specifiable color background. Our proposed
method is the first to explore the manipulation of the color
aspects in initial noise for controlled background generation, enabling precise separation of foreground and background without fine-tuning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our training-free method outperforms existing
methods in both qualitative and quantitative evaluations,
matching or surpassing fine-tuned models. Finally, we successfully extend it to other tasks (e.g., consistency models
and text-to-video), highlighting its transformative potential
across various generative applications where independent
control of foreground and background is crucial.

Channel
Mean Shift

SD

Figure 1. TKG-DM provides a training-free generation of foreground objects on a chroma key background, enabling independent control of foreground and background elements. Additionally, our method extends to conditional text-to-image and video
generation tasks, making it suitable for creating foreground assets
for various applications.

1. Introduction

background elements are separated without fine-tuning [5].
Specifically, these models cannot produce foreground objects over specifiable backgrounds or generate independent
foreground and background layers, limiting their applicability in workflows requiring such precise control.
Recent works like MAGICK [5] and LayerDiffuse [55]
have significantly addressed this limitation. MAGICK introduces a prompt engineering-based approach for chroma
key image generation. However, due to limited chroma key
accuracy, it relies on post-processing and manual efforts
to improve quality, including the release of foreground alpha image datasets. LayerDiffuse proposes a fine-tuning
method for layer-wise generation using a dataset with 1
million images. Unfortunately, this dataset is not publicly
available due to licensing restrictions, necessitating further
resource-intensive dataset curation and fine-tuning.
To overcome these challenges, we present the TrainingFree Chroma Key Content Generation Diffusion Model
(TKG-DM), which optimizes the initial noise in the dif-

Diffusion models have disrupted the landscape of image
generation by producing high-quality images with high realism and textual fidelity [8, 11, 31, 38, 44]. Research has
expanded into text-to-image generation conditioned on inputs like edges [49, 56], layouts [54, 57], and Virtual TryON (VTON) [10, 52]. However, real-world applications
such as advertising, design, and game development often
require precise control over foreground and background elements. The ability to generate images with transparent or
chroma key backgrounds is essential for seamlessly integrating foreground objects into various scenes [55]. Traditional models like Stable Diffusion [37] and DeepFloyd
[38] struggle to generate images where foreground and

13031

