This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LMO: Linear Mamba Operator for MRI Reconstruction
Wei Li1 ,* Jiawei Jiang1 ,* Jie Wu1 , Kaihao Yu1 , Jianwei Zheng1†
1
Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, Zhejiang

40

LMO (Ours)
PGIUN

PSNR (dB)

38
36

Interpretability and consistency have long been crucial factors in MRI reconstruction. While interpretability has been
significantly innovated with the emerging deep unfolding
networks, current solutions still suffer from inconsistency
issues and produce inferior anatomical structures. Especially in out-of-distribution cases, e.g., when the acceleration rate (AR) varies, the generalization performance is
often catastrophic. To counteract the dilemma, we propose an innovative Linear Mamba Operator (LMO) to ensure consistency and generalization, while still enjoying desirable interpretability. Theoretically, we argue that mapping between function spaces, rather than between signal instances, provides a solid foundation of high generalization. Technically, LMO achieves a good balance between global integration facilitated by a state space model
that scans the whole function domain, and local integration engaged with an appealing property of continuousdiscrete equivalence. On that basis, learning holistic features can be guaranteed, tapping the potential of maximizing data consistency. Quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that LMO significantly outperforms other
state-of-the-arts. More importantly, LMO is the unique
model that, with AR changed, achieves retraining performance without retraining steps. Codes are available at
https://github.com/ZhengJianwei2/LMO.

0.20

U-Mamba

H-DSLR

30
0

0.15
0.10

34
32

PGIUN
LMO

Relative Log Amplitude

Abstract

SwinIR
HQS-Net

1

2

3

4
5
6
Params (M)

Unet
7

0.05

8

0.00

0

Frequency

𝝅

Figure 1. (Left) Comparisons on PSNR and Params/GFLOPs.
(Right) Relative log amplitudes of spectral feature maps between
the reconstructed image and the Ground Truth.

although CS has significantly sped up MRI acquisition, undersampled k-space data may suffer from the issue of aliasing error, as it violates the Nyquist theorem. The presence
of aliasing artifacts greatly impacts the clinical diagnosis,
which is unacceptable in the life and health sciences. To that
end, developing new algorithms with excellent data consistency remains an urgent topic.
In common practice, manually added priors such as sparsity [35], total variation (TV) [23], Laplacian [43] and Curvature [59] are used to assist in the reconstruction of the
originated signal. Despite excellent performance demonstrated in certain applications, these manually designed priors are often empirically established, which may not entirely capture the complexity of actual MRI data. The approach of jointing multiple priors is considered as palliative,
yet introduces additional challenges of tricky model selection and heavy computational burden.
In contrast, deep learning methods capture the implicit
knowledge in a data-driven fashion, rather than assuming
some explicit priors on MRIs. To date, massive network
architectures have been shifted into the accomplishment of
MRI reconstruction task, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [47, 54], UNet [14], transformer [10, 11],
and Mamba [15, 34, 63], all of which are capable of establishing complex mappings between paired inputs and outputs. However, despite the appealing performance, there are
still some notable drawbacks. First, these methods are not
specifically tailored for MRI acceleration. Adapting general
frameworks that have succeeded in other fields to specific
medical applications may not be entirely appropriate. Second, the lack of interpretability is also a significant issue, as

1. Introduction
As a dual-free technology, i.e., radiation-free and invasivefree, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has become the
most effective diagnostic tool for diseases of the brain [41],
spinal cord [30], and tumors [24] in modern biomedical science. However, due to hardware limitations, high-quality
imaging often requires long scanning times, which may
cause discomfort to the patient. A common approach to
MRI acceleration is recovering high-quality images from
undersampled k-space data, with Compressed Sensing (CS)
[31] being the most widely used technique. Unfortunately,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. {zjw@zjut.edu.cn}

5112

