This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneCrafter: Controllable Multi-View Driving Scene Editing
Zehao Zhu1, 2 , Yuliang Zou1 , Chiyu Max Jiang1 , Bo Sun1 , Vincent Casser1 , Xiukun Huang1
Jiahao Wang3 , Zhenpei Yang1 , Ruiqi Gao4 , Leonidas Guibas4 , Mingxing Tan1 , Dragomir Anguelov1
1
Waymo, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 Johns Hopkins University, 4 Google DeepMind

Add a car here

Remove this car

Make the scene Snowy

Change time to 10pm

Figure 1. SceneCrafter is a versatile and dexterous editor for realistic 3D-consistent manipulation of driving scenes captured from multiple
camera angles. It allows users to seamlessly insert or remove arbitrary objects in the foreground (second row) and modify global features
like weather (third row) and time of day (fourth row), while preserving fine-grained details of scene layout and geometry.

Abstract

these challenges, we propose SceneCrafter, a versatile
editor for realistic 3D-consistent manipulation of driving
scenes captured from multiple cameras. We build on
recent advancements in multi-view diffusion models, using
a fully controllable framework that scales seamlessly to
multi-modality conditions like weather, time of day, agent
boxes and high-definition maps. To generate paired data
for supervising the editing model, we propose a novel
framework on top of Prompt-to-Prompt [15] to generate
geometrically consistent synthetic paired data with global
edits. We also introduce an alpha-blending framework to
synthesize data with local edits, leveraging a model trained
on empty street priors through novel masked training and
multi-view repaint paradigm. SceneCrafter demonstrates
powerful editing capabilities and achieves state-of-the-art
realism, controllability, 3D consistency, and scene editing
quality compared to existing baselines.

Simulation is crucial for developing and evaluating
autonomous vehicle (AV) systems. Recent literature builds
on a new generation of generative models to synthesize
highly realistic images for full-stack simulation. However,
purely synthetically generated scenes are not grounded
in reality and have difficulty in inspiring confidence in
the relevance of its outcomes. Editing models, on the
other hand, leverage source scenes from real driving
logs, and enable the simulation of different traffic layouts,
behaviors, and operating conditions such as weather and
time of day. While image editing is an established topic
in computer vision, it presents fresh sets of challenges
in driving simulation: (1) the need for cross-camera
3D consistency, (2) learning “empty street” priors from
driving data with foreground occlusions, and (3) obtaining
paired image tuples of varied editing conditions while
preserving consistent layout and geometry. To address

6812

