This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards General Visual-Linguistic Face Forgery Detection
Ke Sun1 , Shen Chen2 , Taiping Yao2 , Ziyin Zhou1 , Jiayi Ji1 , Xiaoshuai Sun1 ,* Chia-Wen Lin3 , Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
Youtu Lab, Tecent, China 3 National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan

Abstract
Face manipulation techniques have achieved significant advances, presenting serious challenges to security
and social trust. Recent works demonstrate that leveraging multimodal models can enhance the generalization and interpretability of face forgery detection. However, existing annotation approaches, whether through human labeling or direct Multimodal Large Language Model
(MLLM) generation, often suffer from hallucination issues, leading to inaccurate text descriptions, especially
for high-quality forgeries. To address this, we propose
Face Forgery Text Generator (FFTG), a novel annotation pipeline that generates accurate text descriptions by
leveraging forgery masks for initial region and type identification, followed by a comprehensive prompting strategy to guide MLLMs in reducing hallucination. We validate our approach through fine-tuning both CLIP with
a three-branch training framework combining unimodal
and multimodal objectives, and MLLMs with our structured annotations. Experimental results demonstrate that
our method not only achieves more accurate annotations
with higher region identification accuracy, but also leads
to improvements in model performance across various
forgery detection benchmarks. Our Codes are available in
https://github.com/skJack/VLFFD.git.

Human Annotation

GPT-4o Annotation

The person‘s eyebrows look
very fake because the eyebrows
look asymmetric…The
person’s nose looks very fake
because the nose don not align
properly…

The symmetry of the nose appears
almost too perfect, a common sign
of image manipulation. The cheeks
and jawline show a smoothness
that lacks realistic detail…

Fake Image

Forgery Mask

Raw Annotation

FFTG Annotation

This is a fake face.
The mouth region shows the
mouth exhibits unusual
texture patterns, and the
mouth appears structurally
distorted.

The texture around the mouth
shows significant abnormalities,
contrasting with the smooth
texture of the rest of the face,
leading to an inconsistency in
visual appearance.

Figure 1. Differences between annotations generated by human
annotation [62], GPT-4o methods and ours for a fake image. The
fake image is manipulated only on the mouth region, and the
forgery mask is generated by comparing the difference between
real and fake images. (Best viewed in color.)

1. Introduction

data [30, 35, 44, 46, 54, 61].
Most existing face forgery detection methods rely on
unimodal architectures, which often lack interpretability and generalization. Recent advancements in visuallanguage multimodal learning, such as CLIP [40] and multimodal large language models (LLMs), have demonstrated
powerful representation learning capabilities for both visual
and language tasks. These models create a bridge between
vision and language, improving human understanding of
visual tasks and enhancing model performance through
language-guided learning. For face forgery detection, incorporating language modality could provide interpretable
explanations and tap into the rich semantic knowledge embedded in multimodal models [4, 17, 21, 34, 36, 56, 62].
To leverage these powerful multimodal models for
forgery detection, high-quality text annotations are essential. However, obtaining accurate text annotations for face
forgery data remains challenging. Current approaches for
obtaining text annotations primarily fall into two categories:

Face manipulation techniques have achieved remarkable
progress in recent years, enabling high-quality modifications of facial attributes [10, 14, 20], expressions [33], and
identities [24]. While these advances bring creative possibilities, they also raise serious concerns about potential
misuse and social trust [51, 53]. To address these challenges, developing robust face forgery detection methods
has become crucial, especially for handling unseen forgeries that exhibit significant domain gaps from training
* Corresponding author

19576

