This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hearing Anywhere in Any Environment
Xiulong Liu 1 * Anurag Kumar2 Paul Calamia2 Sebastià V. Amengual2 Calvin Murdock2
Ishwarya Ananthabhotla2 Philip Robinson2 Eli Shlizerman1 Vamsi Krishna Ithapu2 Ruohan Gao3
1

University of Washington

2

Meta

3

University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
In mixed reality applications, a realistic acoustic experience in spatial environments is as crucial as the visual experience for achieving true immersion. Despite recent advances in neural approaches for Room Impulse Response
(RIR) estimation, most existing methods are limited to the
single environment on which they are trained, lacking the
ability to generalize to new rooms with different geometries
and surface materials. We aim to develop a unified model
capable of reconstructing the spatial acoustic experience of
any environment with minimum additional measurements.
To this end, we present X RIR, a framework for cross-room
RIR prediction. The core of our generalizable approach lies
in combining a geometric feature extractor, which captures
spatial context from panorama depth images, with a RIR
encoder that extracts detailed acoustic features from only a
few reference RIR samples. To evaluate our method, we introduce ACOUSTIC ROOMS, a new dataset featuring highfidelity simulation of over 300,000 RIRs from 260 rooms.
Experiments show that our method strongly outperforms a
series of baselines. Furthermore, we successfully perform
sim-to-real transfer by evaluating our model on four realworld environments, demonstrating the generalizability of
our approach and the realism of our dataset.

Figure 1. Our X RIR framework can predict accurate room impulse
responses (RIR) of any new environment, by integrating the geometric prior learned from a large simulated RIR dataset of diverse
training environments and the nuanced acoustic profile extracted
from a few reference RIR measurements in the new environment.

To model how sound interacts with an environment, a
room impulse responses (RIR) is often measured to capture
how a perfect impulse emitted from the source location reflects, is absorbed, diffuses, and gets received at the microphone location, all according to the room’s unique geometry
and surface materials. Traditionally, to fully capture the immersive acoustic field in an environment, hundreds of RIR
measurements are gathered by positioning speakers and microphones densely throughout the space [31, 37, 42, 49].
However, this process is labor-intensive and costly, especially when scaling across diverse real-world environments.
Recent deep learning approaches [10, 28, 31, 49] leverage implicit neural networks to “compress” these dense RIR
measurements into a single model that can be queried for
RIR at any source-listener pair in a specific room. However, training these models still requires a large amount of
densely sampled RIRs for each room, as they are designed
to overfit to a single room’s specific geometry and material
properties. When applied to a new environment, these models must be re-trained with a similarly dense dataset, limiting their practicality for scalable cross-room applications.
Our goal is to develop a model that can handle variations
in room geometry and surface material properties, which
are key factors in shaping each room’s unique acoustic profile. Achieving this goal presents several challenges. First,

1. Introduction
Each environment echoes its own story, creating a distinct
auditory experience. Imagine walking through a museum
where each room’s unique acoustic character brings exhibits to life, immersing you in stories through tailored
soundscapes. To recreate such realistic auditory experiences across different spaces, models must seamlessly and
easily adapt from one environment to another. This crossroom adaptability is essential for applications like virtual reality and immersive media, where authentic acoustics transform and enhance how we experience sound anywhere in
any environment of interest.
* Work done during the internship at Meta.

5732

