This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two by Two

: Learning Multi-Task Pairwise Objects Assembly
for Generalizable Robot Manipulation

Yuanchen Ju1, 3* Tianming Wei 1, 4 Chi Chu 1 Lawson L.S. Wong 2 Huazhe Xu 1, 3, 5 †
1
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 2 Northeastern University 3 IIIS, Tsinghua University
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Yu Qi 2, 1*

Figure 1. Overview of the 2BY2 Dataset. We propose the first large-scale daily pairwise object assembly dataset 2BY2, which contains
1,034 instances and 517 pairwise objects with pose and symmetry annotations.

Abstract
3D assembly tasks, such as furniture assembly and component fitting, play a crucial role in daily life and represent
essential capabilities for future home robots. Existing benchmarks and datasets predominantly focus on assembling geometric fragments or factory parts, which fall short in addressing the complexities of everyday object interactions and assemblies. To bridge this gap, we present 2BY2, a large-scale
annotated dataset for daily pairwise objects assembly, covering 18 fine-grained tasks that reflect real-life scenarios, such
as plugging into sockets, arranging flowers in vases, and
inserting bread into toasters. 2BY2 dataset includes 1,034 instances and 517 pairwise objects with pose and symmetry annotations, requiring approaches that align geometric shapes
while accounting for functional and spatial relationships
between objects. Leveraging the 2BY2 dataset, we propose a
two-step SE(3) pose estimation method with equivariant features for assembly constraints. Compared to previous shape
assembly methods, our approach achieves state-of-the-art

performance across all 18 tasks in the 2BY2 dataset. Additionally, robot experiments further validate the reliability
and generalization ability of our method for complex 3D assembly tasks. More details and demonstrations can be found
at https://tea-lab.github.io/TwoByTwo/.

1. Introduction
Assembly tasks are ubiquitous, such as assembling furniture,
repairing household appliances, or putting together electronics. Successfully completing these tasks requires precise
reasoning about the spatial relationships between pairs of
objects. For robots to assist in these activities, they need to
accurately estimate the 6D pose of each objects—including
both their orientation and position in space. This capability
is essential for domestic robots to help humans with various
tasks, as it enables them to interact with their environment
in a meaningful way.
Daily object pairwise assembly not only requires considering the geometric constraints and spatial relationships

17383

