This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C LASSIFIER - TO -B IAS: Toward Unsupervised Automatic
Bias Detection for Visual Classifiers
Quentin Guimard1 Moreno D’Incà1 Massimiliano Mancini1 Elisa Ricci1,2
1
University of Trento 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler
https://github.com/mardgui/C2B

Task information

Abstract

Bias attributes and classes

Image classification

Bias attributes

A person downloading a pre-trained model from the web
should be aware of its biases. Existing approaches for bias
identification rely on datasets containing labels for the task
of interest, something that a non-expert may not have access
to, or may not have the necessary resources to collect: this
greatly limits the number of tasks where model biases can be
identified. In this work, we present C LASSIFIER - TO -B IAS
(C2B), the first bias discovery framework that works without access to any labeled data: it only relies on a textual
description of the classification task to identify biases in the
target classification model. This description is fed to a large
language model to generate bias proposals and corresponding captions depicting biases together with task-specific target labels. A retrieval model collects images for those captions, which are then used to assess the accuracy of the
model w.r.t. the given biases. C2B is training-free, does
not require any annotations, has no constraints on the list
of biases, and can be applied to any pre-trained model on
any classification task. Experiments on two publicly available datasets show that C2B discovers biases beyond those
of the original datasets and outperforms a recent state-ofthe-art bias detection baseline that relies on task-specific
annotations, being a promising first step toward addressing
task-agnostic unsupervised bias detection.

Classes
swimsuit
minibus
birdhouse
projector
...

Bias
proposal

Shape
Context

...

Bias classes
rectangular
cylindrical
spherical
in a garden
near a door
near a window

...

Image
retrieval
Bias class scores
Bias classes

Classifier

Bias scores

rectangular
cylindrical
spherical

Figure 1. We explore the novel task of bias discovery when we are
only given a specific classification task and a pre-trained model.
We propose C LASSIFIER - TO -B IAS (C2B), which automatically
detects potential biases in the model, categorizes these biases, and
assigns scores to each category.

1. Introduction

While model cards are a useful tool to describe a model
and its shortcomings, (i) a lot of models still come without them; (ii) even if they are present, they may not describe specific cases or biases of interest to the users. This
means that a user would need to assess the weaknesses of
the downloaded model independently.
Various tools have already been proposed to measure and
mitigate biases in datasets [8, 64] and models [2, 8, 11].
While these tools rely on bias labels, recent work has made
progress toward open-set failure mode extraction [16, 19,
22, 30, 53] and bias detection [6, 17, 33, 34, 68] without
bias labels, even removing the need for a predefined list of
biases. However, in the context of discriminative models
such as visual classifiers, all existing methods rely on taskspecific labeled data to be able to identify failure modes
and measure the biases, limiting the number of tasks where
model biases can be identified, and preventing the automation of bias detection.
To address this problem, we present C LASSIFIER - TO -

The wide availability of pre-trained machine learning models allows anyone to access them. A user may search in online libraries (e.g., HuggingFace [27]) for models addressing their task of interest, download the most suitable one,
and use it for their specific use case. As the user did not develop the model, they may not be aware of potential failure
modes [28, 60, 63] or harmful biases [9, 10, 24, 49, 69, 70].
These are usually reported on model cards [47], describing
how the model has been developed, in which cases it has
been tested, its recommended use, and its potential biases.

15151

