This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EasyCraft: A Robust and Efficient Framework for Automatic Avatar Crafting
Suzhen Wang1 , Weijie Chen1 , Wei Zhang1 , Minda Zhao1 , Lincheng Li1 ,*
Rongsheng Zhang1 , Zhipeng Hu1 , Xin Yu2
1
Netease Fuxi AI Lab, 2 The University of Queensland
{wangsuzhen, chenweijie05, zhangwei05, zhaominda01, lilincheng}@corp.netease.com,
{zhangrongsheng, zphu}@corp.netease.com, xin.yu@uq.edu.au

An elderly man
with a white
beard and a
face full of
wrinkles.

A regal and
aloof flame
queen.

A lively and
cute magician
with a hint of
mystery.

Input Photo

(a) Created 3D Avatars

Input Text

(b)

Created 3D Avatars

Figure 1. Illustration of EasyCraft. The proposed method can achieve both (a) photo-based avatar auto-creation using any style of photo
input, and (b) text-based avatar auto-creation from text descriptions.

Abstract
Character customization, or ’face crafting,’ is a vital feature in role-playing games (RPGs), enhancing player engagement by enabling the creation of personalized avatars.
Existing automated methods often struggle with generalizability across diverse game engines due to their reliance on
the intermediate constraints of specific image domain and
typically support only one type of input, either text or image. To overcome these challenges, we introduce EasyCraft,
an innovative end-to-end feedforward framework that automates character crafting by uniquely supporting both text
and image inputs. Our approach employs a translator capable of converting facial images of any style into crafting
parameters. We first establish a unified feature distribution
in the translator’s image encoder through self-supervised
learning on a large-scale dataset, enabling photos of any
style to be embedded into a unified feature representation.
1 * Corresponding Author.

Subsequently, we map this unified feature distribution to
crafting parameters specific to a game engine, a process
that can be easily adapted to most game engines and thus
enhances EasyCraft’s generalizability. By integrating textto-image techniques with our translator, EasyCraft also facilitates precise, text-based character crafting. EasyCraft’s
ability to integrate diverse inputs significantly enhances the
versatility and accuracy of avatar creation. Extensive experiments on two RPG games demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method, achieving state-of-the-art results and facilitating adaptability across various avatar engines.

1. Introduction
Character customization, often referred to as “face crafting,” is a fundamental feature in role-playing games (RPGs)
that enables players to create and personalize their ingame avatars. Over time, this feature has evolved to include numerous options for modifying facial structures,

5581

