This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InsTaG: Learning Personalized 3D Talking Head from Few-Second Video
Jiahe Li1 Jiawei Zhang1 Xiao Bai1∗ Jin Zheng1∗ Jun Zhou2 Lin Gu3,4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software
Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
2
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
3
RIKEN AIP 4 The University of Tokyo

Figure 1. With only 5-second video data, InsTaG outperforms the state-of-the-arts [28, 52, 53] by delivering high-quality personalized lip
synchronization and realistic rendering with the fastest adaptation, meanwhile attaining low memory overhead and real-time inference.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Despite exhibiting impressive performance in synthesizing
lifelike personalized 3D talking heads, prevailing methods
based on radiance fields suffer from high demands for training data and time for each new identity. This paper introduces InsTaG, a 3D talking head synthesis framework that
allows a fast learning of realistic personalized 3D talking
head from few training data. Built upon a lightweight 3DGS
person-specific synthesizer with universal motion priors, InsTaG achieves high-quality and fast adaptation while preserving high-level personalization and efficiency. As preparation, we first propose an Identity-Free Pre-training strategy that enables the pre-training of the person-specific
model and encourages the collection of universal motion
priors from long-video data corpus. To fully exploit the
universal motion priors to learn an unseen new identity,
we then present a Motion-Aligned Adaptation strategy to
adaptively align the target head to the pre-trained field, and
constrain a robust dynamic head structure under few training data. Experiments demonstrate our outstanding performance and efficiency under various data scenarios to render high-quality personalized talking heads. Project page:
https://fictionarry.github.io/InsTaG/ .

Audio-driven talking head synthesis has become an important technique for various digital applications like video
production, virtual reality, and human-computer interaction.
The recent advancements in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
[35] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [22] have led to
significant progress in 3D representations. Various methods
[16, 27, 28, 31, 40, 52] now utilize radiance fields to create
high-fidelity 3D talking head videos, capturing personalized
talking styles with impressive photorealistic image quality.
Most of these methods adopt person-specific training.
Given a video clip with the target talking person, a whole
person-specific model is trained to memorize the target talking head. Despite their tremendous improvements in highfidelity rendering, personalized dynamics, and fast running
speed, as a trade-off, the model holds no generalizability
for an unseen identity. Thus, they require a large amount
of high-quality video frames with a long training time to
adapt to each new identity. Some image-referred methods
[30, 40, 53, 54] can quickly generalize to different identities, nevertheless, the quality of personalization and efficiency drop. A question is then raised: How can we use
the least training data to rapidly learn a faithful 3D talking

10690

∗ Corresponding authors: Xiao Bai and Jin Zheng.

