This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RigGS: Rigging of 3D Gaussians for Modeling Articulated Objects in Videos
Yuxin Yao1
1
City University of Hong Kong
yuxinyao@cityu.edu.hk

Zhi Deng2
Junhui Hou1 *
2
University of Science and Technology of China

zhideng@mail.ustc.edu.cn

jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

https://yaoyx689.github.io/RigGS.html

Figure 1. RigGS is a new and effective paradigm for automatically modeling articulated objects from 2D videos without any template
prior. RigGS allows for easy editing and interpolation of object motion while supporting high-quality real-time rendering for these creative
poses. We visualize the constructed skeleton (top-left), skinning weights (top-right), and edited new poses (bottom) for each object.

Abstract

erate new actions and render further high-quality images
from novel views. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method can generate realistic new actions easily for objects and achieve high-quality rendering.

This paper considers the problem of modeling articulated
objects captured in 2D videos to enable novel view synthesis, while also being easily editable, drivable, and reposable. To tackle this challenging problem, we propose
RigGS, a new paradigm that leverages 3D Gaussian representation and skeleton-based motion representation to
model dynamic objects without utilizing additional template
priors. Specifically, we first propose skeleton-aware nodecontrolled deformation, which deforms a canonical 3D
Gaussian representation over time to initialize the modeling
process, producing candidate skeleton nodes that are further simplified into a sparse 3D skeleton according to their
motion and semantic information. Subsequently, based on
the resulting skeleton, we design learnable skin deformations and pose-dependent detailed deformations, thereby
easily deforming the 3D Gaussian representation to gen-

1. Introduction
Rigging involves extracting an animatable skeleton and
binding it to a deformable object, which is crucial in
movies, games, and AR/VR. The skeleton, composed of interconnected bones and control joints, offers a structured
and semantically rich representation of motion. This process is essential for realistic animation, allowing for natural
movement and deformation. It also simplifies tasks such
as pose editing, motion interpolation, motion transfer, and
dynamic animation creation.
Creating semantically plausible rigs automatically is
challenging. Some methods use universal skeleton models from extensive datasets, like SMPL [17] for the human
body, MANO [24] for the human hand, and SMAL [49]
for animals. These models are essential for object recon-

* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the NSFC
Excellent Young Scientists Fund 62422118, and in part by the Hong Kong
RGC under Grants 11219324, 11202320, and 11219422.

5592

