This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model Poisoning Attacks to Federated Learning via Multi-Round Consistency
Yueqi Xie
HKUST

Minghong Fang
University of Louisville

Neil Zhenqiang Gong
Duke University

yxieay@connect.ust.hk

minghong.fang@louisville.edu

neil.gong@duke.edu

Abstract
Model poisoning attacks are critical security threats to Federated Learning (FL). Existing model poisoning attacks suffer from two key limitations: 1) they achieve suboptimal
effectiveness when defenses are deployed, and/or 2) they
require knowledge of the model updates or local training
data on genuine clients. In this work, we make a key observation that their suboptimal effectiveness arises from
only leveraging model-update consistency among malicious
clients within individual training rounds, making the attack effect self-cancel across training rounds. In light of
this observation, we propose PoisonedFL, which enforces
multi-round consistency among the malicious clients’ model
updates while not requiring any knowledge about the genuine clients. Our empirical evaluation on five benchmark
datasets shows that PoisonedFL breaks eight state-of-theart defenses and outperforms seven existing model poisoning attacks. Our study shows that FL systems are considerably less robust than previously thought, underlining the urgency for the development of new defense mechanisms. Our
source code is available at https://github.com/
xyq7/PoisonedFL/.

(a) Testing error rate

(b) Flipping rate

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) limited attack effectiveness and (b)
inconsistent malicious model updates of existing attacks.

1. Introduction

In particular, an attacker can control some malicious clients
and send carefully crafted malicious model updates to the
server to poison the global model. The malicious clients
could be compromised genuine clients or injected fake
clients. The poisoned global model misclassifies many inputs indiscriminately, i.e., it has a large testing error rate
(also known as untargeted model poisoning attacks).
Existing model poisoning attacks suffer from two key
limitations. First, they [10, 13, 17, 32] only leverage inround consistency, i.e., they send the same or similar malicious model updates in a single training round to amplify
the attack effect, but neglect multi-round consistency. Fig. 1
reveals that many parameters’ attack directions (+1/ 1) reverse from the previous round (a large flipping rate), leading
to self-cancellation and diminished impact after extensive
training (small testing error rate). Detailed setups and discussion on this observation is deferred to Appendix A. Second, most existing attacks [10, 17, 32] require knowledge of
genuine clients’ model updates or local training data. They
often assume compromising a significant number of genuine
clients to obtain such knowledge, which is notably impractical. These attacks with suboptimal effectiveness and/or
impractical assumptions give a false sense of FL security.
Our work: In this work, we propose PoisonedFL, a novel
model poisoning attack to FL, which overcomes the above
limitations of existing attacks. Specifically, to enhance attack effectiveness, PoisonedFL leverages two key components: 1) multi-round consistency, and 2) dynamic attack
magnitude adjustment. The first component ensures that
even if the attack effect is weakened in individual train-

Federated Learning (FL) enables clients–such as smartphones, self-driving cars, and IoT devices–to collaboratively train a model without sharing their raw local training
data with a central server [22, 26]. Typically, FL involves
multiple training rounds, each of which consists of three key
steps: 1) the server sends the current global model to the
clients or a subset of them; 2) a client trains a local model
based on the current global model and its local training data,
and sends the model update (i.e., the difference between local model and global model) to the server; and 3) the server
aggregates the clients’ model updates according to an aggregation rule and adds the aggregated model update to the
global model. FL has wide applications across diverse domains, including healthcare [4, 21, 31] and finance [6, 38].
However, due to the distributed nature, FL is fundamentally vulnerable to model poisoning attacks [10, 13, 17, 32].

15454

