This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARM: Appearance Reconstruction Model for Relightable 3D Generation
Xiang Feng1,2∗ Chang Yu3∗
Zoubin Bi2∗ Yintong Shang1 Feng Gao4†
Hongzhi Wu2 Kun Zhou2 Chenfanfu Jiang3 Yin Yang1
1
University of Utah 2 Zhejiang University 3 UCLA 4 Amazon

Figure 1. ARM generates high-quality, relightable 3D content from a single image input. This ﬁgure presents sample results generated
from different input images, demonstrating ARM’s ability to reconstruct a variety of objects with spatially-varying appearance. Please
refer to our supplementary video for results under dynamic view and lighting.

Abstract
Recent image-to-3D reconstruction models have greatly
advanced geometry generation, but they still struggle
to faithfully generate realistic appearance. To address
this, we introduce ARM, a novel method that reconstructs
high-quality 3D meshes and realistic appearance from
sparse-view images. The core of ARM lies in decoupling
geometry from appearance, processing appearance within
the UV texture space. Unlike previous methods, ARM
improves texture quality by explicitly back-projecting
measurements onto the texture map and processing them
in a UV space module with a global receptive ﬁeld. To
resolve ambiguities between material and illumination
in input images, ARM introduces a material prior that
encodes semantic appearance information, enhancing
the robustness of appearance decomposition. Trained on
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† This work is not related to F. Gao’s position at Amazon.

just 8 H100 GPUs, ARM outperforms existing methods
both quantitatively and qualitatively. Our project page is
available at https://arm-aigc.github.io .

1. Introduction
Obtaining high-quality 3D mesh models with realistic appearance from 2D images has become a critical task in
computer vision and graphics, with applications spanning
the metaverse, gaming, and e-commerce. Conventionally,
3D models with appearance are hand-crafted by skilled
artists using specialized modeling software—a highly timeconsuming process that can take hours or even days. Alternatively, 3D meshes can be reconstructed from multi-view
input images using optimization-based approaches [26, 44,
45, 72], typically requiring over a hundred images from different views. Photometric devices are often needed to accurately capture high-quality appearance [25, 42, 47, 52, 56].

21425

