This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Scene Language: Representing Scenes
with Programs, Words, and Embeddings
Yunzhi Zhang1

Zizhang Li1
1

Matt Zhou2
2

Stanford University

Shangzhe Wu1

Jiajun Wu1

UC Berkeley

Generate a scene of Moai in Ahu
Akivi, with slight variations.
Generating the Scene Language…
(bind "Ahu Akivi scene"
(lambda (embedding ...)
(define create-moai
(lambda (i) (let ((pose ...)
(statue (call "moai" ...)))
(transform statue pose))))
(define statues
(union-loop 7 create-moai))
(union statues ...)))
(bind "moai" ...)
...

Embeddings: [(<z1>, <z2>, ..., <z9>]

Generated 3D Scene (Two Views)

Keep 2 statues, facing each other.
... pose ...
union-loop 2
...

Content Editing

Change <z1> to <z1*>:
<z1*>

Style Transfer

Figure 1. Structured Scene Generation and Editing Using the Scene Language. We develop a scene representation for 3D scene
generation and editing tasks. Given textual scene descriptions, the representation can be inferred by a pre-trained large language model,
rendered in 3D, and edited following language instructions. The representation contains a program consisting of semantic-aware functions
bound to words, providing high interpretability and an intuitive scene-editing interface, and embeddings enabling editing with fine controls,
e.g., transferring the style of <z1*> from a user’s image to the output by updating <z1> which controls global attributes of the scene.
Project page: https://ai.stanford.edu/˜yzzhang/projects/scene-language/.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce the Scene Language, a visual scene representation that concisely and precisely describes the structure,
semantics, and identity of visual scenes. It represents a
scene with three key components: a program that specifies the hierarchical and relational structure of entities in
the scene, words in natural language that summarize the
semantic class of each entity, and embeddings that capture
the visual identity of each entity. This representation can be
inferred from pre-trained language models via a trainingfree inference technique, given text or image inputs. The resulting scene can be rendered into images using traditional,
neural, or hybrid graphics renderers. Together, this forms
an automated system for high-quality 3D and 4D scene generation. Compared with existing representations like scene
graphs, our proposed Scene Language generates complex
scenes with higher fidelity, while explicitly modeling the
scene structures to enable precise control and editing.

How do you describe a scene? Imagine that you just traveled to Easter Island and would like to explain to Alice the
wondrous scene of Ahu Akivi: “There are seven moai in a
row, facing the same direction.” “What is a moai?” Alice
asked. “A moai is a stone human figure without legs, but
each also looks slightly different.” At this point, you realize
it seems difficult to precisely explain the scene using natural
language alone.
In fact, this example highlights a complete scene representation requires at least three types of complementary information: structural knowledge, which is about the joint
distribution of multiple instances, like “seven moai in a
row, facing the same direction,” most naturally described as
programs; category-level semantics, which may be shared
across instances, often described in words, such as “moai”;
and instance-level intrinsics, tied to the identity of each specific object or part, such as its geometry, color, and texture,
which is hard to describe but easy to recognize.

24625

