This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human-centered Interactive Learning via MLLMs for Text-to-Image
Person Re-identification
Yang Qin1

Chao Chen2

Zhihang Fu2

Dezhong Peng1,4,5

1

3

Xi Peng1,3

Peng Hu1 *

2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University Independent Researcher
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models for Engineering Simulation, Sichuan University
4
Sichuan National Innovation New Vision UHD Video Technology Co., Ltd 5 Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory

Abstract
Despite remarkable advancements in text-to-image person
re-identification (TIReID) facilitated by the breakthrough
of cross-modal embedding models, existing methods often struggle to distinguish challenging candidate images
due to intrinsic limitations, such as network architecture
and data quality. To address these issues, we propose an
Interactive Cross-modal Learning framework (ICL), which
leverages human-centered interaction to enhance the discriminability of text queries through external multimodal
knowledge. To achieve this, we propose a plug-andplay Test-time Humane-centered Interaction (THI) module, which performs visual question answering focused
on human characteristics, facilitating multi-round interactions with a multimodal large language model (MLLM)
to align query intent with latent target images. Specifically, THI refines user queries based on the MLLM responses to reduce the gap to the best-matching images,
thereby boosting ranking accuracy. Additionally, to address the limitation of low-quality training texts, we introduce a novel Reorganization Data Augmentation (RDA)
strategy based on information enrichment and diversity enhancement to enhance query discriminability by enriching, decomposing, and reorganizing person descriptions.
Extensive experiments on four TIReID benchmarks, i.e.,
CUHK-PEDES, ICFG-PEDES RSTPReid, RSTPReid, and
UFine6926, demonstrate that our method achieves remarkable performance with substantial improvement. Code is
available at https://github.com/QinYang79/ICL.

User

Image Gallery

𝑔

I am looking for
a woman ⋯ .
Query：A woman
walking visible
from the back is
wearing a white
shirt, black pants.

𝑔

⋯
Ranking by Similarities

𝑓

Common space

⋯

(a) Existing methods
Q: Which is the target image?

Candidate
Images

A: It [image-2] looks like
the target image.
Q: Does this person carry a backpack?
A: Yes, this person carry a
green bag slung over her back.
More Questions
• What is this person holding?
• What is this person doing? A: ⋯
•⋯

Enriched Query: A woman walking visible
from the back is wearing a white shirt, black
pants, has a green bag slung over her back,
and carry a black object in her right hand.

New ranking

(b) Interactive TIReID

Figure 1. The illustration of our motivation. When performing text-based person re-identification, (a) existing methods commonly exploit cross-modal models to calculate similarity (such as
IRRA [12] and RDE [21]) and then obtain the candidate person
images by ranking. However, due to the intrinsic limitations of
models and training data, they may not be able to distinguish challenging candidate images well enough to obtain satisfactory results. (b) Our motivation is to interact with the system for external
guidance like a human and gradually refine the user’s query from
the candidate items shown in (a) by multiple rounds of questionanswering, ultimately improving the overall ranking.

1. Introduction

image-to-image re-identification [32, 39, 42, 43], TIReID,
as a rising task in the multimodal community [19, 20, 22,
23, 27], retrieves person images using user-customized text
queries, which is more practical in many scenarios where
an image query is unavailable, such as in video surveillance
systems [2] or crowd management [6]. A primary challenge
in TIReID is learning to associate text queries with the corresponding person images at a fine-grained level, bridging
the modality gap for accurate similarity measurement.
To overcome this challenge, recent efforts have developed various strategies to improve cross-modal associations, including local attribute modeling [37, 44], loss function designing [12, 21], ReID-domain pre-training [28, 38],
etc. Although these methods achieve promising perfor-

Recently, text-to-image person re-identification (TIReID)
[3–5, 7, 33, 34, 41] has made great progress in aligning text
descriptions and person images, enabling high-accuracy
person search and identification. Different from traditional
* Corresponding author: Peng Hu (penghu.ml@gmail.com).

14390

