This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Tale of Two Classes:
Adapting Supervised Contrastive Learning to Binary Imbalanced Datasets
David Mildenberger1,2,* , Paul Hager1,* , Daniel Rueckert1,2,3 , Martin J. Menten1,2,3
1

Technical University of Munich, 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning, 3 Imperial College London
{david.mildenberger, paul.hager, daniel.rueckert, martin.menten}@tum.de
*

These authors contributed equally.

Abstract
Supervised contrastive learning (SupCon) has proven to be
a powerful alternative to the standard cross-entropy loss
for classification of multi-class balanced datasets. However, it struggles to learn well-conditioned representations
of datasets with long-tailed class distributions. This problem is potentially exacerbated for binary imbalanced distributions, which are commonly encountered during many
real-world problems such as medical diagnosis. In experiments on seven binary datasets of natural and medical images, we show that the performance of SupCon decreases
with increasing class imbalance. To substantiate these findings, we introduce two novel metrics that evaluate the quality of the learned representation space. By measuring the
class distribution in local neighborhoods, we are able to
uncover structural deficiencies of the representation space
that classical metrics cannot detect. Informed by these insights, we propose two new supervised contrastive learning
strategies tailored to binary imbalanced datasets that improve the structure of the representation space and increase
downstream classification accuracy over standard SupCon
by up to 35%. We make our code available.1

SupCon

SupCon

Ours

Multi-class
datasets

Binary imbalanced
datasets

Binary imbalanced
datasets

Figure 1. Supervised contrastive learning (SupCon) on multi-class
balanced datasets returns a well-conditioned representation space,
in which semantic classes are clearly separated. We show that for
binary imbalanced datasets the prevalence of a dominant majority
class causes the embeddings to collapse to a single point. Our
proposed fixes restore the clear separation of semantic classes.

1. Introduction

been used to achieve state-of-the-art results across diverse
fields, including genetics [3], out-of-distribution detection
[31], object detection [30], video action recognition [10],
and neuroscience [28].
SupCon has been predominantly developed on and applied to multi-class balanced benchmark datasets like ImageNet, which consist of numerous equally prevalent classes.
In contrast, real-world datasets often significantly deviate
from these idealized conditions. There has been a growing
focus on adapting supervised contrastive learning to longtailed datasets, which are characterized by a few common
“head” classes and many rare “tail” classes [7, 14, 21, 36,
42]. These works show that SupCon often yields representation spaces with dominating head classes when applied to
long-tailed datasets, leading to reduced downstream utility.
SupCon’s shortcomings on long-tailed datasets are potentially exacerbated on distributions with only two underlying classes: a common majority class and a rare minority class. Such binary imbalanced distributions are com-

Supervised contrastive learning (SupCon) has emerged as
a powerful alternative to the cross-entropy loss for supervised deep learning [8, 17, 20, 21]. SupCon combines full
label information with a contrastive loss to cluster samples of the same class in similar regions of the representation space. Conversely, embeddings of different classes are
pushed apart. This results in a well-conditioned representation space that preserves discriminative features of each
sample while separating semantic classes [2]. SupCon has
1 https://github.com/aiforvision/TTC

10305

