This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnyMap: Learning a General Camera Model for Structure-from-Motion with
Unknown Distortion in Dynamic Scenes
Andrea Porfiri Dal Cin
Georgi Dikov
Jihong Ju
Mohsen Ghafoorian
XR Labs, Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
{adalcin,gdikov,jihoju,mghafoor}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract

Distorted Video

Current learning-based Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methods struggle with videos of dynamic scenes captured by wideangle cameras. We present AnyMap, a differentiable SfM
framework that jointly addresses image distortion and motion estimation. By learning a general implicit camera model
without predefined parameters, AnyMap handles lens distortion and estimates multi-view consistent 3D geometry, camera poses, and (un)projection functions. To resolve the ambiguity where motion estimation can compensate for undistortion errors and vice versa, we introduce a low-dimensional
motion representation consisting of a set of learnable basis
trajectories, which are interpolated to produce regularized
motion estimates. Experimental results show that our method
achieves accurate camera poses, excels in camera calibration and image rectification, and enables high-quality novel
view synthesis. Our low-dimensional motion representation
effectively disentangles undistortion from motion estimation,
outperforming existing methods.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in Structure-from-Motion (SfM) has shifted
to differentiable estimation of depth, camera poses, and intrinsics, enabling neural networks to implicitly model scene
geometry [6, 16, 45, 51, 57]. Although learning-based methods produce results comparable to conventional methods like
COLMAP [43, 44], they assume a pinhole camera model
and lack support for lens distortion inherent to wide-angle or
fisheye cameras. This limitation restricts their applicability
on distorted videos, leaving COLMAP as the default solution
for camera calibration and image rectification.
Handling distortions in learning-based SfM is challenging. Zero-shot methods [16, 57, 62] that regress 3D geometry, poses, and intrinsics without optimization on input images underperform on distorted images (see Sec. 4.3). Scene
coordinate regressors [6] also fail, as they rely on frozen
pre-trained encoders to map image features to scene coor-

Geometry &
Camera Poses

Per-Pixel Motion Prediction

Range Network
Learned Camera Model
Pose Solver

Calibration & Image Rectification

Motion Handling

Off-the-Shelf Correspondences

Monocular Depths

Figure 1. AnyMap: our differentiable SfM method leverages offthe-shelf correspondences and monodepths to learn the camera
model, enabling calibration, pose estimation, 3D reconstruction,
and image rectification from distorted videos of dynamic scenes.

dinates; lens distortions introduce spatially varying image
deformations, leading to inconsistent encoder performance
across different image regions. Fine-tuning the image encoder, as in FlowMap [45], helps adapt to lens distortions
and more effectively mapping distorted image patches to
scene geometry. However, current optimization strategies
for intrinsics struggle when parameterizing distortions. It
has been shown in [13] that optimizing camera intrinsics
directly is suboptimal due to ambiguities in distorted camera models—different parameter sets can represent equivalent cameras. This leads to optimization instability, with
gradient descent oscillating between equivalent solutions
without convergence. FlowMap estimates camera intrinsics
as a function of scene geometry by selecting among candidate focal lengths and tentatively aligning unprojected point
clouds for each candidate. However, for models like Fisheye624 [42], which involve numerous distortion coefficients,
this approach becomes infeasible due to rapid growth in
combinations and persistent camera model ambiguities.

16674

