This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

vesselFM: A Foundation Model for Universal 3D Blood Vessel Segmentation
Bastian Wittmann1 Yannick Wattenberg2
Tamaz Amiranashvili1,3 Suprosanna Shit1 Bjoern Menze1
1

University of Zurich

2

3

ETH Zurich

Technical University of Munich

{bastian.wittmann, bjoern.menze}@uzh.ch

Abstract
Segmenting 3D blood vessels is a critical yet challenging
task in medical image analysis. This is due to significant
imaging modality-specific variations in artifacts, vascular
patterns and scales, signal-to-noise ratios, and background
tissues. These variations, along with domain gaps arising
from varying imaging protocols, limit the generalization of
existing supervised learning-based methods, requiring tedious voxel-level annotations for each dataset separately.
While foundation models promise to alleviate this limitation, they typically fail to generalize to the task of blood vessel segmentation, posing a unique, complex problem. In this
work, we present vesselFM, a foundation model designed
specifically for the broad task of 3D blood vessel segmentation. Unlike previous models, vesselFM can effortlessly
generalize to unseen domains. To achieve zero-shot generalization, we train vesselFM on three heterogeneous data
sources: a large, curated annotated dataset, data generated by a domain randomization scheme, and data sampled
from a flow matching-based generative model. Extensive
evaluations show that vesselFM outperforms state-of-theart medical image segmentation foundation models across
four (pre-)clinically relevant imaging modalities in zero-,
one-, and few-shot scenarios, therefore providing a universal solution for 3D blood vessel segmentation.

1. Introduction and Motivation
Blood vessel segmentation represents a (pre-)clinically relevant task in (bio)medical image analysis as it plays a vital
role in analyzing, diagnosing, and treating various vascular disorders, such as stroke [11], cerebral aneurysms [34],
viral pneumonia [36], coronary artery disease [54], and
Alzheimer’s [47]. Despite advances in medical image analysis, accurate and robust segmentation of fully-connected
vasculature in task-specific imaging modalities still remains
a challenging problem, especially in 3D. This is primarily due to the complexity introduced by intricate minuscule vascular geometries, as well as significant domain gaps

Figure 1. VesselFM is trained in a supervised manner on imagemask pairs from three heterogeneous data sources (Dreal , Ddrand ,
and Dflow ) and subsequently applied in a zero-, one-, or few-shot
fashion to new, unseen 3D blood vessel domains.

caused by imaging modality and protocol-specific variations in signal-to-noise ratios, vascular patterns and scales,
imaging artifacts, and background tissues. These variations
typically prevent supervised deep learning-based methods
from generalizing to unseen 3D blood vessel domains [51].
Consequently, researchers and clinicians frequently find
themselves forced to default to the labor-intensive process of acquiring manual, voxel-level consistent annotations
from scratch for analyzing vascular images at hand.
Foundation models for image segmentation pre-trained
on large-scale datasets have recently emerged as tools that
can effortlessly generalize to unseen data distributions [25].
Although segmentation foundation models also established
themselves in the medical field [32, 50, 57], they typically
fail to overcome the unique challenges posed by the characteristics of the vascular network. To address this limitation,
we propose vesselFM, a Foundation Model precisely tailored to universal 3D blood vessel segmentation. We train
vesselFM in a supervised manner on image-mask pairs from
three heterogeneous data sources (see Fig. 1). To this end,
we first curate Dreal , which represents, to the best of our
knowledge, the largest annotated dataset for 3D blood vessel segmentation, covering a broad range of imaging modalities from various anatomical regions of different organisms. Second, we supplement Dreal with two synthetic data
sources, Ddrand and Dflow . In particular, we aim to compre-

20874

