This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MPDrive: Improving Spatial Understanding with Marker-Based Prompt
Learning for Autonomous Driving
Zhiyuan Zhang1,∗ , Xiaofan Li2,∗ , Zhihao Xu1,∗ , Wenjie Peng1 ,
Zijian Zhou3 , Miaojing Shi4 , Shuangping Huang1,5,†
3

1
South China University of Technology, 2 Baidu Inc.,
King’s College London, 4 Tongji University, 5 Pazhou Laboratory

Abstract
2

Autonomous driving visual question answering (AD-VQA)
aims to answer questions related to perception, prediction,
and planning based on given driving scene images, heavily
relying on the model’s spatial understanding capabilities.
Prior works typically express spatial information through
textual representations of coordinates, resulting in semantic gaps between visual coordinate representations and textual descriptions. This oversight hinders the accurate transmission of spatial information and increases the expressive
burden. To address this, we propose a novel Marker-based
Prompt learning framework (MPDrive), which represents
spatial coordinates by concise visual markers, ensuring linguistic expressive consistency and enhancing the accuracy
of both visual perception and spatial expression in ADVQA. Specifically, we create marker images by employing
a detection expert to overlay object regions with numerical labels, converting complex textual coordinate generation into straightforward text-based visual marker predictions. Moreover, we fuse original and marker images as
scene-level features and integrate them with detection priors to derive instance-level features. By combining these
features, we construct dual-granularity visual prompts that
stimulate the LLM’s spatial perception capabilities. Extensive experiments on the DriveLM and CODA-LM datasets
show that MPDrive achieves state-of-the-art performance,
particularly in cases requiring sophisticated spatial understanding.

1

Q: What objects should the ego vehicle notice ?
A: Firstly, notice <1018.5,510.8>. The object is
stationary, so the ego vehicle should continue ahead at
the same speed.
A: Firstly, notice <ID 1>. It is going ahead, so the ego
vehicle should slow down and continue ahead.
Secondly, notice <ID 2>. It is stationary, so the ego
vehicle should slightly maneuver to the right.

Figure 1. Comparison of object response process between mainstream MLLMs (red box) and our proposed MPDrive (green box).
Current research directly represents object spatial coordinates in
text format, leading to semantic gaps between coordinates and
text descriptions. This misalignment adversely impacts subsequent prediction and planning tasks. In contrast, MPDrive converts complex spatial coordinate generation into text-based visual
marker (region with numerical label) predictions, ensuring linguistic consistency.

1. Introduction

human error [25, 45, 47, 52]. A robust autonomous driving system requires an agent capable of perceiving complex environments and making informed decisions. Recently, Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
have emerged as a promising approach for autonomous
driving, demonstrating strong generalization capabilities in
visual question answering (AD-VQA) tasks [4, 7, 18, 29,
37, 40, 48, 49, 61].
Current MLLMs face challenges in spatial understanding for autonomous driving scenarios [24, 41, 62], limit-

Autonomous driving has advanced rapidly, showing potential to enhance road safety, traffic efficiency, and reduce
* These authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding Author.

12089

