This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArtiFade: Learning to Generate High-quality Subject from Blemished Images
Shuya Yang∗

Input images

Shaozhe Hao∗ Yukang Cao† Kwan-Yee K. Wong†
The University of Hong Kong

ArtiFade (Ours)

Input images

Textual Inversion

Visible artifacts

ArtiFade (Ours)

DreamBooth

Invisible artifacts

Figure 1. Blemished subject-driven generation with our ArtiFade and vanilla subject-driven methods. We display images generated using
ArtiFade and Textual Inversion [15] on watermark artifacts on the left, and ArtiFade and DreamBooth [44] on adversarial noise artifacts [48]
on the right. In contrast to the poor performance of Textual Inversion and DreamBooth, which are negatively affected by the visible or
invisible artifacts, ArtiFade produces much better fidelity of the subject with high-quality generation.

1. Introduction

Abstract

With the rapid advancement of generative diffusion models [20, 41, 45, 47, 60], subject-driven text-to-image generation [5, 15, 25, 27, 44], which aims to capture distinct
characteristics of a subject by learning from a few images of
the subject, has gained significant attention. This approach
empowers individuals to seamlessly incorporate their preferred subjects into diverse and visually captivating scenes
by simply providing text conditions. Representative works
such as Textual Inversion [15] and DreamBooth [44] have
shown promising results on this task. Specifically, Textual
Inversion proposes to optimize a textual embedding to encode identity characteristics that provide rich subject information for subsequent generation. DreamBooth shares a
similar idea but additionally fine-tunes the diffusion model
to preserve more identity semantics. Plenty of successive
efforts have been made to advance this task from various
perspectives, including generation quality, compositionality, and efficiency [5, 25, 27].
Both of the above mentioned methods, along with their
follow-up works, however, rely heavily on the presence of
unblemished input images that contain only relevant identity information. This is often expensive or even unavailable in real-world applications. Instead, in practical scenarios such as scraping web images of a desired subject, it is
common to encounter images that are blemished by various
visible artifacts such as watermarks, drawings, and stickers.
Additionally, there also exist invisible artifacts like adversarial noises [48] that are not easily detectable or remov-

Subject-driven text-to-image generation has demonstrated
remarkable advancements in its ability to learn and capture characteristics of a subject using only a limited number of images. However, existing methods commonly rely on
high-quality images for training and often struggle to generate reasonable images when the input images are blemished by artifacts. This is primarily attributed to the inadequate capability of current techniques in distinguishing
subject-related features from disruptive artifacts. In this paper, we introduce ArtiFade to tackle this issue and successfully generate high-quality artifact-free images from blemished datasets. Specifically, ArtiFade exploits fine-tuning of
a pre-trained text-to-image model, aiming to remove artifacts. The elimination of artifacts is achieved by utilizing a
specialized dataset that encompasses both unblemished images and their corresponding blemished counterparts during fine-tuning. ArtiFade also ensures the preservation of
the original generative capabilities inherent within the diffusion model, thereby enhancing the overall performance
of subject-driven methods in generating high-quality and
artifact-free images. We further devise evaluation benchmarks tailored for this task. Through extensive qualitative
and quantitative experiments, we demonstrate the generalizability of ArtiFade in effective artifact removal under both
in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios.
* Equal contribution † Corresponding authors

13167

