This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEEN-DA: SEmantic ENtropy guided Domain-aware Attention for Domain
Adaptive Object Detection
Haochen Li1, 4 Rui Zhang2 * Hantao Yao3 Xin Zhang2 Yifan Hao2 Xinkai Song2
Shaohui Peng1 Yongwei Zhao2 Chen Zhao5 Yanjun Wu5 Ling Li1, 4 *
1
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS
2
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
3
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Institute of Software, CAS
{haochen2021, pengshaohui, zhaochen, wuyanjun, liling}@iscas.ac.cn
{zhangrui, zhangxin, haoyifan, songxinkai, zhaoyongwei}@ict.ac.cn, yaohantao@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) aims to generalize detectors trained on an annotated source domain
to an unlabelled target domain. Traditional works focus on aligning visual features between domains to extract domain-invariant knowledge, and recent VLM-based
DAOD methods leverage semantic information provided by
the textual encoder to supplement domain-specific features
for each domain. However, they overlook the role of semantic information in guiding the learning of visual features
that are beneficial for adaptation. To solve the problem,
we propose semantic entropy to quantify the semantic information contained in visual features, and design SEmantic ENtropy guided Domain-aware Attention (SEEN-DA) to
adaptively refine visual features with the semantic information of two domains. Semantic entropy reflects the importance of features based on semantic information, which
can serve as attention to select discriminative visual features and suppress semantically irrelevant redundant information. Guided by semantic entropy, we introduce domainaware attention modules into the visual encoder in SEENDA. It utilizes an inter-domain attention branch to extract
domain-invariant features and eliminate redundant information, and an intra-domain attention branch to supplement the domain-specific semantic information discriminative on each domain. Comprehensive experiments validate
the effectiveness of SEEN-DA, demonstrating significant improvements in cross-domain object detection performance.

1. Introduction
Object detection [8, 33, 44, 45] have been proven to attain encouraging performance assisted by high-quality im* Corresponding author.

ages with accurate annotations. However, due to the noticeable discrepancy between domains, they suffer severe performance degradation when dealing with unseen data in distinct scenes. To alleviate this problem, domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) [3] aims to transfer a detector trained
on the labelled source domain to a unlabelled target domain.
Traditional DAOD works [3, 30, 47] focus on reducing
domain discrepancy by aligning visual features between domains to extract domain-invariant knowledge. Additionally,
[24,32,49,58] decouple the unique features of each domain,
i.e.domain-specific features, to prevent its interference during feature alignment. Although effective, they train the
detector with domain-shared and semantically agnostic category labels (such as one-hot encoding), which ignores the
linguistic properties of categories and inter-domain differences and commonality, i.e.semantic information. Recently,
visual-language models (VLMs) [26,43,65] are proposed to
ground visual with textual modalities. Through the textual
encoder, they align visual features with the textual prompt,
which is constructed from natural language and contains
rich semantic information. Motivated by this, recent VLMbased DAOD methods, such as DA-Pro [23], utilize the textual encoder as detection head and tune the textual prompt
to learn domain-invariant semantics while supplementing
domain-specific semantics for each domain. However, they
freeze the visual encoder and leverage semantic information
solely in the detection head, limiting the discriminability of
visual features.
Summarily, despite promising performance, existing
methods ignore the incorporation of semantic information
to guide the learning of visual features that are beneficial
for adaptation. They typically optimize the visual encoder
with semantically agnostic category labels and adversarial
loss, or directly freeze it, resulting in two limitations. First,
they fail to filter out redundant information from visual fea-

25465

