This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstanceGaussian: Appearance-Semantic Joint Gaussian Representation
for 3D Instance-Level Perception
Haijie Li1

Yanmin Wu1 Jiarui Meng1 Qiankun Gao1
Ronggang Wang1,2 Jian Zhang1,2*

Zhiyao Zhang3

1

2

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
3
College of Information Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China

Abstract
3D scene understanding is vital for applications in autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality. However, scene understanding based on 3D Gaussian Splatting faces three key challenges: (i) an imbalance between appearance and semantics, (ii) inconsistencies in
object boundaries, and (iii) difficulties with top-down instance segmentation. To address these challenges, we propose InstanceGaussian, a method that jointly learns appearance and semantic features while adaptively aggregating instances. Our contributions are as follows: (i) a
new Semantic-Scaffold-GS representation to improve feature representation and boundary delineation, (ii) a progressive training strategy for enhanced stability and segmentation, and (iii) a category-agnostic, bottom-up instance aggregation approach for better segmentation. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance in category-agnostic, openvocabulary 3D point-level segmentation, validating the
effectiveness of our proposed method. Project page:
https://lhj-git.github.io/InstanceGaussian/

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding aims to comprehensively capture a
scene’s content, structure, and semantics, addressing tasks
like instance segmentation, object detection, and openvocabulary queries. This is crucial for applications in autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality, where
detailed scene comprehension can significantly improve
performance and safety. Traditional 3D representations,
∗ Corresponding author
This work is supported by Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology(Grant No.
2024B1212010006)

such as voxels, point clouds, and meshes, provide structured
models but often involve trade-offs between spatial resolution and computational efficiency. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [16] offers a novel approach that combines
the explicitness of traditional representations with neural
adaptability, enabling efficient and detailed scene modeling.
3DGS is particularly promising for advancing 3D scene understanding by effectively balancing quality and efficiency
in capturing complex scene geometry.
In the realm of 3D scene understanding utilizing 3DGS,
three critical challenges emerge. 1) The first is an inherent imbalance in the representation of appearance versus
semantics. Capturing the fine-grained texture details of a
given object or region necessitates multiple Gaussians, each
with varied appearance attributes. However, these Gaussians collectively require only a single, shared semantic
attribute to accurately represent the semantics of the region. This imbalance results in a scenario where the number of Gaussians may be sufficient for appearance representation yet redundant for semantic expression. 2) The
second challenge is an inconsistency between appearance
and semantics. Without semantic constraints, i.e., in pure
appearance reconstruction, a single Gaussian can represent different objects or regions. At object boundaries, for
instance, a single Gaussian may simultaneously represent
both the object’s foreground and background. Recent approaches, such as language-embedded Gaussian Splatting
techniques [25, 34], employ a decoupled learning strategy
that overlooks the interdependence between color and semantics, leading to inconsistencies between appearance and
semantics and posing significant challenges for both 3D
point segmentation and 2D image segmentation. 3) Thirdly,
previous approaches are predominantly designed in a topdown manner, often relying on prior category information.
For instance, GaussianGrouping [38] defines the number of
instances based on 2D tracking results, FastLGS [14] uses

14078

