This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpticalNet: An Optical Imaging Dataset and Benchmark
Beyond the Diffraction Limit
Benquan Wang1 * Ruyi An4 * Jin-Kyu So1 Sergei Kurdiumov3 Eng Aik Chan1
Giorgio Adamo1 Yuhan Peng1 Yewen Li1B Bo An1,2
1 Nanyang Technological University
2 Skywork AI, Singapore
3 University of Southampton
4 The University of Texas at Austin
https://Deep-See.github.io/OpticalNet
① Data Collection: Microscopy Imaging and Scanning

② OpticalNet-enabled Pixelate Imaging of Arbitrary Shape Object

Inference

Unsolved diffraction images

Diffraction image

Pixelate subwavelength imaging

Arbitrary shape object with
Subwavelength feature
Objective lens
Sample
Sample stage

Scanning
start

Quarter-wave
plate (QWP)
Input: Diffraction images

…

Scanning
end

Polarizer

Camera

…

Deep learning

Diffraction image
Output: Object images

Training

Figure 1. Framework of OpticalNet. Drawing an analogy to modular construction, where small units could be assembled to create larger
complex objects, we build the OpticalNet dataset that deconstructs arbitrary-shaped objects into basic building blocks–small n × n grid
regions consisting of squares with sizes below the diffraction limit. This dataset is collected through microscopy imaging via sample
scanning, and we can train a deep-learning-based model to predict object images using diffraction images as inputs. With the trained model,
we translate diffraction images of complex-shaped objects into their corresponding object images for each spatial position and assemble
these modular predictions accordingly to reconstruct the complete structures, enabling subwavelength imaging beyond the diffraction limit.

Abstract
Optical imaging capable of resolving nanoscale features
would revolutionize scientific research and engineering applications across biomedicine, smart manufacturing, and
semiconductor quality control. However, due to the physical
phenomenon of diffraction, the optical resolution is limited
to approximately half the wavelength of light, which impedes
the observation of subwavelength objects such as the native
state coronavirus, typically smaller than 200 nm. Fortunately,
deep learning methods have shown remarkable potential in
uncovering underlying patterns within data, promising to
overcome the diffraction limit by revealing the mapping pattern between diffraction images and their corresponding
ground truth object images. However, the absence of suitable datasets has hindered progress in this field–collecting
high-quality optical data of subwavelength objects is highly
difficult as these objects are inherently invisible under conventional microscopy, making it impossible to perform stan-

dard visual calibration and drift correction. Therefore, we
provide the first general optical imaging dataset based on
the “building block” concept for challenging the diffraction
limit. Drawing an analogy to modular construction principles, we construct a comprehensive optical imaging dataset
comprising subwavelength fundamental elements, i.e., small
square units that can be assembled into larger and more
complex objects. We then frame the task as an image-toimage translation task and evaluate various vision methods.
Experimental results validate our “building block” concept,
demonstrating that models trained on basic square units can
effectively generalize to realistic, more complex unseen objects. Most importantly, by highlighting this underexplored
AI-for-science area and its potential, we aspire to advance
optical science by fostering collaboration with the vision
and machine learning communities.
∗ Equal contributions.

10900

B Corresponding to Yewen Li <yewen001@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

