This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seq2Time: Sequential Knowledge Transfer for Video LLM
Temporal Grounding
Andong Deng1,2,∗ , Zhongpai Gao2,† , Anwesa Choudhuri2 , Benjamin Planche2 , Meng Zheng2 ,
Bin Wang2,3 , Terrence Chen2 , Chen Chen1 , Ziyan Wu2
1

University of Central Florida, 2 United Imaging Intelligence, 3 Northwestern University

Abstract

vanced sports analytics by recognizing patterns and strategies over entire games.

Temporal awareness is essential for video large language models (LLMs) to understand and reason about
events within long videos, enabling applications like dense
video captioning and temporal video grounding in a unified system. However, the scarcity of long videos with
detailed captions and precise temporal annotations limits their temporal awareness. In this paper, we propose
Seq2Time, a data-oriented training paradigm that leverages sequences of images and short video clips to enhance
temporal awareness in long videos. By converting sequence
positions into temporal annotations, we transform largescale image and clip captioning datasets into sequences
that mimic the temporal structure of long videos, enabling
self-supervised training with abundant time-sensitive data.
To enable sequence-to-time knowledge transfer, we introduce a novel time representation that unifies positional
information across image sequences, clip sequences, and
long videos. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method, achieving a 27.6% improvement in F1 score
and 44.8% in CIDEr on the YouCook2 benchmark and
a 14.7% increase in recall on the Charades-STA benchmark compared to the baseline. Project available at:
https://seq2time.github.io/

Building upon well-trained LLMs [2, 7, 8, 14, 39], visual instruction tuning [24]—which projects visual representations into the language embedding space—has significantly advanced the ability to perform various multimodal tasks, such as image captioning [18, 23, 42], video
question answering [6, 19, 20, 26, 37], and 3D perception
[11, 17, 31]. The success of multimodal LLMs (MLLMs)
in general vision-language tasks has further inspired the development of time-sensitive MLLMs [10, 12, 13, 29, 30, 34]
for long-term video understanding, such as dense video captioning [15] and temporal video grounding [1, 9].

1. Introduction
Developing versatile video large language models (LLMs)
capable of perceiving temporal dynamics in long-term
videos is crucial for advancing toward artificial general intelligence (AGI) and has numerous impactful real-world applications, e.g., enabling intelligent surveillance systems to
detect anomalous activities, assisting in medical diagnostics
through the analysis of patient behavior, and facilitating ad* This work was carried out during the internship of Andong Deng at
United Imaging Intelligence, Boston MA, USA. † Corresponding author.

Creating time-sensitive instruction tuning data from existing video datasets with timestamp annotations [1, 9, 15,
32, 40] is essential for temporal grounding. However,
current time-related video datasets face significant limitations. First, they are limited in scale due to the laborintensive process of timestamp annotation; datasets like
TimeIT [30] and VTG-IT [10] contain only around 125K
and 120K videos respectively, which is substantially fewer
than general video instruction tuning datasets without detailed time annotation, e.g., VideoChat2 [20] includes over
800K videos. However, the number of training data is crucial in time-sensitive MLLM training. As illustrated in Table 1, when randomly removing 12% task-irrelevant training data for TimeChat [30], the average performance of
dense video captioning on YouCook2 could drop 13.4%;
while intentionally removing task-relevant training data
(e.g., dense video captioning), the performance sharply degrades 65.5%. Second, the captions in these datasets often
lack richness and precision; the visual-language alignment
is less accurate compared to high-quality datasets. For example, LLaVA-Instruct-150K [24] provides detailed image
captions and specifies key object locations, greatly enhancing perception during instruction following. These limitations—the constrained dataset sizes and suboptimal caption
quality—not only hinder the training of temporally aware
video LLMs but also impede their performance in under-

13766

