This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmotiveTalk: Expressive Talking Head Generation through Audio Information
Decoupling and Emotional Video Diffusion
Haotian Wang1 , Yuzhe Weng1 , Yueyan Li2 , Zilu Guo1 , Jun Du1∗ , Shutong Niu1 , Jiefeng Ma1 ,
Shan He3 , Xiaoyan Wu3 , Qiming Hu3 , Bing Yin3 , Cong Liu3 , Qingfeng Liu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Imperial College London 3 iFLYTEK
* Corresponding author : jundu@ustc.edu.cn

Driven Audio
(Talking, Speaking, ...)

Additional
Emotion Control
(Video, Image, ...)
Portrait

Generated Video

Figure 1. We propose EmotiveTalk, an expressive talking head generation framework. Taking a single portrait and the driven audio as
input, our method can generate expressive portrait video sync with audio and customize the speaking style with additional emotion control.

Abstract
Diffusion models have revolutionized the field of talking
head generation, yet still face challenges in expressiveness, controllability, and stability in long-time generation.
In this research, we propose an EmotiveTalk framework
to address these issues. Firstly, to realize better control
over the generation of lip movement and facial expression, a Vision-guided Audio Information Decoupling (VAID) approach is designed to generate audio-based decoupled representations aligned with lip movements and expression. Specifically, to achieve alignment between audio
and facial expression representation spaces, we present a
Diffusion-based Co-speech Temporal Expansion (Di-CTE)
module within V-AID to generate expression-related representations under multi-source emotion condition constraints. Then we propose a well-designed Emotional Talking Head Diffusion (ETHD) backbone to efficiently generate highly expressive talking head videos, which contains
an Expression Decoupling Injection (EDI) module to automatically decouple the expressions from reference portraits

while integrating the target expression information, achieving more expressive generation performance. Experimental results show that EmotiveTalk can generate expressive
talking head videos, ensuring the promised controllability
of emotions and metric stability during long-time generation, yielding state-of-the-art performance compared to existing methods. The main page of our paper can be found
in https://emotivetalk.github.io/.

1. Introduction

26212

Talking head generation, also known as portrait image animation [52], demonstrates significant value across multiple
domains, including television and film production, online
education as well as human-machine interaction. The generation of realistic talking head videos involves two aspects
of requirements. On the one hand, for the verbal aspect, it is
essential to ensure the synchronization between speech and
lip motions in the generated video [27]. On the other hand,
for the non-verbal aspect, the generated video must convey
non-verbal information, including facial expressions [26].
Despite the success of diffusion models [16, 24, 35] in

