This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evolving High-Quality Rendering and Reconstruction in a Unified Framework
with Contribution-Adaptive Regularization
You Shen1†, Zhipeng Zhang2†, Xinyang Li1 , Yansong Qu1 , Yu Lin1 , Shengchuan Zhang1 , Liujuan Cao1 *
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
PGSR

Abstract

Ours

Representing 3D scenes from multiview images is a core
challenge in computer vision and graphics, which requires
both precise rendering and accurate reconstruction. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has garnered significant attention for its high-quality rendering and fast inference speed. Yet, due to the unstructured and irregular
nature of Gaussian point clouds, ensuring accurate geometry reconstruction remains difficult. Existing methods primarily focus on geometry regularization, with common approaches including primitive-based and dual-model frameworks. However, the former suffers from inherent conflicts
between rendering and reconstruction, while the latter is
computationally and storage-intensive. To address these
challenges, we propose CarGS, a unified model leveraging
Contribution-adaptive regularization to achieve simultaneous, high-quality rendering and surface reconstruction. The
essence of our framework is learning adaptive contribution
for Gaussian primitives by squeezing the knowledge from
geometry regularization into a compact MLP. Additionally,
we introduce a geometry-guided densification strategy with
clues from both normals and Signed Distance Fields (SDF)
to improve the capability of capturing high-frequency details. Our design improves the mutual learning of the two
tasks, meanwhile its unified structure doesn’t require separate models as in dual-model based approaches, guaranteeing efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate CarGS’s
ability to achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in both rendering fidelity and reconstruction accuracy while maintaining real-time speed and minimal storage size.

Reconstruction (F1)

0.5
0.4

GOF
RaDe-GS

0.3
0.2
SuGaR

0.1
0

2DGS

NeuS

3DGS

21

22

23

24

Rendering (PSNR)

25

26

Figure 1. The performance of CarGS in TnT datasets, achieving
high-quality rendering and reconstruction in a unified model. The
storage size of the model is represented by the radius of the circle.

1. Introduction

tasks in the fields of computer vision and graphics. Both
academia and industry are actively pursuing unified scene
representations that enable high-quality rendering and accurate geometry reconstruction concurrently to address the
growing demands of applications in areas such as augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), robotics, and
autonomous driving. However, simultaneously achieving
SOTA performance in both rendering and reconstruction
with a unified model is non-trivial, as an inherent conflict
exists between the two tasks [3, 7, 9].
Revisiting recent approaches, we identify two solutions
aimed at mitigating the conflict. The first branch, which
we refer to as “primitive-based”, introduces additional geometric regularization to 3D Gaussian primitives to improve
surface reconstruction. For example, Sugar [7] regularizes
3D Gaussians to align more closely with surfaces. Although this approach ensures parameter efficiency, it leads
to a misaligned prioritization between appearance and geometry, eventually degrading rendering performance. The
second branch, termed “dual-model based”, seeks to guide
the learning of one task through information derived from
the other. For instance, GSDF [30] introduces a dual-model

Novel view synthesis (NVS) and surface reconstruction
from multi-view images are both challenging and critical
* Corresponding Author.
† Equal Contribution.

16346

