This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Automatic Spectral Calibration of Hyperspectral Images:
Method, Dataset and Benchmark
Zhuoran Du1,2 , Shaodi You1 , Cheng Cheng2 , Shikui Wei2
1
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
2
Visual Intelligence +X International Cooperation Joint Laboratory of MOE, Beijing Jiaotong University
(a) Synchronous Spectral Calibration

Abstract

Devision

Hyperspectral images (HSI) densely sample the world in
both the space and frequency domains and, therefore, are
more distinctive than RGB images. Usually, HSI needs to
be calibrated to minimize the impact of various illumination
conditions. The traditional way to calibrate HSI utilizes a
physical reference, which involves manual operations, occlusions, and/or limits camera mobility. These limitations
inspire this paper to automatically calibrate HSIs using a
learning-based method. Towards this goal, a large-scale
HSI calibration dataset, which has 765 high-quality HSI
pairs covering diversified natural scenes and illuminations,
is created. The dataset is further expanded to 7650 pairs
by combining with 10 different physically measured illuminations. A spectral illumination transformer (SIT) together
with an illumination attention module is proposed. Extensive benchmarks demonstrate the SoTA performance of the
proposed SIT. The benchmarks also indicate that low-light
conditions are more challenging than normal conditions.
The dataset and codes are available online: https://
github.com/duranze/Automatic- spectralcalibration-of-HSI.

Whiteboard Recording
(b) Asynchronous Spectral Calibration

Devision

(c) Automatic Spectral Calibration (Proposed)

Spectral Illumination Transformer (SIT)

Figure 1. Comparison of HSI Calibration Methods: (a) Synchronous, (b) Asynchronous, and (c) Automatic (Proposed).

1. Introduction

a reference such as a barium sulfate panel (an ideal white
panel) [16] in the scene. The disadvantage is the panel
partly occludes the scene. The asynchronous method [2, 8]
(Fig. 1.b) takes two HSIs of the same scenes quickly with
and without the reference. The disadvantage is that this
method requires double shots, manual operations, and an
unmoved camera.
These disadvantages inspire this paper: can we learn to
automatically calibrate the HSI without a physical reference? If the accuracy is close to the physical methods, then
the learning-based method has the advantages of less manual operations, no occlusion, and more mobility.
To enable this research, we have created the first HSI
auto calibration dataset BJTU-UVA Dataset. The dataset is
captured using a 204 bands 400-1000nm hyperspectral camera with a 512 × 512 spatial resolution, and 12 bits quantization. The dataset has 765 calibrated and uncalibrated

Hyperspectral image (HSI) densely samples the world in
both spatial and frequency domains. It is more informative than RGB images for recognizing material. Therefore
it is widely used in remote sensing and laboratory analysis
[21][4][6][17].
However, HSI appearance is highly dependent on global
illumination. While in remote sensing and lab environments, global illuminations are highly uniform in a large
spatial and temporal range or can be well controlled; global
illuminations in natural scenes are highly varied spatially
and temporally. Therefore, to capture HSI in natural scenes,
global illumination needs to be measured simultaneously.
There are two traditional ways to measure the global illumination. The synchronous method [3] (Fig. 1.a) utilizes

28081

