This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chain of Attack: On the Robustness of Vision-Language Models Against
Transfer-Based Adversarial Attacks
Peng Xie* , Yequan Bie* , Jianda Mao, Yangqiu Song, Yang Wang, Hao ChenB , Kani ChenB
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China

Abstract

Attacking Performance (CLIP Score %)

{pxieaf, ybie}@connect.ust.hk, {jhc, makchen}@ust.hk

Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) have showcased remarkable performance in image and natural language understanding, such as image captioning and response generation. As the practical applications of VLMs
become increasingly widespread, their potential safety and
robustness issues raise concerns that adversaries may
evade the system and cause these models to generate toxic
content through malicious attacks. Therefore, evaluating
the robustness of open-source VLMs against adversarial attacks has garnered growing attention, with transfer-based
attacks as a representative black-box attacking strategy.
However, most existing transfer-based attacks neglect the
importance of the semantic correlations between vision and
text modalities, leading to sub-optimal adversarial example
generation and attack performance. To address this issue,
we present Chain of Attack (CoA)1 , which iteratively enhances the generation of adversarial examples based on the
multi-modal semantic update using a series of intermediate attacking steps, achieving superior adversarial transferability and efficiency. A unified attack success rate computing method is further proposed for automatic evasion evaluation. Extensive experiments conducted under the most
realistic and high-stakes scenario, demonstrate that our attacking strategy is able to effectively mislead models to generate targeted responses using only black-box attacks without any knowledge of the victim models. The comprehensive
robustness evaluation in our paper provides insight into the
vulnerabilities of VLMs and offers a reference for the safety
considerations of future model developments.

75
70
65

CoA (Ours)

Score (%)

MF-it

MF-ii: 70.0
MF-it: 65.6
MF-ii-tt: 74.3
Mix.Attack: 44.2
AttackBard: 53.4
CoA (Ours): 75.2

60
55
50
45

MF-ii-tt

MF-ii

AttackBard

Mix.Attack

1

10
100
Training Time (seconds/step, log scale)

1000

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed CoA with other attacking
strategies. The CLIP score results of Unidiffuser [4] are reported.
Our method shows both superior performance and efficiency.

1. Introduction

ing performance in image and natural language understanding, reasoning, and generation [1, 2, 30, 45, 46]. The powerful multi-modal capability in different tasks, including visual question answering and image captioning [10, 28, 34],
makes these models to be widely deployed in real-world applications. However, as more VLMs are made open-sourced
or used for commercial purposes, the security and safety issues raise concerns, e.g., VLMs could be attacked and exploited to generate fake and toxic content, which remains an
inevitable challenge [5, 37, 48]. Moreover, compared to language models, VLMs suffer more from adversarial attacks
since the vision modality is highly susceptible to visually
inconspicuous adversarial perturbations due to the continuous and high dimensional nature of images [7, 22, 38]. This
vulnerability could be exploited by adversaries to mislead
VLMs by circumventing safety checkers [43, 53], injecting
malicious code, or gaining unauthorized API access, leading to severe security risks in practical applications of the
models [27, 54].
To explore the vulnerability of vision-language models,

Vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved significant
progress over the last few years and demonstrated promis* Equal contributions. B Corresponding authors.
1 Code available at https://github.com/Shelton1013/Chain of Attack

14679

