This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot RGB-D Point Cloud Registration with Pre-trained Large Vision Model
Haobo Jiang1 , Jin Xie4 , Jian Yang3 , Liang Yu2 , Jianmin Zheng→1
1

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 Nankai University, 4 Nanjing University

{haobo.jiang, ASJMZheng}@ntu.edu.sg, liangyu.yl@alibaba-inc.com, csjyang@nankai.edu.cn,
csjxie@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Poor Lighting

This paper introduces ZeroMatch, a novel zero-shot RGB-D
point cloud registration framework, aimed at achieving robust 3D matching on unseen data without any task-specific
training. Our core idea is to utilize the powerful zeroshot image representation of Stable Diffusion, achieved
through extensive pre-training on large-scale data, to enhance point-cloud geometric descriptors for robust matching. Specifically, we combine the handcrafted geometric
descriptor FPFH with Stable-Diffusion features to create
point descriptors that are both locally and contextually
aware, enabling reliable RGB-D registration with zero-shot
capability. This approach is based on our observation that
Stable-Diffusion features effectively encode discriminative
global contextual cues, naturally alleviating the feature ambiguity that FPFH often encounters in scenes with repetitive
patterns or low overlap. To further enhance cross-view consistency of Stable-Diffusion features for improved matching,
we propose a coupled-image input mode that concatenates
the source and target images into a single input, replacing the original single-image mode. This design achieves
both inter-image and prompt-to-image consistency attentions, facilitating robust cross-view feature interaction and
alignment. Finally, we leverage feature nearest neighbors
to construct putative correspondences for hypothesize-andverify transformation estimation. Extensive experiments
on 3DMatch, ScanNet, and ScanLoNet verify the excellent
zero-shot matching ability of our method. [Code]

Low Overlap (6.4%)

Repetitive Pattern

ZeroMatch
Handcrafted Geometric Descriptor + Zero-shot Stable-Diffusion Descriptor

Figure 1. Our ZeroMatch can achieve robust RGB-D 3D registration in challenging scenes, such as those with poor lighting, low
overlap, and repetitive patterns, without any task-specific training.

SLAM [11, 64]. While great progress has been made in
both traditional and learning-based 3D registration methods [4, 6, 27, 60], existing research [28, 57] has shown that
the purely point cloud-based methods easily suffer from
less robust geometric representations, particularly in realworld scenarios with low overlap or noisy points, hindering registration stability. In contrast, integrating texture and
semantic cues from RGB images has proven effective in
improving the distinctiveness of point descriptors, driving
increased research interest in RGB-D point cloud registration [15, 29, 62]. This paper considers a less-explored task,
zero-shot RGB-D point cloud registration [56], aimed at
achieving reliable registration on diverse, unseen data without any task-specific training. This task holds greater practical value while presenting more significant challenges.

1. Introduction

The prevalent RGB-D 3D registration can be roughly
categorized into optimization-based traditional methods and
learning-based deep methods. Traditional methods are
typically built on the iterative closest point (ICP) framework [4], incorporating color information to enhance optimization or correspondence estimation for robust registration [20, 43, 49]. Deep methods design various deep
semantic and geometric feature fusion mechanisms, such
as multi-scale linear transformations [57] and multi-scale
bidirectional fusion [29], to increase feature distinctiveness [14, 15, 62]. However, those deep methods are usu-

Point cloud registration is a problem of estimating the rigid
transformation (i.e., 3D rotation and 3D translation) between a pair of source and target point clouds. It plays an
important role in many applications such as 3D reconstruction [1, 18, 19, 24], object location [10, 17], and LiDAR
→ Corresponding author

16943

