This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PassionSR: Post-Training Quantization with Adaptive Scale
in One-Step Diffusion based Image Super-Resolution
Libo Zhu1 , Jianze Li1 , Haotong Qin2 ,* Wenbo Li3 ,
Yulun Zhang1 ,* Yong Guo4 , Xiaokang Yang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 ETH Zürich,
3
Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Abstract
Diffusion-based image super-resolution (SR) models have
shown superior performance at the cost of multiple denoising steps. However, even though the denoising step has
been reduced to one, they require high computational costs
and storage requirements, making it difﬁcult for deployment
on hardware devices. To address these issues, we propose
a novel post-training quantization approach with adaptive
scale in one-step diffusion (OSD) image SR, PassionSR.
First, we simplify OSD model to two core components,
UNet and Variational Autoencoder (VAE) by removing the
CLIPEncoder. Secondly, we propose Learnable Boundary
Quantizer (LBQ) and Learnable Equivalent Transformation
(LET) to optimize the quantization process and manipulate activation distributions for better quantization. Finally,
we design a Distributed Quantization Calibration (DQC)
strategy that stabilizes the training of quantized parameters for rapid convergence. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that PassionSR with 8-bit and 6-bit obtains
comparable visual results with full-precision model. Moreover, PassionSR achieves signiﬁcant advantages over recent
leading low-bit quantization SR methods. Code will be at
https://github.com/libozhu03/PassionSR.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental and challenging task in computer vision, aiming to reconstruct highresolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR) inputs by
recovering lost structures and details. Over time, various
image SR models have been developed to tackle this challenge. Early image SR methods [2, 4, 7, 54] focus on simple synthetic degradations, such as bicubic downsampling,
to create LR-HR pairs. GAN approaches [22, 38, 50] introduce more complex degradation processes. Although these
methods have advanced image quality signiﬁcantly, when
applied to real-world datasets, they encounter some issues,
such as training stability and performance drop, showing
the limitations of early image SR methods.
* Corresponding authors: Haotong Qin and Yulun Zhang

LR (×4)
# Step / Bits
Param. (M) / Ops (G)

DiffBIR [24]
50 / 32-bit
1,618 / 49,056

OSEDiff [43]
1 / 32-bit
1,303 / 4,523

PassionSR (ours)
1 / 8-bit
238 / 1,060

Figure 1. Visual comparison (×4) between full-precision (FP)
multi-step and one-step diffusion SR models and our 8-bit quantized PassionSR. Compared to FP models, PassionSR achieves
about 81.77% params reduction and 4× speedup.

Recently, diffusion-based image SR models have been
attracting researchers’ attention. Diffusion models exhibit
strong performance across various tasks, including image
SR (see Fig. 1), due to their excellent generation ability and
robust training stability. Diffusion-based SR models [24,
37, 44] leverage their capability to capture complex data
distributions, achieving superior perceptual quality.
However, achieving high-quality results with diffusion
models comes at the expense of substantial computational
demands, latency, and storage requirements. It poses signiﬁcant challenges for deployment on hardware devices.
Several strategies have been developed to improve the efﬁciency of diffusion models. For instance, fast diffusion
samplers [32, 55] and distillation techniques [33] have reduced the number of denoising steps. With the advance
of score distillation-based methods [41, 48], one-step diffusion (OSD) image super-resolution (OSDSR) models have
become feasible, such as SinSR [39], OSEDiff [43], and
DFOSD [18]. Despite reducing denoising steps to one, OSDSR models still face high computational costs and storage
requirements. For example, in OSEDiff [43], the parameters and Ops are 1,303M and 4,523G, respectively. The
high computational complexity causes a signiﬁcant burden
for mobile devices like smartphones. This problem hinders
the widespread use of diffusion models, especially in scenarios with limited storage and computational resources.

12778

