This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIRE: Matched Implicit Neural Representations
Dhananjaya Jayasundara1 , Heng Zhao2 , Demetrio Labate3 , and Vishal M. Patel1
1
Johns Hopkins University, 2 The Rockefeller University, 3 University of Houston
{vjayasu1,vpatel36}@jhu.edu, {hzhao25,dlabate2}@central.uh.edu

Abstract

vided with the coordinates of an explicit signal representation. In general, an INR is structured as a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with several fully connected layers, where
the explicit signal’s coordinates serve as the input. Through
the learning process of the MLP, the explicit representation
is encoded into the weights and biases of the neural network. A distinctive feature of INRs is their versatility in
handling different types of signals, from two-dimensional
images through three-dimensional shapes and beyond. For
example, in the context of images, an INR utilizes the coordinates from a two-dimensional grid to produce the corresponding color values at those coordinates, effectively
learning a continuous representation for the image.

Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) are continuous
function learners for conventional digital signal representations. With the aid of positional embeddings and/or exhaustively fine-tuned activation functions, INRs have surpassed many limitations of traditional discrete representations. However, existing works only find a continuous representation for the digital signal by solely using a single, fixed
activation function throughout the INR, and it has not yet
been explored to match the INR to the given signal. As current INRs are not matched to the signal being represented
by the INR, we hypothesize that this approach could restrict
the representation power and generalization capabilities of
INRs, limiting their broader applicability. A way to match
the INR to the signal being represented is through matching the activation of each layer in the sense of minimizing
the mean squared loss. In this paper, we introduce MIRE,
a method to find the highly matched activation function for
each layer in INR through dictionary learning. To showcase
the effectiveness of the proposed method, we utilize a dictionary that includes seven activation atoms: Raised Cosines
(RC), Root Raised Cosines (RRC), Prolate Spheroidal Wave
Function (PSWF), Sinc, Gabor Wavelet, Gaussian, and Sinusoidal. Experimental results demonstrate that MIRE not
only significantly improves INR performance across various tasks, such as image representation, image inpainting, 3D shape representation, novel view synthesis, superresolution, and reliable edge detection, but also eliminates
the need for the previously required exhaustive search for
activation parameters, which had to be conducted even before INR training could begin.

INRs stand in contrast to traditional discrete signal representation techniques, offering a more flexible and potentially more efficient means of representing complex signals
[8]. Once the conversion of an explicit signal representation
to an implicit representation through an INR is completed, a
continuous functional relationship between the signal’s coordinates and its values is established. This learned continuous implicit functional relationship, facilitated by INRs,
serves as a robust representation mechanism for the underlying signal, allowing it to perform operations like precise querying of the learned representation and differentiation, etc. In contrast, discrete representations of signals
encounter limitations in operations such as querying, which
are constrained by quantized interpolations, and also differentiation may not yield desired outputs due to the discrete
nature. Therefore, the inherent capabilities of INRs offer
significant advantages in accurately representing and manipulating signals compared to discrete representations. In
addition, while the memory requirement for conventional
representations increases exponentially with the signal resolution, INRs are not tied to the resolution, making this approach highly memory-efficient [8, 34].

1. Introduction

Despite the potential advantages of using INRs for the
applications mentioned above, their performance critically
depends on the architecture of the MLP, particularly the
choice of activation function. Traditional activation functions, such as ReLU, Sigmoid, and Tanh, which are commonly used in deep learning models, have shown very poor

Implicit Neural Representations (INRs), also known as
coordinate-based neural networks, operate by learning a
continuous (implicit) functional representation when proProject Page: https://dsgrad.github.io/MIRE

8279

