This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parametric Point Cloud Completion for Polygonal Surface Reconstruction
Zhaiyu Chen1,3
1 Technical University of Munich

Yuqing Wang1

Liangliang Nan2

2 Delft University of Technology

Input & GT

Abstract
Existing polygonal surface reconstruction methods heavily
depend on input completeness and struggle with incomplete
point clouds. We argue that while current point cloud completion techniques may recover missing points, they are not
optimized for polygonal surface reconstruction, where the
parametric representation of underlying surfaces remains
overlooked. To address this gap, we introduce parametric completion, a novel paradigm for point cloud completion, which recovers parametric primitives instead of individual points to convey high-level geometric structures. Our
presented approach, PaCo, enables high-quality polygonal
surface reconstruction by leveraging plane proxies that encapsulate both plane parameters and inlier points, proving
particularly effective in challenging scenarios with highly
incomplete data. Comprehensive evaluations of our approach on the ABC dataset establish its effectiveness with
superior performance and set a new standard for polygonal
surface reconstruction from incomplete data. Project page:
https://parametric-completion.github.io.

Xiao Xiang Zhu1,3

3 Munich Center for Machine Learning

AdaPoinTr

PaCo (ours)

Figure 1. Unlike conventional point cloud completion that aims
to recover individual points (middle, non-planar points shown in
red), parametric completion recovers primitive parameters along
with corresponding inlier points. PaCo recovers planar structures
(right, each color denoting a planar primitive), directly enabling
high-quality polygonal surface reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Unlike conventional methods that produce dense triangle
meshes [12, 18, 19], polygonal surface reconstruction prioritizes a compact surface representation [1, 26, 32]. The
compact polygonal representation is valuable for applications where efficiency, interpretability, and editability are
essential [2]. However, recovering accurate polygonal surfaces from incomplete point clouds remains a challenge due
to factors such as occlusions and sensor limitations. This
demands methods that can infer structured, high-level surface representations (e.g., planes) to effectively convey underlying geometries.
One might consider point cloud completion as a potential
solution. However, current practices in point cloud completion aim to recover individual missing points [46–48].
While existing methods show promise for free-form object
completion, they typically fail to produce structured reconstructions with piecewise planar geometry. The emphasis

on point completeness in existing methods overlooks the
need for a parametric planar representation, which is essential for accurately reconstructing polygonal surfaces. We
argue that a persistent gap exists between the goals of point
cloud completion and polygonal surface reconstruction. To
our knowledge, none of the existing completion techniques
are optimized for polygonal surfaces.
To bridge this gap, we introduce parametric point cloud
completion, a novel point cloud completion paradigm. Unlike conventional methods that emphasize individual point
recovery to improve completeness, parametric completion
aims to infer parametric primitives from incomplete data.
This shift prioritizes the recovery of high-level geometric structures over point completeness. We present PaCo,
a neural network that embodies this paradigm and leverages sequence-to-sequence generation to learn plane prox-

11749

