This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seurat: From Moving Points to Depth
Seokju Cho1

Jiahui Huang2
1

KAIST AI

Seungryong Kim1
2

Joon-Young Lee2

Adobe Research

3D Trajectories
Figure 1. Seurat predicts precise and smooth depth changes for dynamic objects over time by only looking at the 2D point trajectories,
which encode depth cues in their motion patterns. The figure illustrates 2D point tracks lifted into 3D space with our depth predictions on
videos from the DAVIS dataset [41].

Abstract
Accurate depth estimation from monocular videos remains challenging due to ambiguities inherent in singleview geometry, as crucial depth cues like stereopsis are absent. However, humans often perceive relative depth intuitively by observing variations in the size and spacing of
objects as they move. Inspired by this, we propose a novel
method that infers relative depth by examining the spatial
relationships and temporal evolution of a set of tracked
2D trajectories. Specifically, we use off-the-shelf point
tracking models to capture 2D trajectories. Then, our approach employs spatial and temporal transformers to process these trajectories and directly infer depth changes over
time. Evaluated on the TAPVid-3D benchmark, our method
demonstrates robust zero-shot performance, generalizing
effectively from synthetic to real-world datasets. Results indicate that our approach achieves temporally smooth, highaccuracy depth predictions across diverse domains.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D structure of a scene is essential for
numerous applications, including image and video generation [56], robotics [12], autonomous driving [40], and 3D
reconstruction [32]. However, obtaining accurate depth in-

formation from monocular images is challenging due to inherent ambiguities [17], difficulties in scale and shift determination [42], and the considerable diversity of real-world
scenes [42, 55]. In monocular video sequences, additional
complexities arise from dynamic objects exhibiting intricate movements [36] and lengthy sequences complicating
the maintenance of temporal coherence in depth estimation [21].
A classical method for obtaining precise depth information is Structured Light 3D Scanning [13, 14, 33], which
involves projecting known patterns onto surfaces. The deformation of these patterns upon interacting with surfaces
encodes valuable data about the 3D structure of the objects. This effectively transforms the spatial variations in
the scene into measurable distortions in the projected pattern, allowing for accurate depth reconstruction.
Drawing inspiration from Structured Light methods [13,
14, 33], we propose that similar principles can be applied
to monocular video sequences, assuming local object rigidity. Just as the deformation of a projected pattern reveals
depth information, the patterns formed by the trajectories of
tracked points [9–11, 23] in video sequences can reveal the
3D structure of a scene. These trajectories inherently capture spatial relationships and motion patterns relative to the
camera, providing robust cues for depth estimation. For example, points moving away from the camera create denser

7211

