This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LIM: Large Interpolator Model for Dynamic Reconstruction
Remy Sabathier
University College London
Meta

Niloy J. Mitra
University College London

David Novotny
Meta

Abstract
Reconstructing dynamic assets from video data is central
to many in computer vision and graphics tasks. Existing 4D
reconstruction approaches are limited by category-specific
models or slow optimization-based methods. Inspired by the
recent Large Reconstruction Model (LRM) [15], we present
the Large Interpolation Model (LIM), a transformer-based
feed-forward solution, guided by a novel causal consistency
loss, for interpolating implicit 3D representations across
time. Given implicit 3D representations at times t0 and
t1 , LIM produces a deformed shape at any continuous time
t ∈ [t0 , t1 ] delivering high-quality interpolations in seconds (per frame). Furthermore, LIM allows explicit mesh
tracking across time, producing a consistently uv-textured
mesh sequence ready for integration into existing production pipelines. We also use LIM, in conjunction with a
diffusion-based multiview generator, to produce dynamic
4D reconstructions from monocular videos. We evaluate
LIM on various dynamic datasets, benchmarking against
image-space interpolation methods (e.g., FiLM [41]) and
direct triplane linear interpolation, and demonstrate clear
advantages. In summary, LIM is the first feed-forward
model capable of high-speed tracked 4D asset reconstruction across diverse categories.

RGB

depth

mesh wireframe

Figure 1. Large Interpolator Model (LIM) outputs a 4D video
reconstruction by interpolating 3D implicit representations between two consecutive keyframes at times t = 0 and t = 1.

sentation, which can then be rendered for novel view generation. In this work, in the context of dynamic reconstruction, we ask if a similar feed-forward approach can be
developed to reconstruct a tracked explicit representation
across time.
Here, L4GM [43] proposed a feedforward 4D video reconstructor which, for each video keyframe, accepts few
views of the reconstructed object and outputs a mixture
of 3D Gaussian Splats [23]. However, this approach has
limitations as it can only reconstruct the keyframes at their
exact timesteps without the ability to interpolate the shape
through time. Additionally, establishing correspondences
between Gaussian mixtures from different timesteps is challenging, which complicates tracing the deformation of the
underlying object geometry through time. This limitation
hinders many important downstream applications, such as
gaming, where we require the 3D shape and texture of a
single mesh to be defined in a static canonical pose while
only its geometry (i.e., vertices) is allowed to be deformed
arbitrarily.
We thus present Large Interpolation Model (LIM) as a
transformer-based feed-forward solution that accepts an im-

1. Introduction
Reconstructing dynamic 4D assets from video data is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics, with
many virtual and augmented reality applications. Existing
4D reconstructors follow two main paradigms: categoryspecific articulated reconstruction and image-or-text conditioned 4D distillation. Hence, they are either restricted to
a specific class of objects such as humans [32] and pets
[3, 44], or are optimization-based [42, 63] making them
slow requiring minutes to hours per reconstruction.
Recently, in the context of static reconstruction, the large
reconstruction model (LRM) [16] has been proposed as an
elegant feed-forward network that, starting from a fixed rig
of multiview images, directly produces 3D implicit repre-

6154

