This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards In-the-wild 3D Plane Reconstruction from a Single Image
Rui Yu2∗
Sili Chen3
Sharon X. Huang1
Jiachen Liu1 *
1
2
The Pennsylvania State University
University of Louisville

Hengkai Guo3
3
Bytedance

Abstract
3D plane reconstruction from a single image is a crucial
yet challenging topic in 3D computer vision. Previous stateof-the-art (SOTA) methods have focused on training their
system on a single dataset from either indoor or outdoor
domain, limiting their generalizability across diverse testing
data. In this work, we introduce a novel framework dubbed
ZeroPlane, a Transformer-based model targeting zero-shot
3D plane detection and reconstruction from a single image,
over diverse domains and environments. To enable datadriven models across multiple domains, we have curated a
large-scale planar benchmark, comprising over 14 datasets
and 560,000 high-resolution, dense planar annotations for
diverse indoor and outdoor scenes. To address the challenge
of achieving desirable planar geometry on multi-dataset
training, we propose to disentangle the representation of
plane normal and offset, and employ an exemplar-guided,
classification-then-regression paradigm to learn plane and
offset respectively. Additionally, we employ advanced backbones as image encoder, and present an effective pixelgeometry-enhanced plane embedding module to further facilitate planar reconstruction. Extensive experiments across
multiple zero-shot evaluation datasets have demonstrated
that our approach significantly outperforms previous methods on both reconstruction accuracy and generalizability,
especially over in-the-wild data. Our code and data are
available at: https://github.com/jcliu0428/ZeroPlane.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D geometric primitives from images has been
a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision for
decades. Compared with discrete representations such as 3D
point clouds, volumetric grids, or meshes, these primitives
encapsulate the 3D scene with structural regularities and nonlocal geometric cues. 3D plane is one of the major geometric
primitives with a concise but compact 3D representation and
is ubiquitous in diverse man-made environments. Perceiving
* Equal contribution.

ARKitScenes [4]

NYUv2 [49]

Mip-NeRF 360 [3]

KITTI [21]

IBims-1 [29]

nuScenes [8]

Figure 1. Our plane reconstruction framework, ZeroPlane, demonstrates superior zero-shot generalizability on unseen and even inthe-wild data across diverse indoor and outdoor environments.

and recovering 3D planes also plays a pivotal role in various
applications including augmented reality (AR) [11], localization and mapping [24, 45] and robotics [52]. Extensive
studies have been conducted on 3D plane reconstruction
from a variety of input data formats such as one or multiple
RGB images [20, 33, 35, 50, 60], RGB-D sequences [24] or
point cloud [39]. Traditional methods have achieved accurate
plane recovery by taking specified scene assumptions [18]
or leveraging RGB-D [24, 45] or multi-view input [20, 50].
These approaches involve complex optimization, making
them less flexible in heterogeneous environments.
In recent years, data-driven frameworks have emerged
to recover 3D planes from a single RGB image with advanced network designs such as CNNs [33, 34, 62, 69] and
Transformers [47, 53]. Despite achieving noteworthy plane
reconstruction accuracy on a single indoor [13] or outdoor
dataset [44], none of these methods have tested and even
considered commendable and generalizable plane reconstruction across diverse environments. Exploring a unified and
transferable framework for plane reconstruction from single
images across diverse scenes is a promising direction with
broad practical applications. For instance, let us consider a
scenario where a robot must navigate through both indoor
spaces and urban streets. Its ability to perceive its surroundings by identifying and reconstructing 3D planes is essential
for effective planning and navigation. An AR user might aim
to place virtual objects on diverse identified planar surfaces,

27027

