This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JamMa: Ultra-lightweight Local Feature Matching with Joint Mamba
Xiaoyong Lu
Songlin Du*
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Shenzhen Research Institute of Southeast University, Shenzhen, China
{luxiaoyong, sdu}@seu.edu.cn
77.4

77.4

77.4

202.9
5.7

59.9

Figure 1. Efficiency vs. Performance. State-of-the-art sparse
and semi-dense
methods are compared in the MegaDepth dataset [19].
In all three commonly used efficiency metrics, the proposed JamMa achieves a superior performance-efficiency balance by a clear margin.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Feature matching, which seeks to establish accurate correspondences between two images, underpins various critical
tasks, including structure from motion (SfM) [33] and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [12]. However,
feature matching faces challenges arising from variations
in viewpoint, illumination, and scale. Furthermore, applications that demand real-time performance place significant
pressure on the efficiency of the matching process.
Feature matching methods are generally classified into
three categories: sparse, semi-dense, and dense methods.
Sparse methods [4, 25, 32, 34], which operate alongside a
keypoint detector [8, 23], are designed to establish correspondences between two sets of keypoints. Therefore, when
the detector performs poorly in challenging scenes, such as
texture-less scenes, it will severely affect the sparse matcher.
In contrast, semi-dense and dense methods [5, 9, 11, 35]
directly establish correspondences between grid points or all
pixels, enhancing robustness in challenging scenes. However, semi-dense and dense matchers typically rely on Transformers [16, 39] to model long-range dependencies in dense
features, resulting in impractically high complexity when
processing high-resolution images. Achieving an optimal
balance between performance and efficiency remains a critical challenge in feature matching.
To achieve high efficiency and robustness in challenging
scenes, we explore the potential of accelerating semi-dense

Existing state-of-the-art feature matchers capture long-range
dependencies with Transformers but are hindered by high
spatial complexity, leading to demanding training and highlatency inference. Striking a better balance between performance and efficiency remains a challenge in feature matching. Inspired by the linear complexity O(N ) of Mamba, we
propose an ultra-lightweight Mamba-based matcher, named
JamMa, which converges on a single GPU and achieves
an impressive performance-efficiency balance in inference.
To unlock the potential of Mamba for feature matching, we
propose Joint Mamba with a scan-merge strategy named
JEGO, which enables: (1) Joint scan of two images to
achieve high-frequency mutual interaction, (2) Efficient scan
with skip steps to reduce sequence length, (3) Global receptive field, and (4) Omnidirectional feature representation. With the above properties, the JEGO strategy significantly outperforms the scan-merge strategies proposed in
VMamba and EVMamba in the feature matching task. Compared to attention-based sparse and semi-dense matchers,
JamMa demonstrates a superior balance between performance and efficiency, delivering better performance with
less than 50% of the parameters and FLOPs. Project page:
https://leoluxxx.github.io/JamMa-page/.
* Corresponding author.

14934

