This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image is All You Need to Empower Large-scale Diffusion
Models for In-Domain Generation
Pu Cao†

Feng Zhou†
Lu Yang∗
Tianrui Huang
Qing Song
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

{caopu, zhoufeng, soeaver, huangtianrui, priv}@bupt.edu.cn

Face

Unconditional Generation

Text-to-Image

Image Editing

wearing glasses

+ female

Stylized Generation

Image-only Dataset

+

Stable Diffusion

Dataset (70,000 images)

+

Animal

Image Translation

Porcelain

Text-to-3D Generation

Dataset (5,000 images)

A DSLR photo of a porcelain vase

Off-the-Shelf
Mechanisms
Input Data
Results Generated by SD1.5

Dataset (15,803 images)

Figure 1. Illutration of In-domain Generation. In this work, we empower large-scale pre-trained diffusion models using only image data
to perform varied generation tasks within each domain with high fidelity and controllability. We mark the input data in blue and the results
generated with the original Stable Diffusion v1.5 model in orange.

Abstract
In-domain generation aims to perform a variety of tasks
within a specific domain, such as unconditional generation, text-to-image, image editing, 3D generation, and more.
Early research typically required training specialized generators for each unique task and domain, often relying on
fully-labeled data. Motivated by the powerful generative
capabilities and broad applications of diffusion models,
we are driven to explore leveraging label-free data to empower these models for in-domain generation. Fine-tuning
a pre-trained generative model on domain data is an intuitive but challenging way and often requires complex manual hyper-parameter adjustments since the limited diversity
of the training data can easily disrupt the model’s origi-

nal generative capabilities. To address this challenge, we
propose a guidance-decoupled prior preservation mechanism to achieve high generative quality and controllability
by image-only data, inspired by preserving the pre-trained
model from a denoising guidance perspective. We decouple domain-related guidance from the conditional guidance
used in classifier-free guidance mechanisms to preserve
open-world control guidance and unconditional guidance
from the pre-trained model. We further propose an efficient
domain knowledge learning technique to train an additional
text-free UNet copy to predict domain guidance. Besides,
we theoretically illustrate a multi-guidance in-domain generation pipeline for a variety of generative tasks, leveraging
multiple guidances from distinct diffusion models and conditions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our method in domain-specific synthesis and its compatibility with various diffusion-based control methods and applications.

† The first two authors contributed to this paper equally.
∗ Corresponding author: Lu Yang.

Code is available at https://github.com/PRIV-Creation/
In-domain-Generation-Diffusion.

18358

