This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UMFN: Unified Multi-Domain Face Normalization for Joint Cross-domain
Prototype Learning and Heterogeneous Face Recognition
Meng Pang1 , Wenjun Zhang1 , Nanrun Zhou2∗ , Shengbo Chen1∗ , Hong Rao1
1
Nanchang University
2
Shanghai University of Engineering Science
{mengpang@,zhangwenjun@,raohong@}ncu.edu.cn,nrzhou@sues.edu.cn,ccb02kingdom@gmail.com

Abstract
Face normalization aims to enhance the robustness
and effectiveness of face recognition systems by mitigating
intra-personal variations in expressions, poses, occlusions,
illuminations, and domains. Existing methods face limitations in handling multiple variations and adapting to crossdomain scenarios. To address these challenges, we propose
a novel Unified Multi-Domain Face Normalization Network
(UMFN) model, which can process face images with various types of facial variations from different domains, and
reconstruct frontal, neutral-expression facial prototypes in
the target domain. As an unsupervised domain adaptation
model, UMFN facilitates concurrent training on multiple
datasets across domains and demonstrates strong prototype
reconstruction capabilities. Notably, UMFN serves as a
joint prototype and feature learning framework, enabling
the simultaneous extraction of domain-agnostic identity features through a decoupling mapping network and a feature domain classifier for adversarial training. Moreover,
we design an efficient Heterogeneous Face Recognition
(HFR) network that fuses domain-agnostic and identitydiscriminative features for HFR, and introduce contrastive
learning to enhance identity recognition accuracy. Empirical studies on diverse cross-domain face datasets validate
the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Figure 1. Illustration of a desired face normalization method capable of handling multiple cross-domain face normalization tasks
and addressing various types of facial variations.

1. Introduction

tion , authentication, and human-computer interaction [39].
However, existing face normalization methods face challenges in coping with increasingly complex and diversified
application scenarios, highlighting the urgent need for more
advanced and versatile solutions to flexibly adapt to various
changes in different environments and conditions.
The limitations of current face normalization methods lie
mainly in their constraints in processing single contaminant
elements and their single-domain applicability. Most methods [3, 10] focus on modeling and processing a single element, such as pose, expression, illumination, or occlusion,
and struggle with multiple coexisting factors. Additionally,
some unsupervised methods [41, 46] may inadvertently lose
crucial identity information, leading to identity inconsistency between the generated prototype and the input face.
Furthermore, existing models [32, 40] are typically domainspecific, lacking universality across multi-domain scenarios. However, practical applications often involve images

Face normalization, as a core technology in the field of computer vision, is dedicated to eliminating interfering variation
factors in facial images, such as pose, expression, occlusion,
and illumination, and reconstructing a frontal, unoccluded,
evenly illuminated facial prototype with a neutral expression [34]. This technology has shown broad application
prospects in numerous areas, including criminal investiga∗ Corresponding authors

29299

