This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Evolving Visual Concept Library using Vision-Language Critics
Atharva Sehgal1 * Patrick Yuan2
1

University of Texas at Austin

Ziniu Hu3
2

Yisong Yue3

Cornell University

Abstract

3

Jennifer J. Sun2

Swarat Chaudhuri1

California Institute of Technology

What is this picture?

We study the problem of building a visual concept library for visual recognition. Building effective visual concept libraries is challenging, as manual definition is laborintensive, while relying solely on LLMs for concept generation can result in concepts that lack discriminative power or
fail to account for the complex interactions between them.
Our approach, E SCHER, takes a library learning perspective to iteratively discover and improve visual concepts.
E SCHER uses a vision-language model (VLM) as a critic
to iteratively refine the concept library, including accounting for interactions between concepts and how they affect
downstream classifiers. By leveraging the in-context learning abilities of LLMs and the history of performance using
various concepts, E SCHER dynamically improves its concept generation strategy based on the VLM critic’s feedback. Finally, E SCHER does not require any human annotations, and is thus an automated plug-and-play framework.
We empirically demonstrate the ability of E SCHER to learn
a concept library for zero-shot, few-shot, and fine-tuning
visual classification tasks. This work represents, to our
knowledge, the first application of concept library learning
to real-world visual tasks.

Prompts

Concept

What does
a donut
look like?

Hole in center
Glazed surface
dessert

What does
a beignet
look like?

A donut ( ) or
a beignet ( )?

Prior
Work

History
sensitive
Feedback

LLM

Fried pastry
sugar coating
pastry

Outputs

VLM

Output:
Beignet

Prior Work: Concept-bottleneck visual recognition

Prior
Work

History
sensitive
Feedback

Evolved Concepts

Outputs

Hole in center
Glazed surface
Circular shape

Output:
Donut

…

Fried pastry
sugar coating
puﬀy texture

Concept Library
Ours: Self-Evolving Visual Concept Library

Figure 1. An overview of E SCHER. Prior work: conceptbottleneck visual recognition aims to leverage discriminative visual concepts to enable more accurate object classification. Ours:
E SCHER is an approach for iteratively evolving a visual concept
library using feedback from a VLM critic, to discover more effective visual concepts.

1. Introduction

approaches for improving concept-bottleneck visual recognition systems by evolving visual concept libraries to find
more effective concepts.
Existing concept-bottleneck visual recognition systems
typically leverage a Large Language Model (LLM) to generate a set of potential visual concepts relevant to the task,
then use a Vision-Language Model (VLM) to make predictions from these concepts. This process potentially
improves both interpretability and accuracy for classification [19, 30, 31]. However, existing methods face limitations: manually defined concepts are labor-intensive, and
LLM-generated concepts can be inaccurate or fail to account for interactions between them. We need more effective methods to construct and refine visual concepts. One
promising approach to improve visual concept learning is
to leverage library learning [6, 9, 10], which focuses on
building a reusable collection of components. While library
learning has shown success in domains that are naturally

How do humans recognize different visual categories? Consider the example in Figure 1: while easily recognizable as
a pastry, distinguishing between a “donut” and a “beignet”
requires understanding visual concepts such circular shape
with a hole for the donut, puffy texture, and the presence
of powdered sugar specifically on the beignet. These visual concepts, including shape, texture, and the presence
or absence of specific features, enable us to make distinctions between objects. Concept-bottleneck visual recognition [19, 30, 31] aims to leverage these discriminative visual
concepts, to enable vision systems to more accurately recognize a wider range of classes. Here, we study general
* Correspondence to atharvas@utexas.edu.
Artifacts available at
https://trishullab.github.io/escher-web

13124

