This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EAP-GS: Efficient Augmentation of Pointcloud for 3D Gaussian Splatting in
Few-shot Scene Reconstruction
Dongrui Dai1,2
Yuxiang Xing1,2
Department of Engineering Physics, Tsinghua University
2
Key Laboratory of Particle and Radiation Imaging (Tsinghua University), Ministry of Education
1

ddr23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

xingyx@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. Comparison of the FSGS [41] and our proposed EAP-GS with 12 training views. With Attentional Pointcloud Augmentation technique, our method generates significantly more valuable points in the initialization stage than the traditional COLMAP method,
especially in regions with weakly pronounced texture and peripheral area, which ultimately improves the reconstruction quality effectively.

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) has shown impressive
performance in 3D scene reconstruction. However, it suffers from severe degradation when the number of training views is limited, resulting in blur and floaters. Many
works have been devoted to standardize the optimization
process of 3DGS through regularization techniques. However, we identify that inadequate initialization is a critical
issue overlooked by current studies. To address this, we propose EAP-GS, a method to enhance initialization for fast,

accurate, and stable few-shot scene reconstruction. Specifically, we introduce an Attentional Pointcloud Augmentation (APA) technique, which retains two-view tracks as an
option for pointcloud generation. Additionally, the scene
complexity is used to determine the required density distribution, thereby constructing a better pointcloud. We implemented APA by extending Structure-From-Motion (SFM)
to focus on pointcloud generation in regions with complex
structure but sparse pointcloud distribution, which significantly increases the number of valuable points and effectively harmonizes the density distribution. A better point-

16498

