This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeqMvRL: A Sequential Fusion Framework for
Multi-view Representation Learning
Ren Wang1,2 Haoliang Sun1 * Yuxiu Lin3 Chuanhui Zuo1
Yongshun Gong1 Yilong Yin1 Wenjia Meng1∗
1
School of Software, Shandong University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Shandong University of Finance and Economics
{xxlifelover, zch1758440889}@gmail.com, {haolsun, ysgong, ylyin, wjmeng}@sdu.edu.cn, linyx0109@mail.sdufe.edu.cn

Abstract

Negative (-1)

Ground Truth:

-0.5
-0.4
Conflicts

Multi-view representation learning integrates multiple observable views of an entity into a unified representation
to facilitate downstream tasks. Current methods predominantly focus on distinguishing compatible components
across views, followed by a single-step parallel fusion process. However, this parallel fusion is static in essence, overlooking potential conflicts among views and compromising
representation ability. To address this issue, this paper
proposes a novel Sequential fusion framework for Multiview Representation Learning, termed SeqMvRL. Specifically, we model multi-view fusion as a sequential decisionmaking problem and construct a pairwise integrator (PI)
and a next-view selector (NVS), which represent the environment and agent in reinforcement learning, respectively.
PI merges the current fused feature with the selected view,
while NVS is introduced to determine which view to fuse
subsequently. By adaptively selecting the next optimal
view for fusion based on the current fusion state, SeqMvRL
thereby effectively reduces conflicts and enhances unified
representation quality. Additionally, an elaborate novel reward function encourages the model to prioritize views that
enhance the discriminability of the fused features. Experimental results demonstrate that SeqMvRL outperforms parallel fusion schemes in classification and clustering tasks.

Image view:
Audio view:
Text view:

(Cry and background Cheer)
0.9

Su Yiming cried tears of joy.

Positive (+1)

(a) A multi-modal sentiment analysis example.
-0.5

-0.4

0.9

Indeterminate

×

M

0

Positive

√

0.225

M : Mean Fusion

(b) Parallel Fusion

-0.5
-0.45

M

M

-0.4

0.9

0.9

(c) Sequential Fusion

Figure 1. Comparison of two fusion pipelines using the mean fusion strategy. (a) shows an example of sentiment analysis with
conflicts between views. Conflicts hinder Parallel Fusion (b). Sequential Fusion (c) can explicitly reduce the conflict and achieve a
more flexible and effective fusion.

1. Introduction

niques like Sobel, Gabor, and HOG, with each contributing
to a complete representation of the underlying entity [3].
MvRL has achieved great success across numerous downstream tasks, from traditional classification and clustering
tasks to emerging embodied perception tasks [4–7]. However, the inherent structural heterogeneity and potential redundancy among views pose significant challenges to effective fusion in MvRL.
To tackle these challenges, existing methods strive to
integrate as much consistency and complementary information as possible while minimizing redundancy in

Multi-view representation learning (MvRL) aims to unify
diverse views into a comprehensive and robust entity representation [1, 2]. These views can include multi-modal
sensor data (e.g., visual, auditory, and tactile inputs from
a robot) or multi-feature data from distinct extraction tech* Corresponding author

25822

