This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Non-Natural Image Understanding with Advancing
Frequency-based Vision Encoders
Wang Lin1,2∗ QingSong Wang1∗ Yueying Feng1∗ Shulei Wang1
Tao Jin1 Zhou Zhao1 Fei Wu1 Chang Yao1 Jingyuan Chen1,2†
1
2
Zhejiang University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
linwanglw@zju.edu.cn, jingyuanchen@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly enhanced
cross-modal understanding capabilities by integrating visual encoders with textual embeddings, giving rise to multimodal large language models (MLLMs). However, these
models struggle with non-natural images such as geometric
and charts, particularly in fields like education and finance.
Despite efforts to collect datasets and fine-tune the MLLMs,
the gap with natural image understanding is still evident,
and the cost of collecting large and diverse non-natural image datasets is high. To address this, we analyzed the limitations of transformer-based vision encoders(ViT) within
existing MLLMs from a frequency perspective. Studies have
shown that ViT models are less effective at capturing highfrequency information, impairing their ability to capture elements like points, lines, and angles in non-natural images.
In response, we introduced FM-ViT, a frequency-modulated
vision encoder that utilizes Fourier decomposition to extract
high and low frequency components from self-attention features and re-weight them during tuning to non-natural images. In addition, we combine the features of CNN models
with FM-ViT and propose EDGE, an MLLM with enhanced
graphical encoders tailored for understanding non-natural
images. Extensive experiments have confirmed the effectiveness of our FM-ViT and EDGE in 4 types. Project page.

1. Introduction
The rapid evolution of large language models (LLMs) [5,
10, 46, 56] has led to significant progress in various domains. A notable extension is the Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [8, 11, 26, 47], which integrate
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

29756

vision encoders to combine language and vision, fostering deeper cross-modal understanding. However, current
MLLMs often struggle with non-natural images—such as
geometric figures, graphs, and function plots—limiting
their applicability in fields like education and finance.
It has been shown that MLLMs underperform on
non-natural images due to insufficient exposure during
training [13, 15, 27]. While fine-tuning on specialized
datasets [62, 65] has been attempted, the cost of gathering
a non-natural image dataset at the scale of natural image
datasets is prohibitive. This challenge motivates us to explore alternatives beyond simple dataset expansion.
A key challenge lies in the distinct distribution of information within natural versus non-natural images. Nonnatural images, often composed of geometric structures,
concentrate essential information in high-frequency features (e.g., edges and lines), while low-frequency features
(e.g., background) contribute less to semantic understanding. Existing models based on CNNs [16] or ViTs [57]
have inherent limitations. CNNs excel at capturing highfrequency information within local receptive fields but
struggle with global relationships (e.g., parallelism, orthogonality, curvilinear trends). ViTs, through self-attention, are
better at capturing global relationships, but we observe that,
as the number of ViT layers increases, high-frequency information is rapidly diminished (see Figure 1). This behavior
suggests that the ViTs operate like a low-pass filter [3, 48].
Visualized attention maps further reveal that the CLIP ViT
fails to effectively capture geometric features such as points,
lines, and angles. Even after fine-tuning on non-natural images [62, 65], improvements are limited.
To address this, we introduce frequency modulation
into the ViT’s self-attention mechanism (see Section 3.2).
Specifically, we propose FM-ViT, which applies Fourier
decomposition [49] to the attention features, separating
them into high- and low-frequency components. The model
then learns to scale these components during training on
non-natural images. Furthermore, we propose sample-wise
adaptive frequency modulation, which dynamically adjusts

