This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoGigaGAN: Towards Detail-rich Video Super-Resolution
Yiran Xu1,2

𝑡

…

𝑡

Taesung Park1
Richard Zhang1
Yang Zhou1
Eli Shechtman1
Feng Liu1
Jia-Bin Huang2
Difan Liu1
1
2
Adobe Research
University of Maryland, College Park
https://videogigagan.github.io/

𝑥

𝑦

𝑦

Input

TTVSR

BasicVSR++

Ours

128×128

TTVSR

BasicVSR++

128×128

Ours

GT

128×128

1024×1024

1024×1024

1024×1024

Figure 1. We present VideoGigaGAN, a generative video super-resolution model that upscales videos with high-frequency details while
preserving temporal consistency. Top: We compare our approach with TTVSR [39] and BasicVSR++ [8]. Our method produces better
temporal consistency and finer details than previous methods. Bottom: Our model produces high-quality videos with 8× super-resolution.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Challenges. Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to reconstruct high-resolution videos from low-resolution inputs, a
task challenged by the need for temporal consistency and
high-frequency detail generation. VSR shows wide applications in generated videos [2, 20], face videos [13], satellite
videos [66], and Animes [65]. Existing methods [7–9, 25]
focus on consistency but often result in blurry outputs that
lack high-frequency appearance details or realistic textures
(see Fig. 2). Effective VSR requires generating plausible
new content not present in the low-resolution inputs, a capability that these models struggle with. Recent diffusionbased methods [20, 47, 73, 80] enjoy higher per-frame quality but suffer from temporal flickering and slow inference.

Video super-resolution (VSR) models achieve temporal consistency but often produce blurrier results than their imagebased counterparts due to limited generative capacity. This
prompts the question: can we adapt a generative image upsampler for VSR while preserving temporal consistency?
We introduce VideoGigaGAN, a new generative VSR model
that combines high-frequency detail with temporal stability, building on the large-scale GigaGAN image upsampler.
Simple adaptations of GigaGAN for VSR led to flickering
issues, so we propose techniques to enhance temporal consistency. We validate the effectiveness of VideoGigaGAN
by comparing it with state-of-the-art VSR models on public
datasets and showcasing video results with 8× upsampling.

ISR v.s. VSR. Generative models (e.g., diffusion mod-

2139

