This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Img-Diff: Contrastive Data Synthesis for Multimodal Large Language Models
Qirui Jiao1 , Daoyuan Chen2 , Yilun Huang2 , Bolin Ding2 , Yaliang Li2 , Ying Shen1,3
1

Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 FSIETP

jiaoqr3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, sheny76@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{daoyuanchen.cdy,lielin.hyl,bolin.ding,yaliang.li}@alibaba-inc.com

... the left image highlights a fish on the
ground, while the right image highlights a
red crab on the sand.

... In the left image, the player is holding a
baseball glove, while in the right image, the
player is holding a basketball.

The left image shows a framed picture on a shelf,
while the right image shows a white vase with
pink flowers. ...

Figure 1. Three “object replacement” examples within I MG -D IFF, highlighting fine-grined difference in both vision and language.

Abstract

We release our codes and dataset to encourage further research on multimodal data synthesis and MLLMs’ fundamental capabilities for image understanding.

High-performance Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) rely heavily on data quality. This study introduces
a novel data synthesis method, leveraging insights from
contrastive learning and image difference captioning to enhance fine-grained image recognition in MLLMs. By analyzing object differences in detailed regions between similar
images, we challenge the model to identify both matching
and distinct components. Specifically, our method initially
create pairs of similar images that highlight object variations. After that, we introduce a Difference Area Generator for object differences identifying, followed by a Difference Captions Generator for differences describing. The
outcome is a high-quality dataset of “object replacement”
samples, named Img-Diff, which can be expanded as needed
due to its automation. We use the generated dataset to finetune state-of-the-art (SOTA) MLLMs such as InternVL2,
yielding comprehensive improvements across numerous image difference and Visual Question Answering tasks. For instance, the trained models notably surpass the SOTA models GPT-4V and Gemini on the MMVP benchmark. Additionally, we conduct thorough evaluations to confirm the
dataset’s diversity, quality, and robustness, presenting several insights on the synthesis of such a contrastive dataset.

1. Introduction
The emergence of large language models (LLMs) has revolutionized natural language processing [48, 64], also paved
the way for the development of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) that seamlessly integrate linguistic and visual understanding. Improving the performance of
MLLMs hinges on two primary avenues: evolving model
architectures and enhancing dataset quality [53]. The majority of state-of-the-art (SOTA) MLLMs [3, 37, 41–43]
employ a two-phase training strategy, commencing with a
pre-training phase involving extensive image-text pairs for
modality alignment, followed by a fine-tuning phase aimed
at optimizing visual question answering (VQA) capabilities
with specific instruction tuning datasets.
The quality of visual instruction tuning datasets plays a
crucial role in MLLMs’ overall performance in VQA tasks
and diverse downstream applications. With the evolution
of visual instruction tuning datasets, several recent studies
have explored the integration of object detection and Optical Character Recognition (OCR) datasets, such as RefCOCO [28], Visual Genome [31], OCR-VQA [49], and
TextVQA [60], effectively enhancing MLLMs’ proficiency

3 “FSIETP” stands for the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fire Science and Intelligent Emergency Technology.

9296

