This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOT3D: Hand and Object Tracking in 3D from Egocentric Multi-View Videos
Prithviraj Banerjee, Sindi Shkodrani, Pierre Moulon, Shreyas Hampali, Shangchen Han,
Fan Zhang, Linguang Zhang, Jade Fountain, Edward Miller, Selen Basol,
Richard Newcombe, Robert Wang, Jakob Julian Engel, Tomas Hodan
Meta Reality Labs

facebookresearch.github.io/hot3d

Figure 1. HOT3D overview. The dataset includes multi-view egocentric image streams from Aria [13] and Quest 3 [40] annotated with high-quality
ground-truth 3D poses and models of hands and objects. Three multi-view frames from Aria are shown on the left, with contours of 3D models of hands
and objects in the ground-truth poses in white and green, respectively. Aria also provides 3D point clouds from SLAM and eye gaze information (right).

Abstract
We introduce HOT3D, a publicly available dataset for egocentric
hand and object tracking in 3D. The dataset offers over 833
minutes (3.7M+ images) of recordings that feature 19 subjects
interacting with 33 diverse rigid objects. In addition to simple pickup, observe, and put-down actions, the subjects perform actions
typical for a kitchen, office, and living room environment. The
recordings include multiple synchronized data streams containing
egocentric multi-view RGB/monochrome images, eye gaze signal,
scene point clouds, and 3D poses of cameras, hands, and objects.
The dataset is recorded with two headsets from Meta: Project Aria,
which is a research prototype of AI glasses, and Quest 3, a virtualreality headset that has shipped millions of units. Ground-truth
poses were obtained by a motion-capture system using small
optical markers attached to hands and objects. Hand annotations
are provided in the UmeTrack and MANO formats, and objects
are represented by 3D meshes with PBR materials obtained by
an in-house scanner. In our experiments, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of multi-view egocentric data for three popular tasks:
3D hand tracking, model-based 6DoF object pose estimation, and
3D lifting of unknown in-hand objects. The evaluated multi-view
methods, whose benchmarking is uniquely enabled by HOT3D,
significantly outperform their single-view counterparts.

1. Introduction
We use our hands to communicate, interact with objects, or
utilize objects as tools to act upon our environment. The dexterity
with which we can manipulate objects is unmatched by other
species and has been a key factor in our evolution [2]. Hand-object
interaction has therefore naturally received considerable attention
from various research fields, including computer vision [47].
A vision-based system for automatic understanding of handobject interaction, which would be able to capture information
about 3D motion, shape and contact of hands and objects, would
be useful for a wide range of applications. For instance, such a system could enable transferring manual skills between users by first
capturing expert users performing a sequence of hand-object interactions (while assembling a piece of furniture, doing a tennis serve,
etc.), and later using the captured information to guide less experienced users, e.g., via AR glasses. The skills could be similarly
transferred from humans to robots. Such a system could also help
AI assistants better understand the context of a user’s actions, or enable new input capabilities for AR/VR users. For example, it could
turn any physical surface into a virtual keyboard or transform any
pencil into a multi-functional magic wand. However, the accuracy
and speed of existing methods for understanding hand-object interaction are not sufficient to reliably support such applications.

7061

