This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Brain-Inspired Spiking Neural Networks for Energy-Efficient Object Detection
Ziqi Li1 , Tao Gao1* Yisheng An1 , Ting Chen1* , Jing Zhang2 Yuanbo Wen1 , Mengkun Liu1 , Qianxi Zhang1
Chang’an University1 , Australian National University2
{lzq,gaotao,aysm,tchen,wyb,mengkunliu,zqx1216}@chd.edu.cn, jing.zhang@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Brain-inspired spiking neural networks (SNNs) have the capability of energy-efficient processing of temporal information. However, leveraging the rich dynamic characteristics of SNNs and prior works in artificial neural networks
(ANNs) to construct an effective object detection model for
visual tasks remains an open question for further exploration. To develop a directly-trained , low energy consumption and high-performance multi-scale SNN model, we
propose a novel interpretable object detection framework
Multi-scale Spiking Detector (MSD). Initially, we propose
a spiking convolutional neuron as a core component of the
Optic Nerve Nucleus Block (ONNB), designed to significantly enhance the deep feature extraction capabilities of
SNNs. ONNB enables direct training with improved energy
efficiency, demonstrating superior performance compared
to state-of-the-art ANN-to-SNN conversion and SNN techniques. In addition, we propose a Multi-scale Spiking Detection Framework to emulate the biological response and
comprehension of stimuli from different objects. Wherein,
spiking multi-scale fusion and the spiking detector are employed to integrate features across different depths and to
detect response outcomes, respectively. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art ANN detectors, with only 7.8 M
parameters and 6.43 mJ energy consumption. MSD obtains
the mean average precision (mAP) of 62.0% and 66.3% on
COCO and Gen1 datasets, respectively.

Figure 1. Illustration of the visual perception stimulation. We
examine membrane potential changes in visual cortex neurons to
explore dendritic and neural heterogeneity and further present an
efficient trainable neuron model that transmits information via bypass pathways by simulating these changes.

to become a more efficient, biologically inspired approach
to object detection. Specifically, SNNs utilize binary signals
(spikes) rather than continuous signals for neuron communication, which significantly reduces the overhead associated with data transmission and storage. Moreover, SNNs
exhibit asynchronous computation and event-driven communication, enabling them to avoid unnecessary computations and synchronization costs. SNNs exhibit outstanding
energy efficiency when deployed on neuromorphic hardware [36, 39]. However, most existing SNN object detection tasks are converted from ANN, which has limitations
in this operation. Spiking-Yolo [23] requires 3500 time
steps to match the performance of artificial neural network
(ANN). Spike Calibration [28] reduces the time steps to the
order of hundreds, but the performance is limited by the
baseline ANN model. Moreover, most ANN-to-SNN methods are not suitable for sparse event data, as their dynamic
design is aimed at approximating the expected activations
of ANN, making them unable to capture spatiotemporal information of DVS data [6] and difficult to train directly.
Additionally, as illustrated in Fig 1, during cognitive
tasks, image signals stimulate brain perception regions,
where neural nuclei in the visual cortex, upon receiving
electrical signals, transmit information through fast or bypass neural circuits due to dendritic heterogeneity, thus preventing information loss. Neuroscientists have observed

1. Introduction
Object detection is a significant topic in computer vision, widely applied in multi-object tracking [53, 54],
autonomous driving [10, 26, 47], robotics [21, 38], remote sensing [11, 12, 46] and medical image analysis
[18, 29], etc. Achieving real-time object detection on embedded computing devices while balancing computational
efficiency and high energy efficiency has always been a research focus.
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), often referred to as
third-generation neural networks [35, 43], hold the potential

3552

