This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boost the Inference with Co-training: A Depth-guided Mutual Learning
Framework for Semi-supervised Medical Polyp Segmentation
Yuxin Li1
Zihao Zhu1
Yuxiang Zhang1 Yifan Chen1
Zhibin Yu1,2 *
1
College of Electronic Engineering, Ocean University of China
2
Key Laboratory of Ocean Observation and Information of Hainan Province,
Sanya Oceanographic Institution, Ocean University of China

Abstract
Semi-supervised polyp segmentation has made significant progress in recent years as a potential solution for
computer-assisted treatment. Since depth images can provide extra information other than RGB images to help segment these problematic areas, depth-assisted polyp segmentation has gained much attention. However, the utilization
of depth information is still worth studying. The existing
RGB-D segmentation methods rely on depth data in the inference stage, limiting their clinical applications. To tackle
this problem, we propose a semi-supervised polyp segmentation framework based on the mean teacher architecture.
We establish an auxiliary student network with depth images as input in the training stage, and we propose a depthguided cross-modal mutual learning strategy to promote the
learning of complementary information between different
student networks. Meanwhile, we use the high-confidence
pseudo-labels generated by the auxiliary student network
to guide the learning progress of the main student network
from different perspectives. Our model does not need depth
data in the inference phase. In addition, we introduce a
depth-guided patch augmentation method to improve the
model’s learning performance in difficult regions of unlabeled polyp images. Experimental results show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance under different label conditions on five polyp datasets. The code is
available at https://github.com/pingchuan/RD-Net.

Figure 1. To illustrate the complementary role of RGB and depth
images, we present segmentation results on unlabeled images
trained with 10% labeled data in the Kvasir-SEG dataset. The results indicate that our method effectively learns richer information
from unlabeled data. The red, blue, and yellow areas represent the
ground truth, prediction, and their overlap, respectively.

1. Introduction

cise segmentation of polyps plays a key role in the early
diagnosis and treatment of colorectal cancer. Recently, supervised deep learning methods have achieved remarkable
success in the field of polyp segmentation [9, 23, 24, 29, 33].
However, these methods rely on high-quality pixel-wise labeled data. Collecting sufficient labeled data in the medical field is not always feasible. To alleviate this limitation, some studies have explored semi-supervised learning
(SSL) [3, 16, 34, 36, 41] methods for medical image segmentation, using unlabeled data to improve the segmentation performance of the model. These semi-supervised
learning (SSL) methods mainly rely on RGB images for
training, neglecting the rich spatial information in the image. Studies have shown that combining RGB images
with depth data can efficiently complement the contour
information that can not be easily extracted in RGB images [6, 11, 14, 40]. As shown in Figure 1, the pseudolabels predicted by the network based on depth images and
RGB images can complement each other during training.
However, these RGB-D segmentation methods usually require complex feature splicing and fusion in the training
phase. This factor leads to reliance on depth data input
during the inference phase, greatly limiting their application in clinical practice. To this end, we propose a semi-

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common gastrointestinal malignancy and has become the third most common cancer [20]. Various screening methods (such as colonoscopy)
are proposed for early detection and treatment to reduce
its incidence [18]. Intestinal polyps are often considered
a precursor to colorectal cancer [25]. Therefore, the pre* Corresponding author: yuzhibin@ouc.edu.cn.

10394

