This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene Splatter: Momentum 3D Scene Generation from Single Image
with Video Diffusion Model
Shengjun Zhang1 , Jinzhao Li1 , Xin Fei1 , Hao Liu2 , Yueqi Duan1†
1
Tsinghua University, 2 WeChat Vision, Tecent Inc.
{zhangsj23, lijinzha22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, duanyueqi@tsinghua.edu.cn

https://shengjun-zhang.github.io/SceneSplatter/

Figure 1. Visualization results of Flash3D [31], CogVideoX [42], ViewCrafter [45] and ours. Flash3D [31] suffers from distortions and
occlusions, while CogVideoX [42] and ViewCrafter [45] change the color style or existing components, compared to the input image. Our
method can generate high fidelity and consistent 3D scene with our cascaded momentum.

Abstract

the generative ability of video diffusion in unknown regions.
Therefore, we further introduce the aforementioned consistent video as a pixel-level momentum to a directly generated video without momentum for better recovery of unseen
regions. Our cascaded momentum enables video diffusion
models to generate both high-fidelity and consistent novel
views. We further finetune the global Gaussian representations with enhanced frames and render new frames for momentum update in the next step. In this manner, we can iteratively recover a 3D scene, avoiding the limitation of video
length. Extensive experiments demonstrate the generalization capability and superior performance of our method in
high-fidelity and consistent scene generation.

In this paper, we propose Scene Splatter, a momentumbased paradigm for video diffusion to generate generic
scenes from single image. Existing methods, which employ
video generation models to synthesize novel views, suffer
from limited video length and scene inconsistency, leading to artifacts and distortions during further reconstruction. To address this issue, we construct noisy samples
from original features as momentum to enhance video details and maintain scene consistency. However, for latent
features with the perception field that spans both known
and unknown regions, such latent-level momentum restricts
† Corresponding author.

6089

