This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MASt3R-SLAM: Real-Time Dense SLAM with 3D Reconstruction Priors
Riku Murai*

Eric Dexheimer*
Imperial College London

Andrew J. Davison

{riku.murai15, e.dexheimer21, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

Two-View Pointmap
Prediction Using MASt3R

We present a real-time monocular dense SLAM system designed bottom-up from MASt3R, a two-view 3D reconstruction and matching prior. Equipped with this strong prior,
our system is robust on in-the-wild video sequences despite
making no assumption on a fixed or parametric camera
model beyond a unique camera centre. We introduce efficient methods for pointmap matching, camera tracking
and local fusion, graph construction and loop closure, and
second-order global optimisation. With known calibration,
a simple modification to the system achieves state-of-the-art
performance across various benchmarks. Altogether, we
propose a plug-and-play monocular SLAM system capable
of producing globally consistent poses and dense geometry
while operating at 15 FPS.

Real-Time Monocular Dense SLAM Without a
Known Camera Model

Figure 1. Reconstruction from our dense monocular SLAM system
on the Burghers sequence [56]. Using two-view predictions from
MASt3R shown on the left, our system achieves globally consistent
poses and geometry in real-time without a known camera model.

1. Introduction
Visual simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM) is
a foundational building block for today’s robotics and augmented reality products. With careful design of an integrated hardware and software stack, robust and accurate
visual SLAM is now possible. However, SLAM is not yet
a plug-and-play algorithm as it requires hardware expertise
and calibration. For a minimal single camera setup without
additional sensing such as an IMU, in-the-wild SLAM that
provides both accurate poses and consistent dense maps does
not exist. Achieving such a reliable dense SLAM system
would open new research avenues for spatial intelligence.
Performing dense SLAM from only 2D images requires
reasoning over time-varying poses and camera models, as
well as 3D scene geometry. To solve such an inverse problem
of large dimensionality, a variety of priors, from handcrafted
to data-driven, have been proposed. Single-view priors, such
as monocular depth and normals, attempt to predict geometry from a single image, but these contain ambiguities and
lack consistency across views. While multi-view priors like
optical flow reduce ambiguity, decoupling pose and geom*Authors contributed equally to this work.

etry is challenging since pixel motion depends on both the
extrinsics and the camera model. Although these underlying
causes may vary across time and different observers, the
3D scene remains invariant across views. Therefore, the
unifying prior required to solve for poses, camera models,
and dense geometry from images is over the space of 3D
geometry in a common coordinate frame.
Recently, two-view 3D reconstruction priors, pioneered
by DUSt3R [50] and its successor MASt3R [21], have created a paradigm shift in structure-from-motion (SfM) by
capitalising on curated 3D datasets. These networks output
pointmaps directly from two images in a common coordinate frame, such that the aforementioned subproblems are
implicitly solved in a joint framework. In the future, these
priors will be trained on all varieties of camera models with
significant distortion. While 3D priors could take in more
views, SfM and SLAM leverage spatial sparsity and avoid
redundancy to achieve large-scale consistency. A two-view
architecture mirrors two-view geometry as the building block
of SfM, and this modularity opens the door for both efficient
decision-making and robust consensus in the backend.

16695

