This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PS-EIP: Robust Photometric Stereo Based on Event Interval Profile*
Kazuma Kitazawa1 Takahito Aoto2 Satoshi Ikehata3 Tsuyoshi Takatani1
1
University of Tsukuba 2 Optech Innovation, LLC. 3 National Institute of Informatics (NII)
kitazawa.kazuma.qy@alumni.tsukuba.ac.jp
sikehata@nii.ac.jp

aoto@optechinnovation.com

takatani@iit.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
Moving Light

Specular

Recently, the energy-efficient photometric stereo method using an event camera (EventPS [67]) has been proposed to
recover surface normals from events triggered by changes
in logarithmic Lambertian reflections under a moving directional light source. However, EventPS treats each event interval independently, making it sensitive to noise, shadows,
and non-Lambertian reflections. This paper proposes Photometric Stereo based on Event Interval Profile (PS-EIP), a
robust method that recovers pixelwise surface normals from
a time-series profile of event intervals. By exploiting the
continuity of the profile and introducing an outlier detection
method based on profile shape, our approach enhances robustness against outliers from shadows and specular reflections. Experiments using real event data from 3D-printed
objects demonstrate that PS-EIP significantly improves robustness to outliers compared to EventPS’s deep-learning
variant, EventPS-FCN, without relying on deep learning.

Recovered normal

Shadow

Event Camera
Δt

1/Δt
t

Events

t

t

Event Interval Profile

Fitting to

Figure 1. Procedure of the proposed method: Events are recorded
under moving light conditions. The profile is reconstructed from
the inverse of the event intervals. A surface normal is determined
through curve fitting for each pixel. The proposed method is robust
to non-Lambertian effects such as specularity and shadows.

high dynamic range (HDR), and low power consumption.
Building upon these advantages, the Lambertian eventbased photometric stereo, namely EventPS [67], has recently been proposed. EventPS leverages the fact that, under a continuously moving light source, events are triggered
by differences in logarithmic Lambertian reflections. In this
context, the surface normal can be uniquely determined as
the null space of the logarithmic intensity ratio scaled by the
event signal threshold. However, this method assumes that
events are triggered at all adjacent event occurrence times.
Consequently, reconstruction fails when events occur at different timings due to observation noise, shadows, or outliers resulting from non-Lambertian reflection components.
Furthermore, despite assuming the continuity of the moving
light source, it does not consider the relationships between
event intervals. This omission makes it more challenging to
remove outliers caused by non-Lambertian effects.
In this paper, we propose a robust method for Lambertian event-based photometric stereo, namely PS-EIP (Photometric Stereo based on Event Interval Profile) as illustrated in Fig. 1. Unlike EventPS, which treats each event
interval independently, our approach considers a time-series
profile formed by event intervals, taking into account the
relationships between adjacent intervals. This profile, con-

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo [22, 23, 25, 27, 52, 53, 64] is a technique for reconstructing surface normals from images captured under varying lighting conditions. Despite its high fidelity, photometric stereo methods often suffer from significant information redundancy and substantial computational
costs. Processing tens of high-resolution color images requires considerable computational resources and often depends on large-scale deep learning models accelerated by
GPUs for extracting high-level image features.
Recently, event cameras have emerged as a promising alternative for energy-efficient computer vision applications.
Unlike conventional RGB cameras, event cameras independently and asynchronously detect changes in intensity at
each pixel, recording the timestamp of each change as an
event. Compared with conventional cameras, event cameras
provide superior features such as high temporal resolution,
* This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers
JP23K20382 and JP24K02966.

6241

