This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free on the Fly: Enhancing Flexibility in Test-Time Adaptation with Online EM
Qiyuan Dai1 Sibei Yang2†
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Sun Yat-sen University
Abstract

濈濦濕濝濢濝濢濛澡澺濦濙濙

澵濪濕濝濠濕濖濝濠濝濨濭

漑濕漒

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have become prominent in open-world image recognition for their strong generalization abilities. Yet, their effectiveness in practical applications is compromised by domain shifts and distributional changes, especially when test data distributions diverge from training data. Therefore, the paradigm of testtime adaptation (TTA) has emerged, enabling the use of online off-the-shelf data at test time, supporting independent
sample predictions, and eliminating reliance on test annotations. Traditional TTA methods, however, often rely on
costly training or optimization processes, or make unrealistic assumptions about accessing or storing historical training and test data. Instead, this study proposes FreeTTA, a
training-free and universally available method that makes
no assumptions, to enhance the ﬂexibility of TTA. More importantly, FreeTTA is the ﬁrst to explicitly model the test
data distribution, enabling the use of intrinsic relationships
among test samples to enhance predictions of individual
samples without simultaneous access—a direction not previously explored. FreeTTA achieves these advantages by
introducing an online EM algorithm that utilizes zero-shot
predictions from VLMs as priors to iteratively compute the
posterior probabilities of each online test sample and update parameters. Experiments demonstrate that FreeTTA
achieves stable and signiﬁcant improvements compared to
state-of-the-art methods across 15 datasets in both crossdomain and out-of-distribution settings.

濇濣濩濦濗濙澔澸濕濨濕

漑濖漒

濈濙濧濨澔澸濕濨濕

澷濕濨

澷濕濨

澸濣濛
澢澔澢澔澢

ऑ

濄濝濛

澸濣濛
澢澔澢澔澢

ऑ

濄濝濛

濈濕濦濛濙濨澔澸濝濧濨濦濝濖濩濨濝濣濢澔濁濣濘濙濠濝濢濛

漑濗漒
濃濢濠濝濢濙澔澹濁

澷濕濨
澸濣濛
澢澔澢澔澢
濄濝濛

ऑ

澵濪濕濝濠濕濖濝濠濝濨濭
濈濦濕濝濢濝濢濛澡澺濦濙濙

濈濕濦濛濙濨澔澸濝濧濨濦濝濖濩濨濝濣濢澔濁濣濘濙濠濝濢濛

Figure 1. Comparison of key properties: target distribution modeling, availability, and training-free efﬁciency. (a) Prompt-based
methods fail the training-free criterion due to lengthy backpropagation. (b) Other methods require access to source or additional
test data, affecting availability. In contrast, (c) our FreeTTA satisﬁes all criteria, offering a universally available, training-free solution that efﬁciently models the target distribution without requiring
additional assumptions.

ing their features with the text embeddings of hand-crafted
class prompts. However, despite its strengths, VLMs face
notable challenges when downstream images demonstrate
distinct domain and distribution shifts relative to their training data in the source domain. To address this, some research focuses on adapting VLMs to speciﬁc target domains
and distributions using parameter-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning techniques, such as adapter tuning [55] and prompt learning [23, 58, 60, 61]. Nonetheless, a key limitation of these
works is their assumption of access to sufﬁcient annotated
downstream data for ﬁne-tuning, which restricts VLMs’ applicability in real-world scenarios where labeled data is unavailable, particularly in dynamic and diverse conditions.
Given this, the paradigm of utilizing off-the-shelf unlabeled data at test time, known as test-time adaption [1, 13,
21, 39, 40, 53], has emerged to improve VLMs’ generalization to the target domain. Building on prompt learning
in VLMs, test-time prompting [39] tuning optimizes the

1. Introduction
Vision-Language models (VLMs) [2, 20, 27, 35], such as
CLIP [35], pretrained on web-scale image-text pairs, encode a diverse array of visual concepts in a shared embedding space for both image and text. This enables their zeroshot generalization across various downstream tasks, including image recognition [23, 55, 58, 60, 61]. Images can
be directly identiﬁed without task-speciﬁc data by align† Corresponding author

9538

