This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeScene: Mixed Graph Diffusion for 3D Scene Synthesis from Free Prompts
Tongyuan Bai1

Wangyuanfan Bai1 Dong Chen1 Tieru Wu1,3 Manyi Li2
Rui Ma1,3 *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
2
School of Software, Shandong University
3
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MOE, China

User Inputs

Diagram
chair

cabinet

chair

Text

Room Image

Add a tv_stand
behind the table

Text
Make the room
in white style

Sketch

Text
Replace the right
nightstand with
a wardrobe

table

chair

Synthesized 3D
Indoor Scene

chair

Figure 1. We introduce FreeScene, a user-friendly controllable indoor scene synthesis framework that allows convenient and effective
control with free-form user inputs, including text and/or different types of images (top-view diagram in the left, realistic photograph in
the middle, sketch in the right). Leveraging a multimodal agent ( ) to extract partial graph priors ( ) from user inputs, FreeScene
subsequently generates a complete and reasonable scene that conforms to the graph via a generative diffusion model ( ).

Abstract
Controllability plays a crucial role in the practical applications of 3D indoor scene synthesis. Existing works either
allow rough language-based control, that is convenient but
lacks fine-grained scene customization, or employ graphbased control, which offers better controllability but demands considerable knowledge for the cumbersome graph
design process. To address these challenges, we present
FreeScene, a user-friendly framework that enables both
convenient and effective control for indoor scene synthesis.
Specifically, FreeScene supports free-form user inputs including text description and/or reference images, allowing
users to express versatile design intentions. The user inputs
are adequately analyzed and integrated into a graph representation by a VLM-based Graph Designer. We then propose MG-DiT, a Mixed Graph Diffusion Transformer, which
performs graph-aware denoising to enhance scene gener* Corresponding author

ation. Our MG-DiT not only excels at preserving graph
structure but also offers broad applicability to various tasks,
including, but not limited to, text-to-scene, graph-to-scene,
and rearrangement, all within a single model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FreeScene provides an efficient
and user-friendly solution that unifies text-based and graphbased scene synthesis, outperforming state-of-the-art methods in terms of both generation quality and controllability
in a range of applications.

1. Introduction
Indoor scene synthesis has demonstrated immense applications across various domains such as game design, VR/AR,
and robotics, where the goal is to produce reasonable and
plausible scenes that meet user requirements such as text
description, sketches, images, etc. To date, there has been a
significant body of related works, utilizing either graphical
probabilistic models [9, 22, 31, 34, 56, 62, 63, 66] or deep

5893

