This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TraF-Align: Trajectory-aware Feature Alignment for Asynchronous
Multi-agent Perception

1

Zhiying Song1 , Lei Yang1 , Fuxi Wen1,2,† , Jun Li1,2
School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University † Corresponding author
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Green Vehicle and Mobility

{song-zy24,yanglei20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {wenfuxi,lijun1958}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Cooperative perception presents significant potential for
enhancing the sensing capabilities of individual vehicles,
however, inter-agent latency remains a critical challenge.
Latencies cause misalignments in both spatial and semantic features, complicating the fusion of real-time observations from the ego vehicle with delayed data from others.
To address these issues, we propose TraF-Align, a novel
framework that learns the flow path of features by predicting the feature-level trajectory of objects from past observations up to the ego vehicle’s current time. By generating temporally ordered sampling points along these paths,
TraF-Align directs attention from the current-time query
to relevant historical features along each trajectory, supporting the reconstruction of current-time features and promoting semantic interaction across multiple frames. This
approach corrects spatial misalignment and ensures semantic consistency across agents, effectively compensating
for motion and achieving coherent feature fusion. Experiments on two real-world datasets, V2V4Real and DAIRV2X-Seq, show that TraF-Align sets a new benchmark for
asynchronous cooperative perception. The code is available at https://github.com/zhyingS/TraF-Align.

observation

(I) Spatial Misalignment

(II) Semantic Misalignment

LiDAR observations of the same object from Agent i

or Ego agent

Figure 1. Asynchronous observations of ego vehicle and other
agents result in spatial and semantic misalignments.

1. Introduction

are cursed with inter-agent time delays [33, 35]. Consider
a network with an ego agent and agent i, where their observations of the same object are shown in Figure 1. Latency in agent i’s message, captured before ego’s observation time, can result in either a complete loss of features
(1-I) or feature misalignment relative to ego’s observation
(1-II). Corresponding to Figure 1-I and 1-II, there are two
main challenges: i) Spatial misalignment, where observations from other agents fail to align with the ground truth
in space, lacking any reference from the ego vehicle’s observations. ii) Semantic misalignment, where both the ego
vehicle and another agent observe the same object but fail
to recognize it as the same entity. These misalignments lead
to mislocated objects and increased false positives [29, 30].

Intelligent vehicles rely on advanced onboard sensors,
such as LiDAR and cameras, to perceive and understand
the surrounding world. Nevertheless, the limited field
of view and detection range of onboard sensors restrict
their ability to perceive objects in occluded areas and at
greater distances [2, 23, 36, 47]. Vehicle-to-everything
(V2X) communication-enabled cooperative perception systems bridge this gap by exchanging perception information
between vehicles and other agents, thereby extending the
perception capability of a single agent [3, 4, 20, 41, 45].
In real-world scenarios, cooperative perception systems

12048

To address the first challenge, some studies have proposed potential solutions, by predicting the current-frame
features using historical frames [15], or predicting the pixellevel flow of features and then extrapolating them [44] or
directly warping them to their future positions [34]. For instance, FFNet [44] uses a self-supervised approach to learn
the first-order derivatives of features between consecutive

