This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Cross Diffusion Guidance for Text-to-Image Synthesis of Similar Subjects
Weimin Qiu
Jieke Wang
Meng Tang
University of California Merced
{wqiu5, jwang450, mtang4}@ucmerced.edu

SD1.4 [41]

a rose and a carnation

a leopard and a tiger

a beagle and a collie

a eagle and an owl

INITNO [17]

CONFORM [31]

Self-Cross (Ours)

SD1.4 [41]

INITNO [17]

CONFORM [31]

Self-Cross (Ours)

Figure 1. Our Self-Cross guidance addresses subject mixing in particular for similar subjects. Our training-free method can boost the
performance of any Unet-based or transformer-based diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion 1, 2, and 3 (shown in Fig. 5 and 6.)

Abstract

1. Introduction

Diffusion models achieved unprecedented fidelity and diversity for synthesizing image, video, 3D assets, etc. However, subject mixing is an unresolved issue for diffusionbased image synthesis, particularly for synthesizing multiple similar-looking subjects. We propose Self-Cross Diffusion Guidance to penalize the overlap between crossattention maps and the aggregated self-attention map.
Compared to previous methods based on self-attention or
cross-attention alone, our guidance is more effective in
eliminating subject mixing. What’s more, our guidance addresses subject mixing for all relevant patches beyond the
most discriminant one, e.g., the beak of a bird. For each
subject, we aggregate self-attention maps of patches with
higher cross-attention values. Thus, the aggregated selfattention map forms a region that the whole subject attends
to. Our training-free method boosts the performance of
both Unet-based and Transformer-based diffusion models
such as the Stable Diffusion series. We also release a similar subjects dataset (SSD), a challenging benchmark, and
utilize GPT-4o for automatic and reliable evaluation. Extensive qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our self-cross diffusion guidance.

Diffusion-based generative models have made significant
progress in recent years in synthesizing high-quality images [41], videos [5], 3D assets [37], etc. With a simple
text prompt, diffusion-based generative models such as Stable Diffusion [41] can create highly photorealistic or artistic
images of various styles and subjects. Such progress revolutionized many applications including the content creation.
However, text-to-image diffusion models still have many issues such as subject neglect, subject mixing, and attribute
binding. We are particularly interested in solving subject
mixing in this work. Many mitigations [8, 17, 31] were proposed to enhance the faithfulness of text-to-image synthesis
but the issue of subject mixing remains, see failure cases of
previous methods [17, 31] in Fig. 1. This is more prominent
when synthesizing multiple similar-looking subjects, e.g., a
photo of a leopard and a tiger in Fig. 1.
Since self-attention maps reflect the similarity of patches
and cross-attention maps reflect the subjects. Intuitively,
patches from a subject should not show large similarity to
patches from other subjects at least for some timesteps and
layers to avoid copying patches from other subjects. Empirically, Fig. 2 shows a failure case for Stable Diffusion [41]
with subject mixing and an obvious overlap between cross-

23528

