This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Around the World in 80 Timesteps:
A Generative Approach to Global Visual Geolocation
Nicolas Dufour 1,2
1

David Picard 1

Vicky Kalogeiton 2

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, IP Paris, CNRS, UGE

2

Loic Landrieu1

LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris

iNat-21 [70]

YFCC-100M [1]

OSV-5M [2]
Figure 1. Geolocation as a Generative Process. We explore diffusion and flow matching for visual geolocation by sampling and denoising
random locations. This process generates trajectories onto the Earth’s surface, whose endpoints provide location estimates. Our models also
provide probability densities for every possible image locations. We illustrate these trajectories and the log-densities for three images from
different datasets: an Andean condor from iNat21 [70], an African open-air market from YFCC-100M [1], and a dashcam snapshot from
OSV-5M [2]. The predicted image locations are indicated by and the true ones by .

Abstract

1. Introduction
“The world has shrunk; today, we travel it at ten times
the speed of a hundred years past.”

Global visual geolocation consists in predicting where an
image was captured anywhere on Earth. Since not all images can be localized with the same precision, this task
inherently involves a degree of ambiguity. However, existing approaches are deterministic and overlook this aspect.
In this paper, we propose the first generative approach for
visual geolocation based on diffusion and flow matching,
and an extension to Riemannian flow matching, where the
denoising process operates directly on the Earth’s surface.
Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on three
visual geolocation benchmarks: OpenStreetView-5M, YFCC100M, and iNat21. In addition, we introduce the task of
probabilistic visual geolocation, where the model predicts a
probability distribution over all possible locations instead of
a single point. We implement new metrics and baselines for
this task, demonstrating the advantages of our generative
approach. Codes and models are available here.

— Around the World in 80 Days, Jules Verne

Knowing where an image was captured is crucial for numerous applications, and yet most images lack geolocation
metadata [21]. In archaeology and cultural heritage, location
data help catalog and interpret historical artifacts [13, 64],
enabling better preservation and contextual understanding.
In fields like forensics and investigative journalism, recovering intentionally removed GPS data can have significant
implications [3, 76], such as verifying the authenticity of
news images and reconstructing crime scenes or missing
persons’ last known locations. Moreover, geolocation helps
organizing multimedia archives for efficient retrieval [16, 52].
These applications motivate the long-standing computer vision challenge of global visual geolocation: inferring the
location of an image purely from its visual content [25, 72].

23016

