This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniMamba: Unified Spatial-Channel Representation Learning with
Group-Efficient Mamba for LiDAR-based 3D Object Detection
Xin Jin→,1,3,↑

Haisheng Su→,2,3( )

Kai Liu3 Cong Ma3 Wei Wu3,4 Fei HUI1( )
1
Chang’an University
2
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
SenseAuto Research, 4 Tsinghua University

Junchi Yan2( )

{suhaisheng,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, {jinxin,feihui}@chd.edu.cn
{liukai3.iag,macong,wuwei}@senseauto.com

Abstract
(a)

Recent advances in LiDAR 3D detection have demonstrated the effectiveness of Transformer-based frameworks
in capturing the global dependencies from point cloud
spaces, which serialize the 3D voxels into the flattened 1D
sequence for iterative self-attention. However, the spatial
structure of 3D voxels will be inevitably destroyed during the serialization process. Besides, due to the considerable number of 3D voxels and quadratic complexity of
Transformers, multiple sequences are grouped before feeding to Transformers, leading to a limited receptive field. Inspired by the impressive performance of State Space Models (SSM), in this paper, we propose a novel Unified Mamba
(UniMamba), which seamlessly integrates the merits of 3D
convolution and SSM in a concise multi-head manner, aiming to perform “local and global” spatial context aggregation efficiently and simultaneously. Specifically, a UniMamba block is designed which mainly consists of spatial locality modeling, complementary Z-order serialization
and local-global sequential aggregator. The spatial locality
modeling module integrates 3D submanifold convolution to
capture the dynamic spatial position embedding before serialization. Then the efficient Z-order curve is adopted for
serialization both horizontally and vertically. Furthermore,
the local-global sequential aggregator adopts the channel grouping strategy to efficiently encode both “local and
global” spatial inter-dependencies using multi-head SSM.
Additionally, an encoder-decoder architecture with stacked
UniMamba blocks is formed to facilitate multi-scale spatial learning hierarchically. Extensive experiments are conducted on three popular datasets: nuScenes, Waymo and
Argoverse 2. Particularly, our UniMamba achieves 70.2
mAP on the nuScenes dataset.

Transformer
Local Group

(b)

SSM
Global Group

UniMamba
LSE

(c)

GSE
Local-Global Group

Figure 1. Comparison of different 3D backbones. (a) Transformerbased backbone using local window grouping. (b) SSM-based
backbone using global sequence grouping. (c) Our proposed UniMamba backbone using channel-wise local-global grouping.

1. Introduction
LiDAR is widely used in Autonomous Driving perception
tasks [36, 37] due to its ability to provide precise 3D location information. However, unlike structured image data,
the sparsity and disorder of point cloud space pose significant challenges for accurate 3D object detection. Therefore,
learning effective pattern representations from 3D point
clouds is a key focus of current research.
Previous methods are generally classified into pointbased and voxel-based approaches. Point-based methods [34, 47] directly apply operators such as PointNet [30,
31] to manipulate raw point clouds, which entails a timeconsuming process of sampling and grouping, leading to
low computational efficiency. In contrast, voxel-based
methods [4, 45, 54] convert point clouds into regular grids,

→ Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors.
↑ Intern at SenseAuto Research.

1407

