This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ego4o: Egocentric Human Motion Capture and Understanding from
Multi-Modal Input
Jian Wang1,4
Rishabh Dabral1,4
Diogo Luvizon1,4
Zhe Cao2
3
2
Lingjie Liu
Thabo Beeler
Christian Theobalt1,4
1
MPI Informatics & Saarland Informatics Campus 2 Google 3 University of Pennsylvania
4
Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and Artificial Intelligence

Motion Description
Right Wrist IMU
Left Hip IMU

Egocentric Image
Right Wrist IMU

Egocentric Image
Left Hip IMU

Left Hip IMU

Ego4o

I am walking in my
room…

Wearable Sensors

Input: Egocentric Image, IMU, or
Motion Description

…walking in the bedroom,
then she turns left and
bends over to grab the…

… is leaning forward while
standing in the living area
as she grabs and …

The person is standing in
the living area, then leans
forward to grab the clothes.

Output: Simultaneous Motion Capture and Understanding with Various Multi-Modal Inputs

Figure 1. Our method can use an egocentric image and 1-3 IMU sensors from wearable devices to accurately predict human motion and
generate motion descriptions. Motion descriptions, when available, can also enhance motion capture accuracy. Ego4o supports flexible
input combinations, functioning with or without images, or with varied IMU placements.

Abstract
This work focuses on tracking and understanding human
motion using consumer wearable devices, such as VR/AR
headsets, smart glasses, cellphones, and smartwatches.
These devices provide diverse, multi-modal sensor inputs,
including egocentric images, and 1-3 sparse IMU sensors
in varied combinations. Motion descriptions can also accompany these signals. The diverse input modalities and
their intermittent availability pose challenges for consistent
motion capture and understanding. In this work, we present
Ego4o (o for omni), a new framework for simultaneous human motion capture and understanding from multi-modal
egocentric inputs. This method maintains performance with
partial inputs while achieving better results when multiple
modalities are combined. First, the IMU sensor inputs, the
optional egocentric image, and text description of human
motion are encoded into the latent space of a motion VQVAE. Next, the latent vectors are sent to the VQ-VAE decoder and optimized to track human motion. When motion
descriptions are unavailable, the latent vectors can be input into a multi-modal LLM to generate human motion descriptions, which can further enhance motion capture accu-

racy. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method in predicting accurate human motion and high-quality motion descriptions. Project
page: https://jianwang-mpi.github.io/ego4o.

1. Introduction
Recently, more and more research has focused on human
motion capture and understanding using widely available
wearable devices, such as VR/AR headsets, smart glasses,
cellphones, and smartwatches [35, 43, 44, 46, 60, 66, 72].
This interest is driven by broad application scenarios, including sports, healthcare, VR/AR, and personal assistants. These devices provide diverse, multi-modal sensor
inputs related to human motion, such as inertial measurement unit (IMU) data, egocentric camera images, and even
voice-enabled conversation data, where the text description of human motion can be extracted. However, existing works mostly focus on motion capture from one single input modality. Some methods [35, 43, 66] predict the
human motion from egocentric cameras, while others capture the human motion from VR tracker [3, 28] or IMU
signals [46, 76]. Each individual modality provides only
a limited view of human motion, constraining the accu-

22668

