This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TASTE-Rob: Advancing Video Generation of Task-Oriented Hand-Object
Interaction for Generalizable Robotic Manipulation
Hongxiang Zhao1 * Xingchen Liu1∗† Mutian Xu1

Yiming Hao1

Weikai Chen‡ Xiaoguang Han1,2§

1

SSE, CUHKSZ 2 FNii, CUHKSZ
https://taste-rob.github.io
use a spatula to scoop the tomato onto a plate

Abstract
We address key limitations in existing datasets and models for task-oriented hand-object interaction video generation, a critical approach of generating video demonstrations for robotic imitation learning. Current datasets, such
as Ego4D [16], often suffer from inconsistent view perspectives and misaligned interactions, leading to reduced video
quality and limiting their applicability for precise imitation
learning tasks. Towards this end, we introduce TASTE-Rob
— a pioneering large-scale dataset of 100,856 ego-centric
hand-object interaction videos. Each video is meticulously
aligned with language instructions and recorded from a
consistent camera viewpoint to ensure interaction clarity.
By fine-tuning a Video Diffusion Model (VDM) on TASTERob, we achieve realistic object interactions, though we
observed occasional inconsistencies in hand grasping postures. To enhance realism, we introduce a three-stage poserefinement pipeline that improves hand posture accuracy
in generated videos. Our curated dataset, coupled with
the specialized pose-refinement framework, provides notable performance gains in generating high-quality, taskoriented hand-object interaction videos, resulting in achieving superior generalizable robotic manipulation. To foster
further advancements in the field, TASTE-Rob dataset and
source code will be made publicly available on our website
https://taste-rob.github.io.

1. Introduction
Robotic manipulation plays an essential role in daily life,
assisting with tasks like object handling, liquid pouring, surface cleaning, and drawer operation. Powered by the success of Imitation Learning (IL) [8–10, 15, 20, 22, 42, 48,
* Equal contribution.
† Work done as a visiting researcher at CUHKSZ.
‡ This paper solely reflects the author’s personal research and is not associated with the author’s affiliated institution.
§ Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn.

Use left hand bring the pink glass to the table, and right
hand put the white remote control to the Yellow Book

Environment

Generated Videos

Figure 1. TASTE-Rob generates high-quality task-oriented handobject interaction videos, enabling robust generalization in robotic
manipulation.

56, 57, 64], current robots can imitate actions from video
demonstrations but require a nearly identical environment
in the recorded video, limiting their generalization to novel
scenes where factors like the position or movement direction of the manipulated object differ.
To solve the issue of limited generalization, recent research combines IL with generative models [2, 3, 5–7, 12,
25, 47, 58], like video diffusion models (VDMs), to create adaptable demonstrations and enable more generalizable robotic manipulation [12, 25, 47]. Specifically, these
works develop VDMs to generate robot-object interaction
videos as demonstrations for IL. While robot-object interaction VDMs enhance generalization performance, they are
constrained by limited robot datasets [4, 8, 21, 24, 51].
A scalable alternative is generating hand-object interaction (HOI) videos, which leverage extensive human manipulation video datasets. Although hand-object interaction differs from robotic motion, advanced policy models [1, 5, 9, 22, 48, 57, 65] can bridge this gap effectively,
achieving remarkable performance through IL. However,
even if existing powerful VDMs are able to generate remarkable human videos, as shown in Figure 7, they struggle
with generating high-quality, task-oriented hand-object interaction videos with accurate task understanding.

27683

