This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relation3D: Enhancing Relation Modeling for Point Cloud Instance Segmentation
Jiahao Lu
University of Science and Technology of China

Jiacheng Deng*
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
3D instance segmentation aims to predict a set of object
instances in a scene, representing them as binary foreground masks with corresponding semantic labels. Currently, transformer-based methods are gaining increasing
attention due to their elegant pipelines and superior predictions. However, these methods primarily focus on modeling
the external relationships between scene features and query
features through mask attention. They lack effective modeling of the internal relationships among scene features as
well as between query features. In light of these disadvantages, we propose Relation3D: Enhancing Relation Modeling for Point Cloud Instance Segmentation. Specifically,
we introduce an adaptive superpoint aggregation module
and a contrastive learning-guided superpoint refinement
module to better represent superpoint features (scene features) and leverage contrastive learning to guide the updates
of these features. Furthermore, our relation-aware selfattention mechanism enhances the capabilities of modeling
relationships between queries by incorporating positional
and geometric relationships into the self-attention mechanism. Extensive experiments on the ScanNetV2, ScanNet++,
ScanNet200 and S3DIS datasets demonstrate the superior
performance of Relation3D. Code is available at this website.

Maft

Ours

Figure 1. T-SNE visualization of the superpoint-level feature
distributions on ScanNetV2 validation set. Different colors represent different instances. Our method highlights better inter-object
diversity and intra-object similarity.
Point feature variation (Maft)

1.8603 (Excessive)

Setting

Maft

Ours (Stage 1)

Ours (Stage 2)

Ours (Stage 3)

Lcont

1.057

0.7255

0.5841

0.5739

Table 1. Excessive feature variation among points within the
same supepoint and comparison of Lcont in different settings.
The experiment is conducted on ScanNetV2 validation set. Lcont
measures the consistency of superpoint features within the same
instance and the differences between features of different instances.
Detailed information about Lcont can be found in Equation 5. Stage
1 represents the features output by ASAM, while stages 2 and 3
represent the features after refinement by CLSR.

distribution of objects and the numerous categories in realworld applications, presents unique challenges for effective
point cloud analysis. To tackle these challenges, early approaches mainly concentrated on accurately generating 3D
bounding boxes (top-down) [13–15] or effectively grouping
the points into instances with clustering algorithms (bottomup) [16–18]. However, these methods have limitations: they
either heavily rely on high-quality 3D bounding boxes, or
require manual selection of geometric attributes.
Recently, researchers start to focus on the design of
transformer-based methods [19–23]. These methods adopt
an encoder-decoder framework (end-to-end), where each
object instance is represented by an instance query. The
encoder is responsible for learning the point cloud scene
features, while the transformer decoder [24] iteratively at-

1. Introduction
Point cloud instance segmentation aims to identify and segment multiple instances of specific object categories in 3D
space. With the rapid development of fields such as robotic
grasping [1], augmented reality [2, 3], 3D/4D reconstruction [4–8], and autonomous driving [9, 10], as well as the
widespread application of LiDAR and depth sensor technologies [11, 12], point cloud instance segmentation has become
a core technology for achieving efficient and accurate scene
understanding. However, the unordered, sparse, and irregular nature of point cloud data, combined with the complex
* Corresponding Author

8889

