This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HVI: A New Color Space for Low-light Image Enhancement
Qingsen Yan1 * Yixu Feng1∗ Cheng Zhang1
Guansong Pang2†
Kangbiao Shi1
Peng Wu1
Wei Dong3
Jinqiu Sun1
Yanning Zhang1†
1
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Singapore Management University
3
Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology

Abstract

and normal-light images within the standard RGB (sRGB)
space. However, the image brightness exhibits a strong
coupling with the color from the three sRGB channels, a.k.a.
high color sensitivity in [9, 23], causing an obvious color
distortion of the restored image in these LLIE methods [3,
18], as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
Inspired by Kubelka-Munk theory [9], recent methods
[25, 52, 56] have sought to transform images from the sRGB
color space to the Hue, Saturation and Value (HSV) color
space. These methods help achieve the brightness enhancement more accurately, but they amplify local color space
noise [9], introducing severe artifacts in the results. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), the transformation from sRGB to the
HSV disrupts the continuity of the red (① Red Discontinuity
Noise) and black (② Black Plane Noise) color, resulting in
increased Euclidean distances for similar color and the introduction of artifacts in the final images (see the zoomed
in images of ① and ②). These two types of noise can cause
severe artifacts in the enhancement of red-dominated or extremely dark images.
To address these issues, we introduce a new color space
named Horizontal/Vertical-Intensity (HVI), designed specifically for the LLIE task. The key intuition is that minimizing
color space noise, by reducing Euclidean distances in similar
colors. To this end, we polarize in the Hue and Saturation
(HS) plane to enforce smaller distances for similar red point
coordinates, which eliminates the red discontinuity noise
in the primary HSV space (see Fig. 1 (c)). For the black
plane noise issue, we introduce a trainable darkness density
parameter k and its corresponding adaptive intensity collapse function Ck , which compresses the radius of low-light
regions to zero, with the flexibility to gradually expand to
the value of one as the intensity increases, as illustrated in
Fig. 1 (d). This helps remove the black noise artifacts while
maintaining the primary image appearance.
We further propose an LLIE network, named Color and
Intensity Decoupling Network (CIDNet), to leverage the
chromatic and intensity information for optimizing the color
and intensity in the HVI space. After transforming the image into the HVI space, CIDNet leverages two network

Low-Light Image Enhancement (LLIE) is a crucial computer
vision task that aims to restore detailed visual information
from corrupted low-light images. Many existing LLIE methods are based on standard RGB (sRGB) space, which often
produce color bias and brightness artifacts due to inherent
high color sensitivity in sRGB. While converting the images
using Hue, Saturation and Value (HSV) color space helps
resolve the brightness issue, it introduces significant red and
black noise artifacts. To address this issue, we propose a new
color space for LLIE, namely Horizontal/Vertical-Intensity
(HVI), defined by polarized HS maps and learnable intensity. The former enforces small distances for red coordinates
to remove the red artifacts, while the latter compresses the
low-light regions to remove the black artifacts. To fully leverage the chromatic and intensity information, a novel Color
and Intensity Decoupling Network (CIDNet) is further introduced to learn accurate photometric mapping function
under different lighting conditions in the HVI space. Comprehensive results from benchmark and ablation experiments
show that the proposed HVI color space with CIDNet outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on 10 datasets. The
code is available at https://github.com/Fediory/HVI-CIDNet.

1. Introduction
Under low-light conditions, imaging sensors often capture weak light signals with severe noise, resulting in poor
visual quality for low-light images. Obtaining high-quality
images from such degraded images necessitates Low-Light
Image Enhancement (LLIE) that aims at improving the image brightness while simultaneously reducing the impact of
noise and color bias [24].
The majority of existing LLIE approaches [10, 15, 18, 35,
51, 55] focus on finding an appropriate image brightness,
which is typically done by employing deep neural networks
to learn a mapping relationship between low-light images
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

5678

