This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A RGUS: Vision-Centric Reasoning with Grounded Chain-of-Thought
Yunze Man1,2∗ , De-An Huang2 , Guilin Liu2 , Shiwei Sheng2 , Shilong Liu2∗
Liang-Yan Gui1 , Jan Kautz2 , Yu-Xiong Wang1† , Zhiding Yu2†
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Visual Question Answering

User Question

Argus Answer

What is this room
filled with?

Room is filled with
stuffed animal toys.

Visual Grounding

User Question

Argus Answer

closest silver SUV.
man carrying bag of bottles.

<box_1>
<box_2>

2

NVIDIA
Visually Grounded CoT

User Question

Argus Answer

Liquid color in the <box> → ctx-token:glass on the table?
color is green

Figure 1. Visual question answering, grounding, and chain-of-thought reasoning with Argus. “ctx-token” is short for context token.

Abstract
Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
vision-language tasks, yet they often struggle with visioncentric scenarios where precise visual focus is needed
for accurate reasoning. In this paper, we introduce Argus to address these limitations with a new visual attention grounding mechanism. Our approach employs objectcentric grounding as visual chain-of-thought signals, enabling more effective goal-conditioned visual attention during multimodal reasoning tasks. Evaluations on diverse
benchmarks demonstrate that Argus excels in both multimodal reasoning tasks and referring object grounding tasks.
Extensive analysis further validates various design choices
of Argus, and reveals the effectiveness of explicit languageguided visual region-of-interest engagement in MLLMs,
highlighting the importance of advancing multimodal intelligence from a visual-centric perspective.

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in the training of multimodal large
language models (MLLMs) [38, 40, 42, 47, 69, 72, 75,
79, 82, 94] have unlocked great advancements in visuallanguage fusion, allowing these models to extract meaning-

ful content from complex images and perform sophisticated
reasoning tasks. However, predominately driven by the success from stronger large language models (LLMs), existing
MLLMs still underperform in many vision-centric scenarios [69, 82, 83], where accurate visual perception and understanding determine the success of the subsequent multimodal reasoning tasks (e.g., spatial relationship between
objects or properties of specific regions-of-interests (RoIs)).
To address these challenges, we revisit the design space
of MLLMs from a vision-centric perspective, draw insights
from cognitive visual intelligence, and propose a new visual
attention grounding mechanism for multimodal reasoning
tasks, as shown in Figure 1.
Seminal studies in cognitive science [14, 25] have recognized two distinct types of visual attention mechanism,
stimulus-driven visual attention and goal-directed visual attention, which are also referred to as involuntary attention and voluntary attention [25, 29, 57, 58], respectively.
Stimulus-driven visual attention is an automatic bottom-up
capture of attention driven by salient objects or textures
in the visual stimulus. On the other hand, goal-directed
attention is a top-down conscious selection of attention,
driven by goals and intentions. Surprisingly, an interest* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
† Equal advising.

14268

