This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SKDream: Controllable Multi-view and 3D Generation with Arbitrary Skeletons
Yuanyou Xu1 , Zongxin Yang2 , Yi Yang1 *
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
2
DBMI, HMS, Harvard University
{yoxu,yangyics}@zju.edu.cn, zongxin yang@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract

2D [30] and 3D [10] conditions have also been explored.
Although the aforementioned conditions in controllable
generation complement text descriptions, they still struggle
to precisely describe shape structures. In contrast, skeletons, among various types of conditions, exhibit superior
ability to depict shape structures: (i) Representation of object anatomy. Skeletons can efficiently represent various
3D structures with sparse joints and bones, while other conditions like depth maps fail to represent full 3D anatomy.
(ii) Articulation into different poses. Skeletons are widely
used for character animation in computer graphics [3, 22]
due to their simplicity and efficiency. Other conditions such
as rough shapes [10] are inconvenient for pose articulation.
(iii) Freedom of editing. Given an initial skeleton, users
can freely add new structures or modify joints and bones to
create ideal shapes. Examples are in Fig. 1.
Despite these advantages, previous studies [19, 20, 40,
75, 77] on conditional generation are limited to human
skeletons. From the perspective of generalization, we would
like to ask: Is it possible to use arbitrary skeletons as conditions to generate any creatures or even general objects?
To achieve this goal, we identify two main challenges
that hinder the use of arbitrary skeletal conditions for generation: (i) Lack of large-scale object-skeleton pairs for
training. Extensive studies [4, 15, 37] on 2D/3D human pose estimation have made human-skeleton paired data
readily available. However, when skeletal structures are unknown, estimating arbitrary skeletons from 2D images or
videos becomes challenging due to its ill-posedness. (ii) Insufficiency of 2D information to describe arbitrary skeletons. Human skeletons are relatively simple and can be described by a fixed set of 2D joints. However, complex skeletons suffer from self-occlusion and ambiguity, necessitating
3D information to fully capture their anatomy and pose.
To address these challenges, we focus on multi-view
and 3D generation with skeletal conditions. To tackle
data scarcity problem, we construct a large-scale dataset
Objaverse-SK containing mesh-skeleton pairs. Textured
meshes are selected from Objaverse [8] by semantic classes
to form a subset. In order to achieve reliable mesh skele-

Controllable generation has achieved substantial progress
in both 2D and 3D domains, yet current conditional generation methods still face limitations in describing detailed
shape structures. Skeletons can effectively represent and describe object anatomy and pose. Unfortunately, past studies are often limited to human skeletons. In this work,
we generalize skeletal conditioned generation to arbitrary
structures. First, we design a reliable mesh skeletonization pipeline to generate a large-scale mesh-skeleton paired
dataset. Based on the dataset, a multi-view and 3D generation pipeline is built. We propose to represent 3D skeletons
by Coordinate Color Encoding as 2D conditional images.
A Skeletal Correlation Module is designed to extract global
skeletal features for condition injection. After multi-view
images are generated, 3D assets can be obtained by incorporating a large reconstruction model, followed by a UV
texture refinement stage. As a result, our method achieves
instant generation of multi-view and 3D contents that are
aligned with given skeletons. The proposed techniques
largely improve the object-skeleton alignment and generation quality. Project page at https://skdream3d.github.io/.

1. Introduction
In view of visual representation dimension [64, 72], 2D
image generation [16, 53, 57], multi-view (2.5D) generation [35, 55], and 3D generation [17, 27, 69] have advanced
successively and achieved significant progress. Given the
success of large language models [23, 26, 43, 48–50], textual representation has been widely applied in generation
[51–53], as in other domains [13, 14, 73]. To achieve
more controllable generation, conditions beyond text have
attracted considerable attention. 2D image conditions (e.g.,
edge maps, human skeletons, and concept references) [54,
75] have been well studied. Similarly in 3D generation,
* Corresponding Author

314

