This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Prior is All You Need: Cross-Task Few-shot 2D Gaze Estimation
Yihua Cheng1 , Hengfei Wang1 , Zhongqun Zhang1 ,* Yang Yue1 ,
Boeun Kim1,3,4 , Feng Lu2 , Hyung Jin Chang1
1
University of Birmingham, 2 Beihang University, 3 Dankook University, 4 KETI
www.yihua.zone/work/gaze322

Abstract

'*D]H(VWLPDWLRQ
࢘ǡ ࢚

3D and 2D gaze estimation share the fundamental objective of capturing eye movements but are traditionally treated
as two distinct research domains. In this paper, we introduce a novel cross-task few-shot 2D gaze estimation approach, aiming to adapt a pre-trained 3D gaze estimation
network for 2D gaze prediction on unseen devices using
only a few training images. This task is highly challenging
due to the domain gap between 3D and 2D gaze, unknown
screen poses, and limited training data. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel framework that bridges the
gap between 3D and 2D gaze. Our framework contains a
physics-based differentiable projection module with learnable parameters to model screen poses and project 3D gaze
into 2D gaze. The framework is fully differentiable and can
integrate into existing 3D gaze networks without modifying
their original architecture. Additionally, we introduce a dynamic pseudo-labelling strategy for ﬂipped images, which
is particularly challenging for 2D labels due to unknown
screen poses. To overcome this, we reverse the projection
process by converting 2D labels to 3D space, where ﬂipping
is performed. Notably, this 3D space is not aligned with the
camera coordinate system, so we learn a dynamic transformation matrix to compensate for this misalignment. We
evaluate our method on MPIIGaze, EVE, and GazeCapture
datasets, collected respectively on laptops, desktop computers, and mobile devices. The superior performance highlights the effectiveness of our approach, and demonstrates
its strong potential for real-world applications.

)HZ6KRW6DPSOHV
3UHWUDLQHG

'
*D]H

࣢ଷ஽

)DFH '*D]H

'LIIHUHQWLDEOH3URMHFWLRQ
࢘ǡ ࢚

‫ܘ‬

)OLS

࣢ଷ஽
'*D]H
'LUHFWLRQ

'3ULRU

࢘ǡ ࢚
‫ܘ‬

'\QDPLF3VHXGR/DEHOOLQJ

6RXUFH)UHH
8QVHHQ'HYLFHV
6FUHHQ&DOLEUDWLRQ)UHH

Figure 1. We introduce a novel cross-task few-shot 2D gaze estimation approach. Our method leverages a pre-trained 3D gaze
estimation network and few-shot 2D gaze samples to achieve 2D
gaze estimation on unseen devices. It contains a physics-based
differentiable projection module to bridge 3D and 2D gaze, along
with a dynamic pseudo-labelling strategy for 2D labels under unknown screen poses. Our approach is both screen-calibration-free
and source-free, signiﬁcantly expanding its application potential.

Recent gaze estimation methods primarily focus on 3D
gaze estimation [8, 36], wherein 3D direction vectors are
derived from facial images. Such methods exhibit high
adaptability, facilitating straightforward application in diverse environments [38]. However, they present limitations
in practical applications, such as human-computer interaction, where precise gaze targets are essential. Existing approaches often require post-processing to calibrate the pose
of interacted objects, e.g., a screen, and compute the intersection between gaze and objects [40]. This process poses
signiﬁcant challenges, particularly for non-expert users.
Conversely, some methods directly estimate 2D gaze
within screen coordinate systems. Deep learning-based approaches utilize large training datasets to map facial images
to 2D gaze [4, 24]. However, these models are often entangled with multiple device-speciﬁc factors. Traditional
approaches construct 3D eye models using prior anatomical
knowledge and ﬁt these models with few-shot calibration
images [18]. Although such methods require specialized
equipment for precise eye tracking, they raise the question,
Can we achieve similar patterns within the deep learning
paradigm for quick adaptation across various devices?

1. Introduction
Gaze estimation tracks eye movements to predict human attention [13]. It is a highly applied research topic, where various application scenarios, such as intelligent vehicles [14,
23], VR/AR [26, 28, 31], and disease diagnosis [6, 34] demand distinct and specialized gaze estimation solutions.
* Corresponding author

23891

