This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Order-Robust Class Incremental Learning: Graph-Driven Dynamic
Similarity Grouping
Guannan Lai†1 , Yujie Li†1, 2 , Xiangkun Wang1 , Junbo Zhang3 , Tianrui Li4 , and Xin Yang⋆1
1

School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics,
Email: aignlai@163.com, {liyj1201, xiangkunwang18}@gmail.com, yangxin@swufe.edu.cn
2
LIACS, Leiden University,
3
JD Intelligent Cities Research, Email: msjunbozhang@outlook.com
4
Southwest Jiaotong University, Email: trili@swjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) aims to enable models
to learn new classes sequentially while retaining knowledge of previous ones. Although current methods have alleviated catastrophic forgetting (CF), recent studies highlight that the performance of CIL models is highly sensitive to the order of class arrival, particularly when sequentially introduced classes exhibit high inter-class similarity. To address this critical yet understudied challenge of
class order sensitivity, we first extend existing CIL frameworks through theoretical analysis, proving that grouping
classes with lower pairwise similarity during incremental
phases significantly improves model robustness to order
variations. Building on this insight, we propose GraphDriven Dynamic Similarity Grouping (GDDSG), a novel
method that employs graph coloring algorithms to dynamically partition classes into similarity-constrained groups.
Each group trains an isolated CIL sub-model and constructs meta-features for class group identification. Experimental results demonstrate that our method effectively
addresses the issue of class order sensitivity while achieving optimal performance in both model accuracy and antiforgetting capability. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/AIGNLAI/GDDSG.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The crucial challenges of CIL (illustration on CIFAR100
dataset). On the left subfigure (a), each model’s performance is
shown under varying class orders, testing its robustness to class
order sensitivity. On the right subfigure (b), the model’s performance is shown when classes within the same task are similar,
evaluating its resilience to intra-task classes with high similarities.

classes within an infinite sequence of tasks [13, 17, 44].
CIL is realistic but a great challenge for deep neural networks [34], where existing works devoted to overcoming
catastrophic forgetting (CF) and encouraging knowledge
transfer across different tasks [28, 49, 57, 60]. With the
rapid advancement of CIL, a growing number of methods
[21, 37, 58] have been introduced to address the problem of
CF from the perspective of the order in which classes appear
(or task order). In practice, the arrival order of each class
and the tasks to which they belong are random and the order
in which tasks arrive is uncontrollable [3], further resulting
in Class order sensitivity and Intra-task class conflicts [25].
Therefore, designing an order-robust CIL method is essential for the community.
Class order sensitivity refers to the model exhibiting significant performance variations depending on the sequence
in which classes are introduced [37]. This phenomenon is
prevalent in real-world applications (see Figure 1(a)). For

1. Introduction
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) necessitates that the
model dynamically acquires knowledge of new classes
while preserving the knowledge of previously learned
† Equal contribution, sorted alphabetically.
⋆ Corresponding author.

4894

