This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GBC-Splat:GeneralizableGaussian-BasedClothedHumanDigitalization
underSparseRGBCameras
HanzhangTu1,ZhanfengLiao1,BoyaoZhou∗,1,ShunyuanZheng2,
XilongZhou∗,3,LiuxinZhang3,QianYingWang3,YebinLiu∗,1
1

TsinghuaUniversity2HarbinInstituteofTechnology3LenovoResearch

Sparse View Human
Performance Capture

Generalizable GaussianBase d Re construction

Subdividion-Based
Upsampling

Figure 1. Human geometry reconstruction and rendering. We introduce a generalizable feed-forward Gaussian-based human digitalization
pipeline. Based on high-quality geometry extraction, our pipeline lifts sparse RGB input images to Gaussian model in less than 0.3s.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present an efﬁcient approach for generalizable clothed
human digitalization, termed GBC-Splat. Unlike previous
methods that necessitate per-subject optimizations or discount watertight geometry, the proposed method is dedicated to reconstructing complete human shapes and Gaussian Splatting via sparse view RGB inputs in a feed-forward
manner. We ﬁrst extract a ﬁne-grained mesh using a combination of implicit occupancy ﬁeld regression and explicit
disparity estimation between views. The reconstructed
high-quality geometry allows us to easily anchor Gaussian
primitives to mesh surface according to surface normal and
texture, which allows 6-DoF photorealistic novel view synthesis. In addition, we introduce a simple yet effective algorithm to subdivide Gaussian primitives in high-frequency
areas to further enhance the visual quality. Without the
assistance of human parametric models, our method can
tackle loose garments, such as dresses and costumes. Our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of
novel view synthesis while keeping high efﬁciency, enabling
the potential of deployment in real-time applications.
∗ Corresponding authors.

26377

Modeling the geometry and appearance of 3D humans has
long been a fundamental problem in the computer vision
community. Early attempts using multi-view stereo [38, 64]
and image-based rendering [2, 3, 10] have realized 360degree 6-DoF photorealistic free-view rendering, which can
be applied to telepresence communication, holographic displays, and AR/VR systems. However, these works rely on
dense cameras and intricate traditional optimizations, which
pose signiﬁcant challenges for large-scale applications. Recent neural implicit representation [41, 47, 55, 85, 87] has
emerged as a promising solution for its inﬁnite resolution,
especially in conjunction with implicit ﬁeld [43, 61, 68]
rendering technique. For example, DoubleField [58] incorporates such implicit geometry representation with neural radiance ﬁeld for appearance modeling, but it struggles
to process dense sampling in two neural ﬁelds and render
high-ﬁdelity appearance. When extending to the temporal
axis, follow-up approaches build the compact representation of 4D geometry and texture via multi-plane factorization [4, 14, 60] or hash encoding [44]. Although the implicit
method has shown its integrity and continuity of 3D human modeling, the low-quality geometry due to misleading
pixel-aligned features and the longtime rendering of NeRF

