This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiGO: Towards Multi-level Geometry Learning for Monocular
3D Textured Human Reconstruction
Gangjian Zhang1* Nanjie Yao1* Shunsi Zhang2 Hanfeng Zhao2
Guoliang Pang2 Jian Shu1 Hao Wang1†
1
HKUST(GZ) 2 Guangzhou Quwan Network Technology
Email: gzhang292@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, nanjiey@uci.edu, haowang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Figure 1. Comparisons with the SOTA Methods in Monocular 3D Textured Human Reconstruction. Existing SOTA methods struggle
with recovering correct human poses and intricate geometry details. SiFU [48] is unable to reconstruct correct human postures, such as
incorrect left-hand positions. VS [15] performs poorly in fine-grained areas such as unclear finger movement and cloth wrinkles. SiTH [5]
produces geometry and texture errors that occur from the generative model, such as the third arm on the back.

sets show the superior performance of our approach compared to state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods.

Abstract

1. Introduction

This paper investigates the research task of reconstructing the 3D clothed human body from a monocular image.
Due to the inherent ambiguity of single-view input, existing approaches leverage pre-trained SMPL(-X) estimation
models or generative models to provide auxiliary information for human reconstruction. However, these methods
capture only the general human body geometry and overlook specific geometric details, leading to inaccurate skeleton reconstruction, incorrect joint positions, and unclear
cloth wrinkles. In response to these issues, we propose a
multi-level geometry learning framework. Technically, we
design three key components: skeleton-level enhancement,
joint-level augmentation, and wrinkle-level refinement modules. Specifically, we effectively integrate the projected 3D
Fourier features into a Gaussian reconstruction model, introduce perturbations to improve joint depth estimation during training, and refine the human coarse wrinkles by resembling the de-noising process of the diffusion model. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on two test

With the increasing popularity of virtual worlds, there is a
growing demand for the realistic digital human creation. To
achieve it efficiently, monocular 3D human reconstruction
has been an important task. However, since single-view images cannot provide sufficient information for reconstruction, there exists substantial ambiguity in simulating the geometry and texture of the occluded human body parts.
To address this issue, existing methods have explored the
introduction of pre-conditioned SMPL-X techniques to provide a 3D body mesh as geometric prior information. These
methods employ various options for human body geometry priors, such as SMPL-X normal maps [15, 37, 38, 48],
low-frequency and high-frequency signals of the SMPL-X
body [42], triplane representaion [47], and the outputs of
generative models [5, 26], in an attempt to achieve more
accurate human body reconstruction.
However, these traditional approaches often focus on
modeling the general geometry of the human body, overlooking the multi-level structures that include the skeleton,
joints, and finer details such as wrinkles around the fingers

†: Corresponding author, ∗: Equal contribution.
Project page: https://multigohuman.github.io/.

338

