This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multitwine: Multi-Object Compositing with Text and Layout Control
Gemma Canet Tarrés1

Zhe Lin2

Zhifei Zhang2

He Zhang2

g.canettarres@surrey.ac.uk

zlin@adobe.com

zzhang@adobe.com

hezhan@adobe.com

Andrew Gilbert1∗

John Collomosse1,2∗

Soo Ye Kim2∗

a.gilbert@surrey.ac.uk

j.collomosse@surrey.ac.uk

sooyek@adobe.com

1

University of Surrey

2

Adobe Research

Figure 1. Our model allows simultaneous compositing of several objects with text and layout control, offering harmonious
and natural results (top row). Object relations and actions can be controlled through text, allowing reposing and automatic
addition of necessary objects (i.e. ﬂowing tea). Pose and layout can be controlled via bounding boxes provided as input. Our
model can also be used for customization (bottom row), seamlessly integrating given objects into described backgrounds.

Abstract

subject-driven generation, also known as customization, we
achieve a more balanced integration of textual and visual
inputs for text-driven object compositing. As a result, we
obtain a versatile model with state-of-the-art performance
in both tasks. We further present a data generation pipeline
leveraging visual and language models to effortlessly synthesize multimodal, aligned training data.

We introduce the ﬁrst generative model capable of simultaneous multi-object compositing, guided by both text
and layout. Our model allows for the addition of multiple
objects within a scene, capturing a range of interactions
from simple positional relations (e.g., next to, in front of) to
complex actions requiring reposing (e.g., hugging, playing
guitar). When an interaction implies additional props, like
‘taking a selﬁe’, our model autonomously generates these
supporting objects. By jointly training for compositing and

1. Introduction
In recent years, advancements in image generation and editing have enabled the creation of realistic and complex visual
scenes from various input modalities, such as text descriptions [11, 30, 33]. These tools are becoming essential for

* : corresponding authors. This work was a joint collaboration between
Adobe and the University of Surrey, conducted during an internship of the
main author at Adobe.

8094

