This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Visual Composition through Improved Semantic Guidance
Austin Stone*

Hagen Soltau*
Kaifeng Chen

Robert Geirhos
Abhijit Ogale

Xi Yi
Ye Xia
Jonathon Shlens

Bingyi Cao

Google DeepMind
Abstract
Visual imagery does not consist of solitary objects, but instead reflects the composition of a multitude of fluid concepts. While there have been great advances in visual representation learning, such advances have focused on building
better representations for a small number of discrete objects
bereft of an understanding of how these objects are interacting. One can observe this limitation in representations
learned through captions or contrastive learning – where
the learned model treats an image essentially as a bag of
words. Several works have attempted to address this limitation through the development of bespoke architectures.
In this work, we focus on simple and scalable approaches.
In particular, we demonstrate that by improving weakly labeled data, i.e. captions, we can vastly improve the performance of standard contrastive learning approaches. Previous CLIP models achieved near chance rate on challenging
tasks probing compositional learning. However, our simple approach boosts performance of CLIP substantially and
achieves state of the art results on compositional benchmarks such as ARO and SugarCrepe. Furthermore, we
showcase our results on a relatively new captioning benchmark derived from DOCCI. We demonstrate through a series of ablations that a standard CLIP model trained with
enhanced data may demonstrate impressive performance on
image retrieval tasks.

Figure 1. Summary of results. Left: Previous state-of-the-art
results in multimodal embeddings have limited understanding of
the composition of images [14, 26]. Right: The goal of this work
is to learn multimodal embeddings which reflect a strong understanding of the composition of visual and semantic information.
Images and captions are red and blue, respectively.

jects and descriptions [22, 36]. One reason for this failure
is that the visual representations are not rich enough to capture the interactions and relationships between various parts
of an image or video.
Current approaches have focused on building new
bespoke architectures that leverage multi-task learning
through multiple losses or side data [17, 37]. Although
these models achieve SOTA results on visual composition
tasks [36], it is unclear how scalable these approaches are
given limitations on gathering high quality, specialized side
information or the complexity of the architectures.
Instead, we search for scalable solutions that focus on
simplicity. The goal of this work is to employ a basic multimodal model solely employing a single contrastive learning
objective [14, 26], and attempt to improve the learned representations with minimal changes.
We posit that underlying visual architecture (e.g. ViT
[8]) contains sufficient parameters and scale to capture visual composition. Furthermore, we posit that contrastive

1. Introduction
Visual composition is a critical problem. Learning representations that capture how attributes and relationships of
objects are represented is a critical task for any system that
attempts to summarize the multitudes of concepts imbued
within pixel space.
Many SOTA multimodal models do not learn embeddings that have an understanding of the relationship of ob* Equal contribution.
Correspondence:
{austinstone,soltau}@google.com

3740

