This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLMDet: Learning Strong Open-Vocabulary Object Detectors under the
Supervision of Large Language Models
Shenghao Fu1,3,4 , Qize Yang3 , Qijie Mo1,4 , Junkai Yan1,4 , Xihan Wei3 ,
Jingke Meng1,4 , Xiaohua Xie1,4,5 ,* Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,4,6∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China;
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China; 3 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group;
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China;
5
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China;
6
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), China
fushh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xiexiaoh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Recent open-vocabulary detectors achieve promising performance with abundant region-level annotated data. In
this work, we show that an open-vocabulary detector cotraining with a large language model by generating imagelevel detailed captions for each image can further improve performance. To achieve the goal, we first collect
a dataset, GroundingCap-1M, wherein each image is accompanied by associated grounding labels and an imagelevel detailed caption. With this dataset, we finetune an
open-vocabulary detector with training objectives including
a standard grounding loss and a caption generation loss.
We take advantage of a large language model to generate
both region-level short captions for each region of interest
and image-level long captions for the whole image. Under the supervision of the large language model, the resulting detector, LLMDet, outperforms the baseline by a clear
margin, enjoying superior open-vocabulary ability. Further, we show that the improved LLMDet can in turn build a
stronger large multi-modal model, achieving mutual benefits. The code, model, and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/iSEE-Laboratory/LLMDet.

Figure 1. LLMDet achieves superior zero-shot performance across
various benchmarks compared with other well-known counterparts. All detectors use Swin-T as the backbone.

1. Introduction

region-word contrastive pre-training. This formulation benefits from massive grounding and image-text data covering a broad range of concepts, making the learned representations semantic-rich. The following works focus on
effective vision-language fusion [9, 33] and fine-grained
region-word alignment by carefully designed word embeddings [52] and negative samples [23, 53, 59]. By scaling up
pretraining data and computation [38, 53], existing openvocabulary object detectors can achieve amazing zero-shot
performance on various benchmarks.
Recent works show that unifying the grounding task
with other language tasks enriches visual representations
with language knowledge thus creating a stronger openvocabulary detector. GLIPv2 [57] pretrains the model under

Open-vocabulary object detection [12, 25, 33] aims to detect arbitrary classes based on text labels from user input, which is a more general detection task than traditional closed-set object detection [1, 10, 14, 29]. GLIP [25]
first unifies object detection and phrase grounding through
* : Corresponding authors are Xiaohua Xie and Wei-Shi Zheng.
Part of the work was done when Shenghao Fu was an intern at Alibaba.

14987

