This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Background Shift:
Rethinking Instance Replay in Continual Semantic Segmentation
Hongmei Yin1 *
Tingliang Feng1 *
Fan Lyu2
Fanhua Shang1†
1
1
Hongying Liu
Wei Feng
Liang Wan1
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hongmeiyin, fengtl, hyliu2009, wfeng, lwan, fhshang}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

fan.lyu@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Stored Data

Stored Instance
Horse

In this work, we focus on continual semantic segmentation (CSS), where segmentation networks are required
to continuously learn new classes without erasing knowledge of previously learned ones. Although storing images of old classes and directly incorporating them into
the training of new models has proven effective in mitigating catastrophic forgetting in classiﬁcation tasks, this strategy presents notable limitations in CSS. Speciﬁcally, the
stored and new images with partial category annotations
leads to confusion between unannotated categories and the
background, complicating model ﬁtting. To tackle this issue, this paper proposes a novel Enhanced Instance Replay
(EIR) method, which not only preserves knowledge of old
classes while simultaneously eliminating background confusion by instance storage of old classes, but also mitigates
background shifts in the new images by integrating stored
instances with new images. By effectively resolving background shifts in both stored and new images, EIR alleviates
catastrophic forgetting in the CSS task, thereby enhancing
the model’s capacity for CSS. Experimental results validate
the efﬁcacy of our approach, which signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art CSS methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/YikeYin97/EIR.

...

Background Shift

Label

Place
Select

Image
Retrain

New Data
Person

Retrain

New Data
Person

Background Shift

Image

Label

(a) Image Replay

Image

Label

(b) Enhanced Instance Replay

Figure 1. Comparison of traditional image replay (a) and our replay methods (b). (a) shows that only the old class “horse” is labeled in stored image, while other classes (new class “person” and
old class “car”) are labeled as background. Both old (“horse”) and
future classes in new images are labeled as background. (b) Our
method avoids confusing information in stored image by retaining
instances and alleviates background shift by fusing these instances
in the new image.

edge, i.e., older classes. Generally, background shift roots
in the fact that only classes being learned in the current step
are correctly labeled, while other old and future classes are
mislabeled as background, i.e., the partial labeling issue.
Replay is a well-proved strategy to mitigate catastrophic
forgetting in general continual learning, i.e., on image classiﬁcation, which uses a small memory buffer to store and
retrain raw images from the old classes continuously [3, 7,
25, 34, 35, 37]. Image replay enables the model to directly
access old data during ﬁne-tuning on new data, reinforcing
existing knowledge and improving retention of old information. However, replay at the image level is ineffective in
CSS due to the limitation of partial labeling. Speciﬁcally,
the stored images are also only annotated with partial old
classes, while other classes might be present but lack an-

1. Introduction
As the development of continual learning [3, 4, 7, 38], continual semantic segmentation (CSS) was proposed to conduct segmentation in class-incremental scenarios, where
the model needs to learn and recognize new classes at
the pixel level. However, CSS suffers from the issue of
background shift, where the background class continuously
shifts over the learning step, exacerbating catastrophic forgetting [2, 5, 12, 23] that the model under-ﬁts prior knowl* Co-ﬁrst authors. Equal contribution.
† Fanhua Shang is the corresponding author of this paper.

9839

