This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Yo’Chameleon:
Personalized Vision and Language Generation
Thao Nguyen1,2

Krishna Kumar Singh2 Jing Shi2 Trung Bui2 Yong Jae Lee1,¶
1
University of Wisconsin–Madison 2 Adobe Research

Yuheng Li2,¶

https://thaoshibe.github.io/YoChameleon

Figure 1. Using only 3-5 images of a novel concept/subject, we personalize Large Multimodal Models (e.g., Chameleon [1]) so that they
retain their original capabilities while enabling tailored language and vision generation for the novel concept.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (e.g., GPT-4, Gemini,
Chameleon) have evolved into powerful tools with millions
of users. However, they remain generic models and lack
personalized knowledge of specific user concepts. Previous
work has explored personalization for text generation, yet it
remains unclear how these methods can be adapted to new
modalities, such as image generation. In this paper, we introduce Yo’Chameleon, the first attempt to study personalization for large multimodal models. Given 3-5 images of a particular concept, Yo’Chameleon leverages soft-prompt tuning
to embed subject-specific information to (i) answer questions
about the subject and (ii) recreate pixel-level details to produce images of the subject in new contexts. Yo’Chameleon is
trained with (i) a self-prompting optimization mechanism to
balance performance across multiple modalities, and (ii) a
“soft-positive” image generation approach to enhance image
quality in a few-shot setting. Our qualitative and quantitative analyses reveal that Yo’Chameleon can learn concepts
more efficiently using fewer tokens and effectively encode
visual attributes, outperforming prompting baselines.
¶ denotes equal advising

Recent advances in Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have
transformed them into versatile, general-purpose AI assistants [1–6]. These models are increasingly being integrated
into everyday applications, offering enhanced performance,
improved efficiency, and support for multiple modes of communication. The ability to process both visual and textual
information within a single system—as demonstrated by
models like GPT-4o [2] and Gemini [4]—has streamlined
user interactions and improved query comprehension.
Modern LMMs enable seamless two-way communication through both text and images. Users can input queries
combining natural language and visual elements, and the
models can respond with both textual descriptions and generated images. For instance, when asked to “Describe a Shiba
Inu dog and generate a photo of it”, these AI assistants can
now provide comprehensive responses that combine detailed
descriptions with visual representations.
While LMMs excel at general tasks, they face limitations
when handling personalized queries. For example, if asked
“Can you describe <bo> and generate a photo of <bo> reading books in library?” these models cannot provide accurate

14438

