This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Down Text Encoders of Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Lifu Wang1,2
Daqing Liu1
Xinchen Liu1
Xiaodong He1
1
2
JD Explore Academy, JD.com Inc.
Georgia Institute of Technology
{lifuwang2002, daqing.liu}@outlook.com

{liuxinchen1,hexiaodong}@jd.com

Abstract
Text encoders in diffusion models have rapidly evolved,
transitioning from CLIP to T5-XXL. Although this evolution has signiﬁcantly enhanced the models’ ability to understand complex prompts and generate text, it also leads
to a substantial increase in the number of parameters. Despite T5 series encoders being trained on the C4 natural
language corpus, which includes a signiﬁcant amount of
non-visual data, diffusion models with T5 encoder do not
respond to those non-visual prompts, indicating redundancy
in representational power. Therefore, it raises an important question: “Do we really need such a large text encoder?” In pursuit of an answer, we employ vision-based
knowledge distillation to train a series of T5 encoder models. To fully inherit T5-XXL’s capabilities, we constructed
our dataset based on three criteria: image quality, semantic understanding, and text-rendering. Our results demonstrate the scaling down pattern that the distilled T5-base
model can generate images of comparable quality to those
produced by T5-XXL, while being 50 times smaller in size.
This reduction in model size signiﬁcantly lowers the GPU
requirements for running state-of-the-art models such as
FLUX and SD3, making high-quality text-to-image generation more accessible. Our code is available at https:
//lifuwang-66.github.io/ScalingDownTE/.

1. Introduction
Text representation plays a crucial rule in Text-to-Image
(T2I) synthesis with diffusion models [7, 15, 33, 35, 36,
40, 41]. Recently, text encoders used for diffusion models has a notable transition from models like CLIP [31]
to the more parameter-intensive T5-XXL [32]. With the
integration of large text encoders [36], diffusion models
are becoming increasingly sophisticated in image synthesis,
especially in complex semantics comprehension and textrendering ability. However, large models also signiﬁcantly
increase GPU memory requirements, presenting challenges
 Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Scaling down pattern of text encoders. We distilled
T5-XXL into a series of smaller T5 models and evaluated their
performance in guiding image synthesis across three key dimensions: image quality, semantic understanding, and text-rendering.
Results are from section 4.2. We treat T5-XXL’s performance as
baseline. Our ﬁndings indicate that while image quality and semantic understanding remain largely intact, text-rendering is more
sensitive to reductions in model size.

for many users. Although previous work has quantized T5XXL to 8-bit [4], the model’s parameter count remains substantial.
Our observations indicate that diffusion models using T5
encoders often struggle to generate coherent images from
non-visual prompts, as illustrated in Figure 2. We believe
this is due to the T5 encoder’s training on the C4 dataset
[32], a comprehensive natural language corpus that includes
a substantial amount of non-visual data. This raises a critical question: Do we truly need such a large text encoder for
effective text representation? We hypothesize that there is
redundancy within the T5 encoder’s embedding space particularly for T2I synthesis. If we can use a smaller text encoder to replace T5-XXL, then it means T5-XXL is overparameterized for diffusion models.
To explore the problem, we ﬁrst leverage knowledge distillation [11, 14], which proves to be an effective approach

18424

