This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Gaussian Splatting with Localized Points Management
Haosen Yang1 *

Chenhao Zhang1 * Wenqing Wang1 * Marco Volino1
Li Zhang2 Xiatian Zhu1
1

Adrian Hilton1

University of Surrey 2 Fudan University
*Equal contribution

3DGS+LPM

3DGS

https://happy-hsy.github.io/projects/LPM/

Rendered Image

Gaussian Points

Rendered Depth

Figure 1. Visualization of points behavior. 3DGS produces ill-conditioned Gaussians (red box) that occlude other valid points, resulting
in noticeably incorrect depth estimation. LPM handles these ill-conditioned points to reduce negative impacts and further calibrate the
geometry.

Abstract
Point management is critical for optimizing 3D Gaussian
Splatting models, as point initiation (e.g., via structure from
motion) is often distributionally inappropriate. Typically,
Adaptive Density Control (ADC) algorithm is adopted,
leveraging view-averaged gradient magnitude thresholding
for point densification, opacity thresholding for pruning,
and regular all-points opacity reset. We reveal that this
strategy is limited in tackling intricate/special image regions (e.g., transparent) due to inability of identifying all
3D zones requiring point densification, and lacking an appropriate mechanism to handle ill-conditioned points with
negative impacts (e.g., occlusion due to false high opacity). To address these limitations, we propose a Localized
Point Management (LPM) strategy, capable of identify-

ing those error-contributing zones in greatest need for both
point addition and geometry calibration. Zone identification is achieved by leveraging the underlying multiview geometry constraints, subject to image rendering errors. We
apply point densification in the identified zones and then reset the opacity of the points in front of these regions, creating a new opportunity to correct poorly conditioned points.
Serving as a versatile plugin, LPM can be seamlessly integrated into existing static 3D and dynamic 4D Gaussian
Splatting models with minimal additional cost. Experimental evaluations validate the efficacy of our LPM in boosting
a variety of existing 3D/4D models both quantitatively and
qualitatively. Notably, LPM improves both static 3DGS and
dynamic SpaceTimeGS to achieve state-of-the-art rendering
quality while retaining real-time speeds, excelling on challenging datasets such as Tanks & Temples and the Neural

21696

