This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V ID C OMPOSITION: Can MLLMs Analyze Compositions in Compiled Videos?
Yunlong Tang1 ,* Junjia Guo1∗ , Hang Hua1 , Susan Liang1 , Mingqian Feng1 , Xinyang Li1 ,
Rui Mao1 , Chao Huang1 , Jing Bi1 , Zeliang Zhang1 , Pooyan Fazli2 , Chenliang Xu1†
1
University of Rochester, 2 Arizona State University
{yunlong.tang, mingqian.feng, jing.bi, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu, pooyan@asu.edu
{jguo40, xli190, rmao6, zzh136}@ur.rochester.edu, {hhua2, sliang22, chuang65}@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract

segments of a single recording, e.g. films, TV series, documentaries, animations, vlogs, etc. These videos are carefully
constructed to create a seamless flow and include richer
compositions, requiring shot-by-shot analysis to interpret.

The advancement of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has enabled significant progress in multimodal understanding, expanding their capacity to analyze
video content. However, existing evaluation benchmarks
for MLLMs primarily focus on abstract video comprehension, lacking a detailed assessment of their ability to understand video compositions, the nuanced interpretation
of how visual elements combine and interact within highly
compiled video contexts. We introduce VidComposition, a
new benchmark specifically designed to evaluate the video
composition understanding capabilities of MLLMs using
carefully curated compiled videos and cinematic-level annotations. VidComposition includes 982 videos with 1706
multiple-choice questions, covering various compositional
aspects such as camera movement, angle, shot size, narrative structure, character actions and emotions, etc. Our
comprehensive evaluation of 33 open-source and proprietary MLLMs reveals a significant performance gap between
human and model capabilities. This highlights the limitations of current MLLMs in understanding complex, compiled
video compositions and offers insights into areas for further improvement. Our benchmark is publicly available at
https://yunlong10.github.io/VidComposition/

Figure 1. Top MLLMs’ performance on V ID C OMPOSITION, across
15 tasks of 5 aspects of video composition understanding: Cinematography Analysis, Character Understanding, Narrative Understanding, Scene Perception, and Making Analysis.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 10, 30, 47, 52] have greatly enhanced capabilities in understanding multimodality. However, while
current benchmarks [3, 4, 11, 13, 26, 34, 37, 64] for evaluating MLLMs assess general image or video comprehension,
they lack a detailed focus on video composition, the nuanced
interpretation of how visual elements combine and interact
within compiled videos. Compiled videos refer to those
created by editing and integrating multiple clips, scenes,
or sequences, either from various sources or from different

Shot-by-shot analysis, a technique where creators meticulously break down the elements of a video, serves as a vital
tool for understanding video composition in depth. This
level of understanding, essential in film analysis and video
production, goes beyond general scene or action recognition,
requiring an in-depth grasp of compositional elements such
as camera movements, shot sizes, narrative structures, and
character dynamics. This analysis also captures the intricate
layers of visual storytelling by deconstructing how technical
and artistic choices shape the viewing experience. However,
achieving this fine-grained level of composition understand-

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

8490

