This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Integral Fast Fourier Color Constancy
Wenjun Wei1 * Yanlin Qian2 * Huaian Chen1 † Junkang Dai1 Yi Jin1 †
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 DJI Technology Co., Ltd
{natstand, anchen, junkangdai}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

honza.qian@dji.com

Abstract
Traditional auto white balance (AWB) algorithms typically
assume a single global illuminant source, which leads to
color distortions in multi-illuminant scenes. While recent
neural network-based methods have shown excellent accuracy in such scenarios, their high parameter count and
computational demands limit their practicality for realtime video applications. The Fast Fourier Color Constancy
(FFCC) algorithm was proposed for single-illuminantsource scenes, predicting a global illuminant source with
high efficiency. However, it cannot be directly applied to
multi-illuminant scenarios unless specifically modified. To
address this, we propose Integral Fast Fourier Color Constancy (IFFCC), an extension of FFCC tailored for multiilluminant scenes. IFFCC leverages the proposed integral UV histogram to accelerate histogram computations
across all possible regions in Cartesian space and parallelizes Fourier-based convolution operations, resulting in a
spatially-smooth illumination map. This approach enables
high-accuracy, real-time AWB in multi-illuminant scenes.
Extensive experiments show that IFFCC achieves accuracy
that is on par with or surpasses that of pixel-level neural
networks, while reducing the parameter count by over 400×
and processing speed by 20 − 100× faster than networkbased approaches.

Figure 1. Frameworks comparison between IFFCC and FFCC
(top). FFCC uses a global histogram to predict a single illuminant, limiting its application in multi-illuminant scenes. In contrast, IFFCC utilizes an integral UV histogram for efficient regionspecific histogram computation, generating spatially continuous illumination map through parallelized Fast Fourier convolution and
smoothing to achieve high-accuracy, real-time auto white balance
in multi-illuminant scenarios.

1. Introduction

Traditional white balance methods often assume the
presence of a single dominant illumination and rely on statistical algorithms [18, 21, 23, 45], such as the gray world
algorithm [10] and the white patch algorithm [33] etc., to
estimate the scene illumination. These algorithms may also
be machine learning-based, trained on AWB benchmarks
[3, 27]. However, they frequently bear local color distortion
in complex multi-illuminant environments, as a single white
balance adjustment is inadequate to handle varying lighting
conditions. For instance, a room illuminated by both warm
high pressure sodium lighting and cool window light may
still fail to accurately reproduce the scene’s true colors.
Recently, deep neural network-based algorithms have
been widely applied to pixel-level multi-illuminant prediction tasks [11, 31, 34, 45], utilizing deep learning to achieve
accurate illumination map estimation in complex scenes.
These methods are especially effective in capturing edgeaware, spatial illumination variations. However, the high
parameter counts and computational demands of these models create substantial challenges for deployment in real-

Color constancy is a fundamental property of the human
visual system, allowing for consistent color perception despite changes in illumination chromaticity. While this ability may seem “natural” to the human eye and visual cortex,
replicating it in computational imaging systems is a complex challenge [19, 22]. Auto white balance (AWB) in image signal processing (ISP) is thus essential for approximating human-like color constancy by estimating ambient illumination chromaticity, enabling accurate color reproduction
across varied lighting conditions.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

26420

