This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ECVC: Exploiting Non-Local Correlations in Multiple Frames for
Contextual Video Compression
Wei Jiang, Junru Li, Kai Zhang, Li ZhangB
Bytedance

In Learned Video Compression (LVC), improving inter prediction, such as enhancing temporal context mining and
mitigating accumulated errors, is crucial for boosting ratedistortion performance. Existing LVCs mainly focus on
mining the temporal movements while neglecting non-local
correlations among frames. Additionally, current contextual video compression models use a single reference
frame, which is insufficient for handling complex movements. To address these issues, we propose leveraging
non-local correlations across multiple frames to enhance
temporal priors, significantly boosting rate-distortion performance. To mitigate error accumulation, we introduce
a partial cascaded fine-tuning strategy that supports finetuning on full-length sequences with constrained computational resources. This method reduces the train-test mismatch in sequence lengths and significantly decreases accumulated errors. Based on the proposed techniques, we
present a video compression scheme ECVC. Experiments
demonstrate that our ECVC achieves state-of-the-art performance, reducing 10.5% and 11.5% more bit-rates than
previous SOTA method DCVC-FM over VTM-13.2 low delay B (LDB) under the intra period (IP) of 32 and −11 , respectively. Our code is available at https://github.
com/JiangWeibeta/ECVC.

Decoded Frame Buffer

Current Frame

Non-Local Correlations Among Frames

Local Correlations (Temporal Movement)

Local & Non-Local Correlations
Visualization

Abstract

Visual Signals

{jiangwei.lvc, lijunru, zhangkai.video, lizhang.idm}@bytedance.com

Figure 1. Visualization of local (red lines) correlations Ĉ ℓ and
non-local (orange lines) correlations Ĉ nℓ in sequence “HoneyBee” in UVG dataset [40]. Ĉ nℓ is defined as the distant correlations without explicit movement between the current frame
and reference frames. Ĉ nℓ is beneficial for temporal context
mining due to lower conditional entropy for xt , formulated as
H(xt |Ĉ ℓ , Ĉ nℓ ) ≤ H(xt |Ĉ ℓ ), where H is the Shannon entropy.

mization [3, 4, 26, 33, 36, 38, 39, 64] of LVCs offers the
potential to surpass handcrafted traditional codecs with redundancy removal.
Early LVCs [15, 19, 30, 32, 33, 35, 42, 43, 46, 61–63]
follow the residual coding paradigm, wherein the residuals between the predicted frame (via estimated motion) and
the current frame, along with motion information, are compressed. Recently, the conditional coding paradigm [26]
has emerged, which leverages temporal information as a
prior, enabling a reduction in conditional entropy and offering more flexibility compared to the predefined subtraction used in residual coding. Subsequent research has
explored various techniques [2, 10, 11, 14, 17, 24, 27–
29, 44, 48, 49, 54, 57, 60, 65] to enhance the performance
of conditional coding. Notably, recent DCVC-DC [28] has
outperformed the H.266/VVC low delay B (LDB) coding
with an intra period (IP) of 32 by exploiting diverse temporal contexts. Additionally, DCVC-FM [29] surpasses the
H.266/VVC LDB configuration [8] in long coding chains,

1. Introduction
Video coding aims to compactly represent the visual signals
while maintaining acceptable reconstructed quality. Traditional video coding, such as H.266/VVC [8], is established
on the block-based hybrid coding framework, which has
been developed for several decades. However, as the performance improvement of traditional codecs approaches a
plateau, learned video compression (LVC) has emerged as
a promising alternative, attracting significant attention from
both academic and industrial fields. The end-to-end opti1 Only one intra frame when compressing a sequence.

7331

