This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COUNTS: Benchmarking Object Detectors and Multimodal Large Language
Models under Distribution Shifts
Jiansheng Li† , Xingxuan Zhang† , Hao Zou, Yige Guo, Renzhe Xu, Yilong Liu
Chuzhao Zhu, Yue He, Peng Cui*
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
lijs23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Extensive literature demonstrates that when the independent and identically distributed (IID) assumption between
training and test data is violated, existing models may
experience significant performance degradation [27, 36,
79, 99]. Even current multimodal large language models (MLLMs)[1, 3, 15, 61, 73] exhibit limited out-ofdistribution generalization capabilities, severely hindering
their usability and trustworthiness in specific domains [22,
86, 95].
The challenges inherent in out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization have spurred significant research interest.
However, existing efforts have predominantly centered on
image classification tasks [21, 36, 43], leaving a considerable gap in our understanding of how models perform
on more intricate, real-world tasks. Furthermore, while
recent works on MLLMs have aimed for comprehensive
evaluation [4, 53, 91], they often neglect the crucial aspect
of grounding model responses within the visual context.
This grounding is indispensable for sophisticated applications such as detailed visual comprehension, interactive embodied agents, and localized content manipulation. Recent
advancements allowing models to process user-specified
regions via bounding boxes represent a promising direction [66], but a thorough investigation of grounding abilities
from an OOD generalization perspective remains an open
research area. This underscores the need for novel benchmarks and datasets specifically designed to rigorously assess these critical facets of model performance.
This discrepancy can be attributed to the scarcity of
suitable benchmark datasets. While comprehensive benchmarks for classification tasks abound [26, 28, 36, 63], there
is a dearth of robust benchmarks offering finer-grained
annotations. Previous studies have often relied on synthetically corrupted data for robustness evaluation [59],
but the extent to which such simulations accurately reflect real-world scenarios remains debatable. Consequently,
other research has turned to collecting images from the

Current object detectors often suffer significant performance degradation in real-world applications when encountering distributional shifts. Consequently, the out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization capability of object detectors has garnered increasing attention from researchers.
Despite this growing interest, there remains a lack of a
large-scale, comprehensive dataset and evaluation benchmark with fine-grained annotations tailored to assess the
OOD generalization on more intricate tasks like object detection and grounding. To address this gap, we introduce COUNTS, a large-scale OOD dataset with object-level
annotations. COUNTS encompasses 14 natural distributional shifts, over 222K samples, and more than 1,196K
labeled bounding boxes. Leveraging COUNTS, we introduce two novel benchmarks: O(OD)2 and OODG. O(OD)2
is designed to comprehensively evaluate the OOD generalization capabilities of object detectors by utilizing controlled distribution shifts between training and testing data.
OODG, on the other hand, aims to assess the OOD generalization of grounding abilities in multimodal large language
models (MLLMs). Our findings reveal that, while large
models and extensive pre-training data substantially enhance performance in in-distribution (IID) scenarios, significant limitations and opportunities for improvement persist in OOD contexts for both object detectors and MLLMs.
In visual grounding tasks, even the advanced GPT-4o and
Gemini-1.5 only achieve 56.7% and 28.0% accuracy, respectively. We hope COUNTS facilitates advancements in
the development and assessment of robust object detectors
and MLLMs capable of maintaining high performance under distributional shifts.

1† Equal Contribution, ∗ Corresponding Author
2 Code and Dataset are available at https://github.com/
jiansheng-li/COUNTS_benchmark.

9186

