This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoICL: Confidence-based Iterative In-context Learning
for Out-of-Distribution Video Understanding
Kangsan Kim1∗ Geon Park1∗ Youngwan Lee1,3 Woongyeong Yeo1 Sung Ju Hwang1,2
1
KAIST 2 DeepAuto.ai 3 ETRI
{kksan07, geon.park, ywlee88, wgcyeo, sungju.hwang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

models are expected to handle previously unseen, out-ofdistribution (OOD) videos [5, 17, 28, 37, 38, 44]. Such
OOD videos are rarely encountered during training due
to their specialized nature or the need for domain-specific
knowledge, such as gymnastic or surgical videos. Consequently, the performance of video LMMs on OOD videos
is poor compared to in-distribution videos [23, 36], primarily due to the limited representation of OOD content
in training datasets. For instance, video LMMs can readily distinguish between well-represented actions like “dancing” and “exercising” but struggle to differentiate actions
like “abuse” from “assault”, as crime videos are seldom included in training datasets. Given that the model faces numerous unseen situations in real-world scenarios, improving OOD video understanding with video LMMs remains a
significant challenge.
Fine-tuning the model on the target videos is a straightforward method to enhance its performance. However, finetuning the model for each OOD scenario is time-consuming
and often impractical, as it requires substantial amounts of
training data to avoid overfitting and incurs significant training costs. In contrast, in the realm of large language models (LLMs), in-context learning (ICL) [7]—which involves
providing example inputs alongside a test sample during inference—has been actively explored as an efficient alternative for handling OOD tasks. ICL has shown strong generalization on unseen tasks in LLMs, making it advantageous
as it bypasses the need for fine-tuning. Many studies have
demonstrated the effectiveness of ICL in language-only and
image-language tasks [2, 16, 27, 55, 56]; however, ICL’s potential in video-language tasks has not been fully explored.
A key challenge with ICL in the video domain is that
video tokens are significantly longer than image or text tokens, limiting the number of video examples in a single context. For instance, LLaVA-Video [57] can process up to 32K
tokens (i.e., context-length), but a 30-second, 384×384 resolution video sampled in 32 frames is converted to approximately 5.5K tokens through the vision encoder of the model
with a patch size of 14. This allows for a maximum of only
four video samples within the token limit. Considering that

Recent advancements in video large multimodal models (LMMs) have significantly improved their video understanding and reasoning capabilities. However, their performance drops on out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks that are
underrepresented in training data. Traditional methods like
fine-tuning on OOD datasets are impractical due to high
computational costs. While In-context learning (ICL) with
demonstration examples has shown promising generalization performance in language tasks and image-language
tasks without fine-tuning, applying ICL to video-language
tasks faces challenges due to the limited context length in
Video LMMs, as videos require longer token lengths. To address these issues, we propose VideoICL, a novel video incontext learning framework for OOD tasks that introduces
a similarity-based relevant example selection strategy and
a confidence-based iterative inference approach. This allows to select the most relevant examples and rank them
based on similarity, to be used for inference. If the generated response has low confidence, our framework selects
new examples and performs inference again, iteratively refining the results until a high-confidence response is obtained. This approach improves OOD video understanding
performance by extending effective context length without
incurring high costs. The experimental results on multiple benchmarks demonstrate significant performance gains,
especially in domain-specific scenarios, laying the groundwork for broader video comprehension applications. Code
is released at https://github.com/KangsanKim07/VideoICL

1. Introduction
Recent video large multimodal models (LMMs) [11, 34, 47,
57] have shown notable improvement in video understanding and reasoning tasks, e.g., enabling these models to comprehend natural scene videos and answer causal questions.
However, as new types of data continue to emerge, these
* Equal contribution.

3295

