This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Effective Cloud Removal for Remote Sensing Images by an Improved
Mean-Reverting Denoising Model with Elucidated Design Space
Yi Liu1 , Wengen Li1∗ , Jihong Guan1∗ , Shuigeng Zhou2 , Yichao Zhang1
1
Tongji University, 2 Fudan University
{liuyi61,lwengen,jhguan,yichaozhang}@tongji.edu.cn, sgzhou@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
(a)

Cloud removal (CR) remains a challenging task in remote
sensing image processing. Although diffusion models (DM)
exhibit strong generative capabilities, their direct applications to CR are suboptimal, as they generate cloudless images from random noise, ignoring inherent information in
cloudy inputs. To overcome this drawback, we develop a
new CR model EMRDM based on mean-reverting diffusion
models (MRDMs) to establish a direct diffusion process between cloudy and cloudless images. Compared to current
MRDMs, EMRDM offers a modular framework with updatable modules and an elucidated design space, based on a
reformulated forward process and a new ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based backward process. Leveraging
our framework, we redesign key MRDM modules to boost
CR performance, including restructuring the denoiser via
a preconditioning technique, reorganizing the training process, and improving the sampling process by introducing
deterministic and stochastic samplers. To achieve multitemporal CR, we further develop a denoising network for simultaneously denoising sequential images. Experiments on
mono-temporal and multi-temporal datasets demonstrate
the superior performance of EMRDM. Our code is available at https://github.com/Ly403/EMRDM .

Forward 


Backward


SDE

SDE

Target

Noise

Mean

R
(c)
Target

Mean

R

Repeat Operator

MRDM Backward 


SDE

Target

Mean Operator

Pred

MRDM Forward 


(b)

M

SDE

Nosiy Mean

Pred

MRDM 


EMRDM 


Forward 


Backward 


SDE

ODE

Nosiy Mean

M
Pred

Figure 1. Comparison of EMRDM (c) with generative DMs (a)
and MRDMs (b). Here, target is the cloudless image, pred is the
CR prediction result, mean is the cloudy image, and noisy mean
is the noisy cloudy image. The forward processes of (a), (b), and
(c) generate diffused images approximated by noise (for DMs) and
noisy mean (for EMRDM and MRDMs), respectively.

1. Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have driven the
progress of CR [62], with generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [20] becoming a predominant approach. However,
the effectiveness of GANs in CR is undermined by training instability [51] and mode collapse [3]. In comparison,
diffusion models (DMs) [23, 55, 56] can overcome these
limitations via enhanced training stability and output diversity, setting new benchmarks in image synthesis [11] and
restoration [36]. Such advantages of DMs also extend to
CR tasks [29, 58, 71, 74].
Existing diffusion-based CR methods typically employ
vanilla DM frameworks that start the diffusion process
from pure noise (Fig. 1 (a)). However, this is unnecessary
as cloudy images contain substantial unexploited information. Even worse, noise-initiated generation lacks pixellevel consistency, inducing distortion [6] in restored images
due to poor fine-grained controllability. To resolve this, we
propose the integration of mean-reverting diffusion models
(MRDMs) [41] into CR. MRDMs start the diffusion process directly from noisy cloudy images (Fig. 1 (b)), intrinsically preserving structural fidelity through pixel-level consistency constraints. Specifically, the forward process pro-

Satellite imagery, as a fundamental remote sensing product [68, 72], enables diverse applications including environmental monitoring [59], land cover classification [34],
and agricultural monitoring [48]. However, cloud coverage
severely affects the usability of satellite imagery. Data analysis for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on the Terra and Aqua satellites indicates that
about 67% of the Earth’s surface experiences cloud coverage [33]. Hence, cloud removal (CR) is a critical preliminary step in processing satellite imagery.
∗ Corresponding author.

17851

