This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIO: Decomposable Implicit 4D Occupancy-Flow World Model
Christopher Diehl1,†,∗ Quinlan Sykora2,3,∗
Ben Agro3,† Thomas Gilles2 Sergio Casas† Raquel Urtasun2,3
1
TU Dortmund University 2 Waabi 3 University of Toronto
christopher.diehl@tu-dortmund.de, {qsykora, tgilles, urtasun}@waabi.ai

(a) Scene Occupancy

(b) Instance Occupancy

(c) Scene Flow

(d) Rendered LiDAR

Figure 1. We present DIO, a world model that learns unsupervised 4D occupancy and flow (a, c) and can be decomposed into instance
occupancy (b) as well as transfered to downstream tasks like LiDAR point cloud forecasting (d).

Abstract
We present DIO, a flexible world model that can estimate
the scene occupancy-flow from a sparse set of LiDAR observations, and decompose it into individual instances. DIO
can not only complete instance shapes at the present time,
but also forecast their occupancy-flow evolution over a future horizon. Thanks to its flexible prompt representation,
DIO can take instance prompts from off-the-shelf models
like 3D detectors, achieving state-of-the-art performance in
the task of 4D semantic occupancy completion and forecasting on the Argoverse 2 dataset. Moreover, our world
model can easily and effectively be transferred to downstream tasks like LiDAR point cloud forecasting, ranking
first compared to all baselines in the Argoverse 4D occupancy forecasting challenge.

1

Introduction

Planning a safe motion requires robots, such as self-driving
vehicles (SDVs), to have an accurate understanding of the
world. An important challenge of perception systems is
their ability to understand individual objects and their shape
when dealing with sparse and noisy observations. Moreover, scene completion at the current time is not sufficient,
as a robot also needs a precise understanding of the evolution of the 4D scene into the future through a world model
to plan a safe trajectory. These systems can benefit from
∗ Denotes equal contribution. † Work done while at Waabi.

reasoning about instances to get a complete understanding
of the scene, allowing a more fine-grained understanding of
the interactions between actors. For instance, if a planned
trajectory overlaps with forecasted future occupancy, it is
important to understand where that occupancy came from
to reason about who has the right-of-way.
Two dominant groups of methods have emerged as interpretable world models for autonomy: Instance-based methods [1–10] first detect a discrete set of objects in the scene,
followed by forecasts of possible future trajectories. While
instance information can benefit motion planning, this approach leads to information bottlenecks (e.g., a finite set
of predicted trajectories). Bird’s-eye-view (BEV) semantic
occupancy fields [11–17] are more suitable to represent future motion uncertainties [12, 18] but lack instance information that reduces expressivity and intepretability. Moreover,
both these approaches are often supervised exclusively with
bounding box labels, which leads to a poor approximation
of the true object geometry, and the BEV assumption may
not hold. This highlights the need for a 4D (x, y, z, t) understanding of the scene.
Recent works [18, 19] propose unsupervised 4D occupancy world models, allowing training on a vast amount of
unlabeled LiDAR data, better capturing the true geometry,
and enabling fine-tuning on specific tasks such as LiDAR
point cloud forecasting and semantic occupancy perception
and prediction. However, these models still face challenges
with (1) decomposing dynamic scenes, (2) predicting occupancy of fine-grained structures, and (3) accurately fore-

27456

