This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Alignment-Free Video Matching for Few-shot Action Recognition
SuBeen Lee, WonJun Moon, Hyun Seok Seong, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{leesb7426, wjun0830, gustjrdl95, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract
Few-Shot Action Recognition (FSAR) aims to train a
model with only a few labeled video instances. A key challenge in FSAR is handling divergent narrative trajectories
for precise video matching. While the frame- and tuple-level
alignment approaches have been promising, their methods
heavily rely on pre-defined and length-dependent alignment
units (e.g., frames or tuples), which limits flexibility for actions of varying lengths and speeds. In this work, we introduce a novel TEmporal Alignment-free Matching (TEAM)
approach, which eliminates the need for temporal units in action representation and brute-force alignment during matching. Specifically, TEAM represents each video with a fixed
set of pattern tokens that capture globally discriminative
clues within the video instance regardless of action length
or speed, ensuring its flexibility. Furthermore, TEAM is inherently efficient, using token-wise comparisons to measure
similarity between videos, unlike existing methods that rely
on pairwise comparisons for temporal alignment. Additionally, we propose an adaptation process that identifies and
removes common information across classes, establishing
clear boundaries even between novel categories. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of TEAM. Codes
are available at github.com/leesb7426/TEAM.

1. Introduction
Recently, action recognition has achieved remarkable performances with the help of numerous labeled videos [2, 5, 8].
However, those performances are not guaranteed when novel
categories are given with few labeled examples [3, 22, 29,
31]. To resolve this problem, Few-Shot Action Recognition (FSAR) has been proposed [31]. Particularly, FSAR
employs episodic learning which iteratively simulates the
episode of learning a set of new classes. Each episode is
given a support set to train a model, composed of a few labeled examples for newly given classes, to distinguish the
category of a set of unlabeled videos, coined as a query set.
* Corresponding author

Due to different class compositions within every episode,
metric learning, a classifier-free strategy, is predominantly
employed in FSAR [3, 20, 23–25, 27, 28]. Distances between the representations of support and query sets are computed to infer the category of a query video. Yet, naı̈vely
constructing video representations, such as average pooling,
are shown to be poor due to an insufficient understanding
of temporal information [3, 31]. Therefore, the previous approaches typically focused on aligning temporal sequences
between videos [3, 20, 23–25, 27, 28].
As the base units for temporal alignment between videos,
the frame and tuple are commonly employed (illustrated in
Fig. 1 (a) and (b)). Both frame- and tuple-based alignment
approaches measure pairwise similarities between each unit
and then derive an optimal alignment path for all units of
query video. This path is regarded as the temporal alignment between support and query videos, the query video
is assigned with the class label of the support video with
minimum cumulative distance.
Although these two temporal alignment paradigms have
shown effectiveness, they suffer from inflexibility and inefficiency. The inflexibility arises from their reliance on predefined units, such as frames or tuples, for action representation. These methods typically struggle to capture actions
if the pre-defined units do not align with the varying action
durations. Moreover, their alignment cost increases quadratically with the number of frames, as shown in Fig. 7. This
issue has been overlooked since typical FSAR benchmarking
datasets consist mostly of trimmed, short-term videos. The
quadratic cost arises because their alignment strategies rely
on pairwise comparisons between the units of support and
query videos.
In this regard, we introduce a novel TEmporal Alignmentfree Matching (TEAM) approach that achieves both flexibility and efficiency by eliminating the need for pre-defined
temporal units in action representation and brute-force alignment for video comparison. Specifically, TEAM represents
each video with a fixed set of pattern tokens with crossattention mechanisms to capture diverse clues within the
video instance which are useful for distinguishing categories.
Therefore, these pattern tokens flexibly identify discrimina-

5412

