This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoVE-KD: Knowledge Distillation for VLMs with Mixture of Visual Encoders
Jiajun Cao1,2 , Yuan Zhang1 , Tao Huang3 , Ming Lu1 , Qizhe Zhang1 , Ruichuan An1 ,
Ningning Ma2 , Shanghang Zhang1,‡
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Peking University 2 Autonomous Driving Development, NIO 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
cao.jiajun888@gmail.com, shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual encoders are fundamental components in visionlanguage models (VLMs), each showcasing unique
strengths derived from various pre-trained visual foundation models. To leverage the various capabilities of
these encoders, recent studies incorporate multiple encoders within a single VLM, leading to a considerable increase in computational cost. In this paper, we present
Mixture-of-Visual-Encoder Knowledge Distillation (MoVEKD), a novel framework that distills the unique proficiencies
of multiple vision encoders into a single, efficient encoder
model. Specifically, to mitigate conflicts and retain the
unique characteristics of each teacher encoder, we employ
low-rank adaptation (LoRA) and mixture-of-experts (MoEs)
to selectively activate specialized knowledge based on input
features, enhancing both adaptability and efficiency. To regularize the KD process and enhance performance, we propose an attention-based distillation strategy that adaptively
weighs the different encoders and emphasizes valuable visual tokens, reducing the burden of replicating comprehensive but distinct features from multiple teachers. Comprehensive experiments on popular VLMs, such as LLaVA and
LLaVA-NeXT, validate the effectiveness of our method. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/hey-cjj/MoVE-KD.

Figure 1. Comparison of LLaVA-1.5-7B [27] and RADIO [36] on
a wide range of benchmarks, and MoVE-KD surpasses them.

1. Introduction

plications. This diversity makes the optimization and integration of visual encoders a key area of research.
To harness the diverse proficiencies of various vision encoders, current methods [24, 38, 42] often employ multiple encoders in a vision-language model via feature concatenation or attention mechanisms. However, compared to
VLMs with a single vision encoder, using multiple encoders
unavoidably increases computational costs and model complexity, diminishing efficiency and scalability. To address
this, we explore a critical question in this paper: can we
distill the unique proficiencies of various encoders into a
single vision encoder, capturing their collective advantages
while improving overall efficiency?
To unify multiple encoders into one, knowledge distillation (KD) [15] presents a promising approach, as it effectively transfers knowledge from a teacher model to a student model. However, classical KD methods primarily focus on one-to-one distillation, and the simultaneous distillation from multiple models, each with distinct pre-training
datasets and objectives, remains relatively under-explored.
Although AM-RADIO [36] proposes using multiple heads
within a single model to replicate the predictions of various

The rapid development of large vision-language models
(VLMs) has significantly advanced artificial intelligence,
particularly in tasks requiring integrated visual and linguistic understanding. At the core of these models, the vision
encoder is essential for visual perception, forming the foundation for interpreting visual inputs and enabling the effective execution of vision-language tasks. Recent studies [20, 38, 42] highlight the distinct strengths of various
vision encoders, such as CLIP [35], EVA [10], and ConvNeXt [31], each excelling in specific vision-language ap‡ Corresponding Author. This work was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (62476011).

19846

