This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LATTE-MV: Learning to Anticipate Table Tennis Hits from Monocular Videos
Daniel Etaat

Dvij Kalaria Nima Rahmanian S. Shankar Sastry
University of California, Berkeley

{danielbetaat, dvijk, rahmanian, sastry}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Physical agility is a necessary skill in competitive table
tennis, but by no means sufficient. Champions excel in this
fast-paced and highly dynamic environment by anticipating
their opponent’s intent – buying themselves the necessary
time to react. In this work, we take one step towards designing such an anticipatory agent. Previous works have developed systems capable of real-time table tennis gameplay,
though they often do not leverage anticipation. Among the
works that forecast opponent actions, their approaches are
limited by dataset size and variety. Our paper contributes
(1) a scalable system for reconstructing monocular video of
table tennis matches in 3D and (2) an uncertainty-aware
controller that anticipates opponent actions. We demonstrate in simulation that our policy improves the ball return
rate against high-speed hits from 49.9% to 59.0% as compared to a baseline non-anticipatory policy.
Project website: https://sastry-group.github.io/LATTE-MV/

Figure 1. Example of a reconstructed frame.

and expert athletes [9]. Despite these findings, anticipation is yet to play a prominent role in strategic algorithms
for table tennis robotics. Previous efforts to forecast opponent serves [43] and incorporate anticipatory action selection [39, 41] have been constrained by small datasets.
Access to a large-scale, high-quality dataset of competitive
gameplay, a resource currently unavailable, may streamline the development of behavior-aware learning-based algorithms – such as an anticipatory mechanism.
To address this gap, we introduce LATTE-MV (Learning
Anticipation for Table Tennis Execution from Monocular
Videos) that primarily contributes a novel system for reconstructing monocular video of table tennis gameplay in
3D. By using monocular videos as input, our system scales
to the wealth of publicly available footage of competitive
gameplay. To the best of our knowledge, this work marks
the first attempt at collecting a dataset of table tennis gameplay at scale without specialized recording equipment. We
process ⇠50 hours of table tennis gameplay into 73,222 exchanges, surpassing the size of the largest collected dataset
publicly referenced (14,241 segments in [10]). We note that
this is not a fair comparison, though, since our reconstruc-

1. Introduction
Table tennis has served as a testbed for robotics research
since the 1980s [4], presenting unique challenges due to
the game’s high speed and dynamic environment. The
sport requires targeted perception, precise motor control,
and strategic decision-making, pushing the boundaries of
robotic capabilities in sensing, actuation, and real-time processing.
Recent advancements in deep learning have propelled
the development of robotic systems capable of playing table
tennis [1, 10, 11, 15, 18, 31]. These systems have achieved
milestones such as cooperative rallying with humans [1] and
competitive play [10]. Despite these achievements, current
state-of-the-art systems struggle against professional players in fast-paced rallies. One explanation for this shortcoming is that the state-of-the-art systems are unable to anticipate their opponent’s future intent when returning highspeed hits.
Human-action anticipation has been widely studied in
robotics [17, 20, 40] and sports [9, 28, 42], where it is often
regarded as a distinguishing characteristic between amateur

7115

