This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Photography: Scene-Consistent Camera Control
for Realistic Text-to-Image Synthesis
Yu Yuan1 , Xijun Wang1 , Yichen Sheng2 , Prateek Chennuri1 , Xingguang Zhang1 , Stanley Chan1
1 School of ECE, Purdue University 2 NVIDIA

Stable Diffusion 3

Ours

(a) Bokeh rendering

A young boy wearing
an orange jacket is
standing on a
crosswalk; with bokeh
blur parameter **

2

8

17

2

8

17

44mm

70mm

24mm

44mm

70mm

(b) Focal length

A quiet mountain trail
with rocks and pine
trees lining the path;
with ** lens

24mm

FLUX
(c) Shutter speed

A brown and orange
leather handbag with
a paw print on it sits;
with shutter speed **
0.2 second

0.5 second

0.9 second

0.2 second

0.5 second

0.9 second

2000K

4000K

5155K

2000K

4000K

5155K

(d) Color temperature

A beautiful blue sky
with a mountain range
in the background;
with temperature **

Figure 1. This paper introduces generative photography, a new paradigm for text-to-image generation that maintains a consistent base
scene while modifying only the camera settings to achieve varied photographic effects. Current state-of-the-art text-to-image generation
models like Stable Diffusion 3 (SD3) [3] and FLUX [1] face two major limitations: failure to accurately interpret camera-specific settings
and difficulties in maintaining consistency in the base scene. This paper introduces a novel approach that addresses these issues, enabling
precise camera setting control and maintaining scene consistency in generative models.

Abstract

are the concepts of Dimensionality Lifting and Differential
Camera Intrinsics Learning, enabling smooth and consistent
transitions across different camera settings. Experimental
results show that our method produces significantly more
scene-consistent photorealistic images than state-of-the-art
models such as Stable Diffusion 3 and FLUX. Our code
and additional results are available at https://generativephotography.github.io/project.

Image generation today can produce somewhat realistic images from text prompts. However, if one asks the generator to synthesize a specific camera setting such as creating
different fields of view using a 24mm lens versus a 70mm
lens, the generator will not be able to interpret and generate
scene-consistent images. This limitation not only hinders
the adoption of generative tools in professional photography but also highlights the broader challenge of aligning
data-driven models with real-world physical settings. In
this paper, we introduce Generative Photography, a framework that allows controlling camera intrinsic settings during content generation. The core innovation of this work

1. Introduction
4 models
Since the breakthrough of probabilistic diffusion
in the early 2020’s [13, 22, 48, 56], foundational vision

7920

