This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanRig: Learning Automatic Rigging for Humanoid Character in a Large
Scale Dataset
Zedong Chu, Feng Xiong, Meiduo Liu, Jinzhi Zhang, Mingqi Shao, Zhaoxu Sun, Di Wang, Mu Xu
Amap, Alibaba Group
{chuzedong.czd, xf250971, liumeiduo.l, wushou.zjz,
mingqi.smq, szx430629, wd426042, xumu.xm}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
With the rapid evolution of 3D generation algorithms,
the cost of producing 3D humanoid character models has
plummeted, yet the field is impeded by the lack of a comprehensive dataset for automatic rigging—a pivotal step
in character animation. Addressing this gap, we present
HumanRig, the first large-scale dataset specifically designed for 3D humanoid character rigging, encompassing
11,434 meticulously curated T-posed meshes adhered to a
uniform skeleton topology. Capitalizing on this dataset,
we introduce an innovative, data-driven automatic rigging framework, which overcomes the limitations of GNNbased methods in handling complex AI-generated meshes.
Our approach integrates a Prior-Guided Skeleton Estimator (PGSE) module, which uses 2D skeleton joints to provide a preliminary 3D skeleton, and a Mesh-Skeleton Mutual Attention Network (MSMAN) that fuses skeleton features with 3D mesh features extracted by a U-shaped point
transformer. This enables a coarse-to-fine 3D skeleton joint
regression and a robust skinning estimation, surpassing previous methods in quality and versatility. This work not only
remedies the dataset deficiency in rigging research but also
propels the animation industry towards more efficient and
automated character rigging pipelines.

Figure 1. The AI-generated mesh and the artist-created one show
distinct face topology distributions. Manual meshes often have
varying vertex densities across body parts and special topologies
near joints for better deformation, while AI meshes tend to have
chaotic topologies which lack semantic information. Previous rigging methods can only handle simple artist-created meshes, while
HumanRig deals well with both AI and manual ones, especially
for those with complex clothes or accessories and irregular body
shapes.

1. Introduction
in rigging has become more pressing than ever.
Bolstered by extensive 3D datasets, the field of AI-driven
3D model generation [20, 23, 24, 27, 29] has experienced
significant advancements. Yet, the advancement in automatic rigging remains constrained due to the lack of a
comprehensive and standardized dataset, which is essential for training powerful and robust rigging models. Previous work, like [25], laid the cornerstone for earlier rigging
methods but was limited by a small scale of 1,729 T-pose
humanoid meshes with inconsistent skeleton topologies and

The animation industry is undergoing a revolutionary
change with the integration of machine learning and datadriven techniques, particularly in the realms of 3D modeling and character animation. A critical phase in bringing 3D
humanoid characters to life is rigging, which entails skeleton construction and skinning to facilitate realistic motion.
Traditionally, rigging is a labor-intensive task generally requiring skilled artists to manually construct skeleton joints
and paint skinning weights. As content creation pipelines
accelerate and grow in complexity, the need for automation

304

