This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEt3R: Measuring Multi-View Consistency in Generated Images
Mohammad Asim1
1

Christopher Wewer1

Thomas Wimmer1,2

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

2

Jan Eric Lenssen1

ETH Zurich

{masim, jlenssen}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

MEt3R

0.30
0.20
0.10
0.05

0.01

0

20

GenWarp

40

Frame

60

MV-LDM

80
DFM

Figure 1. We introduce MEt3R, a metric for multi-view consistency between pairs of generated images, which is independent of image
quality and content and does not require camera poses. Left: generated images from different generative models, conditioned on the first
frame, with MEt3R score map (Cons. Error) indicating levels of inconsistencies between consecutive images i and i + 1. Right: pair-wise
consistency scores, evaluated for consecutive frames in a sliding window, averaged over multiple sequences. The pattern in MV-LDM’s
consistency clearly shows artifacts from using anchor frames that are generated first, highlighting the high signal-to-noise ratio of MEt3R.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generative models, such as diffusion [14, 34] or flowbased [21] models, are trained to sample from a given
data distribution, which makes them ideal candidates for
stochastic inverse problems, such as reconstruction from incomplete information [11, 38, 45]. However, they raise the
inherent challenge that, for individual samples, no ground
truth is available to measure the quality of generations with
pairwise distance metrics. As a result, metrics such as
FID [13], KID [1], and CMMD [17] have been proposed to
measure the quality of generated images without the need
for a paired ground truth.

We introduce MEt3R, a metric for multi-view consistency in
generated images. Large-scale generative models for multiview image generation are rapidly advancing the field of
3D inference from sparse observations. However, due to
the nature of generative modeling, traditional reconstruction metrics are not suitable to measure the quality of generated outputs and metrics that are independent of the sampling procedure are desperately needed. In this work, we
specifically address the aspect of consistency between generated multi-view images, which can be evaluated independently of the specific scene. Our approach uses DUSt3R
to obtain dense 3D reconstructions from image pairs in a
feed-forward manner, which are used to warp image contents from one view into the other. Then, feature maps of
these images are compared to obtain a similarity score that
is invariant to view-dependent effects. Using MEt3R, we
evaluate the consistency of a large set of previous methods
for novel view and video generation, including our open,
multi-view latent diffusion model. Code is available online:
geometric-rl.mpi-inf.mpg.de/met3r/.

Recently, a trend is to repurpose video [3, 15] and image [29, 35] diffusion models for generation of 3D scenes
and objects, by generating multiple views from different
camera poses [11, 41, 52], with or without given images
as conditioning. Compared to direct generation of 3D representations [6, 25, 31], such multi-view generative models can be trained on images and videos, and their pixelaligned representation allows for more efficient models and
better scalability. However, they have only a weak to nonexistent inductive bias to produce actually 3D consistent re-

6034

