This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral State Space Model for
Rotation-Invariant Visual Representation Learning
Ali Bahri1
Moslem Yazdanpanah1
Mehrdad Noori1
Sahar Dastani1,2 *
1
1
David Osowiechi
Gustavo Adolfo Vargas Hakim
Farzad Beizaee1
Milad Cheraghalikhani1
Arnab Kumar Mondal3†
Herve Lombaert2,4
1
Christian Desrosiers
1
LIVIA, ILLS, ÉTS Montréal, Canada, 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute,
3
Apple, 4 Polytechnique Montreal
Input Image

1. Introduction
Visual representation learning is fundamental to computer
vision, where precise feature extraction is essential for tasks
such as image classification, detection, and segmentation.
The ability to extract meaningful patterns directly impacts
* correspondence: sahar.dastani-oghani.1@ens.etsmtl.ca
† work done during author’s PhD at Mila/McGill

Spectral VMamba

State Space Models (SSMs) have recently emerged as an
alternative to Vision Transformers (ViTs) due to their unique
ability of modeling global relationships with linear complexity. SSMs are specifically designed to capture spatially
proximate relationships of image patches. However, they fail
to identify relationships between conceptually related yet not
adjacent patches. This limitation arises from the non-causal
nature of image data, which lacks inherent directional relationships. Additionally, current vision-based SSMs are
highly sensitive to transformations such as rotation. Their
predefined scanning directions depend on the original image
orientation, which can cause the model to produce inconsistent patch-processing sequences after rotation. To address
these limitations, we introduce Spectral VMamba, a novel
approach that effectively captures the global structure within
an image by leveraging spectral information derived from
the graph Laplacian of image patches. Through spectral
decomposition, our approach encodes patch relationships independently of image orientation, achieving patch traversal
rotation invariance with our Rotational Feature Normalizer
(RFN) module. Our experiments on classification tasks show
that Spectral VMamba outperforms the leading SSM models
in vision, such as VMamba, while maintaining invariance to
rotations and a providing a similar runtime efficiency. The
implementation is available at: https://github.com/
Sahardastani/spectral_vmamba.git.

Image Rotated by 90°

SS2D

Abstract

Figure 1. Effect of image rotation on patch processing in VMamba
and Spectral VMamba networks. In VMamba networks (first row),
patches are traversed using predefined horizontal and vertical scanning routes. As a result, rotating the image by 90° significantly
changes the sequence in which patches are processed. In contrast,
Spectral VMamba (second row) organizes patches using spectral information derived from a graph laplacian of the image patches. As
shown in the second row, Spectral VMamba consistently processes
background patches before snake patches in both the original and
rotated images. The snake image in this analysis is AI-generated.

performance and unlocks deeper insights into visual tasks.
Significant advances in representation learning have been
driven by the development of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [14, 16, 24, 34, 36] and Vision Transformers
(ViTs) [7, 23, 38, 44]. Although CNNs are effective at capturing local patterns with linear scaling, they struggle to

23881

