This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DRiVE: Diffusion-based Rigging Empowers
Generation of Versatile and Expressive Characters
Mingze Sun1∗

Junhao Chen1∗ Junting Dong2† Yurun Chen1 Xinyu Jiang1 Shiwei Mao1
Puhua Jiang1,3 Jingbo Wang2 Bo Dai4,5 Ruqi Huang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
3
PengCheng Laboratory, China 4 The University of Hong Kong, China 5 Feeling AI, China
Project Page: https://DRiVEAvatar.github.io/

Image Input

Gaussian
Generation

Rigging Generation

Rendering & Animation

Figure 1. We propose DRiVE, a pipeline that generates 3D Gaussian from a single image along with the corresponding skeleton (including
hair and clothing) and skinning, enabling precise control over 3D Gaussian to render high-quality, controllable, and 3D consistent videos.

Abstract
Recent advances in generative models have enabled highquality 3D character reconstruction from multi-modal.
However, animating these generated characters remains a
challenging task, especially for complex elements like garments and hair, due to the lack of large-scale datasets and
effective rigging methods. To address this gap, we curate
AnimeRig, a large-scale dataset with detailed skeleton
and skinning annotations. Building upon this, we propose
DRiVE, a novel framework for generating and rigging 3D
human characters with intricate structures. Unlike existing methods, DRiVE utilizes a 3D Gaussian representation,
facilitating efficient animation and high-quality rendering.
We further introduce GSDiff, a 3D Gaussian-based diffu-

sion module that predicts joint positions as spatial distributions, overcoming the limitations of regression-based approaches. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DRiVE
achieves precise rigging results, enabling realistic dynamics for clothing and hair, and surpassing previous methods
in both quality and versatility. Code, dataset and visualization results are available at https://DRiVEAvatar.github.io/.

1. Introduction

* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

Crafting and animating 3D human characters has long been
a critical task in an array of applications, including film and
video game making, AR/VR, and human-centric robotics,
to name a few. Notably, the rapid development of generative models opens numerous new opportunities for research
on this classic task. In contrast to the traditional manual and

21170

