This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UNIC-Adapter: Unified Image-instruction Adapter with Multi-modal
Transformer for Image Generation
Lunhao Duan* 1 Shanshan Zhao† 2 Wenjun Yan2 Yinglun Li2 Qing-Guo Chen2
Zhao Xu2 Weihua Luo2 Kaifu Zhang2 Mingming Gong3 Gui-Song Xia† 1 4
1

School of Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 Alibaba International Digital Commerce
3
University of Melbourne 4 School of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University

Abstract
Recently, text-to-image generation models have achieved
remarkable advancements, particularly with diffusion models facilitating high-quality image synthesis from textual
descriptions. However, these models often struggle with
achieving precise control over pixel-level layouts, object
appearances, and global styles when using text prompts
alone. To mitigate this issue, previous works introduce conditional images as auxiliary inputs for image generation,
enhancing control but typically necessitating specialized
models tailored to different types of reference inputs. In this
paper, we explore a new approach to unify controllable generation within a single framework. Specifically, we propose
the unified image-instruction adapter (UNIC-Adapter) built
on the Multi-Modal-Diffusion Transformer architecture, to
enable flexible and controllable generation across diverse
conditions without the need for multiple specialized models.
Our UNIC-Adapter effectively extracts multi-modal instruction information by incorporating both conditional images
and task instructions, injecting this information into the image generation process through a cross-attention mechanism enhanced by Rotary Position Embedding. Experimental results across a variety of tasks, including pixel-level
spatial control, subject-driven image generation, and styleimage-based image synthesis, demonstrate the effectiveness
of our UNIC-Adapter in unified controllable image generation.

Figure 1. With the UNIC-Adapter, SD3 enables flexible and controllable generation across multiple reference modalities within a
single model. (a) to (d) represent text prompts, task instructions,
conditional images, and generated images, respectively.

merous open-source T2I models, like Stable Diffusion 1.5
(SD1.5) [42], Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL) [38], Pixartseries [5–7], Stable Diffusion 3 (SD3) [12], HunyuanDiT [28], and FLUX.1-dev [23] have significantly enhanced
the fidelity of images generated from natural language descriptions. These models utilize a range of architectures,
spanning from U-Net-based designs [43] to the more recent
Diffusion-Transformer-based frameworks [35].
Despite these advancements, relying solely on text
prompts often falls short in defining pixel-level spatial
structures and geometric details, exact object appearances,
and global styles of a specific image. To address this limitation, recent research [13, 18, 33, 34, 45, 55, 58, 60] has
incorporated conditional images as additional inputs alongside text prompts. These conditional images offer finer
control over pixel-level [60, 62], object-level [34, 55, 58],
or style-specific [13, 15, 54] features in the generated outputs. For example, ControlNet [60] enables pixel-level spatial control by integrating structural inputs, such as depth
and edge maps, through a parallel encoder tailored for

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-image (T2I) generation
models [3, 5, 12, 20, 23, 29, 38, 42, 51], primarily driven by
diffusion models [16], have been witnessed in recent years.
By leveraging large-scale paired text-image data [48], nu* This work was done when Lunhao Duan was a research intern at Alibaba International Digital Commerce.
† Corresponding authors.

7963

