This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature4X: Bridging Any Monocular Video to 4D Agentic AI
with Versatile Gaussian Feature Fields
Shijie Zhou1 * Hui Ren2 * Yijia Weng3 Shuwang Zhang1 Zhen Wang1 Dejia Xu4
Zhiwen Fan4 Suya You5 Zhangyang Wang4 Leonidas Guibas3 Achuta Kadambi1
1

2

UCLA

MIT

3

4

Stanford

UT Austin

5

DEVCOM ARL

https://feature4x.github.io/
Input Monocular Video

4D Agentic AI

User

t
Reconstruct

Segment Anything, from Any View, and at Any Time

with 2D Foundation Models

"Delete the dog"

"Extract the dog"

"Make the dog‘s color
look like
"

LLM
LLM-Powered 4D Scene Editing and Spatiotemporal Reasoning

4D Scene

Q: Which direction is this dog moving?
A: The dog is moving towards the left direction.

4D Feature Fields

Figure 1. Feature4X: Building 4D Interactive Scenes with Agentic AI from Monocular Videos. By dynamically distilling modelconditioned features and integrating 2D foundation models with LLMs in feedback loops, Feature4X enables multimodal tasks across 2D,
3D, and 4D with high-level language inputs or direct user interactions, including (but not limited to) segmentation, scene editing, and VQA
across novel views and all time steps, unlocking new possibilities for 4D agentic AI.

Abstract
Recent advancements in 2D and multimodal models have
achieved remarkable success by leveraging large-scale
training on extensive datasets. However, extending these
achievements to enable free-form interactions and highlevel semantic operations with complex 3D/4D scenes remains challenging. This difficulty stems from the limited
availability of large-scale, annotated 3D/4D or multi-view
datasets, which are crucial for generalizable vision and
language tasks such as open-vocabulary and prompt-based
segmentation, language-guided editing, and visual question
answering (VQA). In this paper, we introduce Feature4X,
a universal framework designed to extend any functionality
from 2D vision foundation model into the 4D realm, using
only monocular video input, which is widely available from

user-generated content. The “X” in Feature4X represents
its versatility, enabling any task through adaptable, modelconditioned 4D feature field distillation. At the core of
our framework is a dynamic optimization strategy that unifies multiple model capabilities into a single representation.
Additionally, to the best of our knowledge, Feature4X is the
first method to distill and lift the features of video foundation models (e.g. SAM2, InternVideo2) into an explicit
4D feature field using Gaussian Splatting. Our experiments
showcase novel view segment anything, geometric and appearance scene editing, and free-form VQA across all time
steps, empowered by LLMs in feedback loops. These advancements broaden the scope of agentic AI applications by
providing a foundation for scalable, contextually and spatiotemporally aware systems capable of immersive dynamic
4D scene interaction.

* Equal contribution.

14179

