This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleSSP: Sampling StartPoint Enhancement for Training-free Diffusion-based
Method for Style Transfer
Ruojun Xu
Zhejiang University, Dcar
Hangzhou, China

Weijie Xi
Dcar,
Hangzhou, China

XiaoDi Wang
Dcar,
Beijing,China

ruojunxu@zju.edu.cn

xiweijie@bytedance.com

wangxiaodi.00@bytedance.com

Yongbo Mao *
Dcar,
Beijing, China

Zach Cheng
Dcar,
Beijing, China

maoyongbo@bytedance.com

chengyi.2024@bytedance.com

Abstract

tion [27, 37, 40] and image or video editing [3, 7, 8, 14]. As
part of image editing, diffusion-based style transfer methods [4, 12, 31, 49] have garnered widespread attention.
These methods enable condition-guided image generation
that transfers the style of one image onto another while
maintaining the original content.

Training-free diffusion-based methods have achieved remarkable success in style transfer, eliminating the need for
extensive training or ﬁne-tuning. However, due to the lack
of targeted training for style information extraction and
constraints on the content image layout, training-free methods often suffer from layout changes of original content and
content leakage from style images. Through a series of experiments, we discovered that an effective startpoint in the
sampling stage signiﬁcantly enhances the style transfer process. Based on this discovery, we propose StyleSSP, which
focuses on obtaining a better startpoint to address layout
changes of original content and content leakage from style
image. StyleSSP comprises two key components: (1) Frequency Manipulation: To improve content preservation, we
reduce the low-frequency components of the DDIM latent,
allowing the sampling stage to pay more attention to the
layout of content images; and (2) Negative Guidance via
Inversion: To mitigate the content leakage from style image, we employ negative guidance in the inversion stage to
ensure that the startpoint of the sampling stage is distanced
from the content of style image. Experiments show that StyleSSP surpasses previous training-free style transfer baselines, particularly in preserving original content and minimizing the content leakage from style image. Project page:
https://github.com/bytedance/StyleSSP.

1. Introduction
Recently, Diffusion Models (DMs) have yielded highquality results in various areas such as text-to-image genera* Corresponding author

Previous diffusion-based style transfer methods [20, 21,
31, 55] leverage the generative capability of pre-trained
DMs using inference-stage optimization, yet they are either
time-consuming or fail to fully utilize the generative ability
of large-scale diffusion models. Based on these challenges,
training-free methods [4, 20, 45, 46] have been proposed.
Although these methods have shown promising results, they
still encounter two key issues: (1) Content preservation
problem. Due to the lack of constraints directly imposed
on the content of generated images during training, trainingfree methods often struggle to maintain the original semantic and structural content [26]. Although additional modules
like ControlNet [53] can be used as content constraints, experiments have shown that these methods still risk failure
(as shown in supplementary materials). This issue largely
arises from the diffusion model’s imbalanced preference for
different conditions when multiple conditions are injected
into the U-Net during the sampling stage [9, 13]; (2) Content leakage from the style image. Without targeted training for style extraction, training-free methods struggle to
effectively decouple the style and content. Therefore, when
the style image is directly injected into the pre-trained diffusion model, the generation process is inevitably inﬂuenced
by the content of style image. Fig. 1 illustrates examples of
these two problems.
To address these challenges, we begin by noting recent
advancements in image synthesis tasks with DMs. These

18260

