This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flexible Frame Selection for Efficient Video Reasoning
Shyamal Buch

Arsha Nagrani Anurag Arnab
Google DeepMind

Cordelia Schmid

Abstract
Video-language models have shown promise for addressing
a range of multimodal tasks for video reasoning, such as
video question-answering. However, the inherent computational challenges of processing long video data and increasing model sizes have led to standard approaches that
are limited by the number of frames they can process. In
this work, we propose the Flexible Frame Selector (FFS), a
learnable policy model with a new flexible selection operation, that helps alleviate input context restrictions by enabling video-language models to focus on the most informative frames for the downstream multimodal task, without
adding undue processing cost. Our method differentiates
from prior work due to its learnability, efficiency, and flexibility. We verify the efficacy of our method on standard
video-question answering and reasoning benchmarks, and
observe our model can maintain or improve base videolanguage model accuracy while significantly reducing the
number of downstream processed frames.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Adaptive frame selection for VideoQA. Video
question-answering (VideoQA) is a key task for long video understanding, encompassing causal, temporal, descriptive event reasoning. Large vision-language models (VLMs) are often computationally constrained by expensive video input context. However, not all frames are useful or necessary to perform the task.
We propose FFS, a lightweight policy for flexible frame selection.
FFS is adaptive, learning to use multimodal context to select only
what is necessary for the downstream, large VLM, whether it is
(a) a single frame for simple questions, or (b) multiple frames
for complex queries. Unlike other adaptive selection approaches
[45, 70], our FFS improves overall efficiency, requiring no expensive LLM/VLM API calls of its own.

Reasoning about events to answer questions about videos
is a long-standing challenge for multimodal AI systems.
In the image domain, vision-language models (VLMs)
have shown great promise for multimodal reasoning tasks
[32, 42, 44, 58, 60]. However, transferring this success from
large image-language models [9, 31, 32, 55] to the videolanguage setting [9, 39, 46, 72, 85] has proven challenging,
largely due to the computational complexities arising simultaneously from (1) increasing model sizes and (2) the volume of video data that must be processed for a single pass.
Thus, current state-of-the-art approaches for videolanguage understanding are often constrained to using relatively few frames from the original video data, usually obtained through uniform downsampling [2, 8, 9, 12]. This
approach, while straightforward, often ignores the nuances
of the fundamental nature of videos. In particular, videos
include highly correlated input frames and depict many
Project webpage: https://ffs-video.github.io

events, from which only a few may be semantically relevant
to the task. Thus, sampling uniformly can potentially result
in frame inputs that are either redundant, containing information in multiple frames where one would suffice [5, 30],
or irrelevant, with respect to the input question [38, 85].
Processing these inputs can thus lower overall efficiency. In
addition, for video reasoning tasks, key events of interest
can occur for relatively short timespans within the larger
video, and this uniform sampling method can miss providing the VLM this critical information and thereby lower accuracy. The interplay of these characteristics of videos pro-

29071

