This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Physics-Informed Blur Learning Framework for Imaging Systems
Liqun Chen1
Yuxuan Li1
Jun Dai1
Jinwei Gu2,3
Tianfan Xue3,1 *
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 NVIDIA 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{chenliqun, liyuxuan, daijun, xuetianfan}@pjlab.org.cn, jinweig@nvidia.com
https://openimaginglab.github.io/PSF-Estimation/

Figure 1. We introduce a point spread function (PSF) estimation framework and demonstrate its effectiveness in deblurring. From left to
right: PSF estimated via Degradation Transfer [6] (state-of-the-art), PSF estimated by our method, and the ground-truth PSF of lens #63762
from Edmund; a blurry input image synthesized using an image from the FiveK dataset [5] and the ground-truth PSF; the patches from
the blurry input image; the patches deblurred by pre-trained Restormers [46] using training data generated from PSFs obtained through
our method and Degradation Transfer [6], respectively; and the corresponding ground truth patches. Our approach outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods in both PSF estimation accuracy and deblurring quality.

Abstract
Accurate blur estimation is essential for high-performance
imaging in various applications. Blur is typically represented by the point spread function (PSF). In this paper,
we propose a physics-informed PSF learning framework
for imaging systems, consisting of a simple calibration followed by a learning process. Our framework could achieve
both high accuracy and universal applicability. Inspired
by the Seidel PSF model for representing spatially varying
PSF, we identify its limitations in optimization and introduce a novel wavefront-based PSF model accompanied by
an optimization strategy, both reducing optimization com-

plexity and improving estimation accuracy. Moreover, our
wavefront-based PSF model is independent of lens parameters, eliminating the need for prior knowledge of the lens.
To validate our approach, we compare it with recent PSF estimation methods (Degradation Transfer and Fast Two-step)
through a deblurring task, where all the estimated PSFs are
used to train state-of-the-art deblurring algorithms. Our
approach demonstrates improvements in image quality in
simulation and also showcases noticeable visual quality improvements on real captured images. The code and models
are public.

* Corresponding author

10913

