This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Words or Vision: Do Vision-Language Models Have Blind Faith in Text?
Ailin Deng Tri Cao Zhirui Chen† Bryan Hooi†
National University of Singapore
{ailin,zhiruichen}@u.nus.edu, tricao2001vn@gmail.com
bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Visual Input

Blind Faith in Text

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) excel in integrating visual
and textual information for vision-centric tasks, but their
handling of inconsistencies between modalities is underexplored. We investigate VLMs’ modality preferences when
faced with visual data and varied textual inputs in visioncentered settings. By introducing textual variations to four
vision-centric tasks and evaluating ten Vision-Language
Models (VLMs), we discover a “blind faith in text” phenomenon: VLMs disproportionately trust textual data over
visual data when inconsistencies arise, leading to significant performance drops under corrupted text and raising
safety concerns. We analyze factors influencing this text
bias, including instruction prompts, language model size,
text relevance, token order, and the interplay between visual and textual certainty. While certain factors, such as
scaling up the language model size, slightly mitigate text
bias, others like token order can exacerbate it due to positional biases inherited from language models. To address
this issue, we explore supervised fine-tuning with text augmentation and demonstrate its effectiveness in reducing text
bias. Additionally, we provide a theoretical analysis suggesting that the blind faith in text phenomenon may stem
from an imbalance of pure text and multi-modal data during training. Our findings highlight the need for balanced
training and careful consideration of modality interactions
in VLMs to enhance their robustness and reliability in handling multi-modal data inconsistencies.

LVLM

Broccoli

Textual Input
The pizza has green broccoli
florets on one of its sections.
Q: What green veggie is on the pizza in the image?

Figure 1. Illustration of the “Blind Faith in Text” phenomenon in
Vision-Language Models (VLMs). These models demonstrate a
strong tendency to trust textual data, when it is inconsistent with
the visual data or even incorrect.

inputs are common, as additional textual data may be irrelevant or even misleading [32]. Despite their strong performance on vision-centric benchmarks [13, 41, 42], VLMs’
capability to handle such inconsistencies remains underexplored. This gap motivates our study, as understanding and
addressing VLMs’ tendencies under these conditions is essential for their safe and reliable application in real-world,
multi-modal contexts.
In this work, we explore an open but underexplored
question: How do VLMs handle inconsistencies between visual and textual inputs? This question drives us to investigate the following aspects:
1. Modality Preference: What modality do VLMs prefer
when there are inconsistencies between vision and language data?
2. Robustness to Text Perturbation: Can these models
maintain their performance on vision-centric tasks when
faced with corrupted textual data?
3. Influencing Factors: What factors affect the modality
preference in VLMs?
To address these questions, we construct a comprehensive benchmark by introducing textual variations to four
vision-centric tasks and evaluate ten VLMs, including both
proprietary and open-source models. Our findings reveal a
phenomenon we term “blind faith in text”: when inconsistencies arise between visual and textual inputs, VLMs tend

1. Introduction
With the rise of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [4, 8,
22], these models are increasingly applied in complex
multi-modal tasks, such as retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) [38] and multi-modal agents [11, 15, 17], where they
handle large, context-rich cross-modal inputs. In these practical scenarios, inconsistencies between visual and textual
† corresponding author

3867

