This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OCRT: Boosting Foundation Models
in the Open World with Object-Concept-Relation Triad
Luyao Tang1,2,∗ , Yuxuan Yuan1∗ , Chaoqi Chen3,† , Zeyu Zhang4 , Yue Huang1,2,† and Kun Zhang5,6
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efﬁcient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University 2 School of Informatics, Xiamen University
3
Shenzhen University 4 The Australian National University 5 Carnegie Mellon University
6
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
{lytang, yuanyuxuan0908}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, cqchen1994@gmail.com, steve.zeyu.zhang@outlook.com
yhuang2010@xmu.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Although foundation models (FMs) claim to be powerful, their generalization ability signiﬁcantly decreases when
faced with distribution shifts, weak supervision, or malicious attacks in the open world. On the other hand, most domain generalization or adversarial ﬁne-tuning methods are
task-related or model-speciﬁc, ignoring the universality in
practical applications and the transferability between FMs.
This paper delves into the problem of generalizing FMs to
the out-of-domain data. We propose a novel framework, the
Object-Concept-Relation Triad (OCRT), that enables FMs
to extract sparse, high-level concepts and intricate relational structures from raw visual inputs. The key idea is to
bind objects in visual scenes and a set of object-centric representations through unsupervised decoupling and iterative
reﬁnement. To be speciﬁc, we project the object-centric representations onto a semantic concept space that the model
can readily interpret and estimate their importance to ﬁlter out irrelevant elements. Then, a concept-based graph,
which has a ﬂexible degree, is constructed to incorporate
the set of concepts and their corresponding importance, enabling the extraction of high-order factors from informative
concepts and facilitating relational reasoning among these
concepts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that OCRT
can substantially boost the generalizability and robustness
of SAM and CLIP across multiple downstream tasks. Code

1. Introduction
The ability to generalize to unseen scenarios is considered
an important sign of human intelligence [37]. Foundation
∗ Equal Contribution; † Corresponding Author.

(a) Segmentation with SAM

(b) Hallucination with CLIP

Figure 1. Performance between SoTAs and OCRT across downstream tasks in the open world. (a) OCRT substantially resists
performance damage from weak supervision. (b) OCRT mitigates
the hallucination and comes closest to the original CLIP.

models (FMs) [1, 39, 57] are trained on a large amount of
single and multimodal data to bridge the gap between deep
models and human intelligence. Although FMs claim to
have achieved success in various downstream tasks, they
are still highly vulnerable to out-of-domain data (distribution shift [9, 80], weak supervision [58, 76], or malicious
attacks [84]) in the open world, and this situation often occurs in real applications. For example, the vision foundation model (VFM)–SAM [39] cannot accurately segment
medical or camouﬂaged objects [10, 13]. The multimodal
foundation model (MMFM)–CLIP [57] is extremely prone
to attacks that can induce a wrong understanding of images [6, 7]. This inspires a series of works [29, 79, 82] to enhance the generalizability and robustness of FMs. They typically identify the generalized factors from a small amount
of source domain data to ﬁne-tune FMs and generalize the
model to the out-of-domain data.
From the perspective of representation learning [70], the
mainstream paradigms for improving the generalizability of
VFM and MMFM include inserting LoRA [33] module or
Adapter [29, 81] to ﬁne-tune a small number of parameters,
adversarial learning [46], feature decomposition [22, 75],

25422

