This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MatAnyone: Stable Video Matting with Consistent Memory Propagation
Peiqing Yang1 Shangchen Zhou1 Jixin Zhao1 Qingyi Tao2 Chen Change Loy1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research, Singapore
https://pq-yang.github.io/projects/MatAnyone

Input
Ours
Ours
RVM

Figure 1. Our MatAnyone is capable of producing highly detailed and temporally consistent alpha mattes throughout a video. (a) It adapts
to a variety of frame sizes and media types (e.g., films, games, smartphone videos), achieving fine-grained details at the image-matting
level. (b) RVM [30], an auxiliary-free video matting method, struggles with complex or ambiguous backgrounds. In contrast, our method
effectively isolates the target object from such distractors, preserving a clean background and complete foreground parts. (c) Our method
also excels at consistently tracking the target (i.e., the lady in pink) even in scenes containing multiple salient objects (i.e., the man and the
lady). It accurately distinguishes between them even during their interactions. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract

module via region-adaptive memory fusion, which adaptively integrates memory from the previous frame. This
ensures semantic stability in core regions while preserving fine-grained details along object boundaries. For robust training, we present a larger, high-quality, and diverse
dataset for video matting. Additionally, we incorporate a
novel training strategy that efficiently leverages large-scale
segmentation data, boosting matting stability. With this new

Auxiliary-free human video matting methods, which rely
solely on input frames, often struggle with complex or ambiguous backgrounds. To address this, we propose MatAnyone, a robust framework tailored for target-assigned
video matting. Specifically, building on a memory-based
paradigm, we introduce a consistent memory propagation

7299

