This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open Ad-hoc Categorization with Contextualized Feature Learning
Zilin Wang * 1
Sangwoo Mo⇤ 1
1
University of Michigan
{zilinwan, swmo, stellayu}@umich.edu

Stella X. Yu1,2
2
UC Berkeley

Sima Behpour3
Liu Ren3
3
Bosch Center for AI

sima.behpour@gmail.com

Abstract

liu.ren@us.bosch.com

Adaptive categorization of visual scenes is essential for AI
agents to handle changing tasks. Unlike fixed common categories for plants or animals, ad-hoc categories, such as
things to sell at a garage sale, are created dynamically to
achieve specific tasks. We study open ad-hoc categorization, where the goal is to infer novel concepts and categorize images based on a given context, a small set of labeled
exemplars, and some unlabeled data.
We have two key insights: 1) recognizing ad-hoc categories relies on the same perceptual processes as common
categories; 2) novel concepts can be discovered semantically by expanding contextual cues or visually by clustering
similar patterns. We propose OAK, a simple model that introduces a single learnable context token into CLIP, trained
with CLIP’s objective of aligning visual and textual features
and GCD’s objective of clustering similar images.
On Stanford and Clevr-4 datasets, OAK consistently
achieves the state-of-art in accuracy and concept discovery across multiple categorizations, including 87.4% novel
accuracy on Stanford Mood, surpassing CLIP and GCD by
over 50%. Moreover, OAK generates interpretable saliency
maps, focusing on hands for Action, faces for Mood, and
backgrounds for Location, promoting transparency and
trust while enabling accurate and flexible categorization.

1) closed-world
generalization

3) novel semantic categories

2) novel visual clusters

Figure 1. We study open ad-hoc categorization such as things to
sell at a garage sale to achieve a specific goal (selling unwanted
items). Given the context garage sale, labeled exemplars such as
shoes, we need to both infer novel categories and recognize everything in the scene that can be sold at the garage sale. Supervisedly trained models like CLIP focus on 1) closed-world generalization, recognizing other shoes. Unsupervisedly trained methods
like GCD discover 2) novel visual clusters, identifying suitcases.
Intuitively, we can also discover 3) novel semantic categories by
contextual expansion from shoes to hats.

1. Introduction

We are inspired to study a novel problem setting called
open ad-hoc categorization, which learns categorization
rules under varying contexts to predict predefined categories and discover new ones. Fig. 1 illustrates three types
of concepts we seek to uncover. 1) Closed-world generalization applies known concepts to new instances, such as
CLIP [39] recognizing unseen shoes. 2) Novel visual clusters can emerge through data-driven image clustering, as in
GCD [49] identifying suitcases as a new category. 3) Novel
semantic categories may not resemble known ones visually
can arise contextually, such as from shoes to hats.
We formulate the problem as predicting both known and
novel concepts from unlabeled images using a few labeled
examples within a given context. Fig. 2 illustrates how
the same set of images can belong to different ad-hoc categories, such as action, location, or mood. For instance,
in the context of action, given labeled examples like drinking and reading, the task is to identify novel classes such

The concept of ad-hoc categories in cognitive science differs from common categories for plants or animals [2].
For example, things to sell at a garage sale (Fig. 1) may
not share visual or semantic similarity but are grouped to
achieve the goal of selling unwanted items. Unlike common
categories, ad-hoc categories are less established in memory, often lack clear labels, require explicit naming of exemplars, and depend on context. Recognizing them relies on
the same perceptual processes as common categories but requires contextualization to adapt to varying tasks [24, 41].
* Equal Contribution. https://github.com/Wayne2Wang/OAK

15108

