This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EchoMatch: Partial-to-Partial Shape Matching via Correspondence Reflection
Yizheng Xie1⇤
Viktoria Ehm1,2⇤
Paul Roetzer3
Nafie El Amrani3
Maolin Gao1,2
Florian Bernard3
Daniel Cremers1,2
1
2
3
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
University of Bonn
Improved Overlap Predictions

Shape

SOTA Matching Results

Source

Source

Echo Match

Shape

Target

Non-overlapping
Point

Target

Overlapping
Point

DPFM

Ours

Figure 1. Left: We present EchoMatch, a novel framework for partial-to-partial shape matching. We formalise a correspondence reflection
approach, where we ensure forward-backward-consistency for overlapping points. If a point returns to its original neighbourhood after
sending it from shape X to shape Y and back to shape X , we consider it to be an overlapping point, otherwise it is a non-overlapping point.
Middle: We show improved overlap prediction for partial-to-partial shape matching compared to the previous SOTA method DPFM [3].
Right: We achieve SOTA matching results in the partial-to-partial setting.

tional map framework. With this approach, we show that
we can outperform current SOTA methods in challenging
partial-to-partial shape matching problems. Our code is
available at https://echo-match.github.io.

Abstract
Finding correspondences between 3D shapes is a crucial
problem in computer vision and graphics. While most research has focused on finding correspondences in settings
where at least one of the shapes is complete, the realm of
partial-to-partial shape matching remains under-explored.
Yet, it is important since in many applications shapes are
only observed partially due to occlusion or scanning. Finding correspondences between partial shapes comes with an
additional challenge: We not only want to identify correspondences between points on either shape but also have
to determine which points of each shape actually have a
partner. To tackle this challenging problem, we present
EchoMatch, a novel framework for partial-to-partial shape
matching that incorporates the concept of correspondence
reflection to enable an overlap prediction within a func-

1. Introduction

⇤ These authors contributed equally.

Shape matching is a long-standing problem in computer
vision and beyond and is a fundamental ingredient in addressing tasks such as shape interpolation, animation, or
texture transfer. In 3D shape matching, we are interested in finding correspondences between two 3D shapes.
There exists extensive research on full-to-full shape matching, where the complete geometry of both shapes is available [1, 11, 25, 43, 62]. The more realistic – but substantially more challenging – scenario is partial shape matching,
where either one or both shapes are only observed partially,
e.g., due to scanning artefacts or occlusions.
The partial-to-partial matching case is challenging, as we
need not only to find correspondences between the shapes,

{yizheng.xie, viktoria.ehm}@tum.de

11665

