This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoFlow: One-Step Flow Matching for Human Trajectory Forecasting via
Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation based Distillation
Yuxiang Fu1,2,∗ , Qi Yan1,2, ,* Lele Wang1 , Ke Li4 , Renjie Liao1,2,3
1
University of British Columbia, 2 Vector Institute for AI,
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, 4 Simon Fraser University
{yuxiang.fu, qi.yan, lelewang}@ece.ubc.ca, keli@sfu.ca, rjliao@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract

Past Trajectories

In this paper, we address the problem of human trajectory forecasting, which aims to predict the inherently multimodal future movements of humans based on their past trajectories and other contextual cues. We propose a novel
motion prediction conditional flow matching model, termed
MoFlow, to predict K-shot future trajectories for all agents
in a given scene. We design a novel flow matching loss
function that not only ensures at least one of the K sets
of future trajectories is accurate but also encourages all
K sets of future trajectories to be diverse and plausible.
Furthermore, by leveraging the implicit maximum likelihood estimation (IMLE), we propose a novel distillation
method for flow models that only requires samples from the
teacher model. Extensive experiments on the real-world
datasets, including SportVU NBA games, ETH-UCY, and
SDD, demonstrate that both our teacher flow model and the
IMLE-distilled student model achieve state-of-the-art performance. These models can generate diverse trajectories
that are physically and socially plausible. Moreover, our
one-step student model is 100 times faster than the teacher
flow model during sampling. The code, model, and data
are available at our project page: https://moflowimle.github.io/.

Gaussian noise

Flow matching time

Legend
Past trajectory

…

Future trajectory
K - th prediction

Figure 1. Overview of our MoFlow model, which consists of a
social temporal encoder for contextual cues and a motion decoder
that predicts K-shot future trajectories of all agents in a scene.

1. Introduction

tories remains a challenging task due to the intrinsic multimodality of human motion.

Human trajectory forecasting comprises a dual-purpose
mission: 1) to predict future trajectories of human with unparalleled precision and 2) to generate diverse future movements that reflect the uncertainty of the complex decisionmaking processes inherent to human behaviour. Pedestrian trajectory prediction task plays an important role in
modern autonomous driving systems [13, 23, 40, 47], autonomous drones [14] and human-robot interactions [76].
In a multi-agent scene, trajectory forecasting involves predicting the distribution of future paths through the exploitation of individual historic trajectories and mutual influence
among agents. Despite significant advancements in recent
years [6, 18, 29, 37, 67, 70], predicting future human trajec-

To tackle this challenge, the majority of previous studies
have turned to generative models [10, 29, 67, 70], capturing
the multi-modal nature of potential future paths via a latent
variable. Recent works have leveraged the denoising diffusion models (DMs) [18, 28, 44] for probabilistic time series forecasting through their integration with sequence-tosequence models, due to its outstanding capacity to represent the data distribution. Note that DMs can be seen as special cases of flow-based models with conditional Gaussian
probability path [2, 27, 34, 35]. Therefore, we use the term
DMs and flow models interchangeably unless specified otherwise. Motion Indeterminacy Diffusion (MID) [18] marks
a significant milestone by first applying DMs to human trajectory prediction, where future positions are considered as
particles in theromodynamics. Nonetheless, such diffusion
based approach encounters several critical drawbacks. First,

* Equal Contribution

17282

