This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MP-SfM: Monocular Surface Priors for Robust Structure-from-Motion
Zador Pataki1

Paul-Edouard Sarlin2
Johannes L. Schönberger1,3
Marc Pollefeys1,3
2
3
1
ETH Zurich
Google
Microsoft Spatial AI Lab
unconstrained relative scales

Abstract
While Structure-from-Motion (SfM) has seen much
progress over the years, state-of-the-art systems are prone
to failure when facing extreme viewpoint changes in lowoverlap, low-parallax or high-symmetry scenarios. Because
capturing images that avoid these pitfalls is challenging,
this severely limits the wider use of SfM, especially by nonexpert users. We overcome these limitations by augmenting
the classical SfM paradigm with monocular depth and normal priors inferred by deep neural networks. Thanks to a
tight integration of monocular and multi-view constraints,
our approach significantly outperforms existing ones under
extreme viewpoint changes, while maintaining strong performance in standard conditions. We also show that monocular
priors can help reject faulty associations due to symmetries, which is a long-standing problem for SfM. This makes
our approach the first capable of reliably reconstructing
challenging indoor environments from few images. Through
principled uncertainty propagation, it is robust to errors in
the priors, can handle priors inferred by different models
with little tuning, and will thus easily benefit from future
progress in monocular depth and normal estimation. Our
code is publicly available at github.com/cvg/mpsfm.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) is a prevalent problem in computer vision involving the estimation of 3D structure and
camera motion from a collection of 2D images. The tremendous progress in the field has culminated in a variety of stateof-the-art SfM pipelines (e.g., Bundler [57], VisualSfM [68],
COLMAP [50], GLOMAP [43]). Today, these systems are
successfully applied in a wide range of scenarios with high
relevance for tasks such as (simultaneous) localization and
mapping [46], multi-view stereo [51], or novel-view synthesis [32, 40]. Despite this feat, many challenges and failure
cases remain to be solved, including but not limited to extreme viewpoint and illumination changes [13, 17, 45], repetitive structure [9, 72], scalability to large scenes [1, 21, 26],
or privacy concerns [22, 58].
One of the most frequent failure cases for SfM is the

classical
Structure-from-Motion

broken
reconstruction o

our approach
with monocular
depth & normals

success

Figure 1. A typical failure case for SfM. Existing approaches cannot handle low-overlap image pairs because they require three-view
tracks to ensure a consistent scale across the scene. We bridge this
limitation by augmenting SfM with monocular depth and normal
priors from off-the-shelf deep networks. This makes SfM significantly more robust for data captured by non-expert users.

scenario of extreme viewpoint changes. These can manifest as either extremely wide-baseline and low-overlap or as
low-parallax image pairs. As such, these scenarios present
challenges to different stages in the reconstruction process.
Many recent efforts in the community have centered around
solving the matching problem using the immense progress
in machine learning [13, 17, 45, 65], and we are now able
to match across extreme viewpoint and illumination conditions or even detect symmetry issues from a single pair of
images [9]. However, when we feed the established matches
into the subsequent reconstruction algorithms, we still face
multiple fundamental limitations leading to unstable and
inaccurate results or even outright reconstruction failures.
In particular, the current state-of-the-art systems [16, 43,
50, 64] inherently require three-view overlap with sufficient
baseline and parallax or otherwise cannot perform multiview consistent 3D reconstruction. In practice, this turns out
as one of the main difficulties for the non-expert user and
oftentimes also for experts for a variety of reasons. First, it is
intrinsically hard to capture large and complex scenes while
ensuring sufficient viewpoint overlap and variation. Even for
small scenes and structured setups, it is far from trivial with

21891

