This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Unimodal Regulation
for Balanced Multimodal Information Acquisition

1

Chengxiang Huang1,†
Yake Wei2,†
Zequn Yang2
Di Hu2,*
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Renmin University of China
huangchengxiang2021@bupt.edu.cn, {yakewei,zqyang,dihu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Sensory training during the early ages is vital for human
development. Inspired by this cognitive phenomenon, we
observe that the early training stage is also important for
the multimodal learning process, where dataset information is rapidly acquired. We refer to this stage as the prime
learning window. However, based on our observation, this
prime learning window in multimodal learning is often
dominated by information-sufficient modalities, which in
turn suppresses the information acquisition of informationinsufficient modalities. To address this issue, we propose
Information Acquisition Regulation (InfoReg), a method
designed to balance information acquisition among modalities. Specifically, InfoReg slows down the information acquisition process of information-sufficient modalities during the prime learning window, which could promote information acquisition of information-insufficient modalities. This regulation enables a more balanced learning
process and improves the overall performance of the multimodal network. Experiments show that InfoReg outperforms related multimodal imbalanced methods across various datasets, achieving superior model performance. The
code is available at https://github.com/GeWuLab/InfoReg_CVPR2025.

(a) Multimodal scenario.

(b) Unimodal scenario.

Figure 1. (a). Information amount variation of the audio encoder,
video encoder, and multimodal model during the training process
on CREMA-D [7]. (b). Information amount variation of the audio
and video modalities when trained independently on CREMA-D.

1. Introduction

information acquisition of different modalities, we use the
trace of the Fisher Information Matrix [2, 10] to investigate
the information amount of each modality in multimodal
models. However, based on our observation, the amount
of information in multimodal models is not well consistent
with intuitive expectations. Firstly, as shown in Figure 1a,
the green curve, representing the overall multimodal network, demonstrates a rapid increase in information amount
during the early periods. Information acquisition is most
rapid in this early stage, which we refer to as the prime
learning window, reaching a peak at the end of this period, followed by a subsequent decline. Secondly, for audio modality, its overall trend closely aligns with the overall multimodal model, and shows a high information acquisition amount during the prime learning window. These
findings align with our expectation that modality information could be acquired effectively within the prime learning window. However, the video modality, represented by
the blue curve, shows a much lower information acquisition amount during the prime learning window. Although
the video modality is capable of effective information acquisition in the unimodal scenario in Figure 1b, it fails
to do so in the multimodal scenario when trained jointly
with the audio modality. These observations suggest that
information-insufficient modalities, like video, experience
suppressed information acquisition during the prime learn-

Learning during early developmental ages in humans and
animals is important for skill impairments [15, 21, 42].
Similarly, in deep learning, recent studies have found that
models learn in stages, with early learning being especially
important for effective information acquisition [2, 18].
The above circumstance motivates us to investigate the
process of information acquisition in the multimodal scenario. Due to the presence of multiple modalities, multimodal learning networks are expected to capture sufficient
information from each modality [12, 38]. To observe the
† Equal contribution. * Corresponding author.

25854

