This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProbeSDF: Light Field Probes For Neural Surface Reconstruction
Briac Toussaint1

Diego Thomas2

briac.toussaint@inria.fr

thomas@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Jean-Sébastien Franco1
jean-sebastien.franco@inria.fr
1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LJK, France
2
Kyushu University, Japan

Abstract
SDF-based differential rendering frameworks have
achieved state-of-the-art multiview 3D shape reconstruction. In this work, we re-examine this family of approaches
by minimally reformulating its core appearance model in a
way that simultaneously yields faster computation and increased performance. To this goal, we exhibit a physicallyinspired minimal radiance parametrization decoupling angular and spatial contributions, by encoding them with a
small number of features stored in two respective volumetric
grids of different resolutions. Requiring as little as four parameters per voxel, and a tiny MLP call inside a single fully
fused kernel, our approach allows to enhance performance
with both surface and image (PSNR) metrics, while providing a significant training speedup and real-time rendering.
We show this performance to be consistently achieved on
real data over two widely different and popular application
fields, generic object and human subject shape reconstruction, using four representative and challenging datasets.1

in space and the observed direction to a color and a signed
distance to the reconstructed surface. On one hand, the
mapping can be global and use a complex scene-wide MLP
as implicit 5D decoder, as is the case for most seminal approaches [18, 30]. On the other hand, recent popular variants that target higher speed and memory efficiency use
explicit representations. Global representations are based
on a grid encoding [4, 31, 33] where interpolated spatial
and angular features are run through a global shallow MLP.
Local representations use the sparse 3D Gaussian Splatting [13] sample-based encoding approach, where each separate Gaussian comes with its own opacity and adjoining set
of angular color features. While grids or local approaches
use a single deep MLP to densely encode the complete light
field function, they almost always co-locate storage and decoding of color and angular features.
But is this really a necessary or even desirable feature of
any light field encoding? We question these assertions by
postulating that, contrary to the spatial components of the
light field that mainly encode intrinsic surface texture, the
angular components encode phenomena that are predominantly extrinsic to the surface, i.e. lighting and environment, and as such can be encoded at a lower spatial resolution as they are locally almost invariant to parallax. This
hypothesis is in fact exploited by the rendering community,
where angular and environment components contributing to
the radiance equation used to compute rendered colors, are
typically precomputed at sparse 3D locations coined light
field probes [24], and interpolated in-between.

1. Introduction
Neural radiance fields have established a new milestone for
the task of novel view synthesis and have led to a plethora
of variants of broad applicability. We here take particular
interest in SDF surface-based radiance fields, which have
proven to be a highly performing variant for the tasks of
3D modeling from images [30, 33], with wide reaching applications ranging from object and performance capture, to
immersive and 3D content production.
At the heart of such methods usually lies a parametrization of the light field, in the form of a 5-dimensional function. This function maps the spatial coordinates of a point
1 Source code is available at https : / / gitlab . inria . fr /
projects-morpheo/ProbeSDF

Leveraging this intuition, our approach borrows the
spherical harmonic parametrization popular with explicit
methods e.g. [4, 13] to represent angular components, but
instead decorrelates high density spatial variation from
lower density angular variation using a mid-resolution
probe grid of angular features. Each of the components
encode abstract features that are fed to a tiny MLP, which
acts as a minimal BRDF decoder of spatial and angular

11026

