This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MarkushGrapher: Joint Visual and Textual Recognition of Markush Structures
Lucas Morin1, 2

Valéry Weber1 Ahmed Nassar1 Gerhard Ingmar Meijer1
Luc Van Gool 2, 3 Yawei Li 2 Peter Staar1
1
IBM Research 2 ETH Zurich 3 INSAIT

{lum, vwe, ahn, inm, taa}@zurich.ibm.com

{yawei.li, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract

Visual Definition

Document

The automated analysis of chemical literature holds
promise to accelerate discovery in fields such as material
science and drug development. In particular, search capabilities for chemical structures and Markush structures
(chemical structure templates) within patent documents are
valuable, e.g., for prior-art search. Advancements have
been made in the automatic extraction of chemical structures from text and images, yet the Markush structures remain largely unexplored due to their complex multi-modal
nature. In this work, we present MarkushGrapher, a multimodal approach for recognizing Markush structures in documents. Our method jointly encodes text, image, and
layout information through a Vision-Text-Layout encoder
and an Optical Chemical Structure Recognition vision encoder. These representations are merged and used to autoregressively generate a sequential graph representation of
the Markush structure along with a table defining its variable groups. To overcome the lack of real-world training
data, we propose a synthetic data generation pipeline that
produces a wide range of realistic Markush structures. Additionally, we present M2S, the first annotated benchmark
of real-world Markush structures, to advance research on
this challenging task. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art chemistryspecific and general-purpose vision-language models in
most evaluation settings. Code, models, and datasets are
available 1 .

Textual Definition
Markush Structure
Y
X
Z
R1
R2
R3

Graph

N
C
N
C
N
halogen
H
H
CN
heterocycle OCH3

MarkushGrapher

Table

Figure 1. MarkushGrapher extracts Markush structures from
documents using their visual and textual definitions.

1. Introduction

molecules can be referred to using textual names or depictions of their molecular structures. Over the past years, substantial advances have been made to extract molecules from
text using chemical name entity recognition [26, 43, 56], as
well as, from images through chemical structure image segmentation [40, 45, 57] and chemical structure recognition
[31, 38, 41]. More recently, advances in multi-modal document understanding have opened up opportunities to extract
chemical structure templates, the so-called Markush structures [42]. These widely used representations are compact
descriptions of families of related molecules. A Markush
structure consists of a combination of an image and a
text element: the image defines the Markush backbone,
which contains atoms, bonds, and variable regions, while
the accompanying text element specifies the molecular substituents that can replace those variable regions. The variable regions can be variable groups (commonly referred to
as R-groups), frequency variation indicators, and positional
variation indicators [12]. A visualization of these variable
regions is provided in the suppl. materials. These structures are particularly valuable for prior-art search, freedomto-operate assessment, or landscape analysis in patent documents [42]. Yet, only a very few databases containing

Document understanding plays a critical role in accelerating discovery in chemistry. For example, databases [32]
can be built to offer a unified view of the current knowledge
in documents. Such databases can substantially facilitate
and accelerate Research & Development in fields ranging
from drug discovery to material science [37]. In documents,
1 https://github.com/DS4SD/MarkushGrapher

14505

