This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Polarized Color Screen Matting
Kenji Enomoto

(a) Scene

Scott Cohen
Brian Price
Adobe Research

(b) Chroma keying

TJ Rhodes

(c) Polarimetric matting

(d) Ours

Figure 1. (a) Scenes with fully polarized blue/green backgrounds under unpolarized known color illumination. (b) Commercial keying
tools [31] use color information to extract an alpha matte, often struggling with hair details or motion blur due to the essential ill-posedness
of the problem. (c) Polarimetric matting [22] uses polarization cues to extract an alpha matte without manual operations, often struggling
with polarized foreground reflections as shown in the specular highlight. (d) Our Polarized Color Screen Matting leverages color and
polarization cues, which enables more accurate alpha matte extraction for a wide range of real-world objects.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image and video editing rely on compositing [25] to blend
images. The quality of the composite depends on how accurately the alpha matte depicts opacity. Modern matte extraction methods use inherent information such as color or
polarization to extract the alpha matte. However, they are
forced to compromise on quality of foreground color, alpha, or both. This paper combines color and polarimetric
observations to constrain the problem.

This paper considers the long-standing problem of extracting alpha mattes from video using a known background. While various color-based or polarization-based
approaches have been studied in past decades, the problem
remains ill-posed because the solutions solely rely on either
color or polarization. We introduce Polarized Color Screen
Matting, a single-shot, per-pixel matting theory for alpha
matte and foreground color recovery using both color and
polarization cues. Through a theoretical analysis of our
diffuse-specular polarimetric compositing equation, we derive practical closed-form matting methods with their solvability conditions. Our theory concludes that an alpha
matte can be extracted without manual corrections using
off-the-shelf equipment such as an LCD monitor, polarization camera, and unpolarized lights with calibrated color.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets verify the
validity of our theory and show the capability of our matting methods on real videos with quantitative and qualitative comparisons to color-based and polarization-based
matting methods.

Color-based alpha matte extraction methods are most
commonly used for compositing due to equipment availability. Chroma keying [2, 29] is the de facto standard
in film making, but because it is underconstrained, it often requires manual corrections to extract high-quality alpha mattes. In addition to this, it often struggles with motion blur and transparent objects as depicted in Fig. 1. Recent learning-based matting methods [18, 19, 23, 32] can
sometimes extract acceptable mattes but they still struggle
with complex situations; potential improvements in modeling and dataset remain. Magenta green screen [28] can
extract a more precise alpha matte by sacrificing the green
color channel, but this later requires a restoration of the
green color channel using machine-learning colorization.
All these challenges are rooted in the fact that the use of

391

