This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Adversarial Transferability on Vision Transformers
via Forward Propagation Refinement
Yuchen Ren1 , Zhengyu Zhao1 *, Chenhao Lin1 , Bo Yang2 , Lu Zhou3 , Zhe Liu4 , Chao Shen1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China; 2 Information Engineering University, China;
3
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China; 4 Zhejiang Lab, China
ryc98@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {zhengyu.zhao, linchenhao}@xjtu.edu.cn,
yangbo hn@163.com, {lu.zhou, zhe.liu}@nuaa.edu.cn, chaoshen@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Previous Methods

Abstract

Backward
Explicitly Refine
Gradients

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have been widely applied
in various computer vision and vision-language tasks. To
gain insights into their robustness in practical scenarios,
transferable adversarial examples on ViTs have been extensively studied. A typical approach to improving adversarial transferability is by refining the surrogate model.
However, existing work on ViTs has restricted their surrogate refinement to backward propagation. In this work, we
instead focus on Forward Propagation Refinement (FPR)
and specifically refine two key modules of ViTs: attention
maps and token embeddings. For attention maps, we propose Attention Map Diversification (AMD), which diversifies certain attention maps and also implicitly imposes beneficial gradient vanishing during backward propagation.
For token embeddings, we propose Momentum Token Embedding (MTE), which accumulates historical token embeddings to stabilize the forward updates in both the Attention and MLP blocks. We conduct extensive experiments
with adversarial examples transferred from ViTs to various CNNs and ViTs, demonstrating that our FPR outperforms the current best (backward) surrogate refinement by
up to 7.0% on average. We also validate its superiority
against popular defenses and its compatibility with other
transfer methods. Codes and appendix are available at
https://github.com/RYC-98/FPR.

Input ...

Attention Block

MLP Block

...

Loss

Ignore Forward Propagation
Our FPR

Input ...

Backward
Implicitly Refine
Gradients

Attention Block

MLP Block

...

Loss

Explicitly Refine Attention Maps and Token Embeddings

Forward
Figure 1. Our Forward Propagation Refinement (FPR) vs. previous methods which only refine the backward propagation.

1. Introduction

optimized by adding subtle perturbations [23, 46] into clean
images [6, 44, 47].
A key property of adversarial examples that causes practical security concerns is their transferability, i.e., they can
be optimized on a (seen) surrogate model and then directly
transfer their effects to (unseen) target models [4, 40]. Compared to other transfer approaches that focus on loss design,
optimization algorithm or data augmentation [22, 24, 34],
surrogate refinement [15, 35, 39] explores the intrinsic relationship between the model itself and adversarial transferability, offering a unique perspective.
However, existing surrogate refinements on ViTs [38,
45] are limited to refining the backward propagation, i.e.,
only modifying the gradient information. To address the
above limitation, in this work, we explore the potential
of Forward Propagation Refinement (FPR), i.e., modifying features during forward propagation. Our FPR not
only provides a new perspective of surrogate refinement
but also potentially benefits the refinement during the sub-

Deep neural networks (DNNs) [8, 33, 41] demonstrate remarkable performance across diverse domains, with Vision Transformers (ViTs) [5, 9, 28] excelling particularly
in computer visualization. However, ViTs are also shown
to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [20, 21], which are
* Corresponding author

25071

