This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArtiScene: Language-Driven Artistic 3D Scene Generation
Through Image Intermediary
Zeqi Gu1,2
Yin Cui1
Zhaoshuo Li1
Fangyin Wei1
Yunhao Ge1
1
1
2
Jinwei Gu
Ming-Yu Liu
Abe Davis
Yifan Ding1
1
NVIDIA 2 Cornell University

Figure 1. We present ArtiScene, a training-free, language-driven 3D scene generation pipeline that can design diverse, aesthetic, and easily
editable scenes across a wide range of categories and styles from a text prompt. The figure shows four results with zoom-in details from
various angles. Everything is generated, including furniture, decorative objects, scene layouts, floors, and walls. We first leverage text-toimage models to generate a 2D image intermediary and then extract rich layout and style information from it. For example, the rightmost
column shows the object appearance and geometry acquired from the image via object segmentation and LLM-powered description.

Abstract

to guide 3D synthesis. In light of this, we introduce ArtiScene, a training-free automated pipeline for scene design
that integrates the flexibility of free-form text-to-image generation with the diversity and reliability of 2D intermediary
layouts. First, we generate 2D images from a scene description, then extract the shape and appearance of objects
to create 3D models. These models are assembled into the
final scene using geometry, position, and pose information
derived from the same intermediary image. Being generalizable to a wide range of scenes and styles, ArtiScene outperforms state-of-the-art benchmarks by a large margin in
layout and aesthetic quality by quantitative metrics. It also
averages a 74.89 % winning rate in extensive user studies
and 95.07 % in GPT-4o evaluation.

Designing 3D scenes is traditionally a challenging and laborious task that demands both artistic expertise and proficiency with complex software. Recent advances in text-to3D generation have greatly simplified this process by letting users create scenes based on simple text descriptions.
However, as these methods generally require extra training
or in-context learning, their performance is often hindered
by the limited availability of high-quality 3D data. In contrast, modern text-to-image models learned from web-scale
images can generate scenes with diverse, reliable spatial
layouts and consistent, visually appealing styles. Our key
insight is that instead of learning directly from 3D scenes,
we can leverage generated 2D images as an intermediary

2891

