This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COSMOS: Cross-Modality Self-Distillation for Vision Language Pre-training
Sanghwan Kim1,2,3,4 , Rui Xiao1, 2 , Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu1,2,3,4 ,
Stephan Alaniz1,2,3,4 , Zeynep Akata1,2,3,4
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
3
Helmholtz Munich 4 Munich Data Science Institute (MDSI)

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) trained with contrastive
loss have achieved significant advancements in various vision and language tasks. However, the global nature of the
contrastive loss makes VLMs focus predominantly on foreground objects, neglecting other crucial information in the
image, which limits their effectiveness in downstream tasks.
To address these challenges, we propose COSMOS: CrOSsMOdality Self-distillation for vision-language pre-training
that integrates a novel text-cropping strategy and crossattention module into a self-supervised learning framework. We create global and local views of images and
texts (i.e., multi-modal augmentations), which are essential
for self-distillation in VLMs. We further introduce a crossattention module, enabling COSMOS to learn comprehensive cross-modal representations optimized via a crossmodality self-distillation loss. COSMOS consistently outperforms previous strong baselines on various zero-shot
downstream tasks, including retrieval, classification, and
semantic segmentation. Additionally, it surpasses CLIPbased models trained on larger datasets in visual perception and contextual understanding tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/ExplainableML/cosmos.

The image captures a red fox, standing
alone in a snowy forest. The fox with
vibrant red fur is the main subject of the
image. The fox is facing the camera. The
background of the image is filled with
trees and bushes. The snow covers the
ground and the trees.

Image and Text Cropping Strategy

The fox with vibrant red fur The snow covers
is the main subject of the
the ground and
image. The background of the trees.
Global image crop
the image is filled with trees
and bushes.
Local image crop

Global text crop

Local text crop

Attention Map of Cross Attention Module

The
background of
the image is
filled with
trees and
bushes.

The image
captures a red
fox, standing
alone in a
snowy forest.
0.0

1.0

0.0

1.0

Figure 1. We randomly crop the image and randomly select captions (1-5 sentences) to build global and local crops (top). In our
cross attention module, two modalities are conditioned on each
other to create attention maps (normalized to 0-1, bottom).

1. Introduction
the sequence of words [28, 60, 70].

CLIP [53] uses an instance-level contrastive loss [50] to
learn text and image representations, where the text gets
embedded close to its corresponding image. The contrastive
loss function employed to train CLIP is inherently global,
as it matches the entire image to the text. This leads to
the dominant objects in the image suppressing the recognition of other smaller objects [9, 37, 54, 73], which results
in poor performance for dense prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation [47], and failure to distinguish similarlooking images with different visual patterns [61]. CLIP
also demonstrates a lack of contextual understanding, as its
text encoder perceives a caption as a bag-of-words, ignoring

14690

Previous works [17, 38, 46, 47, 55] have tackled these
limitations by masking the text or the image [17, 38, 55]
and explicitly optimizing local-to-global image representation. For instance, SLIP [46] and SILC [47] improved the
visual representations by integrating self-supervision into
the CLIP image encoder. However, we argue that enhancing only the image encoder leads to sub-optimal results,
since this does not fully exploit the multi-modality of the
data. Therefore, we propose COSMOS, to learn CrOSsMOdality embeddings through Self-distillation. Unlike
previous self-supervised methods [17, 46, 47], COSMOS

