This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UNICL-SAM: Uncertainty-Driven In-Context Segmentation
with Part Prototype Discovery
Dianmo Sheng1,4 , Dongdong Chen2 , Zhentao Tan1,4 , Qiankun Liu3 , Qi Chu1,4 ,
Tao Gong1,4,† , Bin Liu1,4 , Jing Han5 , Wenbin Tu5 , Shengwei Xu6 , Nenghai Yu1,4
1
2
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, USTC
Microsoft GenAI
USTB
4
5
6
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security
BoCom Research
BESTI
dmsheng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tgong@ustc.edu.cn, xusw@besti.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in in-context segmentation generalists have demonstrated significant success in performing
various image segmentation tasks using a limited number
of labeled example images. However, real-world applications present challenges due to the variability of support
examples, which often exhibit quality issues resulting from
various sources and inaccurate labeling. How to extract
more robust representations from these examples has always been one of the goals of in-context visual learning.
In response, we propose UNICL-SAM, to better model the
example distribution and extract robust representations to
help in-context segmentation. We incorporate an uncertainty probabilistic module to quantify each example’s reliability during both the training and testing phases. Utilizing
this uncertainty estimation, we introduce an uncertaintyguided graph augmentation and feature refinement strategy,
aimed at mitigating the impact of high-uncertainty regions
to enhance the learning of robust representations. Subsequently, we construct prototypes for each example by aggregating part information, thereby creating reliable in-context
instruction that effectively represents fine-grained local semantics. This approach serves as a valuable complement
to traditional global pooling features. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework,
underscoring its potential for real-world applications.

strong task generalization capabilities of these in-context
segmentation models are undoubtedly promising for the research community.
However, existing in-context segmentation generalists
often assume that the data in the training sets are of high
quality and treat them equally within the same framework,
thereby overlooking their diversity and differences. Previous works [47, 53] have also reported fluctuations in model
performance based on varying examples and investigated
strategies for selecting effective in-context examples. However, these studies only screened examples during the testing phase without considering optimization methods during
the training phase. The above discussion motivates us to
explore how to incorporate potential distributional diversity
into the training phase to develop more robust in-context
segmentation models.

1. Introduction

In light of this, we introduce UNICL-SAM, to investigate and address the modeling of example distribution differences and further feature optimization strategies within
in-context segmentation. We draw inspiration from traditional Bayesian theory [3, 11, 21], which has previously
addressed the assumptions related to data distribution differences and defined corresponding uncertainty measures to
quantify and assess these distributional discrepancies. This
framework facilitates the optimization of the model. Our
intuition suggests that data uncertainty/discrepancy also exists within the context of contextual segmentation, potentially arising from varying observations in the reference examples. Thus, an uncertainty probabilistic Gaussian graph
model is proposed to capture the training data distribution
and estimate uncertainty for each example during the test
phase. Additionally, we utilize the estimated uncertainty
during training to guide the model to focus more on reliable
(low-uncertainty) regions. The designed uncertainty-guided
graph augmentation module enhances graph representation
via learning invariant representations across different views
of the graph. Further combined with an uncertainty-guided

Inspired by the great success of in-context learning [6, 32,
45] in the field of natural language processing (NLP), recent
advances in vision generalist models [29, 30, 33, 43] indicate that different levels of segmentation tasks, including
instance, semantic, and video segmentation, can be unified
within one framework. The remarkable performance and
† Corresponding author.

20201

