This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Finsler Multi-Dimensional Scaling:
Manifold Learning for Asymmetric Dimensionality Reduction and Embedding
Thomas Dagès1*

Simon Weber2,3*

Michael Lindenbaum1

Ya-Wei Eileen Lin4

Ronen Talmon4

Alfred M. Bruckstein1

Ron Kimmel1

B

B

Abstract
Dimensionality reduction is a fundamental task that aims
to simplify complex data by reducing its feature dimensionality while preserving essential patterns, with core applications in data analysis and visualisation. To preserve the underlying data structure, multi-dimensional scaling (MDS)
methods focus on preserving pairwise dissimilarities, such
as distances. They optimise the embedding to have pairwise distances as close as possible to the data dissimilarities. However, the current standard is limited to embedding data in Riemannian manifolds. Motivated by the lack
of asymmetry in the Riemannian metric of the embedding
space, this paper extends the MDS problem to a natural
asymmetric generalisation of Riemannian manifolds called
Finsler manifolds. Inspired by Euclidean space, we define
a canonical Finsler space for embedding asymmetric data.
Due to its simplicity with respect to geodesics, data representation in this space is both intuitive and simple to analyse. We demonstrate that our generalisation benefits from
the same theoretical convergence guarantees. We reveal the
effectiveness of our Finsler embedding across various types
of non-symmetric data, highlighting its value in applications such as data visualisation, dimensionality reduction,
directed graph embedding, and link prediction.

A

Daniel Cremers2,3

A

Figure 1. External fields, such as non-uniform currents, lead to
time-wise geodesic curves from A to B (in yellow) that differ from
those from B to A (in red). Although asymmetry is impossible in
Riemannian manifolds, it is at the core of Finsler geometry.

that data relationships are primarily linear, limiting its ability to capture the non-linear structures often present in high
dimensions. Manifold learning extends this approach by
assuming that data lies on a low-dimensional manifold,
where meaningful relationships are reflected in more complex pairwise dissimilarities. Methods that integrate manifold learning into MDS can capture these structures by
focusing on pairwise dissimilarities, such as geodesic distances, which reflect the intrinsic geometry of the manifold
and better preserve its continuity in the embedding space.

1. Introduction

The MDS community has universally decided to embed
data into spaces implicitly equipped with a Riemannian geometry [16, 35], choosing Euclidean [88, 96] or more generally geodesic [15] distances in embedding space. However, such embeddings inherit from the limitations of Riemannian metrics. In particular, Riemannian distances are
bound to be symmetric, meaning that they cannot accurately
capture the possible asymmetric nature of the original data
dissimilarities. Yet, such properties are common in realworld applications across a wide range of fields. In physical systems, external fields such as currents lead to different shortest-time paths whether going upstream or downstream (see Fig. 1). In directed graphs, from social media to road networks, non-symmetric edges lead to nonsymmetric pairwise dissimilarities. This inability of Riemannian spaces to account for asymmetry suggests that
asymmetric data should be embedded in spaces equipped
with other types of metrics than the traditional Riemannian
ones. Yet, challenging the Riemannian metric of the em-

Dimensionality reduction is a task at the core of data analysis, allowing complex data to be represented in simple lowdimensional forms. In Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS),
the goal is to preserve pairwise dissimilarities between datapoints, thereby retaining the essential structure of the data.
However, the original MDS approach [31, 56, 93] assumes
* Equal contribution.
thomas.dages@cs.technion.ac.il
sim.weber@tum.de
1 Taub Faculty of Computer Science, Technion
2 Technical University of Munich
3 Munich Center for Machine Learning
4 Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion

25842

