This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C OARSE C ORRESPONDENCES Boost Spatial-Temporal Reasoning
in Multimodal Language Model
Benlin Liu1 *, Yuhao Dong2,3⋆ , Yiqin Wang2⋆ ,
Zixian Ma , Yansong Tang2 , Luming Tang5 , Yongming Rao3 , Wei-Chiu Ma5,6 , Ranjay Krishna1,5
1
University of Washington, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Tencent,
4
Allen Institute for AI, 5 Cornell University
coarse-correspondence.github.io
1

Abstract

lent performance on visual-lingusitic tasks, many recent
works [24, 37] demonstrate that state-of-the-art MLLMs still
struggle at 3D and long video understanding benchmarks,
performing only marginally better than blind text-only baselines. These results suggest that spatial-temporal reasoning
is a major bottleneck on MLLMs’ path to general visual
intelligence.
To enhance MLLMs’ 3D understanding, researchers have
mainly explored three approaches: providing MLLMs with
3D data as input [45], designing specialized architectures for
3D tasks [13], or employing supervised fine-tuning with 3D
data [6]. Similarly, to boost MLLMs’ temporal understanding, prior works have proposed new model architectures
designed for long video understanding [4, 30], or adopted
Socratic-based methods [15, 50] (i.e., converting each frame
of a video into text using a caption model, and then using
text-only LLMs to summarize).
In contrast to prior works that separately enhance spatial
and temporal reasoning, we propose C OARSE C ORRESPON DENCES , a simple yet effective training-free visual prompting method to jointly boost spatial-temporal reasoning in
MLLMs. C OARSE C ORRESPONDENCES uses a tracking
model to extract object-level correspondences across multiple images, and then represent the most salient correspondence relationships on the images through visual prompting.
We refer to our method as Coarse because of the following:
1. We only visually prompt for instance-level correspondences and not point-level correspondences.
2. The instance-level correspondences are extracted using
off-the-shelf tracking models.
3. We only visualize a handful of prominent corresponding
instances.
Despite the obtained correspondence information not being
perfectly precise, our method can still significantly boost
MLLMs’ spatial-temporal reasoning with only 2D image
inputs and without any specialized architectural design or
task-specific fine-tuning.

Multimodal language models (MLLMs) are increasingly being applied in real-world environments, necessitating their
ability to interpret 3D spaces and comprehend temporal
dynamics. Current methods often rely on specialized architectural designs or task-specific fine-tuning to achieve
this. We introduce C OARSE C ORRESPONDENCES, a simple
lightweight method that enhances MLLMs’ spatial-temporal
reasoning with 2D images as input, without modifying the architecture or requiring task-specific fine-tuning. Our method
uses a lightweight tracking model to identify primary object
correspondences between frames in a video or across different image viewpoints, and then conveys this information
to MLLMs through visual prompting. We demonstrate that
this simple training-free approach brings substantial gains
to GPT4-V/O consistently on four benchmarks that require
spatial-temporal reasoning, including +20.5% improvement
on ScanQA, +9.7% on OpenEQA’s episodic memory subset, +6.0% on the long-form video benchmark EgoSchema,
and +11% on the R2R navigation benchmark. Additionally,
we show that C OARSE C ORRESPONDENCES can also enhance open-source MLLMs’ spatial reasoning (by +6.9% on
ScanQA) when applied in both training and inference and
that the improvement can generalize to unseen datasets such
as SQA3D (+3.1%). Taken together, we show that C OARSE
C ORRESPONDENCES effectively and efficiently boosts models’ performance on downstream tasks requiring spatialtemporal reasoning.

1. Introduction
Intelligence is multi-faceted. While multi-modal language
models [28] have shown remarkable linguistic, logical and
even mathematical intelligence, many remain doubtful about
their visual and spatial intelligence. Despite their excel* Equal contribution.

3783

