This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Transformer-Based Aligned Generation
with Self-Coherence Guidance
Shulei Wang1∗ Wang Lin1∗ Hai Huang1 Hanting Wang1 Sihang Cai1 WenKang Han1
Tao Jin1 Jingyuan Chen1 Jiacheng Sun2 Jieming Zhu2 Zhou Zhao1†
1
2
Zhejiang University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
shuleiwang@zju.edu.cn, zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn
(a). Coarse-grained attribute binding

(b). Fine-grained attribute binding

(c). Style binding

PIXART−𝛼
+ours

PIXART−𝛼

left : a red bench and a yellow clock

left : a sunflower has a pink flower
and a blue stem

right : a yellow rabbit and a purple
bowl in the kitchen

right : an apple has blue flesh and an
orange stem with a purple background

left : a watercolor countryside
and a cyberpunk cabin
right : a photorealistic Spiderman and an
impressionism skyscraper

Figure 1. Our method directly optimizes the cross-attention maps in Transformer-based diffusion models, significantly enhancing the
model’s performance in coarse-grained attribute binding and further improving fine-grained attribute and style binding. For instance, our
approach enables precise control over the color of an apple’s flesh and stem as well as the style of two distinct concepts.

precise alignment without additional training. To validate
our approach, we constructed more challenging benchmarks for evaluating coarse-grained attribute binding,
fine-grained attribute binding, and style binding. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of
our method, significantly surpassing other state-of-the-art
methods across all evaluated tasks. Our code is available at

Abstract
We introduce a novel, training-free approach for enhancing
alignment in Transformer-based Text-Guided Diffusion
Models (TGDMs). Existing TGDMs often struggle to generate semantically aligned images, particularly when dealing
with complex text prompts or multi-concept attribute binding challenges. Previous U-Net-based methods primarily
optimized the latent space, but their direct application to
Transformer-based architectures has shown limited effectiveness. Our method addresses these challenges by directly
optimizing cross-attention maps during the generation process. Specifically, we introduce Self-Coherence Guidance,
a method that dynamically refines attention maps using
masks derived from previous denoising steps, ensuring
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

https://scg-diffusion.github.io/scg-diffusion.

1. Introduction
Text-guided diffusion models (TGDMs) [29, 31, 33] have
demonstrated significant capability, generating high-quality
images based on given textual prompts. Previous mainstream TGDMs [31, 33] have primarily utilized the U-Net
architecture [32], predicting noise through down-sampling
and up-sampling modules. Recently, Transformer [38], due
to its robustness [39], scalability [26], and efficient modality fusion [10], has been widely applied in large language
models(LLMs) [1, 24, 37] and multi-modal large language

18455

