This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mono2Stereo: A Benchmark and Empirical Study for Stereo Conversion
Songsong Yu1,2 , Yuxin Chen2 †, Zhongang Qi2 ,* Zeke Xie3 , Yifan Wang1 ,
Lijun Wang1 *, Ying Shan2 , Huchuan Lu1
DLUT1 , ARC Lab, Tencent PCG2 , HKUST(GZ)3

Figure 1. Examples from the Mono2Stereo dataset, visualized in anaglyph (red-blue) stereo format. We categorize the scenes into five
groups based on disparity range, geometric complexity, and color distribution: “Indoor” and “Outdoor” with distinct disparity ranges;
“Simple” and “Complex” with varying geometric complexity; and “Animation” representing a different color distribution compared to
natural images.

Abstract
With the rapid proliferation of 3D devices and the shortage of 3D content, stereo conversion is attracting increasing attention. Recent works introduce pretrained Diffusion Models (DMs) into this task. However, due to the
scarcity of large-scale training data and comprehensive
benchmarks, the optimal methodologies for employing DMs
in stereo conversion and the accurate evaluation of stereo
effects remain largely unexplored. In this work, we introduce the Mono2Stereo dataset, providing high-quality
training data and benchmark to support in-depth exploration of stereo conversion. With this dataset, we conduct
an empirical study that yields two primary findings. 1)
The differences between the left and right views are subtle, yet existing metrics consider overall pixels, failing to
concentrate on regions critical to stereo effects. 2) Mainstream methods adopt either one-stage left-to-right generation or warp-and-inpaint pipeline, facing challenges of
degraded stereo effect and image distortion respectively.
Based on these findings, we introduce a new evaluation met-

ric, Stereo Intersection-over-Union, which prioritizes disparity and achieves a high correlation with human judgments on stereo effect. Moreover, we propose a strong baseline model, harmonizing the stereo effect and image quality
simultaneously, and notably surpassing current mainstream
methods. Our code and data will be open-sourced to promote further research in stereo conversion. Our models are
available at mono2stereo-bench.github.io.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author †Project Lead
The work was done during an internship at ARC Lab.

Stereo conversion aims to convert monocular images or
videos into content with stereoscopic effects. With the rapid
advancement of Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) technologies, the demand for 3D content has
substantially increased. This surge has consequently stimulated significant research interest in the field of stereo conversion. However, traditional approaches typically require
manual depth mapping or binocular equipment, which are
both time-consuming and costly, making it challenging to
meet the growing demand for stereo content production.
In recent year, some works [45, 52] leverage deep generative models, especially pretrained diffusion models [3, 12–

21847

