This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimLingo: Vision-Only Closed-Loop Autonomous Driving with
Language-Action Alignment
Katrin Renz1,2,3∗
1

Wayve

2

Long Chen1

Elahe Arani1

University of Tübingen

3

Scene

Oleg Sinavski1

Tübingen AI Center

Path
Speed

Go around the construction site.
Wait for a gap in the traffic.

or
or

SimLingo

SimLingo

Predict the next action.

Driving

Explain what you are doing.

Commentary

Is there an obstacle?

VQA

Navigational conditioning
"Go
straight"

or
GPS
Target Point

High-level
command

or
or

Accelerate now.
Drive towards the cone.
Drive on the sidewalk.

Dreaming mode

Path
Speed

Instruction

Driving mode

Yes, there is a construction site.

Figure 1. Overview: SimLingo is a vision-language-action model unifying the tasks of autonomous driving, vision-language understanding and language-action alignment. It is state of the art on the official CARLA Leaderboard 2.0 and Bench2Drive using only camera
images. We introduce the task of Action Dreaming, a form of instruction following, to improve the alignment of language and action.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Integrating large language models (LLMs) into autonomous
driving has attracted significant attention with the hope
of improving generalization and explainability. However,
existing methods often focus on either driving or visionlanguage understanding but achieving both high driving
performance and extensive language understanding remains challenging. In addition, the dominant approach to
tackle vision-language understanding is using visual question answering. However, for autonomous driving, this is
only useful if it is aligned with the action space. Otherwise, the model’s answers could be inconsistent with its
behavior. Therefore, we propose a model that can handle
three different tasks: (1) closed-loop driving, (2) visionlanguage understanding, and (3) language-action alignment. Our model SimLingo is based on a vision language model (VLM) and works using only camera, excluding expensive sensors like LiDAR. SimLingo obtains stateof-the-art performance on the widely used CARLA simulator on the Bench2Drive benchmark and is the winning entry at the CARLA challenge 2024. Additionally, we achieve
strong results in a wide variety of language-related tasks
while maintaining high driving performance. Project page:
https://katrinrenz.de/simlingo

In recent years vision language models (VLMs) [11, 34, 35,
55] demonstrated their capacity for having a broad knowledge about the world and being able to generalize to unseen
prompts. Incorporating these capabilities into autonomous
driving systems has the potential to enhance robustness
in diverse, rare scenarios and enable smoother humanmachine interaction. The field of vision-driven robotics
has begun to leverage pre-trained vision language models
(VLMs) to enhance performance as models are better in understanding and adapting to unfamiliar environments and in
following natural language commands [6, 31, 65].
In end-to-end autonomous driving the introduction of
VLMs into the driving models also gained traction [3,
24, 51]. VLMs are used to improve planning performance [49, 63] or enable vision-language capabilities in the
form of visual question answering (VQA) tailored around
driving scenes [42, 43]. VQA is a promising way to test a
model’s ability to comprehend the scene and understand the
significance of objects for their behavior. However, when
evaluating this understanding only in language space, it can
be completely disentangled from the actual driving decision
(e.g. the model claims to see a red traffic light but the actions indicate to accelerate). We argue that only aligned
language interactions - where the model’s actions adapt in
response to language cues - can provide causal evidence of
true language understanding. To address this challenge of
aligning language understanding with driving actions, we
propose Action Dreaming - a new dataset to improve align-

∗ Work done while interning at Wayve.

11993

