This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Bias-Free Training Paradigm for More General AI-generated Image Detection
Fabrizio Guillaro1 Giada Zingarini1 Ben Usman2 Avneesh Sud2
Davide Cozzolino1 Luisa Verdoliva1
1

Real

University Federico II of Naples

Masks

2

Google DeepMind

Generation

Self-conditioned

Content Aug.

“dog”
“cat”

Random Noise

“cat”
Denoising

Denoising

…

Conditioning

Figure 1. We introduce a new training paradigm for AI-generated image detection. To avoid possible biases, we generate synthetic images
from self-conditioned reconstructions of real images and include augmentation in the form of inpainted versions. This allows to avoid
semantic biases. As a consequence, we obtain better generalization to unseen models and better calibration than SoTA methods.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Successful forensic detectors can produce excellent results
in supervised learning benchmarks but struggle to transfer to real-world applications. We believe this limitation
is largely due to inadequate training data quality. While
most research focuses on developing new algorithms, less
attention is given to training data selection, despite evidence that performance can be strongly impacted by spurious correlations such as content, format, or resolution.
A well-designed forensic detector should detect generator
specific artifacts rather than reflect data biases. To this end,
we propose B-Free, a bias-free training paradigm, where
fake images are generated from real ones using the conditioning procedure of stable diffusion models. This ensures
semantic alignment between real and fake images, allowing any differences to stem solely from the subtle artifacts
introduced by AI generation. Through content-based augmentation, we show significant improvements in both generalization and robustness over state-of-the-art detectors and
more calibrated results across 27 different generative models, including recent releases, like FLUX and Stable Diffusion 3.5. Our findings emphasize the importance of a
careful dataset design, highlighting the need for further research on this topic. Code and data are publicly available
at https://grip-unina.github.io/B-Free/.

The rise of generative AI has revolutionized the creation of
synthetic content, enabling easy production of high-quality
sophisticated media, even for individuals without deep technical expertise. Thanks to user-friendly interfaces and pretrained models, users can create synthetic content such as
text, images, music, and videos through simple inputs or
prompts [50]. This accessibility has democratized content
creation, enabling professionals in fields like design, marketing, and entertainment to leverage AI for creative purposes. However, this raises concerns about potential misuse, such as the creation of deepfakes, misinformation, and
challenges related to intellectual property and content authenticity [4, 17, 24].
Key challenges for current GenAI image detectors include generalization — detecting synthetic generators not
present in the training set — and ensuring robustness
against image impairments caused by online sharing, such
as compression, resizing, and cropping [41]. In this context, large pre-trained vision-language models like CLIP
[34] have demonstrated impressive resilience to these distribution shifts [30]. The success of these models in forensic
applications suggests that pre-training on large and diverse
datasets may be a promising path forward. An important
aspect often overlooked in the current literature is the selection of good datasets to train or fine-tune such models that

18685

