This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Layered Image Vectorization via Semantic Simplification
Zhenyu Wang1

Jianxi Huang1

Zhida Sun1
1

Yuanhao Gong1

Daniel Cohen-Or2

Min Lu1 *

Shenzhen University 2 Tel Aviv University

Abstract
This work presents a progressive image vectorization
technique that reconstructs the raster image as layer-wise
vectors from semantic-aligned macro structures to finer details. Our approach introduces a new image simplification
method leveraging the feature-average effect in the Score
Distillation Sampling mechanism, achieving effective visual
abstraction from the detailed to coarse. Guided by the sequence of progressive simplified images, we propose a twostage vectorization process of structural buildup and visual refinement, constructing the vectors in an organized
and manageable manner. The resulting vectors are layered
and well-aligned with the target image’s explicit and implicit semantic structures. Our method demonstrates high
performance across a wide range of images. Comparative
analysis with existing vectorization methods highlights our
technique’s superiority in creating vectors with high visual
fidelity, and more importantly, achieving higher semantic
alignment and more compact layered representation.

Figure 1. Layered vectorization: by generating a sequence of progressive simplified images (top row), our technique reconstructs
vectors layer by layer, from macro to finer details (middle row).
Our approach maintains the vectors compactly aligned within the
boundaries of explicit and implicit semantic objects (bottom row).

1. Introduction

at visual-faithful reconstruction[20, 35, 67], often produce
overly complex and intricate shapes, highlighting the ongoing challenge in achieving a vectorization method that balances visual fidelity with manageability.
In this paper, we introduce a novel image vectorization
approach that progressively creates compact layered vector
representations, from macro to fine levels of detail. Unlike existing work that takes the input image as the single
target [20, 35], our approach features the process of image
semantic simplification, i.e., to generate a sequence of progressively simplified versions for the input image (see the
top row in Figure 1). This sequence of simplified images
serves as stepping-stone targets, guiding the vector reconstruction with incremental and manageable complexity (see
the middle row of Figure 1). Notably, our approach enables
the effective deduction of vectors that capture the underlying implicit semantic objects from these simplified abstract
images, achieving a layered and semantically aligned vector
representation that is highly manageable (Figure 2).
The key of our approach is a new image simplification

Vector graphics represent images at the object level rather
than the pixel level, enabling them to be scaled without
quality loss[16]. This object-based structure allows vectors
to efficiently store and transmit complex visual content using minimal data, which is ideal for easy editing and integration across various visual design applications.
Creating effective vector representation, such as SVG,
however, often demands considerable artistic effort, as it involves carefully designing shapes and contours to capture
an image’s essence. Recently, deep-learning-based methods have been introduced to generate vectors, such as from
text descriptions [26, 54, 61]. While promising, these methods are constrained by the limitation of pre-trained models,
which struggle to produce accurate representation of out-ofdomain examples.
An alternative approach is to generate vectors from raster
images, a process known as image vectorization. Current state-of-the-art vectorization techniques mainly target
* Corresponding author, Email: lumin.vis@gmail.com

7728

