This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BADGR: Bundle Adjustment Diffusion Conditioned by GRadients for
Wide-Baseline Floor Plan Reconstruction
Yuguang Li1,2

*

Ivaylo Boyadzhiev† Zixuan Liu1
Linda Shapiro1‡
1
2
University of Washington
Zillow Group

Alex Colburn1‡

Initial
walls

Projected floor boundaries
superimposed by coarse global poses

…

Time step

𝑡 = 20

𝑡 = 10

𝑡=0

Global wall assignments

…

Scene Initialization

Input panos

Coarse input vs reﬁned output projected in image space

BADGR Diffusion for Bundle Adjustment

Figure 1. Overview of BADGR, a diffusion-based bundle adjustment (BA) model for generating precise, view-consistent camera poses and floor plan
layouts. BADGR uses per-image floor boundaries and image column-to-wall assignments (upper left) as coarse input, refining poses and layouts through a
gradient-conditioned denoising process (upper right). The bottom right shows view consistency by projecting the output layouts with the estimated poses.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Reconstructing precise camera poses and floor plan layouts from wide-baseline RGB panoramas is a difficult and
unsolved problem. We introduce BADGR, a novel diffusion model that jointly performs reconstruction and bundle
adjustment (BA) to refine poses and layouts from a coarse
state, using 1D floor boundary predictions from dozens of
sparsely captured images. Unlike guided diffusion models,
BADGR is conditioned on dense per-column outputs from
a single-step Levenberg Marquardt (LM) optimizer and is
trained to predict camera and wall positions, while minimizing reprojection errors for view consistency. The objective
of layout generation from denoising diffusion process complements BA optimization by providing additional learned
layout-structural constraints on top of the co-visible features across images. These constraints help BADGR make
plausible guesses about spatial relationships, which constrain the pose graph, such as wall adjacency and collinearity, while also learning to mitigate errors from dense boundary observations using global context. BADGR trains exclusively on 2D floor plans, simplifying data acquisition, enabling robust augmentation, and supporting a variety of input densities. Our experiments validate our method, which
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art pose and floor
plan layout reconstruction with different input densities.
Visit project website at: https://badgr-diffusion.github.io.
* Work done at University of Washington.
† Work done as an independent researcher.

Reconstructing floor plan layouts and camera poses has become an important task with many applications such as virtual touring, interior design, and autonomous navigation.
High spatial accuracy in both objectives is essential for
high-fidelity downstream tasks, such as cross-view scene
editing and dense reconstruction. Existing solutions for
image-based layout reconstruction are either coarse, limited to a single room, or, while more accurate, require either
densely captured image inputs or sparser capture with RGBD cameras, which can be costly in terms of equipment, data
bandwidth and capture efforts.
This work aims to accurately reconstruct camera extrinsics and floor plan layouts from sparsely captured 360◦
panoramas without prior pose information [15]. Specifically, our goals are to: (1) reconstruct the floor plan as
a unique set of closed-loop polygons defining rooms and
doors [15, 55]; (2) estimate each camera pose for viewconsistency [17]; (3) accommodate diverse capture densities, down to one image per room; and (4) ensure that generated floor plans remain plausible within the natural distribution of training data, even when certain walls are occluded.
Accurate reconstruction of camera poses and spatial layouts in wide-baseline indoor environments is challenged by
limited co-visibility and sparse features. This process demands not only view-consistency but also layout-structural
constraints, such as Manhattan or Atlanta frameworks [35],
wall thickness, collinearity, and prior knowledge of room

‡ Equal contribution.

16785

