This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProxyTransformation: Preshaping Point Cloud Manifold
With Proxy Attention For 3D Visual Grounding
Qihang Peng

Henry Zheng

Gao Huang*

Tsinghua University

Abstract
Embodied intelligence requires agents to interact with
3D environments in real time based on language instructions. A foundational task in this domain is ego-centric 3D
visual grounding. However, the point clouds rendered from
RGB-D images retain a large amount of redundant background data and inherent noise, both of which can interfere
with the manifold structure of the target regions. Existing
point cloud enhancement methods often require a tedious
process to improve the manifold, which is not suitable for
real-time tasks. We propose Proxy Transformation suitable
for multimodal task to efficiently improve the point cloud
manifold. Our method first leverages Deformable Point
Clustering to identify the point cloud sub-manifolds in target regions. Then, we propose a Proxy Attention module
that utilizes multimodal proxies to guide point cloud transformation. Built upon Proxy Attention, we design a submanifold transformation generation module where textual information globally guides translation vectors for different submanifolds, optimizing relative spatial relationships of target regions. Simultaneously, image information guides linear transformations within each submanifold, refining the
local point cloud manifold of target regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Proxy Transformation significantly outperforms all existing methods, achieving an impressive improvement of 7.49% on easy targets and 4.60%
on hard targets, while reducing the computational overhead
of attention blocks by 40.6%. These results establish a new
SOTA in ego-centric 3D visual grounding, showcasing the
effectiveness and robustness of our approach.

23, 46, 51, 57, 63]. The 3D visual grounding task, which
involves locating target objects in real-world 3D environments based on natural language descriptions, is a core perception capability for embodied agents. This ability is crucial in enabling agents to interpret and interact with their
surroundings via language, which supports applications in
robotics and human-computer interaction.
Despite these advancements, several significant challenges continue to hinder the performance of 3D visual
grounding systems. One key challenge is the limited perception of embodied agents, who rely on ego-centric observations from multiple viewpoints, often lacking a holistic,
scene-level understanding. While some methods attempt
to improve scene-level perception using preconstructed 3D
point clouds [16, 20, 23, 51, 57, 63], following previous 3D
perception approaches [24, 50], they are impractical in realworld applications where comprehensive scene-level information is not readily available.
In response, EmbodiedScan [46] was introduced, utilizing multi-view ego-centric RGB-D scans to enable models
to process scenes directly from sparse, partial viewpoints.
Previous methods[46, 65, 66, 70] decouple the encoding
of RGB images and depth-reconstructed point clouds from
ego-centric perspectives to extract both semantic and geometric information, which are then projected into 3D space
using intrinsic and extrinsic matrices to form a semantically
enriched point cloud for bounding box regression. While
effective, these methods overlook the noise, such as errors
in depth on non-lambertian surfaces, captured by the depth
sensors [21, 22, 41] that causes suboptimal performance.
Consequently, critical geometric details of corresponding
target objects are lost, potentially distorting their original
manifold and further compromising the model’s grounding
performance. Moreover, a substantial portion of the sampled points represents background regions, leading to a diminished density of foreground object points.
In light of such critical challenges, previous works have
focused on improving point cloud structure such as point
cloud denoising [10, 11, 45] or completion methods [2, 26,

1. Introduction
In recent years, the field of embodied AI has gained increasing attention, spurred by 3D visual grounding benchmarks [1, 5, 46] that have led to a surge of research [16, 20,
* Corresponding Author.

24582

