This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaShadow: Object-Centered Shadow Detection, Removal, and Synthesis
Tianyu Wang1,2, *, Jianming Zhang1 , Haitian Zheng1 , Zhihong Ding1 , Scott Cohen1 ,
Zhe Lin1 , Wei Xiong1 , Chi-Wing Fu2 , Luis Figueroa1,† , Soo Ye Kim1,†
1
Adobe Research
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
[I] Object Relocation
Image with

Object Mask

[II] Object Removal with Shadow
Shadow Removal 

Result

Shadow Detection

and Removal
(1)

MetaShadow
Three-in-One Model

(2)

(3)

(4)

[III] Object Insertion with Shadow

Relocate Object

Shadow Synthesis
Image with

Synthesized Shadows

Image with

Relocated Objects

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. MetaShadow is a versatile three-in-one framework designed for shadow-related tasks, enabling shadow manipulation in various
object-centered image editing operations such as: [I] Object Relocation: Our model can detect and remove the shadow of an existing object,
then synthesize the shadow in the new location consistent with the original shadow. [II] Remove an object and its shadow: (1) Based
on the mask of the unwanted object, our model can directly remove its shadow (2). After removing the object (3), we can eliminate any
remaining shadows for a cleaner background (4) if we do not specify which shadow to remove. [III] Insert an object and synthesize its
shadow: When inserting the person in (b) to another image (a) with similar lighting, our model can generate a realistic shadow, enhancing
the final compositing quality.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Shadows are often under-considered or even ignored in image editing applications, limiting the realism of the edited
results. In this paper, we introduce MetaShadow, a threein-one versatile framework that enables detection, removal,
and controllable synthesis of shadows in natural images
in an object-centered fashion. MetaShadow combines the
strengths of two cooperative components: Shadow Analyzer, for object-centered shadow detection and removal,
and Shadow Synthesizer, for reference-based controllable
shadow synthesis. Notably, we optimize the learning of
the intermediate features from Shadow Analyzer to guide
Shadow Synthesizer to generate more realistic shadows that
blend seamlessly with the scene. Extensive evaluations on
multiple shadow benchmark datasets show significant improvements of MetaShadow over the existing state-of-the-art
methods on object-centered shadow detection, removal, and
synthesis. MetaShadow excels in image-editing tasks such
as object removal, relocation, and insertion, pushing the
boundaries of object-centered image editing.

* Work done during an internship at Adobe.
† Co-corresponding authors.

Shadows play a vital role in revealing the realism of an image,
providing strong cues on the perception of the 3D space and
the spatial relations between objects in the environment.
However, when handling object-related image-editing tasks,
such as unwanted object removal, object relocation, and
object insertion, existing applications (e.g., Google Magic
Eraser [9]) in this field often simply neglect manipulating the
shadows, greatly diminishing the overall visual coherence
and realism of the edited images.
To effectively support image editing with shadows, as
shown in Fig. 1, we need to collectively deal with three
tasks: shadow detection, shadow removal, and shadow synthesis in an object-centered fashion. Our object-centered
approach indicates that we primarily focus on instance-level
object manipulation with applications to image editing workflows. Thus, when we edit objects in an image, each object
should be associated with the shadow cast by itself onto the
environment such that its associated shadow can be naturally
manipulated together.
As shown in Tab. 1, most existing works, however, treat
the three tasks separately, with several methods overlooking the need for object-centric formulations to assist imageediting workflows. General shadow detection [56, 65, 66]

28252

