This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OPTICAL: Leveraging Optimal Transport for Contribution Allocation in
Dataset Distillation
Xiao Cui1,2,3 Yulei Qin4 Wengang Zhou1 Hongsheng Li2,3 Houqiang Li1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 CUHK MMLab
3
4
CPII under InnoHK
Independent Researcher
cuixiao2001@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yuleichin@126.com
{zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Before Distillation

Abstract
The demands for increasingly large-scale datasets pose
substantial storage and computation challenges to building deep learning models. Dataset distillation methods,
especially those via sample generation techniques, rise in
response to condensing large original datasets into small
synthetic ones while preserving critical information. Existing subset synthesis methods simply minimize the homogeneous distance where uniform contributions from all real
instances are allocated to shaping each synthetic sample.
We demonstrate that such equal allocation fails to consider
the instance-level relationship between each real-synthetic
pair and gives rise to insufficient modeling of geometric
structural nuances between the distilled and original sets.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework named OPTICAL to reformulate the homogeneous distance minimization into a bi-level optimization problem via matching-andapproximating. In the matching step, we leverage optimal
transport matrix to dynamically allocate contributions from
real instances. Subsequently, we polish the generated samples in accordance with the established allocation scheme
for approximating the real ones. Such a strategy better measures intricate geometric characteristics and handles intraclass variations for high fidelity of data distillation. Extensive experiments across seven datasets and three model
architectures demonstrate our method’s versatility and effectiveness. Its plug-and-play characteristic makes it compatible with a wide range of distillation frameworks.

After Distillation

(a)
Real

Synthetic (Initialized)

(b)
Synthetic (Converged)

Before Distillation

(c)
Equivalent Center (Synthetic)

After Distillation

(d)
Equivalent Center (Real)

Figure 1. Pitfalls of the existing dataset distillation methods due
to homogeneous distance minimization. We visualize two kinds
of real data (gray) with the same equivalent center (green) but of
distinct geometric structures. The initialized synthetic data (red)
all shift towards the same equivalent center (orange) upon convergence (blue). Since contributions from real data are uniformly allocated to synthetic ones, two synthetic sets converge nearly identically, regardless of the structures of the underlying real sets.

1. Introduction

However, such reliance on massive datasets brings significant challenges, particularly in storage and computational
expenses [29, 46, 48]. To alleviate these burdens, dataset
distillation has emerged as a promising solution by condensing large datasets into much smaller versions that still
retain essential information [2, 12, 26, 37, 42]. The distilled
dataset enables efficient storage and training, making the
advanced models more accessible and cost-effective.
Dataset distillation approaches typically fall into two categories: 1) subset selection from real samples and 2) subset synthesis for generated samples. The subset selection
methods [16, 38, 39, 45] leverage coreset-based techniques
to heuristically select representative real samples from the
original dataset for a compact subset. Despite its simplicity,
the selected subset fails to capture the characteristics of the
entire dataset by nature, resulting in suboptimal compression. Recent studies opt to generate synthetic data for lossless distillation. All these methods measure the difference
and divergence between the synthetic and the real datasets
for minimization either in terms of gradients or representations. For the former of gradient, optimization-oriented

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success across computer vision tasks, largely due to the availability of extensive
annotated datasets with millions of examples [5, 9, 35, 52].
Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Hongsheng Li.

15245

