This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMOVA: Empowering Language Models to See, Hear and Speak with
Vivid Emotions
Kai Chen1∗ , Yunhao Gou1,6∗ , Runhui Huang2∗ , Zhili Liu1,3∗ , Daxin Tan3∗ , Jing Xu4 , Chunwei Wang3 ,
Yi Zhu3 , Yihan Zeng3 , Kuo Yang3 , Dingdong Wang4 , Kun Xiang5 , Haoyuan Li5 , Haoli Bai3 ,
Jianhua Han3 , Xiaohui Li3 , Weike Jin3 , Nian Xie3 , Yu Zhang6 , James T. Kwok1 ,
Hengshuang Zhao2 , Xiaodan Liang5 , Dit-Yan Yeung1 , Xiao Chen3 , Zhenguo Li3 ,
Wei Zhang3 , Qun Liu3 , Lanqing Hong3† , Lu Hou3† , Hang Xu3†
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
Sun Yat-sen University 6 Southern University of Science and Technology
Project Page: https://emova-ollm.github.io/
Abstract
GPT-4o, an omni-modal model that enables vocal conversations with diverse emotions and tones, marks a milestone
for omni-modal foundation models. However, empowering
Large Language Models to perceive and generate images,
texts, and speeches end-to-end with publicly available data
remains challenging for the open-source community. Existing vision-language models rely on external tools for speech
processing, while speech-language models still suffer from
limited or totally without vision-understanding capabilities.
To address this gap, we propose the EMOVA (EMotionally
Omni-present Voice Assistant), to enable Large Language
Models with end-to-end speech abilities while maintaining
the leading vision-language performance. With a semanticacoustic disentangled speech tokenizer, we surprisingly notice that omni-modal alignment can further enhance visionlanguage and speech abilities compared with the bi-modal
aligned counterparts. Moreover, a lightweight style module
is introduced for the ﬂexible speech style controls including
emotions and pitches. For the ﬁrst time, EMOVA achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both the vision-language
and speech benchmarks, and meanwhile, supporting omnimodal spoken dialogue with vivid emotions.

Figure 1. EMOVA is the very ﬁrst omni-modal LLM with stateof-the-art performance on both vision-language and speech benchmarks simultaneously. See detailed results in Table 2.

telligent assistants that can see (i.e., perceiving ﬁne-grained
visual inputs), hear (i.e., understanding vocal instructions)
and speak (i.e., generating vocal responses) simultaneously.
Existing Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
mostly focus on two modalities only, either vision-language
[1, 40] or speech-language [11, 87], demonstrating severe
demands for omni-modal models with visual, language and
speech abilities. How to empower Large Language Models
(LLMs) to effectively process omni-modal data in an endto-end manner remains an open question.
Existing omni-modal LLMs [10, 19] generally build on
Vision LLMs and integrate the speech modality by adopting
a speech encoder like Whisper [74], which extracts continuous speech features, similar to how images are processed, to

1. Introduction
OpenAI GPT-4o [70], a novel milestone for the omni-modal
foundation models, has rekindled people’s attention on in∗ Equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order by surname.

† Corresponding authors: {honglanqing,houlu3,xu.hang}@
huawei.com

5455

