This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Message Embedding via Attention Flow-Based Steganography
Huayuan Ye1 , Shenzhuo Zhang1 , Shiqi Jiang1 , Jing Liao2 , Shuhang Gu3 , Dejun Zheng4 ,
Changbo Wang1 , Chenhui Li1∗
1
2
East China Normal University
City University of Hong Kong
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
4
Zhijiang College of Zhejiang Univeristy of Technology, Zhejiang, China
huayuan221@gmail.com; {10195102459, 52265901032}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn; jingliao@cityu.edu.hk;
shuhanggu@gmail.com; zhengdejun@zzjc.edu.cn; {cbwang, chli}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Host Image

Image steganography can hide information in a host image and obtain a stego image that is perceptually indistinguishable from the original one. This technique has tremendous potential in scenarios like copyright protection and information retrospection. Some previous studies have proposed to enhance the robustness of the methods against
image disturbances to increase their applicability. However, they generally cannot achieve a satisfying balance between the steganography quality and robustness. Instead
of image-in-image steganography, we focus on the issue of
message-in-image embedding that is robust to various realworld image distortions. This task aims to embed information into a natural image and the decoding result is required to be completely accurate, which increases the difficulty of data concealing and revealing. Inspired by the
recent developments in transformer-based vision models,
we discover that the tokenized representation of image is
naturally suitable for steganography task. In this paper,
we propose a novel message embedding framework, called
Robust Message Steganography (RMSteg), which is competent to hide message via QR Code in a host image based
on an normalizing flow-based model. The stego image derived by our method has imperceptible changes and the encoded message can be accurately restored even if the image
is printed out and photographed. To our best knowledge,
this is the first work that integrates the advantages of transformer models into normalizing flow. The code is available
at https://github.com/huayuan4396/RMSteg.

Stego Image

Printing

Noise, Blur …

A fashion dog
wearing sunglasses
at Hawaii.
Decoded QR

Figure 1. Compared with previous methods that can only embed limited bit-level information, RMSteg can achieve a much
higher embedding capacity and meanwhile has better steganography quality. Also, it can survive various real-world distortions.

1. Introduction

protection [10, 37] and information retrospection [48, 52].
Steganography aims to prevent people from discovering the
existence of secret data instead of obscuring meaning of
data, differentiating it from cryptography. Specifically, image steganography uses image to carry secret information.
Traditional image steganography methods mainly modify the image in spatial domain [14, 17, 25, 28, 29] or transform domain [2, 36, 55]. This kind of method is easy to be
detected by steganalysis techniques [9, 50], compromising
security. Recently, with the developments of deep learning,
some deep steganography methods have been proposed.
Most of them are based on autoencoder [3, 44, 52, 54] and
normalizing flow [5, 12, 16, 24, 47, 48].
Images can undergo various digital or real-world disturbances during dissemination. To enable the stego images to
survive these distortions, some robust steganography methods have been proposed. They consider various distortion
situations like light field messaging (LFM) [44], JPEG compression [47], etc. In the field of robust steganography,
robust message embedding is very promising in many ap-

Steganography, the art of hiding secret information in a carrier, has long been a prominent research direction. This
technique is competent to embed information like images
and text into target containers, thus achieving copyright

12840

