This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Continual Domain Shift Learning with Multi-Prototype Modeling
Haopeng Sun1,2 * Yingwei Zhang1,2 * Lumin Xu3
Sheng Jin4,5 † Ping Luo4,6 Chen Qian5 Wentao Liu5 Yiqiang Chen1,2 †
1
Beijing Key Lab. of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 The University of Hong Kong
5
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 6 HKU Shanghai Intelligent Computing Research Center
sunhaopeng22s@ict.ac.cn, zhangyingwei@ict.ac.cn, jinsheng@tetras.ai, yqchen@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
In real-world applications, deep neural networks may encounter constantly changing environments, where the test
data originates from continually shifting unlabeled target
domains. This problem, known as Unsupervised Continual
Domain Shift Learning (UCDSL), poses practical difficulties. Existing methods for UCDSL aim to learn domaininvariant representations for all target domains. However, due to the existence of adaptivity gap, the invariant representation may theoretically lead to large joint errors. To overcome the limitation, we propose a novel
UCDSL method, called Multi-Prototype Modeling (MPM).
Our model comprises two key components: (1) MultiPrototype Learning (MPL) for acquiring domain-specific
representations using multiple domain-specific prototypes.
MPL achieves domain-specific error minimization instead
of enforcing feature alignment across different domains. (2)
Bi-Level Graph Enhancer (BiGE) for enhancing domainlevel and category-level representations, resulting in more
accurate predictions. We provide theoretical and empirical
analysis to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method. We evaluate our approach on multiple benchmark
datasets and show that our model surpasses state-of-the-art
methods across all datasets, highlighting its effectiveness
and robustness in handling unsupervised continual domain
shift learning. Codes will be publicly accessible.

59, 68]. However, in real-world scenarios, this assumption often fails as the model may encounter data from nonstationary environments where the target data distribution
constantly changes [42, 60, 69]. This situation necessitates addressing the problem of Unsupervised Continual
Domain Shift Learning (UCDSL) [7, 25]. UCDSL aims
to adapt a pre-trained model to dynamically shifting target domains without access to labeled data from either the
source or target domains. UCDSL encompasses three key
goals: (1) enhancing the model’s generalization to upcoming and previously unseen domains (Domain Generalization) [29, 50, 61, 65], (2) achieving high performance on
the current target domain (Domain Adaptation) [29, 35, 51],
and (3) maintaining satisfactory performance on previously
encountered domains while avoiding catastrophic forgetting
(Continual Learning) [3, 30, 39]. These objectives have
practical significance, as exemplified by the need for autonomous robots to seamlessly transfer skills across diverse
unseen environments and rapidly adapt to new target environments without forgetting prior knowledge.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Network methods demonstrate strong performance under the assumption of identically and independently distributed (IID) training and test data [6, 12, 43,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

10131

A majority of existing UCDSL methods [7, 25] attempt
to learn a universal classifier for all domains by enforcing
feature alignment across different domains. This approach
assumes the existence of an optimal classifier that performs
well on all domains. However, this assumption cannot be
guaranteed and the learned classifier may deviate significantly from the optimal classifier for a specific target domain. As shown in Fig. 1 Left, these methods primarily
focus on achieving universal domain-invariant representations for all domains, disregarding domain-specific information, which limits their discriminative capacity. Consequently, the learned universal classifier exhibits a substantial adaptivity gap with the ideal classifier for each domain, leading to inferior performance on individual domains. To address these issues, we establish an error bound

