This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COB-GS: Clear Object Boundaries in 3DGS Segmentation Based on
Boundary-Adaptive Gaussian Splitting
Jiaxin Zhang, Junjun Jiang*, Youyu Chen, Kui Jiang, Xianming Liu
Harbin Institute of Technology
3DGS scene

Abstract

Foreground

3D segmentation

1. Introduction
Understanding and interacting with 3D scenes has long been
a critical challenge in computer vision and computer graphics. This task involves reconstructing 3D scenes from collections of images or videos, as well as accurately perceiving
and segmenting 3D structures. In recent years, researchers
have conducted extensive research on 3D scene representation and perception. Among these advancements, 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15], an emerging real-time radiance field rendering technique, has demonstrated comparable

Ellipsoids

(ours) Foreground example: process (a)-(e)

Sec. 3.2.1
Sec. 3.2.2

Sec. 3.2.3

Splats

Accurate object segmentation is crucial for high-quality
scene understanding in the 3D vision domain. However,
3D segmentation based on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
struggles with accurately delineating object boundaries, as
Gaussian primitives often span across object edges due to
their inherent volume and the lack of semantic guidance
during training. In order to tackle these challenges, we
introduce Clear Object Boundaries for 3DGS Segmentation (COB-GS), which aims to improve segmentation accuracy by clearly delineating blurry boundaries of interwoven Gaussian primitives within the scene. Unlike existing
approaches that remove ambiguous Gaussians and sacrifice visual quality, COB-GS, as a 3DGS refinement method,
jointly optimizes semantic and visual information, allowing the two different levels to cooperate with each other
effectively. Specifically, for the semantic guidance, we introduce a boundary-adaptive Gaussian splitting technique
that leverages semantic gradient statistics to identify and
split ambiguous Gaussians, aligning them closely with object boundaries. For the visual optimization, we rectify
the degraded suboptimal texture of the 3DGS scene, particularly along the refined boundary structures. Experimental results show that COB-GS substantially improves
segmentation accuracy and robustness against inaccurate
masks from pre-trained model, yielding clear boundaries
while preserving high visual quality. Code is available at
https://github.com/ZestfulJX/COB-GS.

* Correspondence to: Junjun Jiang (junjunjiang@hit.edu.cn)

Background

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Problems on 3DGS segmentation. Our task is to achieve
high-quality 3D segmentation on 3DGS, including foreground and
background. Take foreground as an example: (a) unclear segmentation result of existing methods; (b) blurry boundary Gaussians; (c)
segmentation results from joint optimization; (d) tiny ambiguous
Gaussians due to incorrect masks from pre-trained models; (e) final
segmentation results after improving robustness from COB-GS.

novel view rendering quality against Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [26], while significantly outperforming NeRF in the
speed of optimization and rendering, enabling real-time rendering. As an explicit scene representation, 3DGS opens
new avenues for 3D scene perception and interaction.
3D segmentation is fundamental for effective 3D scene
perception and interaction, and it is crucial to obtain accurate segmentation results within the neural 3D representations exemplified by 3DGS. Currently, two predominant
methodologies exist for executing the segmentation of 3DGS:
feature-based methods and mask-based methods. Featurebased methods typically operate in conjunction with 3D
scene reconstruction to learn distinctive feature properties
for each Gaussian primitive. During the segmentation phase,
the similarity between the 3D Gaussian features and the
queried feature is computed to specify the Gaussian primi-

19335

