This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Gaussian Mixture Model Splatting for Efficient and Part
Controllable 3D Generation
Qitong Yang1 Mingtao Feng1,4 * Zijie Wu1∗ Weisheng Dong1 Fangfang Wu1 Yaonan Wang2 Ajmal Mian3
1
Xidian University 2 Hunan University 3 The University of Western Australia
4
Jiangxi Communication Terminal Industrial Technology Research Institute

Abstract
3D content creation has achieved significant progress in
terms of both quality and speed. Although current Gaussian
Splatting-based methods can produce 3D objects within
seconds, they are still limited by complex preprocessing
or low controllability. In this paper, we introduce a novel
framework designed to efficiently and controllably generate high-resolution 3D models from text prompts or images.
Our key insights are three-fold: 1) Hierarchical Gaussian
Mixture Model Splatting: We propose a hybrid hierarchical
representation to extract fixed number of fine-grained Gaussians with multiscale details from textured object, also establish part-level representation of Gaussians primitives. 2)
Mamba with adaptive tree topology: We present a diffusion
mamba with tree-topology to adaptively generate Gaussians with disordered spatial structures, without the need
for complex preprocessing and maintain linear complexity
generation. 3) Controllable Generation: Building on the
HGMM tree, we introduce a cascaded diffusion framework
combining controllable implicit latent generation, which
progressively generates condition-driven latents, and explicit splatting generation, which transforms latents into
high-quality Gaussian primitives. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the high fidelity and efficiency of our approach.

1. Introduction
The field of 3D content generation [4, 15, 33, 39, 43, 47,
53, 55] holds immense promise across industries such as
digital gaming, virtual reality, and filmmaking [13, 14, 50].
Core technologies like image-to-3D and text-to-3D offer
transformative advantages by drastically reducing the need
for manual work from professional 3D artists. Earlier
3D generation methods used score distillation sampling
(SDS) [31, 32, 36, 41] to leverage 2D diffusion models for
3D generation, achieving detailed objects but suffering from
slow speeds and limited diversity. Some advancements [24,
28, 46, 48, 54] have been made in employing large models
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Our model can generate a wide range of objects featuring
intricate geometries and detailed textures. Besides, our method
also possesses the ability to control the generation of part details.

and transformers to quickly generate 3D objects from single
or few-shot images. However, these methods still struggle
with low resolution, resulting in poor texture and geometric detail. Recent research [38, 43, 57] directly generate the
explicit 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27] representation,
enabling the creation of highly detailed objects with realtime rendering capabilities. However, GaussianCube [57]
requires preprocessing with time complexity of O(N 3 ) and
offers limited control over details, while LGM [43] demands additional viewpoint information to ensure 3D consistency. Gamba [38] relies on stacking parameters to capture disordered Gaussian primitives, which is hard to train.
Above methods only represent objects into single scale sets
of Gaussian primitives, 1) lack of part-level description of
3DGS, suffer 2) time-consuming preprocessing or training
due to disordered structure of GS primitives, and have 3)
limited control over the generation process.
To offer part-level description of 3DGS, we propose the
Hierarchical Gaussian Mixture Model (HGMM) splatting
method, which distributes detail hierarchy within a unified
set of Gaussian primitives. We begin with Gaussian splatting [27] to obtain Gaussian primitives from uniform geometric sampling of the mesh data. Building on the success
of HGMM [10, 11, 21] in multi-scale representation learning, we then construct a hierarchical representation based
on explicit and implicit branches to analyze and distribute

11104

