This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trajectory Mamba: Eﬃcient Attention-Mamba Forecasting Model Based on
Selective SSM
Yizhou Huang1 , Yihua Cheng2 , Kezhi Wang1∗
1 Brunel University of London, 2 University of Birmingham

{byyh009, Kezhi.Wang}@brunel.ac.uk, y.cheng.2@bham.ac.uk

https://github.com/YiZhou-H/Trajectory-Mamba-CVPR
Abstract

1. Introduction
In the rapid development of autonomous driving technology
[3, 12, 17], accurate motion prediction plays a crucial role
by forecasting future trajectories based on historical vehicle
∗ Corresponding author

Stop

Motion prediction is crucial for autonomous driving, as it
enables accurate forecasting of future vehicle trajectories
based on historical inputs. This paper introduces Trajectory
Mamba, a novel eﬃcient trajectory prediction framework
based on the selective state-space model (SSM). Conventional attention-based models face the challenge of computational costs that grow quadratically with the number of
targets, hindering their application in highly dynamic environments. In response, we leverage the SSM to redesign the
self-attention mechanism in the encoder-decoder architecture, thereby achieving linear time complexity. To address
the potential reduction in prediction accuracy resulting from
modiﬁcations to the attention mechanism, we propose a joint
polyline encoding strategy to better capture the associations
between static and dynamic contexts, ultimately enhancing
prediction accuracy. Additionally, to balance prediction
accuracy and inference speed, we adopted the decoder that
diﬀers entirely from the encoder. Through cross-state space
attention, all target agents share the scene context, allowing the SSM to interact with the shared scene representation
during decoding, thus inferring diﬀerent trajectories over the
next prediction steps. Our model achieves state-of-the-art
results in terms of inference speed and parameter eﬃciency
on both the Argoverse 1 and Argoverse 2 datasets. It demonstrates a four-fold reduction in FLOPs compared to existing
methods and reduces parameter count by over 40% while
surpassing the performance of the vast majority of previous methods. These ﬁndings validate the eﬀectiveness of
Trajectory Mamba in trajectory prediction tasks.

Joint Polyline Encoding
@ Pedestrians + Traffic
lights

Stop

Decomposed Attention
@ Static scene + Agent
state

Static
scene

Map polygon
Traffic light vector
Lane lines

Agent
state

Pedestrian
Moto
Car

Motion history

Figure 1. Illustration of proposed joint polyline encoding strategy,
where we consider all factors that aﬀect the movement of motor
vehicles, jointly encoding pedestrians and traﬃc lights rather than
categorizing the scene horizontally into static and dynamic context.
Additionally, we decompose and encode the interactions between
all agents and elements at each time step.

movement data. This task is not only vital for enhancing
driving safety but also meets the stringent requirements for
real-time system response. In recent years, learning-based
approaches have been widely applied to motion prediction
[5, 16, 29, 39, 40]. However, existing prediction methods
often struggle to balance eﬃciency and accuracy, making
it challenging to simultaneously meet performance and efﬁciency requirements in real-time applications. We attempt
to analyze the underlying reasons from the following aspects
and explore possible improvements:
(a). Improving Prediction Accuracy: In autonomous
driving scenarios [38], there are numerous dynamic and
static agents, and the diversity of this data presents significant challenges for motion prediction and model training.
However, conventional methods [29, 39] often struggle to
eﬀectively fuse this heterogeneous data, particularly when
it comes to integrating various features, which leads to suboptimal prediction accuracy. On a positive note, factorized attention-based transformers [21, 40] have made no-

12058

