This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ROBO S PATIAL: Teaching Spatial Understanding to 2D and 3D Vision-Language
Models for Robotics
Chan Hee Song1⇤

Valts Blukis2
1

Jonathan Tremblay2

Stephen Tyree2

Yu Su1

Stan Birchfield2

The Ohio State University, 2 NVIDIA

Abstract

Task: Place the gray bowl in front of the car.

Object-centric

Ego-centric

Spatial context

Spatial understanding is a crucial capability that enables robots to perceive their surroundings, reason about
their environment, and interact with it meaningfully. In
modern robotics, these capabilities are increasingly provided by vision-language models. However, these models
face significant challenges in spatial reasoning tasks, as
their training data are based on general-purpose image
datasets that often lack sophisticated spatial understanding. For example, datasets frequently do not capture reference frame comprehension, yet effective spatial reasoning
requires understanding whether to reason from ego-, world, or object-centric perspectives. To address this issue, we
introduce ROBO S PATIAL, a large-scale dataset for spatial
understanding in robotics. It consists of real indoor and
tabletop scenes, captured as 3D scans and egocentric images, and annotated with rich spatial information relevant
to robotics. The dataset includes 1M images, 5k 3D scans,
and 3M annotated spatial relationships, and the pairing of
2D egocentric images with 3D scans makes it both 2D- and
3D- ready. Our experiments show that models trained with
ROBO S PATIAL outperform baselines on downstream tasks
such as spatial affordance prediction, spatial relationship
prediction, and robotics manipulation.

Point to the vacant space
in front of the car.

Spatial compatibility
Can the gray bowl fit in
front of the car?

Yes
No
Manipulation

Spatial configuration
Is the gray bowl in
front of the car?
Yes!

Figure 1. ROBO S PATIAL dataset facilitates 3D spatial reasoning for robotic manipulation. This illustration demonstrates how
a model trained on ROBO S PATIAL enables human-aligned spatial reasoning within the correct reference frame, supporting task
grounding, planning, and detection for manipulation tasks.

1. Introduction

VLMs can recognize objects, classify scenes, and even
provide general descriptions that capture high-level attributes. However, despite significant recent advancements,
VLMs [30, 35, 42] still fall short in spatial understanding [26, 38, 47, 61]. They struggle with tasks that require
interpreting nuanced spatial relationships between objects,
such as describing where one object is in relation to another
or determining the best location to place an item within a
specific condition. For example, while a model might accurately describe a “bowl on the table,” it lacks the ability to
reason about where on the table the bowl is, where it should
go to ensure accessibility or stability, or how it might fit
among other objects. Furthermore, a critical limitation of
existing VLM training datasets is their inability to capture
reference frame understanding (ref. frame) — the way we
interpret spatial relationships changes drastically depending
on whether we’re viewing from a first-person perspective,
focusing on specific objects, or observing the entire scene,
all of which are essential for real-world interactions.

The rise of vision-language models (VLMs) has opened
new opportunities for agents to interpret and act upon the
visual world using natural language. VLMs have been
adopted across a range of embodied settings, notably in
robotics and augmented reality (AR). In robotics, they have
enabled grounded scene understanding [13, 66], manipulation [7], and policy code generation [29, 48], while in AR,
they support tasks like object labeling [50], action recognition [16, 17], and temporal grounding [22].
* Corresponding author: song.1855@osu.edu. This work was
partly done during the first author’s internship at NVIDIA.

These limitations highlight an ongoing challenge: bridging the gap between surface-level scene description and the
deeper spatial comprehension necessary for intuitive inter-

15768

