This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpatialCLIP: Learning 3D-aware Image Representations
from Spatially Discriminative Language
Zehan Wang1 * , Sashuai Zhou1∗ , Shaoxuan He1 , Haifeng Huang1 , Lihe Yang2 ,
Ziang Zhang1 , Xize Cheng1 , Shengpeng Ji1 , Tao Jin1 , Hengshuang Zhao2 , Zhou Zhao1†
1

Zhejiang University; 2 The University of Hong Kong
https://github.com/SpatialVision/Spatial-CLIP
Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) learns
robust visual models through language supervision, making it a crucial visual encoding technique for various applications. However, CLIP struggles with comprehending
spatial concepts in images, potentially restricting the spatial intelligence of CLIP-based AI systems. In this work,
we propose SpatialCLIP, an enhanced version of CLIP
with better spatial understanding capabilities. To capture
the intricate 3D spatial relationships in images, we improve both “visual model” and “language supervision”
of CLIP. Specifically, we design 3D-inspired ViT to replace the standard ViT in CLIP. By lifting 2D image tokens into 3D space and incorporating design insights from
point cloud networks, our visual model gains greater potential for spatial perception. Meanwhile, captions with
accurate and detailed spatial information are very rare.
To explore better language supervision for spatial understanding, we re-caption images and perturb their spatial
phrases as negative descriptions, which compels the visual
model to seek spatial cues to distinguish these hard negative captions. With the enhanced visual model, we introduce SpatialLLaVA, following the same LLaVA-1.5 training protocol, to investigate the importance of visual representations for MLLM’s spatial intelligence. Furthermore,
we create SpatialBench, a benchmark specifically designed
to evaluate CLIP and MLLM in spatial reasoning. SpatialCLIP and SpatialLLaVA achieve substantial performance
improvements, demonstrating stronger capabilities in spatial perception and reasoning, while maintaining comparable results on general-purpose benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recently, Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)
models [13, 22, 47, 53, 73] have demonstrated the ability to
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

learn robust image representations from language supervision. These models serve as foundational visual encoders
for various applications, such as open-world visual recognition [26, 36, 40, 46, 49, 52] and Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLM) [2, 10, 11, 41, 42, 57].
Although CLIP exhibits strong zero-shot ability across
diverse tasks, it struggles with understanding spatial arrangement within images. As shown in Fig. 1, for a correctly matched image-text pair, we introduce perturbations
to the caption by modifying the object category, object attribute, and spatial phrases. The results reveal that altering the object category or attribute significantly reduces the
image-text similarity in the CLIP space. However, CLIP
struggles to distinguish incorrect spatial relationship descriptions and even assigns a higher matching score to captions with wrong spatial descriptions. Spatial intelligence is
a key aspect of visual perception, and limitations in spatial
understanding may constrain systems built on CLIP from
effectively understanding real-world environments.
In this paper, we present SpatialCLIP, a CLIP model
with enhanced spatial perception capabilities. As titled in
[47], CLIP models are “Learning Transferable Visual Models from Natural Language Supervision”. Our SpatialCLIP
advances the spatial understanding from both “visual models” and “language supervision” perspectives.
For “visual models,” we propose a 3D-inspired ViT that
processes RGB-D input rather than RGB images. By incorporating depth information, our visual model gains the ability to perceive images from the 3D perspective. This design
helps the model understand complex 3D spatial relationships like “behind,” “in front of,” “under,” and “far.” Specifically, we lift the 2D tokens into 3D space using the extra
depth information. In the 3D space, we integrate two structures widely used in point cloud networks: 3D convolution [28, 61] and 3D relative position encoding [34, 62, 67],
into the pre-trained ViT model [18]. By integrating design
insights from 3D point cloud processing, our 3D-inspired
ViT demonstrates enhanced potential for capturing complex
3D spatial structures in images.
For “language supervision”, in current vision-language

29656

