This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Sample Effective and Diverse Prompts for Text-to-Image Generation
Taeyoung Yun1 * Dinghuai Zhang2 Jinkyoo Park1 Ling Pan3
1
KAIST 2 Microsoft Research 3 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models have
achieved impressive image generation capabilities. However, it remains challenging to control the generation process with desired properties (e.g., aesthetic quality, user intention), which can be expressed as black-box reward functions. In this paper, we focus on prompt adaptation, which
refines the original prompt into model-preferred prompts to
generate desired images. While prior work uses reinforcement learning (RL) to optimize prompts, we observe that applying RL often results in generating similar postfixes and
deterministic behaviors. To this end, we introduce Prompt
Adaptation with GFlowNets (PAG), a novel approach that
frames prompt adaptation as a probabilistic inference problem. Our key insight is that leveraging Generative Flow
Networks (GFlowNets) allows us to shift from reward maximization to sampling from an unnormalized density function, enabling both high-quality and diverse prompt generation. However, we identify that a naive application of
GFlowNets suffers from mode collapse and uncovers a previously overlooked phenomenon: the progressive loss of
neural plasticity in the model, which is compounded by inefficient credit assignment in sequential prompt generation.
To address this critical challenge, we develop a systematic
approach in PAG with flow reactivation, reward-prioritized
sampling, and reward decomposition for prompt adaptation. Extensive experiments validate that PAG successfully
learns to sample effective and diverse prompts for text-toimage generation. We also show that PAG exhibits strong
robustness across various reward functions and transferability to different text-to-image models.

Figure 1. Comparison of adapted prompts and their corresponding
images of Prompist [13] (based on reward-maximizing RL) and
our method, PAG. While Promptist leads to mode collapse in the
prompt space and converges to similar outputs, PAG achieves high
image quality while painting generation diversity.

1. Introduction

quality, user intention) remains challenging, as these models are typically optimized for likelihood maximization over
training data distributions [15].
To further improve the generation process with desired
properties, there has been a line of work focusing on finetuning diffusion models with human feedback [5, 7, 11, 34,
55]. While these methods demonstrate promising results,
they rely on access to model parameters, rendering them incompatible with several state-of-the-art closed-source models [38, 41]. Moreover, as text-to-image diffusion models continue to grow exponentially in size, the computational cost of direct fine-tuning becomes prohibitively expensive. This challenge is further compounded by the need

Recent advances in diffusion models [15, 45], combined
with pre-trained text encoders [36, 37] have shown remarkable capability in generating creative and photorealistic images conditioned on novel prompts [38, 40, 41]. However,
generating images with desired properties (e.g., aesthetic
* Work done during TY’s visit to HKUST.

23625

