This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training-free Dense-Aligned Diffusion Guidance for Modular Conditional Image
Synthesis
Zixuan Wang1 Duo Peng2 Feng Chen3 Yuwei Yang4 Yinjie Lei1,B
1
Sichuan University 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design
3
The University of Adelaide 4 Australian National University
zixuan98@stu.scu.edu.cn, duo peng@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, chenfeng1271@gmail.com
yuwei.yang@anu.edu.au, yinjie@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Conditional image synthesis is a crucial task with broad
applications, such as artistic creation and virtual reality. However, current generative methods are often taskoriented with a narrow scope, handling a restricted condition with constrained applicability. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that treats conditional image synthesis as the modular combination of diverse fundamental condition units. Specifically, we divide conditions into
three primary units: text, layout, and drag. To enable effective control over these conditions, we design a dedicated
alignment module for each. For the text condition, we introduce a Dense Concept Alignment (DCA) module, which
achieves dense visual-text alignment by drawing on diverse
textual concepts. For the layout condition, we propose a
Dense Geometry Alignment (DGA) module to enforce comprehensive geometric constraints that preserve the spatial
configuration. For the drag condition, we introduce a Dense
Motion Alignment (DMA) module to apply multi-level motion regularization, ensuring that each pixel follows its desired trajectory without visual artifacts. By flexibly inserting and combining these alignment modules, our framework enhances the model’s adaptability to diverse conditional generation tasks and greatly expands its application
range. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our framework across a variety of conditions,
including textual description, segmentation mask (bounding
box), drag manipulation, and their combinations. Code is
available at https://github.com/ZixuanWang0525/DADG

(a) General pipeline of our proposed modular conditional image synthesis. Overall framework of Training-free Dense-Aligned Diffusion Guidance is illustrated in Fig. 1b.

(b) Illustration of our proposed Training-free Dense-Aligned Diffusion
Guidance. We design three dense alignment modules to enable an effective accommodation of each specific condition unit.

Figure 1. The overview of our modular conditional image synthesis. Driven by modular combination of fundamental condition
units, diverse visual content can be synthesized.

1. Introduction
Conditional image synthesis aims to generate realistic images based on user-provided requirements, playing a pivotal
role in various applications, such as artistic creation [37, 52]
B Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn)

13135

and virtual reality [18, 21]. Recent advances in diffusion
models have demonstrated promising performance in handling diverse conditional signals, including image descriptions [36, 42], segmentation maps [19, 28, 29], bounding

