This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlashGS: Efficient 3D Gaussian Splatting for Large-scale and High-resolution
Rendering
Guofeng Feng2,3,∗,† Siyan Chen7,∗,† Rong Fu1,B Zimu Liao1 Yi Wang1 Tao Liu1 Boni Hu1
Lining Xu4 Zhilin Pei1 Hengjie Li1 Xiuhong Li6 Ninghui Sun2,3 Xingcheng Zhang1 Bo Dai5
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 The University of Hong Kong, 6 Peking University, 7 Independent Researcher

* Equal contribution, † Work done during an internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, B Corresponding author

Figure 1. Our method significantly improves the rasterization performance of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), enabling real-time rendering
in large-scale, high-resolution scenes, such as MatrixCity [32] at 4K. The key innovation lies in mitigating redundancy and workload
imbalance inherent in tile-based rasterization. To achieve this, we introduce a precise intersection algorithm that eliminates redundant
Gaussian-tile pairs and propose a Gaussian size-aware adaptive task partitioning strategy. Additionally, we design a pipelined rendering
process, which further enhances performance, leading to substantial speedups.

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) have
demonstrated significant potential over traditional rendering techniques, attracting widespread attention from both
industry and academia. However, real-time rendering with
3DGS remains a challenging problem, particularly in largescale, high-resolution scenes due to the presence of numerous anisotropic Gaussian representations, and it has
not been extensively explored. To address this challenge,
we introduce FlashGS, an open-source CUDA library with
Python bindings, featuring comprehensive algorithm design and optimizations, including redundancy elimination,
adaptive scheduling, and efficient pipelining. First, we eliminate substantial redundant computations through precise
Gaussian intersection tests, leveraging the intrinsic mecha-

nism of the 3DGS rasterizer. During task partitioning, we
propose an adaptive scheduling strategy that accounts for
variations in Gaussian size and shape. Additionally, we design a multi-stage pipelining strategy for color computation
in the rendering process, further accelerating performance.
We conduct an extensive evaluation of FlashGS across a diverse range of synthetic and real-world 3D scenes, encompassing scene sizes of up to 2.7 km2 cityscape and resolutions of up to over 4K. Our approach improves 3DGS rendering performance by an order of magnitude, achieving an
average speedup of 7.2×, and rendering at a minimum of
125.9 FPS, setting a new state-of-the-art in real-time 3DGS
rendering. https://github.com/InternLandMark/FlashGS.

26652

