This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TopV: Compatible Token Pruning with Inference Time Optimization for Fast
and Low-Memory Multimodal Vision Language Model
Cheng Yang1* , Yang Sui2*† , Jinqi Xiao1 , Lingyi Huang1 , Yu Gong1 , Chendi Li3 ,
Jinghua Yan3 , Yu Bai4 , Ponnuswamy Sadayappan3 , Xia Hu2 , Bo Yuan1
1
Rutgers University, 2 Rice University, 3 The University of Utah, 4 California State University, Fullerton
cheng.yang@rutgers.edu, yang.sui@rice.edu, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) demand substantial computational resources during inference, largely due to the
extensive visual input tokens for representing visual information. Previous studies have noted that visual tokens
tend to receive less attention than text tokens, suggesting
their lower importance during inference and potential for
pruning. However, their methods encounter several challenges: reliance on greedy heuristic criteria for token importance and incompatibility with FlashAttention and KV
cache. To address these issues, we introduce TopV, a compatible TOken Pruning with inference Time Optimization
for fast and low-memory VLM, achieving efficient pruning
without additional training or fine-tuning. Instead of relying on attention scores, we formulate token pruning as
an optimization problem, accurately identifying important
visual tokens while remaining compatible with FlashAttention. Additionally, since we only perform this pruning once
during the prefilling stage, it effectively reduces KV cache
size. Our optimization framework incorporates a visualaware cost function considering factors such as Feature
Similarity, Relative Spatial Distance, and Absolute Central
Distance, to measure the importance of each source visual
token, enabling effective pruning of low-importance tokens.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms previous token pruning methods, validating the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach.

tional text, to generate textual outputs like descriptions or
answers to visual queries, facilitating a range of applications, including visual recognition [35, 49, 56, 61], image captioning [3, 10, 36, 63], visual question answering
[2, 16, 33, 53], and optical character recognition (OCR)
[13, 20, 38, 59] tasks.
Despite their versatility, VLMs require significant computational resources and substantial memory during inference. In addition to processing text tokens (e.g., system
tokens, instruction tokens), VLMs need to handle a considerable volume of visual tokens, which substantially increase
both computational costs and memory usage. For example,
in the OCR task, LLaVA-v1.5 [28] translates an image into
576 visual tokens, constituting up to 87% of the total input sequences. Similarly, InternVL [6, 7, 14], depending on
image resolution, produces between 256 and 1792 visual tokens, accounting for up to 95% of the total tokens. These
inefficiencies present a serious obstacle to scaling VLMs in
resourced-limited environments.
Recently, observed by work [5], visual tokens often receive less attention compared to text tokens, indicating their
lower importance during the VLM inference. Consequently,
visual token pruning [5, 25, 47] is proposed to reduce redundant visual information. FastV [5] dynamically prunes
unimportant visual tokens based on their received attention score. LLaVA-PruMerge [42] retains the most critical
visual tokens and then merges less important tokens into
them. VTW [25] prunes all vision tokens from certain layers. However, they face three drawbacks:
• Greedy Heuristic Criteria for Token Importance. Previous works such as FastV [5], and LLaVa-PruMerge [42]
primarily rely on attention scores to measure the importance, assuming higher scores indicate greater relevance.
In Contrast, VTW [25] prunes all visual tokens after certain layers without considering importance metrics. As a
result, these methods fail to accurately capture each token’s contribution to the VLM model.
• Incompatiblity with FlashAttention. FlashAttention [9]
computes output tokens by fusing the softmax with the

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have significantly advanced the interpretation and synthesis of information
across textual and visual modalities with their cutting-edge
techniques. VLMs process a combination of visual inputs
and textual data, such as an image accompanied by instruc* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

19803

