This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Dropout: Unleashing Dropout across Layers for Generalizable Image
Super-Resolution
Hang Xu Jie Huang Wei Yu Jiangtong Tan Zhen Zou Feng Zhao*
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
University of Science and Technology of China
{xuhang0609, hj0117, patrick914y, jttan, zouzhen}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

past method

Blind Super-Resolution (blind SR) aims to enhance the
model’s generalization ability with unknown degradation,
yet it still encounters severe overfitting issues. Some previous methods inspired by dropout, which enhances generalization by regularizing features, have shown promising results in blind SR. Nevertheless, these methods focus solely on regularizing features before the final layer
and overlook the need for generalization in features at intermediate layers. Without explicit regularization of features at intermediate layers, the blind SR network struggles
to obtain well-generalized feature representations. However, the key challenge is that directly applying dropout
to intermediate layers leads to a significant performance
drop, which we attribute to the inconsistency in trainingtesting and across layers it introduced. Therefore, we
propose Adaptive Dropout, a new regularization method
for blind SR models, which mitigates the inconsistency
and facilitates application across intermediate layers of
networks. Specifically, for training-testing inconsistency,
we re-design the form of dropout and integrate the features before and after dropout adaptively. For inconsistency in generalization requirements across different layers, we innovatively design an adaptive training strategy
to strengthen feature propagation by layer-wise annealing. Experimental results show that our method outperforms all past regularization methods on both synthetic
and real-world benchmark datasets, also highly effective
in other image restoration tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/xuhang07/Adpative-Dropout.

training-testing
inconsistency

problem

dropout

differing generalization
requirements of layers

……

unable to be applied
our method

solution

able to be applied
adaptive dropout

adaptive dropout form

adaptive training
strategy

……

convolutional layer

design

activation layer

Figure 1. Placing dropout before the final convolutional layer
can enhance the generalization performance of blind SR models,
whereas placing it elsewhere has the opposite effect due to the inconsistency introduced. Our method effectively addresses the inconsistency allowing it to be easily applied to intermediate layers.

architectures [2, 34, 35], blind SR models still encounter a
severe over-fitting problem. Therefore, appropriate regularization terms [12, 53, 59] or training strategies [3, 49] are
urgently needed to enhance the generalization of blind SR
models. In the past, Kong et al. [29] first introduced regularization into blind SR, adding dropout before the last convolutional layer of the model, which effectively improved the
model’s generalization ability. Subsequently, Wang et al.
[56] argued that dropout could harm the recovery of highfrequency image information and proposed Simple-Align,
which feeds low-quality images obtained from different
degradations of the same image into the network and aligns
the features before the last convolutional layer, encouraging
the model to be degradation-invariant.
It is worth noting that the above regularization methods
all target the features before the last convolutional layer,
while the features at intermediate layers are only implicitly
impacted [25, 45, 46]. However, we find this indirect impact
hard to regularize the features at intermediate layers to be
degradation-invariant [19, 24, 38], and instead exacerbates
the imbalance between channels, indicating the necessity of
explicit regularization for intermediate features. Therefore,

1. Introduction
Blind SR [7, 13, 18, 37, 43] aims to recover high-quality images from low-quality images without knowing the degradation kernel. However, even with better real-world degradation simulation [52, 57, 68] and more expressive model
* Corresponding author

7513

