This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make It Count: Text-to-Image Generation with an Accurate Number of Objects
Lital Binyamin1 Yoad Tewel2,3 Hilit Segev1 Eran Hirsch1 Royi Rassin1 Gal Chechik1,2
1

Bar-Ilan University 2 NVIDIA 3 Tel-Aviv University

“A photo of six
kittens sitting on a
branch”

“A realistic photo of
Goldilocks and three
bears eating a porridge”

“A photo of ﬁve
eggs in a carton”

“an illustration of
four ninja turtles”

“A realistic photo of
seven dwarves dancing
in the forest”

CountGen
(ours)

SDXL

Figure 1. CountGen generates the correct number of objects specified in the input prompt while maintaining a natural layout that aligns
with the prompt.

Abstract
Despite the unprecedented success of text-to-image diffusion models, controlling the number of depicted objects using text is surprisingly hard. This is important for various
applications from technical documents, to children’s books
to illustrating cooking recipes. Generating object-correct
counts is fundamentally challenging because the generative model needs to keep a sense of separate identity for
every instance of the object, even if several objects look
identical or overlap, and then carry out a global computation implicitly during generation. It is still unknown if
such representations exist. To address count-correct generation, we first identify features within the diffusion model
that can carry the object identity information. We then
use them to separate and count instances of objects during the denoising process and detect over-generation and
under-generation. We fix the latter by training a model that
predicts both the shape and location of a missing object,
based on the layout of existing ones, and show how it can
be used to guide denoising with correct object count. Our
approach, CountGen, does not depend on external source to
determine object layout, but rather uses the prior from the

diffusion model itself, creating prompt-dependent and seeddependent layouts. Evaluated on two benchmark datasets,
we find that CountGen strongly outperforms the countaccuracy of existing baselines. Project page: https:
//make-it-count-paper.github.io/

1. Introduction

13242

Text-to-image diffusion models provide an accessible way
to control the generation of visual content. A major failure mode is their inability to count, that is, they often fail
to generate the correct number of items in response to text
prompts. For instance, when asked to generate an image of
Goldilocks and the three bears, models may generate only
two bears (Fig. 1). Counting failures are particularly frustrating: The accuracy is surprisingly low, and mistakes are
often obvious for people to detect.
To illustrate the difficulty of the problem, consider some
naive attempts to work around it. First, one can manually
design layouts per count, to determine the spatial organization and the number of objects, then provide it as a conditioning signal to a generative model [9]. This approach

