This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CL-LoRA: Continual Low-Rank Adaptation for Rehearsal-Free
Class-Incremental Learning

1

Jiangpeng He1 Zhihao Duan2 Fengqing Zhu2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
2
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, U.S.A.
jpenghe@mit.edu, {duan90, zhu0}@purdue.edu

Abstract

Class-Incremental
Learning

Pre-trained
frozen backbone

Task-shared
learnable modules

Task-specific
learnable modules

…

Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) aims to learn new
classes sequentially while retaining the knowledge of
previously learned classes. Recently, pre-trained models (PTMs) combined with parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) have shown remarkable performance in rehearsalfree CIL without requiring exemplars from previous tasks.
However, existing adapter-based methods, which incorporate lightweight learnable modules into PTMs for CIL, create new adapters for each new task, leading to both parameter redundancy and failure to leverage shared knowledge
across tasks. In this work, we propose ContinuaL LowRank Adaptation (CL-LoRA), which introduces a novel
dual-adapter architecture combining task-shared adapters
to learn cross-task knowledge and task-specific adapters
to capture unique features of each new task. Specifically,
the shared adapters utilize random orthogonal matrices
and leverage knowledge distillation with gradient reassignment to preserve essential shared knowledge. In addition,
we introduce learnable block-wise weights for task-specific
adapters, which mitigate inter-task interference while maintaining the model’s plasticity. We demonstrate CL-LoRA
consistently achieves promising performance under multiple benchmarks with reduced training and inference computation, establishing a more efficient and scalable paradigm
for continual learning with pre-trained models.

Task 2

Block 1

Block 2

…

Task 1

Block N-1

Block N

Figure 1. Overview of our dual-adapter architecture. The taskshared learnable modules are continuously updated to capture
cross-task knowledge while task-specific modules preserve the
unique characteristics of each individual task.

1. Introduction

is catastrophic forgetting [33], where the model’s performance on old tasks dramatically degrades after learning new
classes. Recently, the advent of pre-trained models (PTMs)
has revolutionized the CIL paradigm by providing robust
and generalizable representations learned from large-scale
datasets [6, 40]. Through parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) [19], recent works [41, 48, 49, 57, 58] have demonstrated promising results in CIL even without the need to
store old task data as exemplars, marking a significant advancement over traditional rehearsal-based CIL methods
with model training from scratch [4, 18, 31, 38, 52].
The goal of PTM-based CIL is to use a small set
of trainable parameters to adaptively learn new classes
while keeping the backbone frozen [49, 57]. Adapterbased methods [10, 34, 56, 58] achieve this goal by inserting lightweight learnable modules (adapters) into pretrained models, offering a flexible and parameter-efficient
approach with remarkable performance. Meanwhile, LowRank Adaptation (LoRA) [20] has emerged as a promising
PEFT method by decomposing the weight updates into lowrank matrices, significantly reducing the number of trainable parameters. Recent works [26, 47, 50] have demonstrated the effectiveness of applying LoRA as learnable
adapters in CIL. However, similar to other adapter-based
methods [56, 58], this approach of learning new adapters
for each new task leads to parameter redundancy [57] dur-

Modern computer vision models have achieved remarkable progress in various downstream tasks but typically
require training on static datasets. However, in realworld scenarios, data often arrives sequentially with new
classes gradually becoming available, necessitating ClassIncremental Learning (CIL) [4, 25, 31, 38, 46] that can
continuously incorporate new knowledge while retaining
previously learned information. A key challenge in CIL
Code is available at: https://github.com/JiangpengHe/
CL-LoRA

30534

