This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chapter-Llama: Efficient Chaptering in Hour-Long Videos with LLMs
Lucas Ventura1,2
1
2

Antoine Yang3

Cordelia Schmid2

Gül Varol1

LIGM, École des Ponts, IP Paris, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University

3

Google DeepMind

https://imagine.enpc.fr/˜lucas.ventura/chapter-llama/

Abstract
We address the task of video chaptering, i.e., partitioning a
long video timeline into semantic units and generating corresponding chapter titles. While relatively underexplored, automatic chaptering has the potential to enable efficient navigation
and content retrieval in long-form videos. In this paper, we
achieve strong chaptering performance on hour-long videos by
efficiently addressing the problem in the text domain with our
‘Chapter-Llama’ framework. Specifically, we leverage a pretrained large language model (LLM) with large context window,
and feed as input (i) speech transcripts and (ii) captions describing video frames, along with their respective timestamps. Given
the inefficiency of exhaustively captioning all frames, we propose a lightweight speech-guided frame selection strategy based
on speech transcript content, and experimentally demonstrate
remarkable advantages. We train the LLM to output timestamps
for the chapter boundaries, as well as free-form chapter titles.
This simple yet powerful approach scales to processing one-hour
long videos in a single forward pass. Our results demonstrate
substantial improvements (e.g., 45.3 vs 26.7% F1 score) over
the state of the art on the recent VidChapters-7M benchmark.
To promote further research, we release our code and models at
our project page.

1. Introduction
According to a study by [46], the video durations uploaded
to the popular online video sharing platform YouTube have
increased steadily over the years. Videos have become longer
since the first video upload in 2005 [19, 47]. In 2020, 25%
of videos were estimated to be longer than 15 minutes, 5%
more than 3 hours [46]. Long-form videos such as news,
sports, educational, and vlog streams can often span extensive
durations and cover multiple topics [97]. Finding specific
content within increased video duration and volume makes
efficient content navigation more important than ever.
However, much of the traditional video analysis research
has focused on processing short videos of a few seconds
[4, 15, 34, 55, 63, 67, 74, 78, 85, 87, 98, 110]. At the same

ASR

Speech-based frame selector

Captioner

LLM

00:00:00 Planting Malungaay Tree
00:02:43 Island hopping

00:08:45 Pealing Coconut & Drinking Tuba
00:12:54 Eating Poisonous Fish

Figure 1. Chapter-Llama: Our method generates automatic video
chapters for hour-long videos by training a large language model
(LLM) to predict chapter boundaries and titles. The LLM processes
transcribed speech (ASR) and descriptive captions of key frames,
which are sampled based on ASR content. This text-based approach,
equipped with speech-based frame selection, enables efficient
processing of long-form content.

time, the definition of long videos has changed within the past
decade. Early works claimed processing 100 frames (i.e., a few
seconds) to be long [61, 93] as opposed to ingesting up to 16
frames [83, 92]. With the introduction of datasets containing
1-5 minute videos [29, 37, 44, 56, 82, 126], several minutes
were considered very long. Studying hour-long videos has only
recently seen an interest in the context of movie description [31],
video captioning [40], or grounding [32, 84]. Very recently,
the work of [109] collected the VidChapters-7M dataset with
videos spanning from minutes to hours, along with their userdefined video chapters, and proposed the video chapter generation task, automatically dividing a video into thematic sections
(i.e., chapters) with descriptive concise chapter titles. Video
chaptering, if achieved successfully, can offer a compelling solution to long content indexing, bypassing the current need for
time-consuming manual annotation by video owners [109].
In this paper, we address the challenge of automatic video
chaptering with a simple yet effective framework designed to
handle hour-long videos. Existing work for chaptering [109]

18947

