This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIDI: Multi-Instance Diffusion for Single Image to 3D Scene Generation
Zehuan Huang1
1

Yuan-Chen Guo2† Xingqiao An3 Yunhan Yang4 Yangguang Li2
Ding Liang2 Xihui Liu4 Yan-Pei Cao2
Lu Sheng1

Zi-Xin Zou2

Beihang University 2 VAST 3 Tsinghua University 4 The University of Hong Kong
Project page: https://huanngzh.github.io/MIDI-Page/
(a) Scene generation

Total3D

InstPIFu

SSR

DiffCAD

Gen3DSR

REPARO

Ours

(b) Generalization

Synthetic Data

Real-world Image

Stylized Image

Figure 1. MIDI generates compositional 3D scenes from a single image by extending pre-trained image-to-3D object generation models
to multi-instance diffusion models, incorporating a novel multi-instance attention mechanism that captures inter-object interactions. (a)
shows our generated scenes compared with those reconstructed by existing methods. (b) presents our generated results on synthetic data,
real-world images, and stylized images.

Abstract
This paper introduces MIDI, a novel paradigm for compositional 3D scene generation from a single image. Unlike existing methods that rely on reconstruction or retrieval techniques or recent approaches that employ multi-stage objectby-object generation, MIDI extends pre-trained image-to3D object generation models to multi-instance diffusion
models, enabling the simultaneous generation of multiple
3D instances with accurate spatial relationships and high
generalizability. At its core, MIDI incorporates a novel
multi-instance attention mechanism, that effectively captures inter-object interactions and spatial coherence directly within the generation process, without the need for
complex multi-step processes. The method utilizes partial
object images and global scene context as inputs, directly
modeling object completion during 3D generation. During
training, we effectively supervise the interactions between
3D instances using a limited amount of scene-level data,
while incorporating single-object data for regularization,
thereby maintaining the pre-trained generalization ability.

MIDI demonstrates state-of-the-art performance in imageto-scene generation, validated through evaluations on synthetic data, real-world scene data, and stylized scene images generated by text-to-image diffusion models.

† Project lead;

1. Introduction

corresponding author

Generating compositional 3D scenes from a single image is
challenging due to the limited spatial clues captured from
a partial point of view. In fact, accurately inferring the 3D
geometry of each instance and the spatial relationships of
multiple instances within a scene, requires extensive prior
knowledge of the 3D visual world.
Existing methods can be broadly categorized into two
classes, according to how the prior knowledge is processed.
The former class [4, 6, 7, 17, 36, 46, 48, 74, 76] encodes 3D geometry by neural networks that are trained from
scene-level 3D datasets, and then inferences the geometry in a new image with a feed-forward pass. Due to the
scarcity of supervised data, these methods often suffer from
poor reconstruction quality in unseen scenarios. The other
class [16, 18, 26, 30–32] stores 3D models in a database,
then retrieve and assemble similar 3D models to match the

23646

