This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaSS13K: A Matting-level Semantic Segmentation Benchmark
Chenxi Xie1,2†
Minghan Li1,2†
Hui Zeng2
Jun Luo2
Lei Zhang1,2 *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 OPPO Research Institute

Figure 1. Comparisons on the resolution and annotation quality between existing semantic segmentation datasets (a) COCO, (b) ADE20K,
(c) EntitySeg and (d) our established dataset MaSS13K. Note that the ‘others’ category, which is highlighted in yellow, in our MaSS13K
actually contains a group of well-segmented objects without specific class names. Please zoom-in for a better view.

Abstract
High-resolution semantic segmentation is essential for
applications such as image editing, bokeh imaging, AR/VR,
etc. Unfortunately, existing datasets often have limited resolution and lack precise mask details and boundaries. In
this work, we build a large-scale, matting-level semantic
segmentation dataset, named MaSS13K, which consists of
13,348 real-world images, all at 4K resolution. MaSS13K
provides high-quality mask annotations of a number of objects, which are categorized into seven categories: human, vegetation, ground, sky, water, building, and others.
MaSS13K features precise masks, with an average mask
complexity 20-50 times higher than existing semantic segmentation datasets. We consequently present a method
specifically designed for high-resolution semantic segmentation, namely MaSSFormer, which employs an efficient
pixel decoder that aggregates high-level semantic features
and low-level texture features across three stages, aiming
to produce high-resolution masks with minimal computa* Corresponding author. † Equal contribution. This work is supported
by the PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovative Research Center.

tional cost. Finally, we propose a new learning paradigm,
which integrates the high-quality masks of the seven given
categories with pseudo labels from new classes, enabling
MaSSFormer to transfer its accurate segmentation capability to other classes of objects. Our proposed MaSSFormer
is comprehensively evaluated on the MaSS13K benchmark
together with 14 representative segmentation models. We
expect that our meticulously annotated MaSS13K dataset
and the MaSSFormer model can facilitate the research
of high-resolution and high-quality semantic segmentation.
Datasets and codes can be found at https://github.
com/xiechenxi99/MaSS13K.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which assigns a category label to
each pixel in an image, has made significant strides over the
past decades, driven by the advancements of deep learning
and the availability of large-scale benchmark datasets such
as COCO-Stuff [30], and ADE20K [55], among others.
Building upon these datasets, researchers have developed a
variety of networks, including FCN-based models [34] such

14046

