This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Remote Photoplethysmography in Real-World and Extreme Lighting Scenarios
Hang Shao1 , Lei Luo1* , Jianjun Qian1 , Mengkai Yan1 , Shuo Chen2 , Jian Yang1 *
1
PCA Lab†, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 Nanjing University, China
{shaohang,cslluo,csjqian,ymk,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, shuo.chen.ya@foxmail.com

Abstract
Physiological activities can be manifested by the sensitive
changes in facial imaging. While they are barely observable
to our eyes, computer vision manners can, and the derived
remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) has shown considerable promise. However, existing studies mainly rely on spatial skin recognition and temporal rhythmic interactions, so
they focus on identifying explicit features under ideal light
conditions, but perform poorly in-the-wild with intricate obstacles and extreme illumination exposure. In this paper, we
propose an end-to-end video transformer model for rPPG.
It strives to eliminate complex and unknown external timevarying interferences, whether they are sufficient to occupy
subtle biosignal amplitudes or exist as periodic perturbations that hinder network training. In the specific implementation, we utilize global interference sharing, subject background reference, and self-supervised disentanglement to
eliminate interference, and further guide learning based on
spatiotemporal filtering, reconstruction guidance, and frequency domain and biological prior constraints to achieve
effective rPPG. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first robust rPPG model for real outdoor scenarios based on
natural face videos, and is lightweight to deploy. Extensive
experiments show the competitiveness and performance of
our model in rPPG prediction across datasets and scenes.

Figure 1. Existing learning-based rPPGs have shown promise under static illuminations (a), but they are not effective in real-world
scenarios (b). Performances of different methods can be compared
intuitively (under the MR-NIRP-DRV [20] dataset).

1. Introduction

role in health self-examination, anti-spoofing, driver fatigue
diagnosis, and DeepFake in the foreseeable future.
The contraction and relaxation of cardiac alter the instantaneous flow and velocity of red blood cells in subcutaneous
capillaries, thereby changing facial skin imaging. Although
these contents are difficult to be directly perceived by naked
eyes, camera can capture the absorption and scattering of incident light caused by variations in superficial living tissues
[3, 4]. On these bases, rPPG summarizes biosignal clues by
comparing skin color between frames. Early related studies
implemented rPPG based on manual features [5, 6]. Subsequently, deep learning-based methods showed stronger robustness in motion and heterogeneous videos [7, 8].
However, similar to the bottleneck of the traditional blind
source separation methods which can demodulate as long as
biosignal meets certain conditions, existing learning-based
rPPG methods are also vulnerable in many cases, especially
in the following aspects: 1) Insufficient ability to remove
extreme light interference. Facial color changes caused by
heart activity are relatively asthenic. When external light interference is sufficient to mask such changes, existing rPPG
methods that mine clues from skin region-of-interest (ROI)
can easily fail [9, 10]. 2) Weak ability to resist periodic interference. Cardiac signals have quasi-periodic character-

Heart rate (HR), heart rate variability, respiratory rate, blood
pressure, and blood oxygen saturation are significant vital
parameters, and their remote sensing can provide important
evidence for many tasks for clinical purposes and intelligent
applications. Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) aims
to capture blood volume pulse (BVP) signals containing the
above bio-indicators based on facial videos [1, 2]. With the
popularization of commercial cameras and mobile communication devices, rPPG technique will play an irreplaceable
* Corresponding authors.
† Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Informa-

tion of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering.

10858

