This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimLTD: Simple Supervised and Semi-Supervised Long-Tailed Object Detection
Phi Vu Tran
LexisNexis Risk Solutions
Abstract

40

LVIS v1 Object Detection Benchmark
Learning Modality

38

While modern visual recognition systems have made significant advancements, many continue to struggle with the open
problem of learning from few exemplars. This paper focuses
on the task of object detection in the setting where object
classes follow a natural long-tailed distribution. Existing
methods for long-tailed detection resort to external ImageNet
labels to augment the low-shot training instances. However,
such dependency on a large labeled database has limited utility in practical scenarios. We propose a versatile and scalable approach to leverage optional unlabeled images, which
are easy to collect without the burden of human annotations.
Our SimLTD framework is straightforward and intuitive, and
consists of three simple steps: (1) pre-training on abundant
head classes; (2) transfer learning on scarce tail classes; and
(3) fine-tuning on a sampled set of both head and tail classes.
Our approach can be viewed as an improved head-to-tail
model transfer paradigm without the added complexities of
meta-learning or knowledge distillation, as was required
in past research. By harnessing supplementary unlabeled
images, without extra image labels, SimLTD establishes new
record results on the challenging LVIS v1 benchmark across
both supervised and semi-supervised settings.

36

Overall mAPbox (%)

SimLTD
[CVPR'25]

Fully Supervised Single-Stage
Fully Supervised Multi-Stage
Weakly Supervised Single-Stage
Weakly Supervised Multi-Stage
Semi-Supervised Single-Stage
Semi-Supervised Multi-Stage

34

RichSem
[NeurIPS'23]

Detic [ECCV'22]

32

CascadeMatch [IJCV'23]

30

DiffusionDet [ICCV'23]
Dong et al. [ICCV'23]

28

EFL [CVPR'22]
AHRL [CVPR'22]

26

MosaicOS [ICCV'21]

24
14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

Rare Class APr (%)

Figure 1. A survey comparing our SimLTD to the state of the art for
long-tailed detection. We combine unlabeled data with an intuitive
multi-stage training strategy to deliver the best overall performance
while also optimizing for accuracy on rare classes. Our simple
approach achieves superior results on the challenging LVIS v1
benchmark without requiring auxiliary image-level supervision.

tion. It is in the tail that most data-hungry models struggle
with performance, a distribution characterized by many rare
classes having as few as a single training exemplar.
Figure 1 plots several recent state-of-the-art methods to
address the extreme disparity of class distributions in longtailed detection (LTD). One promising direction is to divide
the problem into multiple manageable parts to help alleviate
the severity of the class imbalance. LST [19] proposes to
segment the overall dataset into seven phases, each phase
containing progressively smaller but balanced data samples,
and train a model in an incremental manner via network
expansion and knowledge distillation. While LST adopts
innovative ideas from class-incremental learning [4, 31, 40],
the method is overly complex with the maintenance of many
sub-parts. Moreover, the method requires numerous stages
of knowledge transfer that can lead to catastrophic forgetting
and result in an inferior solution [12].
Another interesting direction is to leverage external data
to augment the training instances in LVIS. The intuition
is that while the rare objects may not appear frequently in
natural scenes, they can be found in abundance from object-

1. Introduction
The task of detecting, localizing, and classifying object instances from image and video is a long-standing problem
in computer vision. Recent years have seen unprecedented
progress on modern object detection systems, mostly driven
by powerful neural architectures. Much of this success
is measured on the relatively balanced, small-vocabulary
benchmarks like PASCAL VOC [13] and MS-COCO [22].
When evaluated on a more complex and imbalanced dataset
with a much larger vocabulary, however, the same models
exhibit a considerable drop in detection accuracy [15].
This paper explores ways to enhance the capability of
commodity detection systems, with a particular evaluation
emphasis on the challenging large-vocabulary LVIS benchmark [15]. LVIS represents a realistic application, a scenario
in which object classes follow a natural long-tailed distribu-

4672

