This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Order-One Rolling Shutter Cameras
Marvin Anas Hahn
Trinity College Dublin
17 Westland Row, Dublin Ireland

Kathlén Kohn
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Lindstedtsvägen 25, 10044 Stockholm, Sweden

hahnma@maths.tcd.ie

kathlen@kth.se

Orlando Marigliano
University of Genoa
Via Dodecaneso 35, 16146 Genoa, Italy

Tomas Pajdla
CIIRC, Czech Technical University in Prague
Czech Republic

orlando.marigliano@edu.unige.it

pajdla@cvut.cz

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) General rolling shutter cameras see points in space multiple times (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rolling shutter). (b) Order-one
rolling shutter cameras see points in space exactly once. Their rolling planes intersect in a line. Examples include (c) perspective cameras
and (d) some Straight-Cayley cameras moving on a twisted cubic.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Rolling shutter (RS) cameras dominate consumer and
smartphone markets. Several methods for computing the
absolute pose of RS cameras have appeared in the last
20 years, but the relative pose problem has not been fully
solved yet. We provide a unified theory for the important
class of order-one rolling shutter (RS1 ) cameras. These
cameras generalize the perspective projection to RS cameras, projecting a generic space point to exactly one image point via a rational map. We introduce a new backprojection RS camera model, characterize RS1 cameras,
construct explicit parameterizations of such cameras, and
determine the image of a space line. We classify all minimal problems for solving the relative camera pose problem
with linear RS1 cameras and discover new practical cases.
Finally, we show how the theory can be used to explain RS
models previously used for absolute pose computation.
KK and OM were supported by Göran Gustafssons Stiftelse and Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and
Software Program (WASP) funded by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. OM was supported by the EU (Project
101061315–MIAS–HORIZON-MSCA-2021-PF-01) and TP by OPJAK CZ.02.01.01/00/22 008/0004590 Roboprox.

Rolling shutter (RS) cameras [41] dominate consumer and
smartphone markets thanks to affordability, enhanced resolution, and rapid frame rates. Unlike global shutter cameras
(GS), RS cameras capture images sequentially line-by-line,
causing image distortions if the camera moves during capture (Fig. 1a). The distorted RS images do not match the
geometry of GS cameras. Thus, for non-negligible movements, the developed multi-view geometry for GS cameras
cannot be applied. So currently, accurate multi-view geometry from moving cameras requires GS cameras. Since
moving cameras are omnipresent (e.g., every modern car is
equipped with cameras and cameras are often mounted on
drones), new theory and algorithms must be developed for
RS cameras. Many partial results appeared in the last 20
years [1, 2, 4–10, 12, 16–19, 24, 27, 29, 31, 33, 34, 37, 38,
40, 42, 43, 49–51, 54–58]. Here, we provide a unified theory and extend multi-view GS geometry to the important
class of moving order-one RS cameras.
General RS cameras project a point in space into many

27007

