This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Assessing and Learning Alignment of Unimodal Vision and Language Models
Le Zhang1,2
1

Qian Yang1,2

Aishwarya Agrawal1,2,3

Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract

supervised
learning

How well are unimodal vision and language models
aligned? Although prior work have approached answering this question, their assessment methods do not directly
translate to how these models are used in practical visionlanguage tasks. In this paper, we propose a direct assessment method, inspired by linear probing, to assess visionlanguage alignment. We identify that the degree of alignment of the SSL vision models depends on their SSL training objective, and we find that the clustering quality of SSL
representations has a stronger impact on alignment performance than their linear separability. Next, we introduce
Swift Alignment of Image and Language (SAIL), a efficient
transfer learning framework that aligns pretrained unimodal vision and language models for downstream visionlanguage tasks. Since SAIL leverages the strengths of pretrained unimodal models, it requires significantly fewer
(→6%) paired image-text data for the multimodal alignment compared to models like CLIP which are trained from
scratch. SAIL training only requires a single A100 GPU,
→5 hours of training and can accommodate a batch size up
to 32,768. SAIL achieves 73.4% zero-shot accuracy on ImageNet (vs. CLIP’s 72.7%) and excels in zero-shot retrieval,
complex reasoning, and semantic segmentation. Additionally, SAIL improves the language-compatibility of vision encoders that in turn enhance the performance of multimodal
large language models.1

contrastive
learning

Linear Layer

Linear Layer

Linear Layer

Model

Vision
Model

Language
Model

{(Ii , labeli )}Bi=1

{(Ii , Ti )}Bi=1

Linear Probing

Alignment Probing

Figure 1. Conceptual Overview: Alignment probing evaluates
the alignment potential of two pretrained uni-modal models.

1. Introduction

cross-modal alignment performance: is it linear separability
or the clustering quality?
Although prior work have approached answering the
question of “To what extent are pretrained unimodal models
aligned with each other”, their assessment methods do not
directly translate to how these models are used in practical
vision-language tasks. For instance, Huh et al. [17] assess
cross-modal alignment using mutual nearest-neighbor metrics, indicating a certain level of alignment across models
trained on separate modalities. However, this assessment
method serves only as a proxy method as it focuses on relative ordering within each modality rather than directly measuring cross-modal distances. The latter is precisely how inference with vision-language models (VLMs) is conducted,
so we believe directly measuring cross-modal distances is a
more direct measurement of alignment performance.
To quantitatively answer aforementioned questions regarding the impact of modality-specific representation
on cross-modal alignment, we introduce visual-language
alignment probing, akin to linear probing used in SSL
evaluation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, alignment probing
freezes the pretrained vision and language backbones and
trains a lightweight linear alignment layer on image-text
datasets. We evaluate alignment through zero-shot retrieval tasks, finding that vision and language models exhibit strong alignment generally. However, the degree of
alignment of the SSL vision models depends on their SSL
training objective. We also found that the clustering quality of visual representations, as indicated by k-NN classifier
performance, has a stronger impact on image-text alignment

The integration of language and vision is pivotal in advancing models for computer vision tasks [19, 20, 27, 28, 46].
This raises a key question: “To what extent can unimodal visual and language models be aligned with each other?” In
particular, how do unimodal representations impact crossmodal alignment: Do larger unimodal models trained on extensive datasets yield better cross-modal alignment? Does
the choice of self-supervised learning (SSL) method play a
critical role in determining the alignment strength? What
property of SSL representation correlates the most with
1 Project page: https://lezhang7.github.io/sail.github.io/

14604

