This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLAVIDAL : A Large LAnguage VIsion Model
for Daily Activities of Living

Dominick Reilly1

Rajatsubhra Chakraborty1 Arkaprava Sinha1 Manish Kumar Govind1
Pu Wang1 Francois Bremond3,4 Le Xue2 Srijan Das1
1
UNC Charlotte 2 Salesforce AI Research 3 Inria 4 Université Côte d’Azur
{dreilly1,sdas24}@charlotte.edu

Web-scraped videos
dataset

Only used for training

ADL-X Dataset (Ours)

ADL Video

Drink water

Peel potato
Q1: What is the person doing in this video?
Q2: Is she holding bread?
Video

Training

Vacuum floor

Shine shoes

Video

LLM

Object

Skeleton

Text

LLM

Standard LLVM

LLAVIDAL (Ours)

A1: We see a young woman wearing pink
glasses standing in the kitchen. She is
holding a cell phone and looking at it. She is
standing in front of a sink in the kitchen.

A1: The video shows a woman preparing
food in a kitchen. She is standing in front of
a sink and a stove with various utensils and
pans nearby. The woman is wearing a pink
top and black pants while preparing food.

A2: No, the woman in the video is not
holding bread in her hands.

A2: Yes, the woman is holding bread in her
hand while preparing food.

Training

Eat a
snack

Use tablet

Play badminton

Text

Eat a snack

Riding horse

Drink
water

Use tablet
Temporal stitching
Object tracking

Trimmed videos
w/ 3D skeletons

Figure 1. Web-video trained Large Language Vision Models (LLVM) struggle to understand the fine-grained details and human-object
interactions present in Activities of Daily Living (ADL). We propose LLAVIDAL, an LLVM trained with three modalities on our curated
ADL-X dataset. ADL-X is derived from trimmed, multi-view ADL videos and is augmented with skeleton and object modalities.

Abstract
Current Large Language Vision Models (LLVMs) trained
on web videos perform well in general video understanding but struggle with fine-grained details, complex humanobject interactions (HOI), and view-invariant representation learning essential for Activities of Daily Living (ADL).
This limitation stems from a lack of specialized ADL video
instruction-tuning datasets and insufficient modality integration to capture discriminative action representations.
To address this, we propose a semi-automated framework
for curating ADL datasets, creating ADL-X, a multiview,
multimodal RGBS instruction-tuning dataset. Additionally,
we introduce LLAVIDAL, an LLVM integrating videos, 3D
skeletons, and HOIs to model ADL’s complex spatiotemporal relationships. For training LLAVIDAL a simple joint

alignment of all modalities yields suboptimal results; thus,
we propose a Multimodal Progressive (MMPro) training
strategy, incorporating modalities in stages following a
curriculum. We also establish ADL MCQ and video description benchmarks to assess LLVM performance in ADL
tasks. Trained on ADL-X, LLAVIDAL achieves state-of-theart performance across ADL benchmarks. Code and data
will be made publicly available at https://adl-x.github.io/.

1. Introduction

24297

This paper aims explores the potential of Large LanguageVision Language Models (LLVMs) to understand Activities
of Daily Living (ADL) which present various challenges
including multiple exo-centric viewpoints, fine-grained activities with subtle motion, complex human-object interactions, and long-term temporal relationships. Recently,

