This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FireEdit: Fine-grained Instruction-based Image Editing via Region-aware
Vision Language Model
Jun Zhou1,2 *, Jiahao Li2 , Zunnan Xu3 *, Hanhui Li1 , Yiji Cheng2 , Fa-Ting Hong4 *,
Qin Lin2 , Qinglin Lu2 , Xiaodan Liang1†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Hunyuan, Tencent 3 Tsinghua University 4 HKUST
Make the water in the vase blue

Abstract
Currently, instruction-based image editing methods have
made significant progress by leveraging the powerful crossmodal understanding capabilities of vision language models (VLMs). However, they still face challenges in three key
areas: 1) complex scenarios; 2) semantic consistency; and
3) fine-grained editing. To address these issues, we propose
FireEdit, an innovative Fine-grained Instruction-based image editing framework that exploits a REgion-aware VLM.
FireEdit is designed to accurately comprehend user instructions and ensure effective control over the editing process.
Specifically, we enhance the fine-grained visual perception
capabilities of the VLM by introducing additional region
tokens. Relying solely on the output of the LLM to guide
the diffusion model may lead to suboptimal editing results.
Therefore, we propose a Time-Aware Target Injection module and a Hybrid Visual Cross Attention module. The former dynamically adjusts the guidance strength at various
denoising stages by integrating timestep embeddings with
the text embeddings. The latter enhances visual details for
image editing, thereby preserving semantic consistency between the edited result and the source image. By combining
the VLM enhanced with fine-grained region tokens and the
time-dependent diffusion model, FireEdit demonstrates significant advantages in comprehending editing instructions
and maintaining high semantic consistency. Extensive experiments indicate that our approach surpasses the stateof-the-art instruction-based image editing methods.

Give the city fireworks

Make the background a chemical plant

Input image

IP2P

UltraEdit

SmartEdit

Ours

Figure 1. Our framework leverages a vision language model
(VLM) to guide instruction-based image editing. Our primary innovation is the introduction of region tokens, which enable the
VLM to accurately identify edited objects or areas in complex
scenarios while preserving high-frequency details in unintended
regions during image decoding.

1. Introduction

and video generation [23, 26, 28, 56, 57]. This advancement
provides enhanced control and flexibility for generative image editing, enabling the development of numerous commercial products. By transferring the discrepancies between
input and target text descriptions to a cross-modal implicit
mapping of intermediate latent features, the desired regions
of real images can be modified [3, 14, 24, 34, 35, 40]. Precise editing is achievable when region masks are available.
However, fine-grained text descriptions and region masks
are often difficult to obtain.
Instruction-based image editing methods eliminate the
reliance on these seemingly essential conditions and are
widely adopted in the community for their simplicity, userfriendliness, and efficiency. IP2P [4] is a pioneering work
in instruction-based editing, allowing users to express their
modification intentions for a specified image using straightforward natural language. To achieve precise and highfidelity image editing, recent methods focus on large-scale
generation of high-quality input-target-instruction triples

As a critical area of research in multimedia interaction, image editing has consistently garnered significant attention
from both academia and industry. The emergence of diffusion models [15, 16, 48] and autoregressive models [50, 51]
has reshaped the fields of image generation [7, 19, 32, 33]
* Work done during the internship at Tencent.
† Corresponding author.

13093

