This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMTPD: A New Benchmark for Temporal Prediction of Social Media Popularity
1

Yijie Xu* , 1 Bolun Zheng*† , 1 Wei Zhu* , 1 Hangjia Pan, 1 Yuchen Yao,
2
Ning Xu, 2 Anan Liu, 3 Quan Zhang, 1 Chenggang Yan
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, 2 Tianjin University, 3 Peking University

Abstract
Social media popularity prediction task aims to predict the
popularity of posts on social media platforms, which has
a positive driving effect on application scenarios such as
content optimization, digital marketing and online advertising. Though many studies have made significant progress,
few of them pay much attention to the integration between
popularity prediction with temporal alignment. In this paper, with exploring YouTube’s multilingual and multi-modal
content, we construct a new social media temporal popularity prediction benchmark, namely SMTPD, and suggest
a baseline framework for temporal popularity prediction.
Through data analysis and experiments, we verify that temporal alignment and early popularity play crucial roles in
social media popularity prediction for not only deepening
the understanding of temporal dynamics of popularity in social media but also offering a suggestion about developing
more effective prediction models in this field. Code is available at https://github.com/zhuwei321/SMTPD

(a) A social media post, also serving as a sample in SMTPD.

1. Introduction
(b) Box plots of popularity scores over time.

With the advancement of Internet communication technology in recent years, social media has gradually emerged
and has influenced various aspects of human life. Any content posted on social media stands the chance of becoming
hot spot, and widely disseminated social media content can
generate significant social and economic benefits. The prediction of social media popularity holds immense potential
applications in content optimization [1, 30], online advertising [14, 15], digital marketing [19, 45], search recommendations [4, 17], intelligent fashion [10], and beyond.
In the early stages of popularity research, statistical and
topological methods [41, 43, 53] were extensively employed, with the research focus primarily on time-aware
popularity prediction. These prediction methods rely on
information about the earlier popularity of posted content.

Figure 1. Content sections and popularity trend of SMTPD. In 1a,
a sample involves four sections of content, with temporal popularity. 1b depicts box plots of daily popularity scores, illustrating
variations in popularity distribution at different time points. The
distribution consistently demonstrates a decay pattern over time.

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

Along with the many large-scale social media popularity
datasets are proposed [3, 42, 47, 48], the machine learning based methods are widely employed to achieve reasonable predictions of social media popularity and have shown
remarkable performance. These methods emphasize meticulous design in feature extraction and fusion, followed by
popularity prediction using machine learning models such
as deep neural networks (DNN) and gradient boosting decision trees (GBDT).
Table 1 lists the public or mentioned social media popularity datasets in the most recent years as far as we know.
For above machine learning based methods, the large-scale

This work is supported by the the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2020YFB1406600.

18847

