This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Change You Want To Detect:
Semantic Change Detection In Earth Observation With Hybrid Data Generation
Yanis Benidir

Nicolas Gonthier
Univ Gustave Eiffel, ENSG, IGN, LASTIG, France

Clément Mallet

firstname.lastname@ign.fr

Abstract
Bi-temporal change detection at scale based on Very High
Resolution (VHR) images is crucial for Earth monitoring.
This remains poorly addressed so far: methods either require large volumes of annotated data (semantic case), or
are limited to restricted datasets (binary set-ups). Most approaches do not exhibit the versatility required for temporal
and spatial adaptation: simplicity in architecture design
and pretraining on realistic and comprehensive datasets.
Synthetic datasets are the key solution but still fail to handle complex and diverse scenes. In this paper, we present
HySCDG a generative pipeline for creating a large hybrid
semantic change detection dataset that contains both real
VHR images and inpainted ones, along with land cover semantic map at both dates and the change map. Being semantically and spatially guided, HySCDG generates realistic images, leading to a comprehensive and hybrid transfer-proof
dataset FSC-180k. We evaluate FSC-180k on five change detection cases (binary and semantic), from zero-shot to mixed
and sequential training, and also under low data regime
training. Experiments demonstrate that pretraining on our
hybrid dataset leads to a significant performance boost, outperforming SyntheWorld, a fully synthetic dataset, in every
configuration. All codes, models, and data are available
here: https://yb23.github.io/projects/cywd/.

Figure 1. Efficient and scalable change detection requires a comprehensive training dataset that does not exist today. Using a singletemporal dataset (image+semantic map), we propose HySCDG that
generates a novel bi-temporal hybrid dataset FSC-180k. This
enables multiple transfer learning possibilities on either binary and
semantic change detection tasks.
/ : Transfer with/without
fine-tuning our model, respectively.

cant challenges and costs, especially when dealing with Very
High Resolution (VHR) images (ground sampling distance:
GSD <1 m, [30]). This is due to the need for expertise and
considerable effort in collecting, preprocessing, and annotating images [59, 62], particularly in the case of VHR data and
multiple labels (termed semantic change detection, SCD)
[57, 61, 70, 74].
As an alternative, synthetic data generation is a promising direction for bi-temporal labeled data provision from a
single temporal domain that is successful in diverse areas
such as urban sprawl [17], disaster or climate change monitoring [42] or crop mapping [36]. Two main paradigms
exist for CD: fully synthetic datasets (mainly graphics-based

1. Introduction
Efficient methods for change detection (CD) are crucial for
monitoring territories and the various phenomena and activities that impact them [3]. As human and climatic pressures
increase, this topic is of utmost importance and calls every
year for higher spatial resolution and semantic accuracy [55].
Change detection at scale has benefited greatly from the contributions of deep learning in recent years [7, 12, 69, 73], but
most methods are grounded on large volumes of annotated
data [41, 60]. Creating a large-scale dataset for bi-temporal
(pair-wise) remote sensing change detection poses signifi-

2204

