This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReasonGrounder: LVLM-Guided Hierarchical Feature Splatting for
Open-Vocabulary 3D Visual Grounding and Reasoning
Zhenyang Liu1,3 , Yikai Wang2 *, Sixiao Zheng1,3 , Tongying Pan1 ,
Longfei Liang4 , Yanwei Fu1,3†, Xiangyang Xue1†
1

Fudan University 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 Shanghai Innovation Institute 4 NeuHelium Co., Ltd

lzyzjhz@163.com, yikai.wang@ntu.edu.sg, sxzheng18@fudan.edu.cn, typan23@m.fudan.edu.cn,
longfei.liang@neuhelium.com, {yanweifu,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Project Page: ZhenyangLiu.github.io/ReasonGrounder

Abstract

 
  
  

Open-vocabulary 3D visual grounding and reasoning aim
to localize objects in a scene based on implicit language descriptions, even when they are occluded. This ability is crucial for tasks such as vision-language navigation and autonomous robotics. However, current methods struggle because they rely heavily on fine-tuning with 3D annotations
and mask proposals, which limits their ability to handle diverse semantics and common knowledge required for effective reasoning. In this work, we propose ReasonGrounder,
an LVLM-guided framework that uses hierarchical 3D feature Gaussian fields for adaptive grouping based on physical scale, enabling open-vocabulary 3D grounding and reasoning. ReasonGrounder interprets implicit instructions using large vision-language models (LVLM) and localizes occluded objects through 3D Gaussian splatting. By incorporating 2D segmentation masks from the SAM and multiview CLIP embeddings, ReasonGrounder selects Gaussian
groups based on object scale, enabling accurate localization through both explicit and implicit language understanding, even in novel, occluded views. We also contribute
ReasoningGD, a new dataset containing over 10K scenes
and 2 million annotations for evaluating open-vocabulary
3D grounding and amodal perception under occlusion.
Experiments show that ReasonGrounder significantly improves 3D grounding accuracy in real-world scenarios.

   
  
  

Figure 1. Examples of open-vocabulary 3D visual grounding
and reasoning. In a given scene, the user observes from a perspective with occlusions and asks questions such as: “Can you
localize the red, round, sweet fruit on the table that is partially occluded by the toy sheep?” Open-vocabulary 3D visual grounding
and reasoning seeks to interpret complex implicit queries, deduce
answers, and accurately localize the target object, even when it is
partially or fully occluded from the current viewpoint.

guage descriptions, even when the objects are occluded or
only partially visible. This task is challenging as language
complexity requires both comprehension and advanced visual reasoning. For instance, simple commands like apple
can be directly interpreted, while more complex instructions, such as Can you localize the red, round, sweet fruit
on the table that is partially occluded by the toy sheep?, require more from the system. As shown in Figure 1, these instructions involve locating the target object, interpreting the
intent of the description, and accounting for occlusion. This
capability is crucial for applications such as autonomous
robotics [11, 34] and augmented reality [3, 4], where systems must handle dynamic, unstructured, and often incomplete visual data while interpreting vague or indirect language to infer user intent and complete complex tasks.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary 3D visual grounding and reasoning aims
to accurately localize objects in a scene using implicit lan* The work was completed while Yikai was at Fudan.
† Corresponding authors.
‡ Prof. Yanwei Fu is also with Institute of Trustworthy Embodied Al,
and the School of Data Science, Fudan University.

3718

