This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DVHGNN: Multi-Scale Dilated Vision HGNN for Efficient Vision Recognition
Caoshuo Li1,2∗ , Tanzhe Li1,2∗ , Xiaobin Hu3 , Donghao Luo3 , Taisong Jin1,2†
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China.
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China. 3 Tencent Youtu Lab.
{licaoshuo, tanzheli}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, jintaisong@xmu.edu.cn,
{xiaobinhu, michaelluo}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recently, Vision Graph Neural Network (ViG) has gained
considerable attention in computer vision. Despite its
groundbreaking innovation, Vision Graph Neural Network
encounters key issues including the quadratic computational complexity caused by its K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
graph construction and the limitation of pairwise relations of normal graphs. To address the aforementioned
challenges, we propose a novel vision architecture, termed
Dilated Vision HyperGraph Neural Network (DVHGNN),
which is designed to leverage multi-scale hypergraph to
efficiently capture high-order correlations among objects.
Specifically, the proposed method tailors Clustering and
Dilated HyperGraph Construction (DHGC) to adaptively
capture multi-scale dependencies among the data samples.
Furthermore, a dynamic hypergraph convolution mechanism is proposed to facilitate adaptive feature exchange and
fusion at the hypergraph level. Extensive qualitative and
quantitative evaluations of the benchmark image datasets
demonstrate that the proposed DVHGNN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art vision backbones. For instance, our DVHGNN-S achieves an impressive top-1 accuracy of 83.1% on ImageNet-1K, surpassing ViG-S by +1.0↑
and ViHGNN-S by +0.6↑.

Figure 1.
Comparison of FLOPs and Top-1 accuracy on
ImageNet-1K. The proposed DVHGNN achieves the best performance compared to other state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction

capturing the long-range dependencies. The introduction
of the Transformer [47], renowned for handling long-range
information in natural language processing (NLP), to computer vision via the Vision Transformer (ViT) [9] marked
a significant shift. ViT demonstrates strong performance
across various vision tasks by efficiently modeling longrange dependencies of an image. Despite its strengths, ViT
still has the drawbacks including the absence of CNNs’ inductive bias, a dependency on extensive training data and
the quadratic computational complexity caused by its global
self-attention mechanism. Subsequently, various variants
and extensions [28, 32, 37, 46, 49, 53] of ViT have been
proposed to mitigate these drawbacks, offering more efficient and adaptable solutions for different vision tasks.

The rapid advancement of deep learning has significantly
propelled computer vision community. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [6, 17, 19, 26, 42, 43, 45] have become the predominant approach in various vision tasks, efficiently capturing the spatial relationships and structural
complexities within images owing to the locality and shared
weights. However, CNNs are constrained by their narrow
focus on local information, rendering them incapable of
∗ Equal contribution

† Corresponding author

Both CNNs and ViTs treat images as grid and sequential
structures, respectively, lacking the flexibility and the ability to capture the structure of complex objects in an image.

20158

