This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Semantic Feature Discrimination for Perceptual Image
Super-Resolution and Opinion-Unaware No-Reference Image Quality Assessment
Guanglu Dong
Xiangyu Liao
Mingyang Li
Guihuan Guo
Chao Ren*
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University, China
{dongguanglu, liaoxiangyu1, 2024222055110, guoguihuan}@stu.scu.edu.cn, chaoren@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been widely
applied to image super-resolution (SR) to enhance the perceptual quality. However, most existing GAN-based SR
methods typically perform coarse-grained discrimination
directly on images and ignore the semantic information
of images, making it challenging for the super resolution
networks (SRN) to learn fine-grained and semantic-related
texture details. To alleviate this issue, we propose a semantic feature discrimination method, SFD, for perceptual SR.
Specifically, we first design a feature discriminator (FeatD), to discriminate the pixel-wise middle semantic features
from CLIP, aligning the feature distributions of SR images
with that of high-quality images. Additionally, we propose
a text-guided discrimination method (TG-D) by introducing
learnable prompt pairs (LPP) in an adversarial manner to
perform discrimination on the more abstract output feature
of CLIP, further enhancing the discriminative ability of our
method. With both Feat-D and TG-D, our SFD can effectively distinguish between the semantic feature distributions
of low-quality and high-quality images, encouraging SRN
to generate more realistic and semantic-relevant textures.
Furthermore, based on the trained Feat-D and LPP, we propose a novel opinion-unaware no-reference image quality
assessment (OU NR-IQA) method, SFD-IQA, greatly improving OU NR-IQA performance without any additional
targeted training. Extensive experiments on classical SISR,
real-world SISR, and OU NR-IQA tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/GuangluDong0728/SFD.

Figure 1. Perception-distortion trade-off comparison between our
proposed SFD and other SOTA GAN-based SISR methods.

Figure 2. Relative PLCC comparation between the proposed SFDIQA and other OU NR-IQA methods.

1. Introduction
As one of the most important tasks in low-level computer
vision [14, 19, 33, 36, 50, 52, 60, 67], single image superresolution (SISR) [11, 18, 28, 34, 56, 57, 62, 80] aims to
accurately reconstruct high-resolution (HR) images from the
* Corresponding author

given low-resolution (LR) counterparts. In recent years, with
advancements in deep learning, SISR has achieved rapid and
substantial progress. Since Dong et al. [11] first introduce
deep learning to SISR task, numerous studies have emerged
to explore more advanced network architectures, including

28176

