This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A General Adaptive Dual-level Weighting Mechanism for Remote Sensing
Pansharpening
Jie Huang1 *

Haorui Chen1 *
Jiaxuan Ren1
Siran Peng2, 3
Liangjian Deng1†
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

{jayhuang,hrchen,jiaxuan.ren}@std.uestc.edu.cn,liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Block

PAN

Block

Block

Currently, deep learning-based methods for remote sensing
pansharpening have advanced rapidly. However, many existing methods struggle to fully leverage feature heterogeneity
and redundancy, thereby limiting their effectiveness. We use
the covariance matrix to model the feature heterogeneity
and redundancy and propose Correlation-Aware Covariance Weighting (CACW) to adjust them. CACW captures
these correlations through the covariance matrix, which is
then processed by a nonlinear function to generate weights
for adjustment. Building upon CACW, we introduce a general adaptive dual-level weighting mechanism (ADWM) to
address these challenges from two key perspectives, enhancing a wide range of existing deep-learning methods.
First, Intra-Feature Weighting (IFW) evaluates correlations
among channels within each feature to reduce redundancy
and enhance unique information. Second, Cross-Feature
Weighting (CFW) adjusts contributions across layers based
on inter-layer correlations, reﬁning the ﬁnal output. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of
ADWM compared to recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Furthermore, we validate the effectiveness of our approach through generality experiments, redundancy visualization, comparison experiments, key variables and complexity analysis, and ablation studies. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Jie-1203/ADWM .

HRMS

(a) General methods
LRMS
(H,W,C)

(H,W,C)

(C,1)

(N,H,W,C)

(N,1)

(H,W,C)
sum

layer-weight

channel-weight

(b) Intra-Feature Weighting (IFW)

Block

Block

Block

PAN

(c) Cross-Feature Weighting (CFW)

LRMS

HRMS

(d) Our dual-level weighting
Block

Feature
Extraction
Block

Weight

Weight
Generation

IFW

CFW

Feature
Maps

Figure 1. Application of our dual-level weighting mechanism
within the existing methods. (a) General methods. (b) Intra-Feature
Weighting (IFW): weighting different channels within a single feature. (c) Cross-Feature Weighting (CFW): weighting features at
different depths to obtain the ﬁnal result. (d) Our dual-level weighting combines both IFW and CFW to fully unlock the potential of
the original networks.

1. Introduction
The application of high-resolution multispectral (HRMS)
images is expanding rapidly, with uses in ﬁelds such as
object detection [8, 28], change detection [3, 23], unmixing [4], and classiﬁcation [6, 7]. However, due to technological limitations, satellites are typically only able to capture

low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) images alongside highresolution panchromatic (PAN) images. In this setup, PAN
images provide high spatial resolution, whereas LRMS images offer rich spectral information. To generate HRMS
images with both high spatial and spectral resolutions, the
pansharpening technique was introduced and has since seen
continuous development.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

7447

