This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Generalization of Handwritten Text Recognition Models
Carlos Garrido-Munoz Jorge Calvo-Zaragoza
Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence Group, University of Alicante, Spain
{carlos.garrido,jorge.calvo}@ua.es

Abstract
Recent advances in Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR)
have led to significant reductions in transcription errors
on standard benchmarks under the i.i.d. assumption, thus
focusing on minimizing in-distribution (ID) errors. However, this assumption does not hold in real-world applications, which has motivated HTR research to explore Transfer Learning and Domain Adaptation techniques. In this
work, we investigate the unaddressed limitations of HTR
models in generalizing to out-of-distribution (OOD) data.
We adopt the challenging setting of Domain Generalization, where models are expected to generalize to OOD data
without any prior access. To this end, we analyze 336
OOD cases from eight state-of-the-art HTR models across
seven widely used datasets, spanning five languages. Additionally, we study how HTR models leverage synthetic
data to generalize. We reveal that the most significant
factor for generalization lies in the textual divergence between domains, followed by visual divergence. We demonstrate that the error of HTR models in OOD scenarios can
be reliably estimated, with discrepancies falling below 10
points in 70% of cases. We identify the underlying limitations of HTR models, laying the foundation for future
research to address this challenge. Code is available at
github.com/carlos10garrido/HTR-OOD.

Figure 1. Average performance of HTR models for in-distribution
(ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. The significant performance drop in OOD scenarios highlights the limited generalization capability of current models. Details in Sect. 4.

1. Introduction

process is challenging due to the vast variations in writing styles, different languages and alphabets, and even the
mediums on which the text is written [35].
Perhaps influenced by the long-standing competitions in
the field of HTR [2, 5, 76, 78], the latest improvements—
from both models [10, 11, 20, 39, 46, 47, 64] and data generation [17, 36, 44, 61, 82]—have been oriented towards
increasing performance in the test sets of standard benchmarks, relying on the assumption that test data will conform
to the same source distribution. This adheres to the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) condition, which is often overlooked in real-world settings [12, 13, 27]. However,
as demonstrated by our preliminary results shown in Fig. 1,
the performance gap between in-distribution (ID) data and
out-of-distribution (OOD) data in HTR is particularly remarkable. This phenomenon is yet to be explored in this
field. Although this generalization issue remains largely unexplored, the literature recognizes the importance of gener-

Handwritten text plays a central role in transmitting human knowledge and culture across generations. Despite
the advancements in digital storage, significant volumes of
handwritten documents remain to be transcribed and thus
inaccessible for further analysis or retrieval. The field of
Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) focuses on automatically transcribing handwritten text into digital format. HTR
has wide-range applications, including the preservation of
cultural heritage [52], digital transcription of historical and
matrimonial records [69], digitization of personal and official documents [66], and even real-time digital note-taking
through graphic tablets [67]. However, this transcription

15275

