This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FAM Diffusion: Frequency and Attention Modulation for High-Resolution
Image Generation with Stable Diffusion
Haosen Yang1,2 * Adrian Bulat1 Isma Hadji1 Hai X. Pham1
Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3 Brais Martinez1
1

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK

2

University of Surrey, UK

Abstract

3

Xiatian Zhu2

Queen Mary University, UK

istic local patterns [1, 3, 7]. This is illustrated in Figure 1(a).
While retraining diffusion models on higher-resolution images is a straightforward solution, the computational demands quickly become prohibitive. This restricts applications requiring flexible or high-resolution image generation,
e.g. 4K. Therefore, adapting pre-trained diffusion models to
generate high-resolution images without additional training
is a topic of high interest that we tackle in this work.
Prior efforts addressing this important problem can be
largely categorized into two tracks. The first set of approaches, e.g. [3, 15], propose mechanisms that improve the
global structure consistency by steering the high-resolution
generation using the image generated at native (i.e. training)
resolution. However, the effectiveness of such mechanisms
is mixed, with trailing issues like poor detail quality, inconsistent local textures, and even persisting pattern repetitions
as shown in Figure 1(b). Furthermore, these works typically
operate on a patch-based basis, generating one patch at a
time. Concretely, this means that these methods resort to
redundant and overlapping forward passes, leading to large
latency overheads. The second group of approaches, e.g.
[7, 11, 34], eschews patch-based generation in favor of a
one-pass approach by directly altering the model architecture. This leads to faster generation, but unfortunately, it
comes at the cost of image quality, as shown in Fig. 1 (c).
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose
a straightforward yet effective approach that takes the best
of both worlds. Our method follows the single pass generation strategy for improved latency but, like patch-based approaches, leverages the native resolution generation to steer
the high-resolution one. Specifically, our method starts by
generating an image at native resolution conditioned on the
input text prompt. We then resort to a test-time diffusedenoise strategy [3, 8, 27], where the high-resolution denoising stage is guided by the native resolution diffusion
process. However, instead of blindly steering the high-res
image toward the low-res one as done elsewhere [3, 15], we
propose a Frequency Modulation (FM) module. In particular, we leverage the Fourier domain to selectively condi-

Diffusion models are proficient at generating high-quality
images. They are however effective only when operating at
the resolution used during training. Inference at a scaled
resolution leads to repetitive patterns and structural distortions. Retraining at higher resolutions quickly becomes
prohibitive. Thus, methods enabling pre-existing diffusion
models to operate at flexible test-time resolutions are highly
desirable. Previous works suffer from frequent artifacts and
often introduce large latency overheads. We propose two
simple modules that combine to solve these issues. We introduce a Frequency Modulation (FM) module that leverages
the Fourier domain to improve the global structure consistency, and an Attention Modulation (AM) module which improves the consistency of local texture patterns, a problem
largely ignored in prior works. Our method, coined FAM
diffusion, can seamlessly integrate into any latent diffusion
model and requires no additional training. Extensive qualitative results highlight the effectiveness of our method in
addressing structural and local artifacts, while quantitative
results show state-of-the-art performance. Also, our method
avoids redundant inference tricks for improved consistency
such as patch-based or progressive generation, leading to
negligible latency overheads. FAM diffusion project webpage: https://happy-hsy.github.io/projects/Famdiffusion/

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [22] demonstrate impressive generative
power across a range of applications [6, 18, 20, 23, 29, 30,
33]. While powerful, one known shortcoming of diffusion
models is their inability to seamlessly scale to higher resolutions beyond the one used during training. It is known that
directly generating images at resolutions beyond the training resolution results in severe object repetition and unreal* This work was conducted while Haosen Yang was an intern at Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK.

2459

