This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BACON: Improving Clarity of Image Captions via Bag-of-Concept Graphs
Zhantao Yang1,2⋆ , Ruili Feng2⋆⋄ , Keyu Yan2 , Huangji Wang1 , Zhicai Wang2
Shangwen Zhu1 , Han Zhang1,2 , Jie Xiao2 , Pingyu Wu2 , Kai Zhu2 , Jixuan Chen2
Chen-Wei Xie2 , Yue Yang3 , Hongyang Zhang4 , Yu Liu2 , Fan Cheng1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Alibaba group
3
University of Pennsylvania, 4 University of Waterloo
{ztyang196, ruilifengustc, yankeyu66, zhushangwen6, hzhang9617, jiexiao916, wpy364755620}@gmail.com
zhicaiw@outlook.com {kaizhustc, chenjixuan.cjx, eniac.xcw, ly103369}@alibaba-inc.com
yueyang1@seas.upenn.edu

hongyang.zhang@uwaterloo.ca

chengfan85@gmail.com

https://ztyang23.github.io/bacon-page

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image captioning is a crucial task that plays a significant
role in fields such as text-to-image generation and multimodal understanding. The rapid advancement of visionlanguage models (VLMs) [4, 5, 8, 23, 32, 35] has empowered these models to serve as highly effective captioners, producing accurate and detailed descriptions. However, their generated captions often suffer from issues such
as information entanglement and excessive length, collectively referred to as a “lack of clarity.” This poses challenges for applications that utilize these captions, particularly in models lacking strong text encoders based on large
language models (LLMs), such as SDXL [35] and GroundingDINO [24]. Both struggle due to their lack of strong text
encoders and syntax analysis capabilities; SDXL has difficulty extracting key objects and their descriptions, as well
as comprehending lengthy texts, while GroundingDINO
has difficulty identifying essential nouns from long texts.
Besides, these captions frequently overlook useful details,
such as image style and relationships between objects.
To address this challenge, this paper proposes BACON
—a neat and efficient approach for extracting elementwise and structured captions from VLMs, resulting in
clearer and more complete image captions. The elementwise method breaks down images into basic elements, facilitating information disentanglement and enhancing interpretability. Its structured format allows for quick access
to individual elements, alleviating issues related to syntax
and order. Additionally, by incorporating all important elements, BACON typically produces more complete captions. As illustrated in Fig. 1, a BACON-style caption composes of three key parts: 1) an overall description capturing the image’s style, theme, and key features; 2) a detailed
object list with labels and descriptions for each item; 3) the

Advancements in large Vision-Language Models have
brought precise, accurate image captioning, vital for advancing multi-modal image understanding and processing.
Yet these captions often carry lengthy, intertwined contexts
that are difficult to parse and frequently overlook essential cues, posing a great barrier for models like GroundingDINO and SDXL, which lack the strong text encoding
and syntax analysis needed to fully leverage dense captions.
To address this, we propose BACON, a prompting method
that breaks down VLM-generated captions into disentangled, structured elements such as objects, relationships,
styles, and themes. This approach not only minimizes confusion from handling complex contexts but also allows for efficient transfer into a JSON dictionary, enabling models without linguistic processing capabilities to easily access key
information. We annotated 100,000 image-caption pairs
using BACON with GPT-4V and trained an LLaVA captioner on this dataset, enabling it to produce BACON-style
captions without relying on costly GPT-4V. Evaluations of
overall quality, precision, and recall—as well as user studies—demonstrate that the resulting caption model consistently outperforms other SOTA VLM models in generating
high-quality captions. Besides, we show that BACON-style
captions exhibit better clarity when applied to various models, enabling them to accomplish previously unattainable
tasks or surpass existing SOTA solutions without training.
For example, BACON-style captions help GroundingDINO
achieve 1.51× higher recall scores on open-vocabulary object detection tasks compared to leading methods.

† Corresponding author, ⋆ Equal contribution, ⋄ Project leader

14380

