This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonSter: Marry Monodepth to Stereo Unleashes Power
Junda Cheng1 , Longliang Liu1 , Gangwei Xu1 , Xianqi Wang1 ,
Zhaoxing Zhang1 , Yong Deng2 , Jinliang Zang2 , Yurui Chen2 , Zhipeng Cai3 , Xin Yang1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology

2

Autel Robotics

3

Intel Labs

MonSter(Ours)

IGEV

Left Image

{jundacheng, longliangl, gwxu, xianqiw, zzx, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn, czptc2h@gmail.com

Figure 1. Zero-shot generalization comparison: all models are trained on Scene Flow and tested directly on KITTI. Compared to the
baseline IGEV [37], our method MonSter shows significant improvement in challenging regions such as reflective surfaces, textureless
areas, fine structures, and distant objects.

Abstract

ETH3D. Achieving up to 49.5% improvements (Bad 1.0
on ETH3D) over the previous best method. Comprehensive analysis verifies the effectiveness of MonSter in illposed regions. In terms of zero-shot generalization, MonSter significantly and consistently outperforms state-of-theart across the board. The code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/Junda24/MonSter.

Stereo matching recovers depth from image correspondences. Existing methods struggle to handle ill-posed
regions with limited matching cues, such as occlusions
and textureless areas. To address this, we propose MonSter, a novel method that leverages the complementary
strengths of monocular depth estimation and stereo matching. MonSter integrates monocular depth and stereo matching into a dual-branch architecture to iteratively improve
each other. Confidence-based guidance adaptively selects
reliable stereo cues for monodepth scale-shift recovery. The
refined monodepth is in turn guides stereo effectively at illposed regions. Such iterative mutual enhancement enables
MonSter to evolve monodepth priors from coarse objectlevel structures to pixel-level geometry, fully unlocking the
potential of stereo matching. As shown in Fig. 2, MonSter ranks 1st across five most commonly used leaderboards
— SceneFlow, KITTI 2012, KITTI 2015, Middlebury, and

1. Introduction
Stereo matching estimates a disparity map from rectified
stereo images, which can be subsequently converted into
metric depth. It is the core of many applications such as
self-driving, robotic navigation, and 3D reconstruction.
Deep learning based methods [5, 13, 15, 18, 33, 34,
39, 47, 49] have demonstrated promising performance on
standard benchmarks. These methods can be roughly categorized into cost filtering-based methods and iterative
optimization-based methods. Cost filtering-based methods [5, 13, 14, 20, 36, 40, 42] construct 3D/4D cost volume
using CNN features, followed by a series of 2D/3D con-

† Corresponding author.

6273

