This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLAME : Frozen Large Language Models Enable Data-Efficient
Language-Image Pre-training
Anjia Cao1
1

Xing Wei1

Zhiheng Ma2,3,4 *
2

School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
4

Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computility Microelectronics

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

caoanjia7@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

weixing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

mazhiheng@suat-sz.edu.cn

long
data- multiembedding(s) input efficient lingual

Abstract
Interpolated PE

Language-image pre-training faces significant challenges
due to limited data in specific formats and the constrained capacities of text encoders. While prevailing methods attempt
to address these issues through data augmentation and architecture modifications, they continue to struggle with processing long-form text inputs, and the inherent limitations of traditional CLIP text encoders lead to suboptimal downstream
generalization. In this paper, we propose FLAME (Frozen
Large lAnguage Models Enable data-efficient languageimage pre-training) that leverages frozen large language
models as text encoders, naturally processing long text inputs
and demonstrating impressive multilingual generalization.
FLAME comprises two key components: 1) a multifaceted
prompt distillation technique for extracting diverse semantic
representations from long captions, which better aligns with
the multifaceted nature of images, and 2) a facet-decoupled
attention mechanism, complemented by an offline embedding strategy, to ensure efficient computation. Extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate FLAME’s superior performance. When trained on CC3M, FLAME surpasses the previous state-of-the-art by 4.9% in ImageNet top-1 accuracy.
On YFCC15M, FLAME surpasses the WIT-400M-trained
CLIP by 44.4% in average image-to-text recall@1 across
36 languages, and by 34.6% in text-to-image recall@1 for
long-context retrieval on Urban-1k. Code is available at
https://github.com/MIV-XJTU/FLAME.

Long Caption

Pre-trained
Text Encoder

𝑒

Sub
Cap 1

Text Encoder

𝑒2
···

Sub
Cap 2

𝑒1

···

Long Caption

(a) Long-CLIP

Sub
Cap N

𝑒𝑁

(b) DreamLIP
𝑒1

Multifaceted Prompts

𝑒2
···

LLM
Long Caption

𝑒𝑁

(c) FLAME (Ours)

Figure 1. Conceptual comparison of text streams. FLAME
leverages frozen large language models (LLMs) to directly process
long captions. With multifaceted prompts, this framework extracts
diverse semantic embeddings, achieving data efficiency. Preserving
LLMs’ inherent capabilities enables multilingual generalization.

vision. CLIP-style models have demonstrated state-of-theart performance across a wide range of downstream tasks
[29, 30, 38, 39, 42, 48, 54]. However, the deployment of
CLIP models in real-world scenarios presents several challenges, especially when data is scarce. Specifically, there
are two major limitations that hinder their broader applicability: 1) Limited Training Pairs—high-quality image-text
pairs, particularly those involving long-form descriptions
and non-English languages, are difficult to come by; and
2) Constrained Model Capacity—the standard CLIP text
encoder has a max sequence length limitation of 77 tokens,
which restricts its ability to leverage the rich, long-context

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning, particularly language-image pretraining, has made significant strides with models like CLIP
(Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training) [38], which learn
transferable visual representations through language super* Corresponding author: Zhiheng Ma.

4080

