This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Track4Gen: Teaching Video Diffusion Models to Track Points
Improves Video Generation
Hyeonho Jeong1,2,*
1

Chun-Hao P. Huang1

Adobe Research

2

Jong Chul Ye2

KAIST

3

Niloy J. Mitra1,3

Duygu Ceylan1

University College London

Abstract
While recent foundational video generators produce visually rich output, they still struggle with appearance drift,
where objects gradually degrade or change inconsistently
across frames, breaking visual coherence. We hypothesize that this is because there is no explicit supervision in
terms of spatial tracking at the feature level. We propose
Track4Gen, a spatially aware video generator that combines video diffusion loss with point tracking across frames,
providing enhanced spatial supervision on the diffusion features. Track4Gen merges the video generation and point
tracking tasks into a single network by making minimal
changes to existing video generation architectures. Using Stable Video Diffusion [4] as a backbone, Track4Gen
demonstrates that it is possible to unify video generation
and point tracking, which are typically handled as separate tasks. Our extensive evaluations show that Track4Gen
effectively reduces appearance drift, resulting in temporally stable and visually coherent video generation. Project
page: hyeonho99.github.io/track4gen

Figure 1. Motivation. Videos generated by Stable Video Diffusion [4] suffer from appearance drift, while those from our method,
Track4Gen, are free from such appearance inconsistency issues.

Unfortunately, appearance drift remains a persistent issue in current video models, even with increased training
data and more advanced architectures. We speculate that
this limitation arises from supervision being based solely
on video diffusion loss (i.e., denoising score matching [64])
in the pixel/latent space, without explicit spatial awareness
guidance in the feature space. Hence, in this paper, we ask
if and how we can empower video diffusion models with appearance constancy by providing additional supervision.

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based video generators [4, 6, 47] are making
rapid strides in creating temporally consistent and visually
rich video content. This progress marks a significant shift,
as the unification of generation and control has the potential
to transform the traditional workflow of first capturing and
then digitally editing video.
Despite impressive capabilities, video generators often
suffer from appearance drift, where visual elements gradually change, mutate, or degrade over time, causing inconsistencies in the objects. For example, in Fig. 1, we observe
the horns of the cow distorting and morphing unrealistically
over time, breaking the plausibility of the generated content.
This is in striking contrast to humans, who develop a sense
of appearance constancy as early as infancy through observation and interaction with the world [72].

We present Track4Gen as a spatially aware video generator that receives supervision both in terms of the original diffusion-based objective as well as (dense) point correspondence across frames, which we refer to as tracks. We
demonstrate that it is possible to provide such track-level supervision in the diffusion feature space by making minimal
architecture changes. Our generated videos do not suffer
from degradation of video quality (according to the usual
video generation metrics), while being significantly more

∗ Work done during internship at Adobe.

7276

