This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionSfM: Predicting Structure and Motion
via Ray Origin and Endpoint Diffusion
Qitao Zhao, Amy Lin, Jeff Tan, Jason Y. Zhang, Deva Ramanan, Shubham Tulsiani
Carnegie Mellon University
Project page: qitaozhao.github.io/DiffusionSfM
Input Images

Ray Origin & Endpoint Diffusion Timesteps

3D Point Clouds &
Recovered Cameras

Figure 1. DiffusionSfM. Top: Given a set of multi-view images (left), DiffusionSfM represents scene geometry and cameras (right) as
pixel-wise ray origins and endpoints in a global frame. It learns a denoising diffusion model to infer these elements directly from multiview inputs. Unlike traditional Structure-from-Motion (SfM) pipelines, which separate pairwise reasoning and global optimization into
two stages, our approach unifies both into a single end-to-end multi-view reasoning framework. Bottom: Example results of inferred scene
geometry and cameras for two distinct settings: a real-world outdoor scene (left) and a synthetic indoor scene (right).

Abstract

1. Introduction
The task of recovering structure (geometry) and motion
(cameras) from multi-view images has long been a focus of
the computer vision community, with typical pipelines [25]
performing pairwise correspondence estimation followed
by global optimization. While classical methods relied on
hand-designed features, matching, and optimization, there
has been a recent shift towards incorporating learning-based
alternatives [5, 6, 14, 23]. More recently, the widely influential DUSt3R [36] advocates for predicting pairwise
3D pointmaps (instead of only correspondences), demonstrating that this can yield accurate dense geometry and
cameras. In order to reconstruct more than two views,
DUSt3R (and its variants [10]) still require a global optimization reminiscent of classic bundle adjustment. While
these methods, both classical and learning-based, have led
to impressive improvements in SfM, the overall approach
is largely unchanged – learned or geometric pairwise reasoning followed by global optimization. In this work, we

Current Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methods typically follow a two-stage pipeline, combining learned or geometric
pairwise reasoning with a subsequent global optimization
step. In contrast, we propose a data-driven multi-view reasoning approach that directly infers 3D scene geometry and
camera poses from multi-view images. Our framework, DiffusionSfM, parameterizes scene geometry and cameras as
pixel-wise ray origins and endpoints in a global frame and
employs a transformer-based denoising diffusion model to
predict them from multi-view inputs. To address practical
challenges in training diffusion models with missing data
and unbounded scene coordinates, we introduce specialized
mechanisms that ensure robust learning. We empirically
validate DiffusionSfM on both synthetic and real datasets,
demonstrating that it outperforms classical and learningbased approaches while naturally modeling uncertainty.

6317

