This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Finer-CAM
: Spotting the Difference
Reveals Finer Details for Visual Explanation
Ziheng Zhang*, Jianyang Gu∗ , Arpita Chowdhury, Zheda Mai, David Carlyn,
Tanya Berger-Wolf, Yu Su, Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University

Birds525
Cars
Aircraft

Average Cosine Similarity

0.8
0.6

[Blue Grosbeak,
Grandala]: 0.42

0.4

Grad-CAM

Finer-CAM

Target: Blue Grosbeak

Target: Blue Grosbeak

Why Blue Grosbeak?

What’s the difference
from Grandala?

0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0

100

200

300

400

Class Index

500

Why Grandala?

Reference: Grandala

Figure 1. Illustration of Finer-CAM. Left: Sorted cosine similarity between linear classifier weights, averaged across all classes (details
in the supplementary). Many pairs of classes are highly similar, yet neural networks can effectively distinguish them to achieve high
fine-grained classification accuracy. Middle: Standard CAM methods highlight main regions contributing to the target class’s logit value,
inadvertently including regions predictive of similar classes and overshadowing fine discriminative details. Right: We propose Finer-CAM
to explicitly compare the target class with similar classes and spot the difference, enabling accurate localization of discriminative details.

Abstract

sizes the unique, discriminative details of the target class.
Finer-CAM is easy to implement, compatible with various
CAM methods, and can be extended to multi-modal models for accurate localization of specific concepts. Additionally, Finer-CAM allows adjustable comparison strength,
enabling users to selectively highlight coarse object contours or fine discriminative details. Quantitatively, we show
that masking out the top 5% of activated pixels by FinerCAM results in a larger relative confidence drop compared
to baselines. The source code and demo are available at
https://github.com/Imageomics/Finer-CAM.

Class activation map (CAM) has been widely used to highlight image regions that contribute to class predictions. Despite its simplicity and computational efficiency, CAM often
struggles to identify discriminative regions that distinguish
visually similar fine-grained classes. Prior efforts address
this limitation by introducing more sophisticated explanation processes, but at the cost of extra complexity. In this paper, we propose Finer-CAM, a method that retains CAM’s
efficiency while achieving precise localization of discriminative regions. Our key insight is that the deficiency of CAM
lies not in “how” it explains, but in “what” it explains.
Specifically, previous methods attempt to identify all cues
contributing to the target class’s logit value, which inadvertently also activates regions predictive of visually similar classes. By explicitly comparing the target class with
similar classes and spotting their differences, Finer-CAM
suppresses features shared with other classes and empha-

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks can capture texture and structure information in images and leverage these features to recognize the corresponding classes [8, 9, 16, 36]. Thanks
to large-scale datasets and robust training processes, deep
learning algorithms have achieved classification accuracies
surpassing those of human experts [15, 39]. With these ad-

* Equal contributions

9611

