This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProjAttacker: A Conﬁgurable Physical Adversarial Attack for
Face Recognition via Projector
Yuanwei Liu1,2∗ Hui Wei1,2∗ Chengyu Jia1,2 Ruqi Xiao1,2
Weijian Ruan3,4 Xingxing Wei5 Joey Tianyi Zhou6 Zheng Wang1,2†
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artifcial Intelligence, School of Computer Science,

Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
3

2

Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan, China

Hangzhou Research Institute of Xidian University, Hangzhou, China

Technology Group Corporation, Shenzhen, China
6

5

4

Smart City Research Institute of China Electronics

Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China

Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore

Abstract
Previous physical adversarial attacks have shown that
carefully crafted perturbations can deceive face recognition
systems, revealing critical security vulnerabilities. However, these attacks often struggle to impersonate multiple
targets and frequently fail to bypass liveness detection. For
example, attacks using human-skin masks [28] are challenging to fabricate, inconvenient to swap between users,
and often fail liveness detection due to facial occlusions. A
projector, however, can generate content-rich light without
obstructing the face, making it ideal for non-intrusive attacks. Thus, we propose a novel physical adversarial attack
using a projector and explore the superposition of projected
and natural light to create adversarial facial images. This
approach eliminates the need for physical artifacts on the
face, effectively overcoming these limitations. Speciﬁcally,
our proposed ProjAttacker generates adversarial 3D textures that are projected onto human faces. To ensure physical realizability, we introduce a light reﬂection function that
models complex optical interactions between projected light
and human skin, accounting for reﬂection and diffraction
effects. Furthermore, we incorporate camera Image Signal
Processing (ISP) simulation to maintain the robustness of
adversarial perturbations across real-world diverse imaging conditions. Comprehensive evaluations conducted in
both digital and physical scenarios validate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has become a widely adopted technology for authentication and access control [2, 13]. De* Equal contribution

† Corresponding author

AdvEyeglass

AdvHat

AT3D

Face Recognition

(a) Existing Attack Methods
Victim List

Victim
Targets
Attacker

Victim

Face Recognition

Real-time C fi
l
onfiguration

ProjAttacker

Applications of

ProjAttacker

Attack Deploy

Liveness detection

Victim Selection

Face Recognition

Face Recognizer

Liveness Detector

Attacker

Liveness Detection

(b) Our Attack Method

Figure 1. Comparison of our ProjAttacker with existing attack methods. While existing methods [10, 18, 28] can successfully attack face recognition, they are difﬁcult to fabricate, inconvenient to swap between targets, and unable to bypass liveness
detection due to facial occlusions. In contrast, our ProjAttacker
projects light-based adversarial textures onto the face, enabling a
non-intrusive attack via projector that overcomes these limitations,
allowing real-time, conﬁgurable face swaps that simultaneously
deceive both liveness detection and recognition models.

spite its prevalence, signiﬁcant security vulnerabilities remain. Recent studies have shown that imperceptible, carefully crafted perturbations can deceive deep neural network
based face recognition models, leading to incorrect predictions [5, 20, 25, 30]. These attacks remain effective in
the physical world [24], exposing substantial security risks.
Developing physical adversarial attack methods to identify
weaknesses and assess the robustness of these systems is
essential for secure real-world deployment.
Existing physical adversarial attacks on face recognition systems largely rely on physical artifacts like textured

21248

