This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEGA: Masked Generative Autoencoder for Human Mesh Recovery
∗

†

Guénolé Fiche1,2
Simon Leglaive1
Xavier Alameda-Pineda3
Francesc Moreno-Noguer4
1
2
CentraleSupélec (IETR UMR CNRS 6164)
Naver Labs Europe
3
4
Inria, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, LJK
Amazon

optimal minima. With the advancement of deep learning and the availability of datasets of images with 3D human pose and shape annotations, most approaches have
shifted to a regression-based paradigm. Early approaches
used neural architectures based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) [37, 52].
Recent works have adopted Transformers [83] for extracting image features or making predictions [13, 27]. Despite
achieving unprecedented accuracy, state-of-the-art HMR
models still have some weaknesses, such as producing unrealistic predictions, especially when dealing with occlusions.
To address these issues, recent works have proposed tokenizing the human pose using vector quantized-variational
autoencoders (VQ-VAEs) [22, 24]. This approach uses a
discrete representation of the human mesh, learned from
large-scale motion capture datasets, to confine predictions
to the space of anthropomorphic meshes using a dictionary
of valid mesh tokens. This tokenization aligns well with
Transformer-based architectures, which were initially designed for processing discrete data in natural language processing. Notably, VQ-HPS [24] reframed HMR as a classification task and achieved state-of-the-art results with large
and small training datasets, demonstrating the great potential of human mesh tokenized representations in HMR.

Abstract
Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) from a single RGB image
is a highly ambiguous problem, as an infinite set of 3D interpretations can explain the 2D observation equally well.
Nevertheless, most HMR methods overlook this issue and
make a single prediction without accounting for this ambiguity. A few approaches generate a distribution of human meshes, enabling the sampling of multiple predictions;
however, none of them is competitive with the latest singleoutput model when making a single prediction. This work
proposes a new approach based on masked generative modeling. By tokenizing the human pose and shape, we formulate the HMR task as generating a sequence of discrete tokens conditioned on an input image. We introduce MEGA,
a MaskEd Generative Autoencoder trained to recover human meshes from images and partial human mesh token sequences. Given an image, our flexible generation scheme
allows us to predict a single human mesh in deterministic
mode or to generate multiple human meshes in stochastic
mode. Experiments on in-the-wild benchmarks show that
MEGA achieves state-of-the-art performance in deterministic and stochastic modes, outperforming single-output and
multi-output approaches. See the project page at https://gfiche.github.io/research-pages/mega/.

While significant progress has been made in HMR, a
major issue remains unaddressed in most prior works: a
2D image, especially with occlusions, cannot provide sufficient information to estimate a 3D human mesh with certainty [64, 78] (see Fig. 1). This limitation causes singleoutput models to be biased toward most common poses
and body shapes [17]. To mitigate this problem, several
works have proposed probabilistic approaches that generate multiple predictions from a single image [45, 75].
These approaches have used various families of generative
models, ranging from conditional variational autoencoders
(CVAEs) [77] to diffusion models [12, 90]. However, this
increase in diversity typically comes at the cost of accuracy [76], and none of these multi-output methods are competitive with the latest single-output HMR models when
making a single prediction.

1. Introduction
Perceiving humans from images is a long-standing problem in computer vision, with applications in diverse fields
such as sports [23, 86] or e-commerce [58, 96]. Many approaches rely on statistical body models like SMPL [59] for
representing humans. Earlier human mesh recovery (HMR)
methods recovered the SMPL pose and shape parameters
from 2D cues using optimization-based techniques [8, 47].
However, these optimization procedures require good initialization, are time-consuming, and often converge to sub∗ Work done at CentraleSupélec before joining Naver Labs Europe.
† Work done at IRI (CSIC-UPC) before joining Amazon.

5366

