This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evaluating Model Perception of Color Illusions in Photorealistic Scenes
Lingjun Mao
Zineng Tang
Alane Suhr
University of California, Berkeley
{lingjun, terran, suhr}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

framework for generating realistic color illusion images,
covering many scenarios with illusions that we might genuinely encounter in our real life. We cover three different types of color illusions: contrast (Figure 1a), stripe
(Figure 1b), and filter (Figure 1c) illusions. For contrast
and stripe illusions, we first generate simple arrangements
of shapes exhibiting specific illusions, which are then processed through ControlNet [42] to generate more realistic
images. For filter illusions, we directly apply filters to the
original MS COCO 2017 images. In the end, we produce
a dataset consisting of total 19,000 images, half of which
include an illusion, and the other half being a control set
without illusions. Each image is paired with a syntheticallygenerated natural language question, asking either about
color differences between specific regions or directly inquiring about the color of a particular object in the image.

We study the perception of color illusions by visionlanguage models. Color illusion, where a person’s visual
system perceives color differently from actual color, is wellstudied in human vision. However, it remains underexplored
whether vision-language models (VLMs), trained on largescale human data, exhibit similar perceptual biases when
confronted with such color illusions. We propose an automated framework for generating color illusion images, resulting in RCID (Realistic Color Illusion Dataset), a dataset
of 19,000 realistic illusion images. Our experiments show
that all studied VLMs exhibit perceptual biases similar human vision. Finally, we train a model to distinguish both
human perception and actual pixel differences.

We test recent VLMs using our generated illusion images. We find that, after appropriate fine-tuning, they perform well on non-illusion images, but their accuracy drops
significantly on illusion images. Some of their responses
exhibit visual biases similar to those of humans, while some
are entirely incorrect, failing to align with either pixel values or human perception. We also observe that external
prompts, such as Chain of Thought (CoT) [40] and few-shot
examples, can influence VLM performance to some extent.
Furthermore, fine-tuning on illusion images enhances the
models’ ability to understand these color illusions. Based
on this, we propose a foundational baseline method that enables models to capture both human perceptual biases and
true pixel values. Finally, we investigate the underlying
causes of VLM susceptibility to color illusions, including
biases from both the visual system and prior knowledge.

1. Introduction
Human visual perception does not always align perfectly
with the real world [4, 12, 17]; we are easily influenced
by contextual factors such as lighting conditions or surrounding objects and patterns. Figure 1 shows several examples of color illusions, where human judgment of object color and brightness does not align with actual pixel
values. Currently, many large vision-language models
(VLMs) [9, 22, 23, 39] exhibit behavioral similaritities to
human visual perception in various aspects, including object recognition [41, 44], scene understanding [24, 36], and
spatial reasoning [5]. But because the human visual system behaves idiosyncratically when encountering these illusions, we aim to study whether these models perceive such
illusions in the same way humans do. Prior work [34, 43]
has explored this question by sourcing illusion images from
the internet. However, this approach has a drawback: the
number of illusion images on the web is limited, and most
images (e.g., 60% for the IllusionVQA dataset [34]) are
well-known examples of these illusions; thus, VLMs have
likely memorized humanlike behavioral responses to them.
Additionally, the limited scale also restricts the depth and
variety of analyses that can be conducted.
To address these limitations, we propose an automatic

In conclusion, our contributions are as follows: (1)
We propose an automated framework for generating realistic illusion images and create a large, realistic dataset
of color illusion images, named RCID (Realistic Color
Illusion Dataset), to enhance the fairness and accuracy of
model testing. (2) We investigate underlying mechanisms
of color illusions in VLMs, highlighting the combined influence of the vision system and prior knowledge. We
also explore how external prompts and instruction tuning

7805

