This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R-TPT: Improving Adversarial Robustness of Vision-Language Models through
Test-Time Prompt Tuning
Lijun Sheng1,2 , Jian Liang2,3 *, Zilei Wang1 , Ran He2,3
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
slj0728@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liangjian92@gmail.com

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP, have gained
significant popularity as foundation models, with numerous
fine-tuning methods developed to enhance performance on
downstream tasks. However, due to their inherent vulnerability and the common practice of selecting from a limited set of open-source models, VLMs suffer from a higher
risk of adversarial attacks than traditional vision models. Existing defense techniques typically rely on adversarial fine-tuning during training, which requires labeled
data and lacks of flexibility for downstream tasks. To address these limitations, we propose robust test-time prompt
tuning (R-TPT), which mitigates the impact of adversarial attacks during the inference stage. We first reformulate
the classic marginal entropy objective by eliminating the
term that introduces conflicts under adversarial conditions,
retaining only the pointwise entropy minimization. Furthermore, we introduce a plug-and-play reliability-based
weighted ensembling strategy, which aggregates useful information from reliable augmented views to strengthen the
defense. R-TPT enhances defense against adversarial attacks without requiring labeled training data while offering
high flexibility for inference tasks. Extensive experiments
on widely used benchmarks with various attacks demonstrate the effectiveness of R-TPT. The code is available in
https://github.com/TomSheng21/R-TPT.

Training-time defense

Test-time defense

CLIP

CLIP

Generate

Labeled

Adversarial
training

Generate

Deploy

Deploy
Test
Attack

Robust
CLIP

Adversarial
example

Test

CLIP

Attack
Adversarial
example

Robust
adaptation

Robust prediction

Robust prediction

Require labeled data

Only need test data

Limited flexibility

Flexible across tasks

Figure 1. Comparison between training-time and test-time defense
for CLIP. Our test-time defense paradigm provides robust prediction as the conventional training-time methods and requires no annotated dataset or adversarial training.

1. Introduction

visual modalities using two specialized feature extractors
trained with a contrastive loss function. Due to its concise architecture and impressive performance, CLIP has become the most widely used VLM across diverse research
topics. For classification tasks, CLIP extracts features from
both images and category descriptions, then chooses the
category whose features exhibit the highest similarity to
the image’s feature representation. Beyond classification
[47, 48, 60, 61], CLIP has been successfully applied to various vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation [36, 59],
object detection [55, 58], and image clustering [3, 22].

Vision-language models (VLMs) [5, 32, 56] are multimodal
models pretrained on large-scale paired image-text data.
Their powerful zero-shot inference capability and broad applicability across a range of downstream tasks have made
them a foundational tool in the research community. CLIP
[32], a milestone work, aligns features from the text and
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.

The impressive performance on downstream tasks and
the broad range of applications of CLIP not only highlight
its powerful capabilities but also expose it to potential vul-

29958

