This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Population Normalization for Federated Learning
Zhuoyao Wang1 ,* Fan Yi1 ,* Peizhu Gong1 , Caitou He2 , Cheng Jin1,3 , Weizhong Zhang1,4†
1
Fudan University 2 Wenzhou University
3
Innovation Center of Calligraphy and Painting Creation Technology, MCT, China
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{18110240064,pzgong,jc,weizhongzhang}@fudan.edu.cn, fyi21@m.fudan.edu.cn, hctou89@wzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Batch normalization (BN) is widely recognized as an essential method in training deep neural networks, facilitating convergence and enhancing model stability. However,
in Federated Learning (FL) contexts, where training data
are typically heterogeneous and clients often face resource
constraints, the effectiveness of BN is considerably limited for two primary reasons. First, the population statistics, specifically the mean and variance of these heterogeneous datasets, vary substantially, resulting in inconsistent BN layers across client models, which ultimately drives
these models to diverge further. Second, estimating statistics from a mini-batch is often imprecise since the batch size
has to be small in resource-limited clients. This paper introduces Population Normalization, a novel technique for
FL, in which the statistics are learned as trainable parameters rather than calculated from mini-batches as in BN.
Thus, our normalization layers are homogeneous among the
clients and the adverse impact of small batch size is eliminated as the model can be well-trained even when the batch
size equals to one. To enhance the flexibility of our method
in practical applications, we investigate the role of stochastic uncertainty in BN’s statistical estimation. When larger
batch sizes are available, we demonstrate that injecting simple artificial noise can effectively mimic this stochastic uncertainty and improve the model’s generalization capability.
Experimental results validate the efficacy of our approach
across various FL tasks.

1. Introduction
Batch Normalization (BN) [17] has become a standard component in deep neural networks (DNNs). It is proposed to
stabilize and accelerate the training of DNNs, and the original motivation was to reduce the so-called internal covariate shift. In each training step, it normalizes the layer input of a neural network using the mean and variance com∗ Equal Contribution, † Corresponding authors.

puted within a randomly sampled mini-batch. Specifically,
consider a particular neuron in a network, and we denote
{x1 , . . . , xm } to be its pre-activations on a mini-batch B of
size m, BN first normalizes each xi as
x̂i =

xi − µB
,
σB

(1)

where µB and σB2 are the sample mean and variance of the
pre-activation on B. It then scales and shifts each x̂i as yi =
αx̂i + β to compensate the effect of normalization, where γ
and β are two parameters to be learned during the training
process. BN finally takes yi as the new pre-activation of
this neuron. It has been reported in literature [12, 16, 17,
37, 40] that BN can significantly improve the convergence
of training and the generalization performance of the final
learned models.
However, we notice that the effectiveness of BN is compromised in Federated Learning [14, 19, 42], which typically aims at collaboratively training models on resource
limited clients (e.g., mobiles) with locally private and heterogeneous training data. The main reasons can be summarized as follows. One is that the statistics, i.e., the mean
and variance, of heterogeneous datasets in the clients differ
greatly. Eqn. (1) implies that this can lead to inconsistent
BN layers among the client models and finally causes these
models to drift further away from each other. The other is
that in resource limited clients, the mini-batch size has to
be small, which makes µB and σB2 inaccurate estimations
of the population mean and variance for normalization and
the obtained BN would cause instability during training that
slows down convergence.
Some other normalization techniques, such as batch
renormalization [16], group normalization [40], and layer
normalization [2], are proposed to address this heavy reliance on batch size. The key ideas are to estimate the
population mean and variance as accurately as possible by
using techniques such as moving average [16] or to normalize the activation along other dimensions such as the
channel dimension [2]. Nevertheless, these approaches focus on training acceleration, which typically under-perform

10214

