This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Uncertainty-Aware Diffusion for Multi-Agent Trajectory Modeling
Guillem Capellera1,2 Antonio Rubio2 Luis Ferraz2 Antonio Agudo1
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC 2 Kognia Sports Intelligence
{guillem.capellera, antonio.agudo}@upc.edu

{antonio.rubio, luis.ferraz}@kogniasports.com

Figure 1. Uncertainty-aware, unified and interpretable approach for trajectory modeling in multi-agent scenarios. U2Diff is a
diffusion-based model capable of performing trajectory completion tasks such as forecasting, imputation or inferring totally unseen agents,
while also jointly estimating state-wise uncertainty. RankNN is a post-processing operation that infers an error probability for each
generated mode under the same prior observations, which is strongly correlated with the error related to the ground truth.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modeling trajectories in multi-agent settings is crucial for
capturing stochastic human behaviors in various domains,
including pedestrian motion prediction [2, 5, 18, 22, 30, 41,
42, 49, 51, 59], human pose estimation [1, 9, 17, 21, 27, 36,
37, 39], and sports analytics [4, 10, 25, 38, 45, 61, 65, 67].
Multi-modal generative approaches primarily focus on
forecasting future states based on past trajectories, utilizing models such as Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [13, 22], Conditional Variational Auto-Encoders
(CVAEs) [57, 64], and, more recently, Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [23]. DDPM have shown
particular success in trajectory forecasting for applications
like pedestrian and sports modeling [20, 38]. However, their
evaluation is often limited to agent-wise metrics, overlooking scene-level dynamics that are crucial for multi-agent
contexts. Additionally, these methods generally require
fixed temporal window dimensions, which restricts their
adaptability across diverse task settings and scenarios.
The task of trajectory completion has emerged as a key
advancement beyond traditional forecasting, enabling models to infer trajectories by leveraging both past and/or future observations [34, 47, 61]. This task also seeks to predict totally unobserved agents using only the motions of the
surrounding observable ones [11, 29, 60]. This capability
is especially relevant in sports, where complex multi-agent
interactions require models to accurately capture both indi-

Multi-agent trajectory modeling has primarily focused on
forecasting future states, often overlooking broader tasks
like trajectory completion, which are crucial for real-world
applications such as correcting tracking data. Existing
methods also generally predict agents’ states without offering any state-wise measure of uncertainty. Moreover, popular multi-modal sampling methods lack any error probability estimates for each generated scene under the same prior
observations, making it difficult to rank the predictions during inference time. We introduce U2Diff, a unified diffusion model designed to handle trajectory completion while
providing state-wise uncertainty estimates jointly. This uncertainty estimation is achieved by augmenting the simple
denoising loss with the negative log-likelihood of the predicted noise and propagating latent space uncertainty to
the real state space. Additionally, we incorporate a Rank
Neural Network in post-processing to enable error probability estimation for each generated mode, demonstrating a strong correlation with the error relative to ground
truth. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art solutions in trajectory completion and forecasting across four
challenging sports datasets (NBA, Basketball-U, FootballU, Soccer-U), highlighting the effectiveness of uncertainty
and error probability estimation.

22476

