This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Camouflage Anything: Learning to Hide using Controlled Out-painting and
Representation Engineering
Biplab Das
IIIT Bangalore
Samsung R&D Institute, Bangalore

Viswanath Gopalakrishnan
IIIT Bangalore
viswanath.g@iiitb.ac.in

biplab.das@samsung.com

Figure 1. Motivation for our work to improve on short comings of state-of-the-art (SOTA) LAKE-RED [68] method. We are
motivated to improve on issues highlighted in (a) (b) and (c). We show results of LAKE-RED on left and our results on right.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce Camouflage Anything, a novel
and robust approach to generate camouflaged datasets. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply Controlled Out-painting and Representation Engineering for
generating realistic camouflaged images with an objective
to hide any segmented object coming from a generic or
salient database. Our proposed method uses a novel control
design to out-paint a given segmented object, with a camouflaged background. We also uncover the role of representation engineering in enhancing the quality of generated camouflage datasets. We address the limitations of existing metrics FID and KID in capturing the “camouflage quality”,by
proposing a novel metric namely, CamOT. CamOT uses Optimal Transport between foreground & background Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) of concerned camouflaged object to assign an image quality score. Furthermore, we conduct LoRA-based fine-tuning of the robust BiRefNet baseline with our generated camouflaged datasets, leading to
notable improvements in camouflaged object segmentation
accuracy. The experimental results showcase the efficacy
and potential of Camouflage Anything, outperforming existing methods in camouflaged generation tasks.

1. Introduction
Background Camouflaged Visual Understanding encompasses a diverse array of tasks aimed at understanding
the complexities of objects exhibiting camouflage within visual scenes [14]. A comprehensive taxonomy introduced
by Fan et al. [14] includes tasks such as Concealed Object Segmentation (COS) [12], Concealed Object Localization (COL) [13], and Concealed Instance Segmentation
(CIS). These tasks focus on different levels of understanding, from segmentation to localization and instance-level
recognition of camouflaged objects. Recent advancements
in this field have been significantly propelled by the availability of benchmarks such as CAMO [30], COD10K [13],
and NC4K [37], which provide extensive datasets for evaluation. The rapid evolution of deep learning models has
further accelerated progress. Notably, CamoFormer-C [64],
with its robust backbone, remains one of the top-performing
methods among convolutional-based approaches. Similarly,
CamoFormer-R [64] has outperformed strong competitors
with identical backbones, such as SegMaR [25] and ZoomNet [44]. More recently, BiRefNet [70] has established a
new state-of-the-art in the camouflage detection task, showcasing the continued advancement and potential in camouflaged visual understanding.

3603

