This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASIGN: An Anatomy-aware Spatial Imputation Graphic Network for 3D Spatial
Transcriptomics
Junchao Zhu1 , Ruining Deng1 , Tianyuan Yao1 , Juming Xiong1 , Chongyu Qu1 , Junlin Guo1 , Siqi Lu1 ,
Mengmeng Yin2 , Yu Wang2 , Shilin Zhao2 , Haichun Yang2 , Yuankai Huo1,2 *
1. Vanderbilt University, 2. Vanderbilt Univeristy Medical Center
yuankai.huo@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Spatial transcriptomics (ST) is an emerging technology that
enables medical computer vision scientists to automatically
interpret the molecular profiles underlying morphological
features. Currently, however, most deep learning-based
ST analyses are limited to two-dimensional (2D) sections,
which can introduce diagnostic errors due to the heterogeneity of pathological tissues across 3D sections. Expanding ST to three-dimensional (3D) volumes is challenging due to the prohibitive costs; a 2D ST acquisition already costs over 50 times more than whole slide imaging
(WSI), and a full 3D volume with 10 sections can be an
order of magnitude more expensive. To reduce costs, scientists have attempted to predict ST data directly from WSI
without performing actual ST acquisition. However, these
methods typically yield unsatisfying results. To address this,
we introduce a novel problem setting: 3D ST imputation
using 3D WSI histology sections combined with a single
2D ST slide. To do so, we present the Anatomy-aware
Spatial Imputation Graph Network (ASIGN) for more precise, yet affordable, 3D ST modeling. The ASIGN architecture extends existing 2D spatial relationships into 3D by
leveraging cross-layer overlap and similarity-based expansion. Moreover, a multi-level spatial attention graph network integrates features comprehensively across different
data sources. We evaluated ASIGN on three public spatial
transcriptomics datasets, with experimental results demonstrating that ASIGN achieves state-of-the-art performance
on both 2D and 3D scenarios. The code for this paper is
publicly available1 .

Figure 1. ASIGN presents a novel problem setting for 3D spatial transcriptomic (ST). Unlike recent methods that focus on either (a) directly predicting 2D ST from 2D WSI or (b) performing
a full 3D WSI to 3D ST prediction, our proposed ASIGN method
generates a 3D ST volume by combining 3D WSI histology sections with a single 2D ST slide. This approach provides a balanced
solution—more precise than “free but less accurate” 3D predictions, yet far more affordable than the “precise but prohibitively
expensive” acquisition of full 3D ST for every slide.

tissue and cellular levels [4, 7], transforming our understanding of human tissue development and clinical diagnosis [3, 12, 19]. However, current spatial transcriptomics
methods [11, 27, 32] are laborious and costly. This, coupled with the need for specialized equipment and expertise,
limits their practical applications in real clinical settings.

1. Introduction

The features of histopathological images are closely correlated with gene expression patterns [2], which offers an
opportunity to directly predict spatial transcriptomic expression from images. Driven by the widespread adoption
of deep learning models in medical field [12, 16, 25, 41], recently, several studies have employed architectures such as
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [9, 12, 35, 36] and
graph neural networks (GNNs) [15, 23, 38] to predict spatial transcriptomic expression from histopathological twodimensional whole-slide images (WSIs). These methods

The rapid advancement of spatial transcriptomic (ST) has
provided researchers with an unprecedented capability to
characterize spatial gene expression patterns at both the
1 Code Availability: https://github.com/hrlblab/ASIGN

30829

