This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise Calibration and Spatial-Frequency Interactive Network for
STEM Image Enhancement
Hesong Li1 Ziqi Wu1 Ruiwen Shao1 Tao Zhang2 Ying Fu1†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Hangzhou Dianzi University
{lihesong2,3220222208,rwshao,fuying}@bit.edu.cn

tzhang@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM)
enables the observation of atomic arrangements at subangstrom resolution, allowing for atomically resolved analysis of the physical and chemical properties of materials.
However, due to the effects of noise, electron beam damage,
sample thickness, etc, obtaining satisfactory atomic-level
images is often challenging. Enhancing STEM images can
reveal clearer structural details of materials. Nonetheless,
existing STEM image enhancement methods usually overlook unique features in the frequency domain, and existing
datasets lack realism and generality. To resolve these issues, in this paper, we develop noise calibration, data synthesis, and enhancement methods for STEM images. We
first present a STEM noise calibration method, which is
used to synthesize more realistic STEM images. The parameters of background noise, scan noise, and pointwise
noise are obtained by statistical analysis and fitting of real
STEM images containing atoms. Then we use these parameters to develop a more general dataset that considers both regular and random atomic arrangements and includes both HAADF and BF mode images. Finally, we
design a spatial-frequency interactive network for STEM
image enhancement, which can explore the information in
the frequency domain formed by the periodicity of atomic
arrangement. Experimental results show that our data is
closer to real STEM images and achieves better enhancement performances together with our network. Code will
be available at https://github.com/HeasonLee/SFIN.

1. Introduction
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) enables scientific observation at the atomic scale and plays a
crucial role in the discovery and study of new materials such
as semiconductor materials [16, 21], new energy materials
[19, 20, 28], and functional materials [26, 30].
† Corresponding author.

=

Noise
Calibration
Noise

Bbackground

+

Background Noise

σscan

Scan Noise

+

Data
Synthesis
Periodic

σpointwise

+

λpointwise
Pointwise Noise

+
HAADF Mode

Random

BF Mode

+

Network
Design
Spatial Domain Processing

Frequency Domain Processing

Figure 1. The three efforts we undertake to boost the performance
of STEM image enhancement. (1) Calibrating the noise in real
STEM images to make synthetic data more realistic; (2) Increasing the generalization of the dataset by adding randomized atomic
arrangements and BF mode images; (3) Incorporating frequency
domain operations in the image enhancement network to leverage
the regularities in atomic arrangements.

Although STEM images have the advantage of atomic
scale, they are susceptible to various types of noise interference [5, 9, 10]. Since prolonged exposure or increased
electron beam intensity can damage samples and cannot remove background noise caused by impurities, high-quality
real STEM image data cannot be collected directly.
Some existing studies have synthesized simulated STEM
datasets [5, 9, 10] and trained deep neural networks [7, 9]
to achieve STEM image enhancement. However, there are
three unresolved issues with existing datasets and enhancement methods. Firstly, current synthetic data [5, 9, 10] lacks
realism. STEM images have unique scanning noise related
to image gradients, making traditional calibration methods
requiring uniform calibration frames [23, 24] unavailable.
Thus, existing datasets use random noise parameters, which
are different from those in real STEM images. Secondly,
existing datasets lack generality because they only include
regular atomic patterns and exclude random arrangements
such as defects, embeddings, and interfaces. Besides, they
only include HAADF images, missing BF mode, which

21287

