This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoSPatS: Video SPatiotemporal Splines for Disentangled Occlusion,
Appearance and Motion Modeling and Editing
Juan Luis Gonzalez1 , Xu Yao1 , Alex Whelan1 , Kyle Olszewski1 , Hyeongwoo Kim2 , Pablo Garrido1
1
Flawless AI 2 Imperial College London
{juanluis.gonzalez, xu.yao, kyle.olszewski, pablo.garrido}@flawlessai.com

hyeongwoo.kim@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. Time varying appearance (e.g. highlights, shadows, etc.) create optical flow ambiguities for video implicit representations. By
adopting spatial and color deformation spline fields, our proposed method can disentangle occlusions, appearance, and motion in videos,
allowing for consistent video editing, even in the presence of temporally varying texture appearance and occlusions.

video editing models. Visit our project site1 .

Abstract
We present an implicit video representation for occlusions,
appearance, and motion disentanglement from monocular videos, which we call Video SPatiotemporal Splines
(VideoSPatS). Unlike previous methods that map time and
coordinates to deformation and canonical colors, our
VideoSPatS maps input coordinates into Spatial and Color
Spline deformation fields Ds and Dc , which disentangle motion and appearance in videos. With spline-based
parametrization, our method naturally generates temporally
consistent flow and guarantees long-term temporal consistency, which is crucial for convincing video editing. Using
multiple prediction branches, our VideoSPatS model also
performs layer separation between the latent video and the
selected occluder. By disentangling occlusions, appearance,
and motion, our method enables better spatiotemporal modeling and editing of diverse videos, including in-the-wild
talking head videos with challenging occlusions, shadows,
and specularities while maintaining an appropriate canonical space for editing. We also present general video modeling results on the DAVIS and CoDeF datasets, as well as our
own talking head video dataset collected from open-source
web videos. Extensive ablations show the combination of
Ds and Dc under neural splines can overcome motion and
appearance ambiguities, paving the way for more advanced

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations have shown promising results
for modeling images [16, 18, 29, 30] and videos [10, 19, 38].
The implicit representations of videos are typically modeled as continuous functions that map spatial and temporal
coordinates into color values. This becomes a challenging modeling task when various types of motion, lighting
variations, and occlusions are present. By increasing the
number of parameters in the implicit functions, perfect video
reconstructions are achievable. However, without the implicit function disentangled, applying consistent editing to
the whole sequence remains an open challenge.
Recent advances in diffusion models for text-to-video generation, such as Sora [2], Mochi [31] and CogVideoX [37],
have made video modeling an increasingly relevant task.
Although these models have succeeded in generating impressive quality video content with high-fidelity motions, the
question of how to perform semantics-aware and disentangled editing still prevails. Several existing approaches [10,
13, 14, 19, 38] propose to learn a canonical representation
for a video, such that edits can be applied in this canonical space, and then propagated through the entire sequence.

22901

1 https://juanluisg-flwls.github.io/videospats-website/

