This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-based Realistic Listening Head Generation via Hybrid Motion
Modeling
Yinuo Wang1, * ,‡, Yanbo Fan2, * ,†, Xuan Wang2 , Guo Yu1,†, Fei Wang1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Ant Group
1

nuo1wang.github.io/DiffListener

Abstract
Listening head generation aims to synthesize non-verbal
responsive listening head videos that naturally react to a
certain speaker, for which, both realistic head movements,
expressive facial expressions, and high visual qualities are
expected. Previous approaches typically follow a two-stage
pipeline that first generates intermediate 3D motion signals
such as 3DMM coefficients, and then synthesizes the videos
by deterministic rendering, suffering from limited motion
expressiveness and low visual quality (e.g. 256 × 256). In
this work, we propose a novel listening head generation
method that harnesses the generative capabilities of the diffusion model for both motion generation and high-quality
rendering. Crucially, we propose an effective hybrid motion
modeling module that addresses training difficulties caused
by the scarcity of listening head data while preserving the
intricate details that may be lost in explicit motion representations. We further develop a tailored control guidance
for head pose and facial expression, by integrating their intrinsic motion characteristics. Our method enables highfidelity video generation with 512 × 512 resolution and delivers vivid listener motion feedback. We conduct comprehensive experiments and obtain superior performance in
terms of both visual quality and motion expressiveness compared with existing methods.

1. Introduction
Listening head generation aims to generate responsive listener videos that react to the corresponding speaker [46].
Unlike talking head videos, the listener’s response mainly
consists of non-verbal behaviors, such as nodding, smil* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors
‡ This work was done during Yinuo Wang’s internship at Ant Group

15885

ing, frowning, head shaking, etc. The realism and vividness
of the listener feedback are vital to the success of speaker
and listener communication. Being a crucial part of digital
avatar generation, listening head generation has many potential applications, such as movie production, online customer service, and human-computer interaction.
While most works focus on speaker-centric talking head
generation [16, 17, 26–28, 37, 44], only a few study listening head generation [21, 24, 25, 46]. It is a non-trivial
problem as given a certain speaker video, there can be many
reasonable listener reactions. Such a one-to-many mapping
problem makes it challenging for the model to learn to generate proper yet diverse listener motions. In addition, since
the generated listening head mostly contains non-verbal reactions, the audience may focus more on the listeners’ facial
expressions, requiring that the generated reaction videos be
high-fidelity to manifest detailed and subtle expressions.
The state-of-the-art works of listening head generation
follow a two-stage design that first generates intermediate
listener motion signals and then synthesizes the RGB videos
with post-rendering [20, 21, 35, 46]. For motion generation,
explicit 3D motion signals, such as 3DMM [3] coefficients
are used as motion descriptions. Existing works developed
different models to generate the listener’s 3D motion coefficients, including LSTM [46], VQ-VAE [35], and diffusionbased models [20, 21]. As for the video rendering, PIRenderer [29] is used to generate the RGB frames conditioned
on the generated 3DMM coefficients. Though promising,
they still fall short of generating expressive and natural listening head motions, as well as photorealistic rendering.
For instance, 1) the intermediate parametric 3D motion signals, such as the 3DMM expression coefficients, are characterized in a low-dimensional generalizable subspace and
lack facial details and subtle expressions, which limits the
richness and naturalness of the learned facial expressions, 2)
while focusing more on motion generation, the determinis-

