This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision-Language Models Do Not Understand Negation
Kumail Alhamoud1
Shaden Alshammari1
Philip H.S. Torr3
Yoon Kim1
1

MIT

Yonglong Tian⇤2
Guohao Li3
Marzyeh Ghassemi1

OpenAI 3 University of Oxford
https://NegBench.github.io
2

Abstract
Many practical vision-language applications require models that understand negation, e.g., when using natural language to retrieve images which contain certain objects but
not others. Despite advancements in vision-language models (VLMs) through large-scale training, their ability to
comprehend negation remains underexplored. This study
addresses the question: how well do current VLMs understand negation? We introduce NegBench, a new benchmark designed to evaluate negation understanding across
18 task variations and 79k examples spanning image, video,
and medical datasets. The benchmark consists of two core
tasks designed to evaluate negation understanding in diverse multimodal settings: Retrieval with Negation and
Multiple Choice Questions with Negated Captions. Our
evaluation reveals that modern VLMs struggle significantly
with negation, often performing at chance level. To address
these shortcomings, we explore a data-centric approach
wherein we finetune CLIP models on large-scale synthetic
datasets containing millions of negated captions. We show
that this approach can result in a 10% increase in recall on
negated queries and a 28% boost in accuracy on multiplechoice questions with negated captions.

Figure 1. We present NegBench with image retrieval and multiplechoice tasks to evaluate negation understanding. CLIP-based models frequently misinterpret negation in both tasks, but we show
how a synthetic data approach can improve performance.

1. Introduction

Despite these advances, there is an emerging limitation: these models fail to handle negation, which is essential in many real-world scenarios. Negation enables
precise communication by specifying what is false or absent [13, 17, 28, 29]. For example, a radiologist may search
for images showing “bilateral consolidation with no evidence of pneumonia”, or a safety inspector might query
“construction sites with no barriers”. Current benchmarks
like CREPE and CC-Neg have introduced limited tests of
negation, but they rely on rigid, templated examples that
do not reflect the complexity of natural language queries
[26, 43]. As a result, they fall short in evaluating how well
VLMs understand negation in practical applications.
To comprehensively evaluate how well VLMs handle
negation, we design a multi-level evaluation paradigm inspired by real-world information retrieval systems, where a
coarse-grained retrieval step often precedes a fine-grained
ranking or selection step [25, 31].
The first task, Retrieval-Neg, tests whether models can
handle real-world queries that mix affirmative and negative
statements, such as “a beach with no people” or “a building without windows.” This task challenges the model to

Joint embedding-based Vision-Language Models (VLMs),
such as CLIP, have revolutionized how we approach multimodal tasks by learning a shared embedding space where
both images and text are mapped together. This shared
space enables a variety of applications, including crossmodal retrieval, video retrieval, text-to-image generation,
image captioning, and even medical diagnosis [2, 20, 21,
23, 33, 35, 38, 40–42, 53]. By aligning visual and linguistic representations, these models achieve remarkable performance across domains and are able to model complex
interactions between vision and language inputs.
* Yonglong Tian was at Google Deepmind during this work.

29612

