This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Practical solutions to the relative pose of three calibrated cameras
Charalambos Tzamos1,∗
1

Viktor Kocur2,∗ Yaqing Ding1 Daniel Barath3
Torsten Sattler4 Zuzana Kukelova1

Zuzana Berger Haladová2

Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University in Bratislava
3
ETH Zürich (Zurich), HUN-REN SZTAKI (Budapest)
4
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
P3P

We study the challenging problem of estimating the relative pose of three calibrated cameras from four point correspondences. We propose novel efficient solutions to this
problem that are based on the simple idea of using four correspondences to estimate an approximate geometry of the
first two views. We model this geometry either as an affine
or a fully perspective geometry estimated using one additional approximate correspondence. We generate such an
approximate correspondence using a very simple and efficient strategy, where the new point is the mean point of three
corresponding input points. The new solvers are efficient
and easy to implement, since they are based on existing efficient minimal solvers, i.e., the 4-point affine fundamental
matrix, the well-known 5-point relative pose solver, and the
P3P solver. Extensive experiments on real data show that
the proposed solvers, when properly coupled with local optimization, achieve state-of-the-art results, with the novel
solver based on approximate mean-point correspondences
being more robust and accurate than the affine-based solver.

Approx.

geometry

Figure 1. Visualization of the four-points-in-three-views (4p3v)
problem and our solution based on using four correspondences to
efficiently estimate an approximate geometry of the first two views
and then register the third view using a P3P solver [40].

1. Introduction

Minimal camera geometry problems often result in complex systems of polynomial equations. Efficient algebraic
methods helped solve many previously unsolved problems
[3, 25, 26, 29, 53, 54]. Still, they fail to generate efficient and/or numerically stable solutions for some configurations. In this paper, we study one such challenging
problem: Estimating the relative pose of three calibrated
cameras. This problem has received attention for a long
time [1, 19, 31, 34, 44]. However, due to its complexity,
it is still not considered fully solved. There are no efficient and practical solutions for most of the minimal configurations of point and/or line correspondences [24]. One
such configuration that is particularly interesting is the notoriously difficult configuration of four points in three calibrated views [35, 44], known as the 4p3v problem.
State-of-the-art algebraic and numerical methods are
known to fail in generating efficient and numerically stable solutions to the 4p3v problem. The existing methods
for solving this problem are only approximate [21, 36]. By
solving only for one (or a few) solutions from the 272 solutions of the 4p3v problem [21], and by discretely sampling the space of potential solutions [36], the existing 4p3v
methods can often fail, i.e., the returned solution can be, in
general, arbitrarily far from the geometrically correct solution. To decrease the failure rate, both methods [21, 36]

Camera geometry estimation is crucial in many computer vision applications, e.g., visual navigation [48],
Structure-from-Motion [51], augmented reality [4], selfdriving cars [16], and visual localization [47]. Due to noise
and outliers in input correspondences, the predominant way
for camera geometry estimation is to use a hypothesisand-test framework, e.g., RANSAC [2, 6, 14, 45]. For
RANSAC-like methods, using as few (ideally the minimal
number of) correspondences as possible for estimation is
important since the number of RANSAC iterations (and
thus its run-time) grows exponentially with the number of
correspondences required for the model estimation.
∗ Equal contribution

21913

