This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Adversarial Robustness in GNeRFs: The IL2-NeRF Attack
Nicole Meng1,2

Caleb Manicke2

Ronak Sahu2

Abstract
Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields (GNeRF) are recognized as one of the most promising techniques for novel view
synthesis and 3D model generation in real-world applications. However, like other generative models in computer
vision, ensuring their adversarial robustness against various threat models is essential for practical use. The pioneering work in this area, NeRFool, introduced a state-ofthe-art attack that targets GNeRFs by manipulating source
views before feature extraction, successfully disrupting the
color and density results of the constructed views. Building on this foundation, we propose IL2-NeRF (Iterative
L2 NeRF Attack), a novel adversarial attack method that
explores a new threat model (in the L2 domain) for attacking GNeRFs. We evaluated IL2-NeRF against two
standard GNeRF models across three benchmark datasets,
demonstrating similar performance compared to NeRFool,
based on the same evaluation metrics proposed by NeRFool. Our results establish IL2-NeRF as the first adversarial method for GNeRFs under the  L_2  norm. We establish a foundational L2 threat model for future research,
enabling direct performance comparisons while introducing a smoother, image-wide perturbation approach in Adversarial 3D Reconstruction. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/The- NRC- SCAR- Group/
IL2-NeRF

1. Introduction
In recent years, machine learning has significantly advanced
the field of computer vision, with numerous state-of-the-art
(SOTA) models pushing the boundaries of 2D and 3D representation. Among these models, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) has emerged as a powerful method for reconstructing highly detailed 3D scenes from 2D images [9, 21, 33].
NeRF utilizes a deep learning model to represent a 3D scene
as a continuous volumetric field, generating realistic views
from any camera angle based on its learned representation
of light and color radiance.
1 Tufts University,2 University of Connecticut, 3 University of Min-

nesota

Caiwen Ding3

Yingjie Lao1

As machine learning vision models see greater in-field
deployment, security concerns around these models increase. Specifically, adversarial attacks can perturb images,
in turn producing adversarial examples that machine learning models misclassify. The first proposed successful attack
for GNeRF models was the NeRFool attack under the L∞
norm [8].
Being the first adversarial attack proposed on GNeRF
models, NeRFool was the advent for analyzing robustness
for a novel type of vision model. With this in mind, we are
keen to present new attacks across new threat norms. Our
main contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. We introduce IL2-NeRF, the first adversarial attack on
GNeRF models in the  L_2  domain, providing a novel
threat model that applies uniform perturbations across
the entire image and setting a foundation for future  L_2  based attacks.
2. Technical Contribution: We utilize several unique factors, such as an independent perturbation variable and
a weighted loss term, that presents a unique perspective on iterative attack algorithms. The traits we present
here provide a framework for future algorithms to exploit
GNeRF robustness.
3. Comprehensive Experimental Validation: We demonstrated the effectiveness of IL2-NeRF through rigorous
experiments across multiple datasets (LLFF, DeepVoxels, Synthetic) and GNeRF models (IBRNet, GNT). The
results showcase IL2-NeRF’s comparable performance
with existing methods like NeRFool in degrading 3D
model outputs under varied conditions.

2. Preliminaries
In this section, we will formalize the loss objective of the
NeRF and GNeRF pipelines. This allows us to define the
NeRFool attack. Lastly, we propose the threat model we
operate under. All of this serves as a preliminary to establish
our new attack algorithm.

2.1. NeRF Pipeline
In computer vision, the 3D coordinate of the camera is
stored in the form of the location (x, y, z) and direction (θ,
ϕ). The rays are formed and broken into ro ∈ R3 (ray ori-

16388

