This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReNeg: Learning Negative Embedding with Reward Guidance
Xiaomin Li1,2,∗ , Yixuan Liu1,∗,‡ , Takashi Isobe1 , Xu Jia2,† , Qinpeng Cui3 , Dong Zhou1 ,
Dong Li1 , You He3 , Huchuan Lu2 , Zhongdao Wang3,† , Emad Barsoum1
1
Advanced Micro Devices Inc., 2 Dalian University of Technology, 3 Tsinghua University
xmli22@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {yixuan.liu,takashi.isobe,dong.zhou,d.li,ebarsoum}@amd.com,
{xjia,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, heyou f@126.com, {cqp22,wcd17}@tsinghua.edu.cn

SD

SD + 𝑁 ∗

SD + ReNeg

Portrait of a monkey wearing an astronaut helmet.

SD + 𝑁 ∗

SD + ReNeg

A man rides a motorcycle down a dirt road.

SD

SD + ReNeg

Transfer to T2V Models

SD + ReNeg

SD

SD + 𝑁

∗

SD + 𝑁 ∗

A bathroom vanity with a large mirror on the wall.

A versatile negative embedding

Transfer to ControlNet
SD

SD

SD + 𝑁 ∗

Chief in the kitchen.

SD + ReNeg

A smiling girl.

A person is smoking.

Figure 1. We develop ReNeg, a versatile negative embedding seamlessly adaptable to text-to-image and even text-to-video models. Strikingly simple yet highly effective, ReNeg amplifies the visual appeal of outputs from base Stable Diffusion (SD) models. ‘+N ∗ ’ and
‘+ReNeg’ indicate improved results with handcrafted negative prompts and our negative embedding, respectively.

Abstract
In text-to-image (T2I) generation applications, negative embeddings have proven to be a simple yet effective approach
for enhancing generation quality. Typically, these negative embeddings are derived from user-defined negative
prompts, which, while being functional, are not necessarily optimal. In this paper, we introduce ReNeg, an end-toend method designed to learn improved Negative embeddings guided by a Reward model. We employ a reward
feedback learning framework and integrate classifier-free
guidance (CFG) into the training process, which was previously utilized only during inference, thus enabling the effec∗ Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at AMD.

tive learning of negative embeddings. We also propose two
strategies for learning both global and per-sample negative
embeddings. Extensive experiments show that the learned
negative embedding significantly outperforms null-text and
handcrafted counterparts, achieving substantial improvements in human preference alignment. Additionally, the
negative embedding learned within the same text embedding space exhibits strong generalization capabilities. For
example, using the same CLIP text encoder, the negative
embedding learned on SD1.5 can be seamlessly transferred
to text-to-image or even text-to-video models such as ControlNet, ZeroScope, and VideoCrafter2, resulting in consistent performance improvements across the board. Code is
available at https://github.com/AMD-AIG-AIMA/ReNeg.

† Corresponding authors.
‡ Project lead.

23636

