This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improve Representation for Imbalanced Regression
through Geometric Constraints
Zijian Dong1,* Yilei Wu1,* Chongyao Chen2,* Yingtian Zou1 Yichi Zhang1 Juan Helen Zhou1,†
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore

2

Duke University, US

{zijian.dong, yilei.wu}@u.nus.edu, helen.zhou@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In representation learning, uniformity refers to the uniform feature distribution in the latent space (i.e., unit hypersphere). Previous work has shown that improving uniformity contributes to the
learning of under-represented classes. However, most of the previous work focused on classification; the representation space
of imbalanced regression remains unexplored. Classificationbased methods are not suitable for regression tasks because
they cluster features into distinct groups without considering
the continuous and ordered nature essential for regression. In
a geometric aspect, we uniquely focus on ensuring uniformity
in the latent space for imbalanced regression through two key
losses: enveloping and homogeneity. The enveloping loss encourages the induced trace to uniformly occupy the surface of
a hypersphere, while the homogeneity loss ensures smoothness,
with representations evenly spaced at consistent intervals. Our
method integrates these geometric principles into the data representations via a Surrogate-driven Representation Learning
(SRL) framework. Experiments with real-world regression and
operator learning tasks highlight the importance of uniformity in
imbalanced regression and validate the efficacy of our geometrybased loss functions. Code is available here.

MAE:
Many-shot: 3.832
Medium-shot: 4.339
Few-shot: 5.285

MAE:
Many-shot: 3.087
Medium-shot: 3.117
Few-shot: 3.812

Label

Vanilla

SRL

Figure 1. 2D feature space of vanilla baseline and ours from
UCI-Airfoil [2]. The vanilla feature space lacks uniformity and is
dominated by samples from the Many-shot region. In contrast, our
approach achieves a more uniform distribution over the feature space,
improving the performance, especially in the Medium and Few-shot
regions. (For visualization purposes, we curated the dataset to ensure
equal partitions across the three regions.)

1. Introduction

uniformity in classification inapplicable. While the issue of
deep imbalanced regression (DIR) has received considerable
attention, the focus has predominantly been on training unbiased
regressors, rather than on the aspect of representation learning
[6, 10, 16, 19, 25]. Among the methods that do explore representation learning [24, 27], the emphasis is typically on understanding the relationship between the label space and the feature
space (the representations themselves should be continuous and
ordered). However, a critical aspect that remains under-explored
is the interaction between data representations and the entire
feature space. Specifically, how these representations distribute
within the full scope of the feature space has not been examined.

Imbalanced datasets are ubiquitous across various domains,
including image recognition [30], semantic segmentation
[31], and regression [25]. Previous studies have demonstrated
the significance of uniform or balanced distribution of
class representations for effective imbalanced classification
[5, 8, 9, 12, 22, 26, 33] and imbalanced semantic segmentation
[31]. In classification tasks, these representations typically form
distinct clusters. However, in the context of regression, representations are expected to be continuous and ordered [24, 27],
rendering the methods used for quantifying and analyzing
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Uniformity in classification refers to how effectively

5082

