This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Locality-Aware Zero-Shot Human-Object Interaction Detection
Sanghyun Kim

Deunsol Jung

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{sanghuyn.kim, deunsol.jung, mscho}@postech.ac.kr
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/LAIN

2

Abstract

RF-UC
UV

<hold-umbrella>
0.35

mAP
32

0.64

Recent methods for zero-shot Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection typically leverage the generalization
ability of large Vision-Language Model (VLM), i.e., CLIP,
on unseen categories, showing impressive results on various zero-shot settings. However, existing methods struggle
to adapt CLIP representations for human-object pairs, as
CLIP tends to overlook fine-grained information necessary
for distinguishing interactions. To address this issue, we
devise, LAIN, a novel zero-shot HOI detection framework
designed to enhance the locality and interaction awareness
of CLIP representations. The locality awareness, which involves capturing fine-grained details and the spatial structure of individual objects, is achieved by aggregating the
information and spatial priors of adjacent neighborhood
patches. The interaction awareness, which involves identifying whether and how a human is interacting with an
object, is achieved by capturing the interaction pattern between the human and the object. By infusing locality and interaction awareness into CLIP representations, LAIN captures detailed information about the human-object pairs.
Our extensive experiments on existing benchmarks show
that LAIN outperforms previous methods in various zeroshot settings, demonstrating the importance of locality and
interaction awareness for effective zero-shot HOI detection.

<hold-bike>

1

30

0.32
0.19

<ride-bike>
0.3
0.14

(a)

CLIP
Ours

CLIP(RF-UC)
28.79

28

CLIP(UV)
26.16

26

<hold-frisbee>

1

0.34

4

0.83
0.35
0.01

2 3

0.36
0.01

(b)

(1,4)

24

(2,4)

(3,4)

22

EOID

HOICLIP CLIP4HOI

(c)

Ours

20

Figure 1. (a)-(b): Since CLIP primarily encodes global information, it struggles to capture the fine-grained details required to
accurately identify interactions within human-object pairs. (c):
When existing methods adapt CLIP representations to zero-shot
HOI detection, this limitation hinders CLIP’s generalization, and
results in degraded performance which is even lower than CLIP’s
original zero-shot performance in UC-RF and UV settings.

1. Introduction

supervised learning, limited to identifying predefined HOI
categories. Given that humans interact with objects in a
compositional way, it is costly and impractical to collect
annotations for all possible HOI categories, limiting their
ability to identify novel HOI categories not present in the
training set. Recently, strong generalization ability of CLIP
on unseen categories, which stems from contrastive imagelevel pre-training on large-scale data, has inspired the development of a zero-shot HOI model that leverages this capability to recognize unseen HOI categories.

The task of Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims
to localize human-object pairs and recognize the interactions between them in a given image, i.e., identifying a set
of HOI instances (human, object, interaction). HOI detection is useful for a wide range of computer vision applications, including image retrieval [11, 50, 55] and image captioning [16, 51, 54], where a comprehensive understanding
of human-object relationships is essential. Although significant advances have been made recently, conventional HOI
methods [22, 23, 26] have primarily been relying on fully

20190

While existing methods [36, 37, 52] for zero-shot HOI
detection have achieved strong performance by leveraging
CLIP representations, the domain gap between the imagelevel pre-training task and the region-level task poses the
challenges in adapting CLIP representations to zero-shot
HOI detection. Since CLIP predominantly encodes global
information [61, 63], it often fails to extract fine-grained information about individual objects. This hinders the HOI
model from capturing whether and how the person inter-

