This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CATANet: Efficient Content-Aware Token Aggregation for Lightweight Image
Super-Resolution
Xin Liu Jie Liu
Jie Tang Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{liujie,tangjie,gswu}@nju.edu.cn

xinliu2023@smail.nju.edu.cn

https://github.com/EquationWalker/CATANet

Abstract
Transformer-based methods have demonstrated impressive
performance in low-level visual tasks such as Image SuperResolution (SR). However, its computational complexity
grows quadratically with the spatial resolution. A series
of works attempt to alleviate this problem by dividing LowResolution images into local windows, axial stripes, or dilated windows. SR typically leverages the redundancy of
images for reconstruction, and this redundancy appears not
only in local regions but also in long-range regions. However, these methods limit attention computation to contentagnostic local regions, limiting directly the ability of attention to capture long-range dependency. To address these
issues, we propose a lightweight Content-Aware Token Aggregation Network (CATANet). Specifically, we propose an
efficient Content-Aware Token Aggregation module for aggregating long-range content-similar tokens, which shares
token centers across all image tokens and updates them
only during the training phase. Then we utilize intra-group
self-attention to enable long-range information interaction.
Moreover, we design an inter-group cross-attention to further enhance global information interaction. The experimental results show that, compared with the state-of-theart cluster-based method SPIN, our method achieves superior performance, with a maximum PSNR improvement of
0.33dB and nearly double the inference speed.

Figure 1. Performance and model complexity comparison on Urban100 dataset for upscaling factor ×2.

1. Introduction

ods [10, 20–22, 25, 58, 61] have been proposed to challenge the reconstruction of HR images from LR images.
Due to the local mechanism of convolution, which limits
the capture of global dependencies, some CNN-based methods [25, 61] use very deep and complex network architectures to increase receptive fields and achieve better performance. However, these methods inevitably increase computational resources, which restricts their applicability.
Recently, with the success of transformers in NLP [42],
transformers have been applied to multiple high-level computer vision tasks [3, 8, 12, 31, 46], achieving remarkable
results. The key success of transformer-based approaches
is the Self-Attention mechanism, which can effectively capture long-range dependencies. Due to the powerful potential
of transformers, they have also attracted attention in lowlevel computer vision tasks [4, 5, 24, 45, 50, 53, 59], including image super-resolution. HAT [4] shows through experiments that utilizing more global information can effectively
enhance the quality of reconstructed images. However,
these methods divide larger images into smaller local regions for separate processing to alleviate the high complexity of global self-attention. Although this strategy can improve the efficiency of transformer-based models and pro-

Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) is a classic task in
computer vision and image processing. Its goal is to recover
High-Resolution (HR) images from its Low-Resolution
(LR) counterpart. SISR is widely applied in various fields,
such as medical imaging, digital photography, and reducing
server costs for streaming media transmission.
Since the pioneering work of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in SISR [9], numerous CNN-based meth: Corresponding author (liujie@nju.edu.cn).

17902

