This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Condensing Action Segmentation Datasets via Generative Network Inversion
Guodong Ding, Rongyu Chen and Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
{dinggd, rchen, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

This work presents the first condensation approach for
procedural video datasets used in temporal action segmentation. We propose a condensation framework that leverages generative prior learned from the dataset and network
inversion to condense data into compact latent codes with
significant storage reduced across temporal and channel
aspects. Orthogonally, we propose sampling diverse and
representative action sequences to minimize video-wise redundancy. Our evaluation on standard benchmarks demonstrates consistent effectiveness in condensing TAS datasets
and achieving competitive performances. Specifically, on
the Breakfast dataset, our approach reduces storage by over
500× while retaining 83% of the performance compared to
training with the full dataset. Furthermore, when applied to
a downstream incremental learning task, it yields superior
performance compared to the state-of-the-art.

Averaged Segmentation Performance

Abstract
80

60

40

20

0

GTEA
50Salads
Breakfast

1MB

Original
Ours

10MB

100MB

1G

10G

100G

Dataset Storage Requirements
Figure 1. Comparison of action segmentation performance with
dataset storage across common action segmentation benchmarks
at different scales. Our method effectively reduces dataset storage
while retaining competitive performance to the original setup.

1. Introduction
denses static and dynamic information from videos for action recognition in a two-stage framework. First, a synthetic
“image” aggregates the static visual information, while a
dynamic memory block is learned to capture and supplement the motion and dynamics.
This work aims to develop an effective dataset condensation approach for temporal action segmentation (TAS) [10].
TAS is a task that divides videos into segments by assigning labels on a per-frame basis to capture the sequence and
duration of distinct actions. The videos are long, often spanning several minutes, creating significant challenges in raw
data storage and processing. Dataset condensation for TAS
presents unique challenges that are not typically encountered for action recognition datasets. First, TAS requires
frame-level predictions rather than assigning a single label to an entire video or segment, as in action recognition.
Consequently, dataset condensation for TAS must be capable of restoring the actual temporal resolutions of segments. Directly adapting the existing video condensation
approach proposed by [37] for condensing TAS datasets

The effectiveness of data-driven deep neural network models hinges on training with large and diverse datasets. For
instance, ImageNet [7] comprises over 14 million natural
images for image classification, and Common Crawl [1]
provides over 5 billion website pages to foster natural language processing tasks. However, the storage, processing,
and training costs associated with massive datasets pose significant challenges, especially as data volumes continue to
grow. This need for efficiency has driven interest in dataset
condensation [36], a technique aimed at compressing large
datasets into smaller, information-rich subsets. Such techniques have potential applications in downstream areas, including incremental learning and federated learning.
The core objective of dataset condensation is to learn a
small synthetic dataset from an original large-scale dataset.
Ideally, models trained on the synthetic data should perform comparably to those trained on the original. Significant efforts since then [4, 6, 22, 35, 43] have been dedicated to dataset condensation for image data. Video, however, remains under-explored. The recent work [37] con-

17733

