This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T2ICount: Enhancing Cross-modal Understanding for Zero-Shot Counting
Yifei Qian1 , Zhongliang Guo2 , Bowen Deng1 , Chun Tong Lei3 , Shuai Zhao4 , Chun Pong Lau3 ,
Xiaopeng Hong5 , Michael P. Pound1 *
1

2
University of Nottingham
University of St Andrews 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
Nanyang Technology University 5 Harbin Institute of Technology

{yifei.qian, bowen.deng, michael.pound}@nottingham.ac.uk, zg34@st-andrews.ac.uk, {ctlei2, cplau27}@cityu.edu.hk,
shuai.zhao@ntu.edu.sg, hongxiaopeng@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Bears

Zero-shot object counting aims to count instances of arbitrary object categories specified by text descriptions. Existing methods typically rely on vision-language models like
CLIP, but often exhibit limited sensitivity to text prompts. We
present T2ICount, a diffusion-based framework that leverages rich prior knowledge and fine-grained visual understanding from pretrained diffusion models. While one-step
denoising ensures efficiency, it leads to weakened text sensitivity. To address this challenge, we propose a Hierarchical
Semantic Correction Module that progressively refines textimage feature alignment, and a Representational Regional
Coherence Loss that provides reliable supervision signals
by leveraging the cross-attention maps extracted from the
denoising U-Net. Furthermore, we observe that current
benchmarks mainly focus on majority objects in images, potentially masking models’ text sensitivity. To address this,
we contribute a challenging re-annotated subset of FSC147
for better evaluation of text-guided counting ability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
superior performance across different benchmarks. Code
is available at https://github.com/cha15yq/
T2ICount.

Ground-truth: 2.0

CLIP-Count: 42.41

VLCounter: 25.04

Ours: 2.0

Figure 1. Visualizations of density maps predicted by official
pretrained models of two recently proposed text-guided zero-shot
object counting methods, CLIP-Count [7] and VLCounter [8],
which demonstrate poor text sensitivity compared to the proposed
T2ICount.

1. Introduction

requires a small number of annotated examples per target
class; (b) reference-less counting, which estimates quantities based on general object patterns; (c) zero-shot counting, which leverages pre-trained model knowledge to adapt
to unseen categories. The first two paradigms have notable
limitations; few-shot methods still require some annotation
for new categories [24, 27, 38], while reference-less approaches lack the ability to focus on specific object categories [5, 23]. Zero-shot methods present a promising direction, enabling counting of specific but previously unseen
categories without requiring additional annotation [7, 8].
Recent approaches to zero-shot counting have relied on
pre-trained vision-language models, particularly CLIP [21],
to bridge the semantic alignment gap between visual and

The task of object counting, estimating the quantity of objects within images, has garnered significant attention due
to its broad application across domains [10, 18, 29]. Conventional object counting approaches have mainly focused
on class-specific counting [19, 20, 30, 36], requiring extensive annotation and retraining procedures when adapting to
novel object categories, reducing general applicability.
In contrast, class-agnostic counting encompasses three
methodological categories: (a) few-shot counting, which
* Corresponding Author.

25336

