This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaCM2 : On Understanding Extremely Long-Term Video with Adaptive
Cross-Modality Memory Reduction

1

Yuanbin Man1 , Ying Huang1 , Chengming Zhang2 , Bingzhe Li3 , Wei Niu4 , Miao Yin1†
Department of CSE, University of Texas at Arlington, 2 Department of CS, University of Houston,
3
Department of CS, University of Texas at Dallas, 4 School of Computing, University of Georgia
{yuanbin.man, ying.huang}@uta.edu, czhang48@uh.edu,
bingzhe.li@utdallas.edu, wniu@uga.edu, miao.yin@uta.edu

Abstract

What does the
Man play?

What does the
Man play?

The advancements in large language models (LLMs) have
propelled the improvement of video understanding tasks by
incorporating LLMs with visual models. However, most existing LLM-based models (e.g., VideoLLaMA, VideoChat)
are constrained to processing short-duration videos. Recent
attempts to understand long-term videos by extracting and
compressing visual features into a fixed memory size. Nevertheless, those methods leverage only visual modality to
merge video tokens and overlook the correlation between
visual and textual queries, leading to difficulties in effectively handling complex question-answering tasks. To address the challenges of long videos and complex prompts,
we propose AdaCM2 , which, for the first time, introduces
an adaptive cross-modality memory reduction approach to
video-text alignment in an auto-regressive manner on video
streams. Our extensive experiments on various video understanding tasks, such as video captioning, video question answering, and video classification, demonstrate that
AdaCM2 achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple datasets while significantly reducing memory usage.
Notably, it achieves a 4.5% improvement across multiple
tasks in the LVU dataset with a GPU memory consumption
reduction of up to 65%.

Single-Modality Correlationbased Token Merge

Dual-Modality Attention Mechanism
W

Memory Bank

d
t
m
p

Q-Former

?

LLM

LLM

Play Football

Play Football

Figure 1. (Left) Existing approaches compress visual features of
videos via single-modality correlation; (Right) Our AdaCM2 reduces video memory adaptively based on cross-modality attention.

from 5 to 15 seconds. However, long-term video understanding [45], a sub-technique that develops models to process richer information, has played a crucial role in realworld applications such as movie analysis and video retrieval. Unfortunately, it poses significant challenges as
video length increases, especially the large memory consumption challenge. The number of frames the model must
process grows rapidly, leading to substantial memory consumption, thereby preventing prior approaches from processing such long videos.
To solve the large memory consumption challenge, many
approaches focus on compressing video tokens. For instance, MA-LMM [16] employs a memory bank to compress visual tokens based on the cosine similarities of adjacent two frames. Koala [37] passes multiple segments
of video into tokenizer functions that aggregate visual tokens to handle long videos. Even though those methods reduce memory consumption, they still suffer from two significant limitations. 1) Ignoring text-driven information: As
shown in Figure 1, existing works compress visual information without considering textual information, leading to
the loss of vital visual tokens that are highly related to

1. Introduction
Video understanding is an important task in computer vision and artificial intelligence, which involves processing
and reasoning over visual and textual information. While
the recent success of large language models (LLMs) [5,
31, 34, 39] has significantly improved video-language models [27, 29], prior work has primarily focused on short
video understanding tasks, typically with videos ranging
† Corresponding author.

8534

