This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Realistic Example-based Modeling via 3D Gaussian Stitching
Xinyu Gao1∗
1

Ziyi Yang1∗ Bingchen Gong2∗ Xiaoguang Han3†
Sipeng Yang1 Xiaogang Jin1†

Zhejiang University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)

Figure 1. Our method can seamlessly stitch multiple 3D Gaussian fields together interactively, resulting in new, highly detailed, and
realistic objects. All of the geometric parts or models are derived from the BlendedMVS [59] and Mip360 [2] datasets. Project page:
https://ingra14m.github.io/gs_stitching_website/.

Abstract
Using parts of existing models to rebuild new models, commonly termed as example-based modeling, is a classical
methodology in the realm of computer graphics. Previous works mostly focus on shape composition, making them
very hard to use for realistic composition of 3D objects
captured from real-world scenes. This leads to combining
multiple NeRFs into a single 3D scene to achieve seamless
appearance blending. However, the current SeamlessNeRF
method struggles to achieve interactive editing and harmonious stitching for real-world scenes due to its gradientbased strategy and grid-based representation. To this end,
we present an example-based modeling method that com* denotes equal contribution.
† denotes the corresponding authors.

bines multiple Gaussian fields in a point-based representation using sample-guided synthesis. Specifically, as for
composition, we create a GUI to segment and transform
multiple fields in real time, easily obtaining a semantically
meaningful composition of models represented by 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). For texture blending, due to the discrete and irregular nature of 3DGS, straightforwardly applying gradient propagation as SeamlssNeRF is not supported. Thus, a novel sampling-based cloning method is
proposed to harmonize the blending while preserving the
original rich texture and content. Our workflow consists
of three steps: 1) real-time segmentation and transformation of 3DGS using a well-tailored GUI, 2) KNN analysis
to identify boundary points in the intersecting area between
the source and target models, and 3) two-phase optimization of the target model using sampling-based cloning and

26597

