This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Hierarchical Decomposition for Single Image Plant Modeling
Zhihao Liu1,2
1

The University of Tokyo

Zhanglin Cheng3
2

RIKEN AIP

3

Naoto Yokoya1,2,∗

SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Figure 1. We propose a novel learning-based framework that automatically generates high-quality 3D plant models from single-view
images. Our method sequentially combines hierarchical structure learning with parametric modeling based on botanical priors, producing
usable, structured plant assets ready for immediate use in practical applications. Through learning the decomposition of box hierarchies
at different levels of detail (LoD), our method offers a comprehensive solution that can adapt to two prominent categories of plants: (a)
Houseplants and (b) larger trees. (c) shows a garden with several of our results directly assembled.

scape design. Traditional approaches have relied on procedural modeling [12, 31, 33–35, 46] to generate random
3D plant models from scratch and demonstrated considerable capability, but their complexity often presents a significant barrier to non-expert users, limiting their practical utility. Alternative approaches explore more direct reconstruction methods, such as reconstructing plant models from 3D
point clouds [6, 18, 44]. However, they are hindered by the
expensive and time-consuming nature of data acquisition.
Thus, this limitation has motivated the exploration of single
image-based reconstruction as a more flexible and accessible choice.
Compared to typical man-made objects, reconstructing plants solely from single images is considerably more
challenging due to their intricate branching structures and
significant self-occlusion. In recent years, a number of
methods in generative AI have been proposed for singleview 3D reconstruction, including Wonder3D [26] and
several concurrent works [15–17]. Although working
well on smooth-surfaced objects, these
pure AI-driven methods still face a critical limitation in plant modeling: i.e., the
inability to capture fine details and highresolution features. Thus, when applied
to 3D plants that have intricate structures,
they often produce problematic, noisy results. The wrapped figure on the left shows
an example result of Wonder3D [26]. Apparently, generating high-quality, usable
3D plants models with intricate branch and leaf details ex-

Abstract
Obtaining high-quality, practically usable 3D models of
biological plants remains a significant challenge in computer vision and graphics. In this paper, we present a
novel method for generating realistic 3D plant models from
single-view photographs. Our approach employs a neural
decomposition technique to learn a lightweight hierarchical
box representation from the image, effectively capturing the
structures and botanical features of plants. Then, this representation can be subsequently refined through a shapeguided parametric modeling module to produce complete
3D plant models. By combining hierarchical learning and
parametric modeling, our method generates structured 3D
plant assets with fine geometric details. Notably, through
learning the decomposition in different levels of detail, our
method can adapt to two distinct plant categories: outdoor
trees and houseplants, each with unique appearance features. Within the scope of plant modeling, our method is the
first comprehensive solution capable of reconstructing both
plant categories from single-view images.

1. Introduction
Vegetation is an essential part of natural scenes. Their highquality 3D models can greatly enhances the realism of various applications such as video games, movies, and landEmail: liuzh96@outlook.com (Zhihao Liu)
∗ Corresponding author.

733

