This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoMBO: Conflict Mitigation via Branched Optimization for
Class Incremental Segmentation

1

Kai Fang1 *, Anqi Zhang1 *, Guangyu Gao1†, Jianbo Jiao2 , Chi Harold Liu1 , Yunchao Wei3
2
3
Beijing Institute of Technology
University of Birmingham
Beijing Jiaotong University

Abstract
Effective Class Incremental Segmentation (CIS) requires simultaneously mitigating catastrophic forgetting and ensuring sufficient plasticity to integrate new classes. The inherent conflict above often leads to a back-and-forth, which
turns the objective into finding the balance between the performance of previous (old) and incremental (new) classes.
To address this conflict, we introduce a novel approach,
Conflict Mitigation via Branched Optimization (CoMBO).
Within this approach, we present the Query Conflict Reduction module, designed to explicitly refine queries for new
classes through lightweight, class-specific adapters. This
module provides an additional branch for the acquisition
of new classes while preserving the original queries for
distillation. Moreover, we develop two strategies to further mitigate the conflict following the branched structure,
i.e., the Half-Learning Half-Distillation (HDHL) over classification probabilities, and the Importance-Based Knowledge Distillation (IKD) over query features. HDHL selectively engages in learning for classification probabilities of
queries that match the ground truth of new classes, while
aligning unmatched ones to the corresponding old probabilities, thus ensuring retention of old knowledge while absorbing new classes via learning negative samples. Meanwhile, IKD assesses the importance of queries based on
their matching degree to old classes, prioritizing the distillation of important features and allowing less critical features to evolve. Extensive experiments in Class Incremental
Panoptic and Semantic Segmentation settings have demonstrated the superior performance of CoMBO. Project page:
https://guangyu-ryan.github.io/CoMBO.

Figure 1. Comparison of our improved distillation and learning
strategy (bottom) with previous conflicting strategy (top). Previous strategies impose contradictory supervision on the same target
to find a balance, whereas our strategy, including the importance
factor for distillation and the QCR module for adaptive learning,
enables more compatible, target-specific supervision. The visualization on incremental classes (‘Traffic Light’) highlights the effectiveness of our strategy.

1. Introduction

ing variant, unifies semantic and instance segmentation
to both classify every pixel and simultaneously identify distinct object instances. Recent advancements in
mask classification-based segmentation, such as MaskFormer [16] and Mask2Former [17], enable the unification
of semantic and panoptic segmentation. However, traditional approaches to segmentation suffer from limitations
in dynamic environments where new classes can emerge
unpredictably, as they are typically trained on a static set

Semantic segmentation, the fundamental task in computer vision, involves classifying each pixel into predefined categories. Panoptic segmentation, the challeng* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author, guangyugao@bit.edu.cn.

25667

