This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GazeGene: Large-scale Synthetic Gaze Dataset with 3D Eyeball Annotations
Yiwei Bao Zhiming Wang Feng Lu *
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
{baoyiwei, zy2306418, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Annotations

Traditional Datasets

?

Thanks to the introduction of large-scale datasets,
deep-learning has become the mainstream approach for
appearance-based gaze estimation problems. However,
current large-scale datasets contain annotation errors and
provide only a single vector for gaze annotation, lacking
key information such as 3D eyeball structures. Limitations in annotation accuracy and variety have constrained
the progress in research and development of deep-learning
methods for appearance-based gaze-related tasks. In this
paper, we present GazeGene, a new large-scale synthetic
gaze dataset with photo-realistic samples. More importantly, GazeGene not only provides accurate gaze annotations, but also offers 3D annotations of vital eye structures
such as the pupil, iris, eyeball, optical and visual axes for
the first time. Experiments show that GazeGene achieves
comparable quality and generalization ability with realworld datasets, even outperforms most existing datasets on
high-resolution images. Furthermore, its 3D eyeball annotations expand the application of deep-learning methods on various gaze-related tasks, offering new insights
into this field. The dataset is available at: https://phiai.buaa.edu.cn/GazeGene/.

No Annotation

Noisy Annotation

Our Dataset

Pupil
Iris
Eyeball
Visual Axis
Optical Axis
Head Pose
Head Gaze
Accurate Annotation

Figure 1. We propose a large-scale synthetic gaze datset GazeGene, which offers accurate and comprehensive 3D annotations of
eyeball structures for the first time.

1. Introduction

categories: model-based methods and appearance-based
methods. Model-based methods usually estimate gaze by
measuring eyeball structures through dedicated hardwares
such as infrared cameras and lights. These methods are
often deployed in specialized devices such as eye trackers
for their high accuracy and cost. On the contrary, recent
appearance-based methods directly estimate gaze from the
eye or face images using deep-learning techniques. These
methods require only a single web camera, giving it the
potential to be applied in everyday devices such as smartphones.
Deep-learning gaze estimation methods have achieve
tremendous progress in the last ten years, thanks to the advancements in computational hardware and the introduction of large datasets such as ETH-XGaze [52]. However,
the annotation accuracy and variety of existing large gaze
datasets are limited, hindering the further research and development of deep-learning based methods. Most largescale appearance-based datasets annotate gaze direction by
calibrated geometric settings. There is an inevitable error
during calibration and 3D head pose estimation, result in inaccurate gaze annotations. Moreover, existing remote gaze
datasets only provide annotation of a single gaze direction
originated from the center of user faces, missing annotations
for critical 3D eyeball structures such as eyeball center, radius and pupil. Consequently, deep-learning methods lack
the capability to understand human eyeball structures or to
perform more complex gaze-related tasks, such as optical
and visual axes estimation.
The main challenge of providing accurate annotations

Vision is one of the primary senses in humans. Thus,
gaze direction provides valuable insights for understanding human interaction intentions and environmental perception processes. In recent years, gaze estimation technology has demonstrated significant potential for applications in human-computer interaction and cognitive analysis.
For example, gaze is widely utilized for interaction in VR
[6, 27, 38] and AR [29, 43] systems, and it also plays an important role in medical diagnosis [8, 24, 25] and intelligent
cockpit systems [5, 34].
Gaze estimation techniques could be classified into two
* Corresponding Author. This work was supported by Beijing Natural
Science Foundation (L242019) and National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC, no. 62372019)

18749

