This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MambaVO: Deep Visual Odometry Based on Sequential Matching Refinement
and Training Smoothing
Shuo Wang1∗ , Wanting Li1∗ , Yongcai Wang1† , Zhaoxin Fan2,3,4† ,
Zhe Huang1 , Xudong Cai1 , Jian Zhao4,5 , Deying Li1
1

2

School of Information, Renmin University of China
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
3
Hangzhou International Innovation Institute, Beihang University
4
The Institute of AI (TeleAI), China Telecom
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN),
Northwestern Polytechnical University (NWPU), Xi’an China
∗

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding authors

Abstract

is critical for robots, self-driving cars and other autonomous
agents [23, 54, 55]. Early works mainly rely on geometric
feature methods [3, 38, 41], in which, the frontend extracts
feature points and conducts feature matching [31, 43, 60],
while the backend optimizes poses and build maps using filtering [16] or optimization methods [9, 27, 56]. However,
the geometric features are less effective in challenging environments, such as scenes with weak textures.

Deep visual odometry has demonstrated great advancements by learning-to-optimize technology. This approach
heavily relies on the visual matching across frames. However, ambiguous matching in challenging scenarios leads
to significant errors in geometric modeling and bundle adjustment optimization, which undermines the accuracy and
robustness of pose estimation. To address this challenge,
this paper proposes MambaVO, which conducts robust initialization, Mamba-based sequential matching refinement,
and smoothed training to enhance the matching quality and
improve the pose estimation. Specifically, the new frame
is matched with the closest keyframe in the maintained
Point-Frame Graph (PFG) via the semi-dense based Geometric Initialization Module (GIM). Then the initialized
PFG is processed by a proposed Geometric Mamba Module (GMM), which exploits the matching features to refine
the overall inter-frame matching. The refined PFG is finally
processed by differentiable BA to optimize the poses and the
map. To deal with the gradient variance, a Trending-Aware
Penalty (TAP) is proposed to smooth training and enhance
convergence and stability. A loop closure module is finally
applied to enable MambaVO++. On public benchmarks,
MambaVO and MambaVO++ demonstrate SOTA performance, while ensuring real-time running.

Building on the progress in computer vision and deep
learning, early approaches have explored using neural networks to directly regress poses [30, 35, 45, 53]. However, these methods suffer from poor accuracy and lack
generalization to unseen environments. A more promising
paradigm is the concept of learning to optimize [47, 49, 51],
where neural networks are utilized to extract features and
perform matching, while differentiable nonlinear optimization layers [40, 47] refine poses based on geometric residuals. This type of method has achieved state-of-the-art results in the field of deep visual odometry[34, 51].
The success of learning-to-optimize deep VO lies on
the nested optimization of the sequential image matching
network and the differentiable Bundle Adjustment (BA).
Although being successful, we find that the accuracy and
robustness of matching and pose optimization in existing
methods are limited by three key aspects. (1) Unstable initialization. Existing methods using random patches [51],
predicted optical flow [49], or motion prediction [25] may
fail to provide robust initial estimates in challenging environments. (2) Less refined matching. Accurate inter-frame
correspondences are crucial for visual odometry. Current
feature extraction and limited feature interaction restrict the

1. Introduction
Visual Odometry (VO) is the task of tracking an agent’s sixDOF poses when interacting with the physical world, which

1252

