This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COSMIC: Clique-Oriented Semantic Multi-space Integration for
Robust CLIP Test-Time Adaptation
†

Fanding Huang1,*, Jingyan Jiang2,*, Qinting Jiang1 , Hebei Li3 , Faisal Nadeem Khan1, , Zhi Wang1,

†

1

2

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
Shenzhen Technology University 3 University of Science and Technology of China
Text Prompt

Abstract

CLIP

Recent vision-language models (VLMs) face significant
challenges in test-time adaptation to novel domains. While
cache-based methods show promise by leveraging historical information, they struggle with both caching unreliable
feature-label pairs and indiscriminately using single-class
information during querying, significantly compromising
adaptation accuracy. To address these limitations, we
propose COSMIC (Clique-Oriented Semantic Multi-space
Integration for CLIP), a robust test-time adaptation framework that enhances adaptability through multi-granular,
cross-modal semantic caching and graph-based querying
mechanisms. Our framework introduces two key innovations: Dual Semantics Graph (DSG) and Clique Guided
Hyper-class (CGH). The Dual Semantics Graph constructs
complementary semantic spaces by incorporating textual
features, coarse-grained CLIP features, and fine-grained
DINOv2 features to capture rich semantic relationships.
Building upon these dual graphs, the Clique Guided Hyperclass component leverages structured class relationships
to enhance prediction robustness through correlated class
selection. Extensive experiments demonstrate COSMIC’s
superior performance across multiple benchmarks, achieving significant improvements over state-of-the-art methods:
15.81% gain on out-of-distribution tasks and 5.33% on
cross-domain generation with CLIP RN-50. Code is available at github.com/hf618/COSMIC.

Test image

Class Center

🔥

Similarity?

Pseudo-label

Class Center

Cache
Noisy

Query
Ineffective

➕

Average
Accuracy
61%

🙁

(a) Cache-based methods
Text Prompt

Dual Graph

🔥

Hyper-Class
Centers

×
×

CLIP

×

Similarity?
DINO

Test image

Pseudo-label

×

Cache
Refined

Query
Effective

➕

×

Average
Accuracy
68%

😄

(b) Clique-Oriented Semantic Multi-space Integration for
CLIP (Ours)

Figure 1. (a) In the conventional cache-based method, the cache
has only dull information with coarse-grained clip visual features
and simple query way via similarity between samples and cached
visual class centers. (b) In our COSMIC, the cache has diverse
structural information via extra fine-grained DINOv2 visual features and effective query way via similarity between samples and
meticulously designed hyper-class centers.

sual and textual features on large-scale datasets, enabling
these models to exhibit robust image understanding capabilities in open-world scenarios. However, when deployed
in real-world applications, these models often encounter test
samples that significantly deviate from the training dataset,
resulting in performance degradation [42, 43].
Recently, researchers [30] have explored the test-time
adaptation (TTA) scenario for CLIP inference. TTA focuses on adapting models solely during testing by finetuning a small subset of the model’s parameters, such as
prompts (i.e., prompt learning), or even employing trainingfree cache-based methods to enhance the zero-shot image
classification of CLIP. Prompt learning methods [1, 8, 30]
optimize textual learnable prompts by minimizing entropy
with confidence selection, ensuring consistent predictions
across various augmented views of each test image. Using

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP [28] and
ALIGN [17], have demonstrated remarkable performance
across various downstream tasks, including semantic segmentation [21, 36] and video understanding [32, 35]. This
success can be attributed primarily to the alignment of vi* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Co-corresponding authors.

9772

