This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TreeMeshGPT: Artistic Mesh Generation with Autoregressive Tree Sequencing
Stefan Lionar1,2,3
1

Sea AI Lab

2

Jiabin Liang1,2,3
3

Garena

Gim Hee Lee3

National University of Singapore

Figure 1. Artistic meshes generated by TreeMeshGPT. Our method offers a novel sequencing approach for artistic mesh generation
using autoregressive Transformer decoder by retrieving the next token from a dynamically growing tree structure. In our experiment with
7-bit discretization, TreeMeshGPT supports meshes with up to 5,500 triangular faces under strong point cloud conditioning.12

Abstract
We introduce TreeMeshGPT, an autoregressive Transformer
designed to generate high-quality artistic meshes aligned
with input point clouds. Instead of the conventional nexttoken prediction in autoregressive Transformer, we propose a novel Autoregressive Tree Sequencing where the next
input token is retrieved from a dynamically growing tree
structure that is built upon the triangle adjacency of faces
within the mesh. Our sequencing enables the mesh to extend locally from the last generated triangular face at each
step, and therefore reduces training difficulty and improves
mesh quality. Our approach represents each triangular face
with two tokens, achieving a compression rate of approximately 22% compared to the naive face tokenization. This
efficient tokenization enables our model to generate highly
detailed artistic meshes with strong point cloud conditioning, surpassing previous methods in both capacity and fi-

delity. Furthermore, our method generates mesh with strong
normal orientation constraints, minimizing flipped normals
commonly encountered in previous methods. Our experiments show that TreeMeshGPT enhances the mesh generation quality with refined details and normal orientation consistency.

1. Introduction

1 TreeMeshGPT supports a higher face count with finer discretization
as it preserves the required manifold connectivity condition.
2 Our code is available at: https://github.com/sail- sg/
TreeMeshGPT.

In recent advancements in 3D generation, representations
such as voxels, point clouds, and implicit functions are often utilized [17, 35]. After the generation process, these
representations are converted into meshes using techniques
like Marching Cubes [19], which result in dense, overtessellated triangular meshes. However, these dense meshes
are unsuitable for applications that require real-time rendering, such as gaming and virtual reality. Although many
mesh down-sampling algorithms can reduce the number
of triangles, they also degrade mesh quality and produce
messy, unstructured wireframes. In contrast, skilled artists
can create highly compact meshes with minimal triangles

26608

