This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quaffure: Real-Time Quasi-Static Neural Hair Simulation
Tuur Stuyck∗ Gene Wei-Chin Lin∗ Egor Larionov Hsiao-yu Chen
Aljaz Bozic Nikolaos Sarafianos Doug Roble
∗

Meta Reality Labs
equal contributions

Figure 1. We present Quaffure, a real-time quasi-static neural hair simulator, which produces naturally draped hair in only a few milliseconds on commodity hardware, taking the hairstyle, body shape and pose into account. Our method scales to predicting the drape of 1000
hair grooms in just 0.3 seconds. Quaffure is trained using a physics-based self-supervised loss, eliminating the need for simulated training
data that is costly and cumbersome to obtain. We show that our method works for a wide variety of body shapes and poses with a range of
hairstyles varying from straight to curly, short to long.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Hair is a crucial aspect of realistic avatars, playing a vital role in real-time applications such as games and telepresence, as well as offline generation of digital characters
for film. Over the past decades, computer graphics research has devoted significant attention to the topic of hair,
in order to create believable and engaging virtual characters. Hair modeling is a complex process that involves multiple stages, including grooming, simulation, and rendering. Previous research has explored various approaches to
hair motion modeling, including physics-based simulations
[7, 15, 43] and data-driven methods [11, 39, 40]. However,
hair remains a challenging phenomenon to model due to the
high number of degrees of freedom required to represent a
full head of hair, which typically consists of hundreds of
thousands of strands. To make hair motion modeling more
tractable, it is common practice to model a full groom with a

Realistic hair motion is crucial for high-quality avatars, but
it is often limited by the computational resources available
for real-time applications. To address this challenge, we
propose a novel neural approach to predict physically plausible hair deformations that generalizes to various body
poses, shapes, and hairstyles. Our model is trained using
a self-supervised loss, eliminating the need for expensive
data generation and storage. We demonstrate our method’s
effectiveness through numerous results across a wide range
of pose and shape variations, showcasing its robust generalization capabilities and temporally smooth results. Our
approach is highly suitable for real-time applications with
an inference time of only a few milliseconds on consumer
hardware and its ability to scale to predicting the drape of
1000 grooms in 0.3 seconds.

239

