This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention IoU: Examining Biases in CelebA using Attention Maps
Aaron Serianni

Tyler Zhu

Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University

Vikram V. Ramaswamy

{serianni, tylerzhu, olgarus, vr23}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Computer vision models have been shown to exhibit and
amplify biases across a wide array of datasets and tasks.
Existing methods for quantifying bias in classification models primarily focus on dataset distribution and model performance on subgroups, overlooking the internal workings
of a model. We introduce the Attention-IoU (Attention Intersection over Union) metric and related scores, which use attention maps to reveal biases within a model’s internal representations and identify image features potentially causing
the biases. First, we validate Attention-IoU on the synthetic
Waterbirds dataset, showing that the metric accurately
measures model bias. We then analyze the CelebA dataset,
finding that Attention-IoU uncovers correlations beyond accuracy disparities. Through an investigation of individual
attributes through the protected attribute of Male, we examine the distinct ways biases are represented in CelebA.
Lastly, by subsampling the training set to change attribute
correlations, we demonstrate that Attention-IoU reveals potential confounding variables not present in dataset labels. Our code is available at https://github.com/
aaronserianni/attention-iou.

Average Image

Male

Blond Hair

Wavy Hair

Figure 1. We use attention maps to understand which image regions a model relies on for the target classification task. Our proposed Attention-IoU framework provides insights into how models represents biases between correlated attributes. For example,
consider the spatially related attributes of blond and wavy hair in
the CelebA dataset [44], which have similar label correlations to
the Male label. They are attended to differently by the model,
with blond hair appearing closer to Male in both average attention
map (top row) and the Attention-IoU mask score (bottom row).
Thus, Attention-IoU reveals that blond hair, when compared to
wavy hair, has a spurious correlation with Male that is not present
in the dataset labels.

1. Introduction
Biases in computer vision models can lead to failures
in model performance and unequal behavior for different groups. These biases are often caused by spurious
correlations, where a model relies on an attribute that is
associated with, but not causally related to, the target.
A model dependent on such spurious correlations might
then perform poorly on out-of-distribution test data or
exhibit low accuracy for groups for which the correlation
does not hold. For example, models have been shown
to be biased towards low-level features such as texture
and image spectra [17, 18, 83], and high-level attributes
including background and contextual objects [66]. This
becomes more concerning for tasks involving people, since
these correlations can cause models to discriminate against
societally protected groups such as gender, race, age,

ethnicity, and income [6, 12, 23, 63, 90, 91].
Past works have extensively investigated biases and spurious correlations through the lens of dataset labeling and
model accuracy. For example, fairness metrics reveal disparities in model accuracy between groups or individuals
(see [8, 46, 51, 74] for surveys). Others have created tools to
surface biases by analyzing and categorizing objects, gender, skin tone, geographical labels, among others, sometimes in combination with model predictions and unsupervised techniques [4, 35, 76]. Many studies have also explored methods to mitigate the effects of spurious correlations in datasets [23, 27, 50, 80, 91].
These approaches to the discovery and measurement of
spurious correlations using dataset inputs and model out-

4386

