This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How Do I Do That?
Synthesizing 3D Hand Motion and Contacts for Everyday Interactions
Aditya Prakash*1

Benjamin Lundell2
Dmitry Andreychuk2
David Forsyth1
†1
†2
Saurabh Gupta
Harpreet Sawhney
1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Microsoft
https://bit.ly/LatentAct

Synthesized Hand Motion and Contacts
t = 15

Synthesized Hand Motion and Contacts

t = 25

t=5

LatentAct

t=5

Input Image (t = 0)

t = 15

t = 25

LatentAct

Input Image (t = 0)

GT

GT

LatentAct

LatentAct

GT

push graphic card
GT

rotate gopro

screw tripod

mix/stir coffee

Figure 1. Interaction Trajectories. We tackle the novel task of predicting future 3D hand poses & contact maps, i.e., interaction trajectories,
from a single image showing the object, text describing the action and a 3D contact point on the object, in everyday activites. We show the
trajectory predicted by our method (LatentAct) & ground truth (GT) for 3 future timesteps along with the contact point. We consider 2
settings (top) Forecasting: single RGB view, action text & 3D contact points as input, (bottom) Interpolation: goal image is also provided.

Abstract

we develop a data engine that extracts 3D hand poses and
contact trajectories from the diverse HoloAssist dataset. We
evaluate our model on a benchmark that is 2.5-10× larger
than existing works, in terms of diversity of objects and interactions observed, and test for generalization of the model
across object categories, action categories, tasks, and scenes.
Experimental results show the effectiveness of our approach
over transformer & diffusion baselines across all settings.

We tackle the novel problem of predicting 3D hand motion
and contact maps (or Interaction Trajectories) given a single
RGB view, action text, and a 3D contact point on the object
as input. Our approach consists of (1) Interaction Codebook:
a VQVAE model to learn a latent codebook of hand poses
and contact points, effectively tokenizing interaction trajectories, (2) Interaction Predictor: a transformer-decoder
module to predict the interaction trajectory from test time
inputs by using an indexer module to retrieve a latent affordance from the learned codebook. To train our model,

1. Introduction
Hands interact with objects in diverse ways, often requiring
varying skill levels to complete different tasks. Consider
teaching someone to repair a bike. It is challenging to specify

* Part of the work was done during an internship at Microsoft
† Joint last authors, indicates equal contribution

7026

