This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Highlight Audio by Watching Movies
Chao Huang1 , Ruohan Gao2 , J. M. F. Tsang3 , Jan Kurcius3 , Cagdas Bilen3 ,
Chenliang Xu1 , Anurag Kumar3 , Sanjeel Parekh3
1
University of Rochester, 2 University of Maryland, College Park, 3 Meta Reality Labs Research

Abstract
Recent years have seen a significant increase in video
content creation and consumption. Crafting engaging content requires the careful curation of both visual and audio
elements. While visual cue curation, through techniques like
optimal viewpoint selection or post-editing, has been central
to media production, its natural counterpart, audio, has not
undergone equivalent advancements. This often results in a
disconnect between visual and acoustic saliency. To bridge
this gap, we introduce a novel task: visually-guided acoustic
highlighting, which aims to transform audio to deliver appropriate highlighting effects guided by the accompanying video,
ultimately creating a more harmonious audio-visual experience. We propose a flexible, transformer-based multimodal
framework to solve this task. To train our model, we also introduce a new dataset—THE MUDDY MIX DATASET, leveraging the meticulous audio and video crafting found in movies,
which provides a form of free supervision. We develop a
pseudo-data generation process to simulate poorly mixed
audio, mimicking real-world scenarios through a three-step
process—separation, adjustment, and remixing. Our approach consistently outperforms several baselines in both
quantitative and subjective evaluation. We also systematically study the impact of different types of contextual guidance and difficulty levels of the dataset. Our project page is
here: https://wikichao.github.io/VisAH/.

Figure 1. We propose a new task that aims to transform poorly
mixed audio into a well-balanced mix using visual guidance. One
of our key insights is to use well-curated audio-visual content
from a movie database as free supervision to learn the appropriate
highlighting effect for audio (L2H).

1. Introduction

be obscured by the sound of crashing waves. Is it possible to
automatically adjust the levels of the speech and the wave
sounds according to the video content to ensure they are both
acoustically salient and well-balanced?
A naive approach would involve first demixing the sounds
into different source components and then remixing them
at their respective intended levels. But doing so has two
major drawbacks: (i) imperfect demixing could lead to the
highlighting of undesired sources, and (ii) ensuring the right
temporal variations and alignment with the video manually
is a laborious process. Some research efforts, such as in music remixing [26, 36, 66], focus on adjusting the levels and
effects of individual instruments to recompose music tracks.
However, this approach is limited to the music domain, neglecting the broader needs of natural audio composition
across varied media contexts.

Be it amateur recordings of memorable moments or professionally created content—telling a story and delivering the
best audio-visual experience with a video requires the right
balance of audio and visual elements in the scene. Consider
for example, the scene in Fig. 1c that depicts a video of a
man talking in the sea. The scene is best represented when
the focus is on the person and the sea at the appropriate
moments. While there are several ways to visually highlight
the intended objects during capture or in post-production
[50, 62], they remain relatively under-explored and limited
for the acoustics. In our case above, the man’s speech can

23925

