This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identity-Preserving Text-to-Video Generation by Frequency Decomposition
Shenghai Yuan1,4 , Jinfa Huang3 , Xianyi He1,4 , Yunyang Ge1,4 ,
Yujun Shi5 , Liuhan Chen1,4 , Jiebo Luo3 , Li Yuan1,2,†
1

Peking University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 University of Rochester,
4
Rabbitpre Intelligence, 5 National University of Singapore

{yuanshenghai,HeXianyi,yunyang,chenliuhan}@stu.pku.edu.cn, shi.yujun@u.nus.edu,
yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn, {jhuang90@ur,jluo@cs}.rochester.edu

https://pku-yuangroup.github.io/ConsisID
Reference Image

a man standing next to an airplane, engaged in a conversation on his cell phone ... wearingsunglasses and a black top .. talking seriously ... airplane has a green
striperunning along its side, and there is a large engine visible behind his ...

Reference Image

a young woman with long blonde hair ... front of a lush, green bush...white flowers ... wearing a black top ... smiling and looking at the camera while gently touching
the flowers on the bush ... then bends downslightly and smells one of theflower...

Reference Image

... a man ... his gaze focused and intense as he holds the basketball ... dressed in athletic gear ... The basketball is positioned firmly in his hands as he gradually
puts it down ... urban street court, with the fading light of dusk casting a soft glow over the scene. The man's serious expression and steady grip on the ball ...

Text

Reference Image

a young boy sitting at a table, eating a piece of food. He appears to be enjoying his meal, as he takes a bite and chews it. The boy is wearing a blue shirtand has
short hair ...background is dark, with some light coming from the left side of the frame. There is a straw visible on the right side of the frame ...

Figure 1. Examples of identity-preserving video generation (IPT2V) by our ConsisID. Given a reference image, our method can
generate realistic and personalized human-centered videos while preserving identity. Red indicates that attributes in long instructions.

Abstract
Identity-preserving text-to-video (IPT2V) generation aims
to create high-fidelity videos with consistent human identity. It is an important task in video generation but remains an open problem for generative models. This paper
pushes the technical frontier of IPT2V in two directions that

have not been resolved in the literature: (1) A tuning-free
pipeline without tedious case-by-case finetuning, and (2)
A frequency-aware heuristic identity-preserving Diffusion
Transformer (DiT)-based control scheme. To achieve these
goals, we propose ConsisID, a tuning-free DiT-based controllable IPT2V model to keep human-identity consistent
in the generated video. Inspired by prior findings in fre-

12978

