This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoMatcher: Multi-View Collaborative Feature Matching
Jintao Zhang1 , Zimin Xia2 ,* Mingyue Dong1 , Shuhan Shen3 , Linwei Yue4 , Xianwei Zheng1∗
1
The State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
2
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 China University of Geosciences

Abstract
This paper proposes a multi-view collaborative matching
strategy for reliable track construction in complex scenarios. We observe that the pairwise matching paradigms applied to image set matching often result in ambiguous estimation when the selected independent pairs exhibit significant occlusions or extreme viewpoint changes. This challenge primarily stems from the inherent uncertainty in interpreting intricate 3D structures based on limited two-view
observations, as the 3D-to-2D projection leads to significant information loss. To address this, we introduce CoMatcher, a deep multi-view matcher to (i) leverage complementary context cues from different views to form a holistic
3D scene understanding and (ii) utilize cross-view projection consistency to infer a reliable global solution. Building
on CoMatcher, we develop a groupwise framework that fully
exploits cross-view relationships for large-scale matching
tasks. Extensive experiments on various complex scenarios
demonstrate the superiority of our method over the mainstream two-view matching paradigm.

Figure 1. From two view to multi-view. Unlike pairwise schemes
prone to uncertainty, we first partition the image set into co-visible
groups and collaboratively estimate group-wide correspondences
using a reliable deep multi-view matcher. Benefiting from holistic
scene understanding and consistency constraint, our method generates high-quality tracks in complex scenarios.

43, 50]. Inspired by Transformer [54], these methods employ deep networks to jointly analyze global context from
both views. This enables models to learn to infer underlying 3D scenes by integrating spatial and visual cues, which
has been proven crucial for accurate estimations [27, 43].
Despite great progress, current two-view matchers still
struggle in challenging wide-baseline scenarios, particularly with severe occlusions and repetitive textures [25]. We
argue that one potential cause for this difficulty lies in the
inherent uncertainty of interpreting complex 3D structures
from limited two-view observations— a task that even humans find prone to perceptual ambiguity. Projecting complex 3D geometries onto 2D planes inevitably results in significant loss of scene information. For example, spatially
distant regions may appear close in 2D. This makes it highly
unreliable to infer the original scene solely from ambiguous two-view context [6, 57]. Moreover, while matchers
can learn two-view geometric priors, this alone is also in-

1. Introduction
Research on recovering 3D structures and camera poses
from multiple views storing scene information has a long
history [20, 23, 34]. A core component of this process is
feature matching, which aims to estimate point correspondences across the image set [25, 32, 58]. For computational
flexibility, existing methods often decompose the set into
pairs of co-visible images [1, 18] and apply a two-view
matching approach to each pair independently [31, 43].
The pairwise matches are then merged into comprehensive
multi-view tracks [1, 45]. Following this pairwise framework to build systems for localization [22, 42] and mapping [29, 45] has become a entrenched research paradigm.
Recent advances in learning-based two-view matchers
have greatly improved performance in most cases [15, 30,
* Corresponding author.

21970

