This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inference-Scale Complexity in ANN-SNN Conversion for High-Performance and
Low-Power Applications
Tong Bu1,3† , Maohua Li2† , Zhaofei Yu1,3*
†

Equal contribution, * Corresponding author

putong30@pku.edu.cn, maohuali@hhu.edu.cn, yuzf12@pku.edu.cn

Existing Framework

Proposed Framework

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have emerged as a promising substitute for Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) due to
their advantages of fast inference and low power consumption. However, the lack of efficient training algorithms has
hindered their widespread adoption. Even efficient ANNSNN conversion methods necessitate quantized training of
ANNs to enhance the effectiveness of the conversion, incurring additional training costs. To address these challenges, we propose an efficient ANN-SNN conversion framework with only inference scale complexity. The conversion
framework includes a local threshold balancing algorithm,
which enables efficient calculation of the optimal thresholds and fine-grained adjustment of the threshold value by
channel-wise scaling. We also introduce an effective delayed
evaluation strategy to mitigate the influence of the spike
propagation delays. We demonstrate the scalability of our
framework in typical computer vision tasks: image classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, and video
classification. Our algorithm outperforms existing methods, highlighting its practical applicability and efficiency.
Moreover, we have evaluated the energy consumption of the
converted SNNs, demonstrating their superior low-power
advantage compared to conventional ANNs. This approach
simplifies the deployment of SNNs by leveraging open-source
pre-trained ANN models, enabling fast, low-power inference
with negligible performance reduction. Code is available at
https://github.com/putshua/Inference-scale-ANN-SNN.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large models have significantly reshaped the landscape of deep learning technology, industry, and the research community. These advanced models,
characterized by their massive scale and unprecedented zero1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2 School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Hohai University
3 School of Computer Science, Peking University

Longer
GPU
Dependent Time

Entire
Dataset

Training
Free

Shorter
Time

Sample
Dataset

Figure 1. Compared to existing frameworks that require retraining a quantized ANN, the proposed framework is able to directly
convert a pre-trained ANN to an SNN at inference-scale complexity, significantly reducing computational requirements, minimizing
dependence on GPUs, and requiring only a small subset of the
original dataset.

shot generalizability in downstream tasks, greatly impact
our daily lives. Nevertheless, the pursuit of larger models
raises concerns about high energy consumption for model
inference and training. The deployment of large models on
resource-constrained devices has also become a challenge.
Spiking neural networks (SNNs), a well-established type
of neural network that mimic the function of biological neurons and are considered the third generation of ANNs [44],
offer a potential solution to these issues as an alternative to
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). Unlike ANNs, spiking
neurons encode information as discrete events (binary spikes
or action potentials) and generate outputs based on both their
inputs and internal state. This unique processing mechanism
enables SNNs to effectively handle spatio-temporal information while leveraging sparse representations, leading to more
efficient and biologically plausible information processing.
With the development of the neuromorphic computing
hardware [10, 11, 17, 41, 42, 49, 50, 68, 69], SNNs can
now be deployed on neuromorphic chips and further applied
in power-limited scenarios [9, 56]. However, the lack of
efficient training algorithms has hindered their widespread
application. Recent learning methods have made significant
progress in training deep convolutional SNNs [15, 26] and
large spiking transformers using supervised learning algorithms [57, 67, 70]. While supervised training enables SNNs

24387

