This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ATP: Adaptive Threshold Pruning for Efficient Data Encoding in Quantum
Neural Networks
Mohamed Afane1, * Gabrielle Ebbrecht1 Ying Wang2 Juntao Chen1, * Junaid Farooq3
Fordham University 2 Stevens Institute of Technology 3 University of Michigan-Dearborn

1

Abstract
Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs) offer promising capabilities for complex data tasks, but are often constrained
by limited qubit resources and high entanglement, which
can hinder scalability and efficiency. In this paper, we introduce Adaptive Threshold Pruning (ATP), an encoding
method that reduces entanglement and optimizes data complexity for efficient computations in QNNs. ATP dynamically prunes non-essential features in the data based on
adaptive thresholds, effectively reducing quantum circuit
requirements while preserving high performance. Extensive
experiments across multiple datasets demonstrate that ATP
reduces entanglement entropy and improves adversarial robustness when combined with adversarial training methods like FGSM. Our results highlight ATP’s ability to balance computational efficiency and model resilience, achieving significant performance improvements with fewer resources, which will help make QNNs more feasible in practical, resource-constrained settings.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Demonstration of the adaptive threshold pruning framework. The original image (top) is split into a 3x3 grid, with
each section assessed for information density. The pruned image
(bottom) shows filtered regions that fall below a defined intensity
threshold in blue indicating areas that do not contribute significantly to the classification task, effectively freeing qubits and optimizing resources by focusing only on key areas of high relevance.

Quantum machine learning (QML) has gained attention for
its ability to solve problems that are difficult for classical
models by using the unique properties of quantum systems
[1]. It has shown practical benefits in fields such as chemistry [32], optimization [13], and others involving highdimensional or structured data [7, 37].However, quantum
algorithms are still constrained by the availability of qubits,
noise, and decoherence in hardware [19, 29]. Because of
quantum hardware’s sensitivity to the environment, qubits
are prone to premature collapse that degrades the fidelity of
computation. Qubits may also be disturbed by signals intended to alter the state of another qubit in close proximity
[4] which reduces stability in hardware with many qubits
and complicates the training of quantum models. As a result, shallower Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs) are often more practical. [9, 38].

Efficient data encoding into quantum states remains a
crucial bottleneck for achieving scalability and accuracy in
QML applications [30, 41]. For instance, limiting qubit interactions can reduce crosstalk and enhance stability, which
is essential for noise resilience [2]. While using larger
and deeper QNNs can enhance a model’s ability to capture complex data relationships and potentially improve performance, increasing encoding depth introduces new challenges. As the depth of the encoding circuit grows, encoded
quantum states tend to converge towards a maximally mixed
state at an exponential rate, becoming increasingly indistinguishable from random noise [21]. This concentration effect leads to a lack of state diversity and the emergence of
barren plateaus, where gradients vanish, significantly hindering the model’s learning process [26]. These effects are
especially problematic when encoding is not adapted to the
structure or scale of the data. Thus, QNNs must balance expressibility with computational demands and sensitivity to
barren plateaus [25].

* Corresponding authors: {mafane,jchen504}@fordham.edu

20427

