This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Autoregressive Distillation of Diffusion Transformers
Yeongmin Kim†,‡,∗ Sotiris Anagnostidis†,§ Yuming Du† Edgar Schönfeld† Jonas Kohler†
Markos Georgopoulos† Albert Pumarola† Ali Thabet† Artsiom Sanakoyeu†

Figure 1. Samples (1024 × 1024) generated by our 3-step ARD model, distilled from a 1.7B Emu.

lizing a predicted historical trajectory that is less susceptible to accumulated errors, and 2) it leverages the previous history of the ODE trajectory as a more effective
source of coarse-grained information. ARD modifies the
teacher transformer architecture by adding token-wise time
embedding to mark each input from the trajectory history
and employs a block-wise causal attention mask for training. Furthermore, incorporating historical inputs only in
lower transformer layers enhances performance and efficiency. We validate the effectiveness of ARD in a classconditioned generation on ImageNet and T2I synthesis. Our
model achieves a 5× reduction in FID degradation compared to the baseline methods while requiring only 1.1%
extra FLOPs on ImageNet-256. Moreover, ARD reaches
FID of 1.84 on ImageNet-256 in merely 4 steps and outperforms the publicly available 1024p text-to-image distilled
models in prompt adherence score with a minimal drop
in FID compared to the teacher. Project page: https:
//github.com/alsdudrla10/ARD.

Abstract
Diffusion models with transformer architectures have
demonstrated promising capabilities in generating highfidelity images and scalability for high resolution. However, iterative sampling process required for synthesis is
very resource-intensive. A line of work has focused on distilling solutions to probability flow ODEs into few-step student models. Nevertheless, existing methods have been limited by their reliance on the most recent denoised samples
as input, rendering them susceptible to exposure bias. To
address this limitation, we propose AutoRegressive Distillation (ARD), a novel approach that leverages the historical trajectory of the ODE to predict future steps. ARD offers two key benefits: 1) it mitigates exposure bias by uti∗ Work done during an internship at Meta GenAI. † Meta GenAI. § ETH
Zürich. ‡KAIST. Correspondence to: alsdudrla10@kaist.ac.kr

15745

