This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HaWoR: World-Space Hand Motion Reconstruction from Egocentric Videos
Jinglei Zhang1 , Jiankang Deng2 , Chao Ma1* , Rolandos Alexandros Potamias2*
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Imperial College London
{zhangjinglei168, chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn, {j.deng16, r.potamias}@imperial.ac.uk

Input video
Missing

Hand and camera motion in world space
Figure 1. We propose HaWoR, a world-space 3D hand motion estimation method for egocentric videos. We decouple world-space hand
motion estimation by combining camera-frame motions and world-space camera trajectories. HaWoR achieves state-of-the-art performance
on both camera pose estimation and hand motion reconstruction, even under challenging cases where hands are out of the view frustum.

Abstract

work that effectively completes the missing frames of the
sequence. Through extensive quantitative and qualitative
evaluations, we demonstrate that HaWoR achieves stateof-the-art performance on both hand motion reconstruction
and world-frame camera trajectory estimation under different egocentric benchmark datasets. Code and models are
available on https://hawor-project.github.io/.

Despite the advent in 3D hand pose estimation, current
methods predominantly focus on single-image 3D hand reconstruction in the camera frame, overlooking the worldspace motion of the hands. Such limitation prohibits their
direct use in egocentric video settings, where hands and
camera are continuously in motion. In this work, we propose HaWoR, a high-fidelity method for hand motion reconstruction in world coordinates from egocentric videos.
We propose to decouple the task by reconstructing the hand
motion in the camera space and estimating the camera trajectory in the world coordinate system. To achieve precise camera trajectory estimation, we propose an adaptive
egocentric SLAM framework that addresses the shortcomings of traditional SLAM methods, providing robust performance under challenging camera dynamics. To ensure robust hand motion trajectories, even when the hands move
out of view frustum, we devise a novel motion infiller net-

1. Introduction
Recovering fine-grained 3D hand motion estimation from
monocular videos has garnered significant attention, given
its critical role in various applications such as augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) and human behavior analysis [3, 5, 31, 50]. Despite the progress of 3D hand pose estimation from monocular images and videos [14, 22, 23, 28–
30], existing approaches predominantly focus on cameraspace reconstructions, often overlooking the hands’ trajectories in world-space. Neglecting the camera motion restricts the ability of hand reconstruction methods to accu-

* Corresponding authors

1805

