This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiVOS: Light Video Object Segmentation with Gated Linear Matching
Qin Liu1
Jianfeng Wang2
Zhengyuan Yang2
Linjie Li2
Kevin Lin2
Marc Niethammer1
Lijuan Wang2
1
2
UNC Chapel Hill Microsoft
https://github.com/uncbiag/LiVOS

Abstract
Semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) has
been largely driven by space-time memory (STM) networks,
which store past frame features in a spatiotemporal memory to segment the current frame via softmax attention.
However, STM networks face memory limitations due to
the quadratic complexity of softmax matching, restricting
their applicability as video length and resolution increase.
To address this, we propose LiVOS, a lightweight memory
network that employs linear matching via linear attention,
reformulating memory matching into a recurrent process
that reduces the quadratic attention matrix to a constantsize, spatiotemporal-agnostic 2D state. To enhance selectivity, we introduce gated linear matching, where a datadependent gate matrix is multiplied with the state matrix
to control what information to retain or discard. Experiments on diverse benchmarks demonstrated the effectiveness of our method. It achieved 64.8 J &F on MOSE and
85.1 J &F on DAVIS, surpassing all non-STM methods and
narrowing the gap with STM-based approaches. For longer
and higher-resolution videos, it matched STM-based methods with 53% less GPU memory and supports 4096p inference on a 32G consumer-grade GPU–a previously costprohibitive capability–opening the door for long and highresolution video foundation models.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) involves separating specific objects from the background in a sequence of video
frames. It plays a critical role in various real-world applications, including robotics [41], video editing [28], and
medical imaging [45]. Based on the level of user input,
VOS tasks are generally categorized into three settings:
unsupervised, semi-supervised (or one-shot), and interactive [20]. In this work, we focus on the semi-supervised setting, where the segmentation of the first frame is provided,
and the model is required to propagate this segmentation
across subsequent frames.

query
query frame
keys
memory frames
(w/ masks)

affinity matrix
readout

transpose

values

↑ Softmax matching
↓ Linear matching
query
query frame
keys
state matrix

memory frames
(w/ masks)

readout

transpose

values
ory
em

M
t of
Ou

Figure 1. Top: Conceptual comparison of softmax vs. linear
matching in video object segmentation. Bottom: Softmax matching suffers from memory constraints due to its quadratic attention
complexity, while linear matching achieves linear growth with a
constant-size state. Curves are based on results in Tab. 3.

Semi-supervised VOS is primarily driven by space-time
memory (STM) networks [10, 12, 14, 36, 43], which store
past frames and their segmentations as keys and values in
the memory bank to help segment the query frame. Segmentation occurs by matching each pixel in the query frame
to all spatiotemporal pixels in the memory frames via softmax attention [49]. This softmax matching process is highly
inefficient due to the large attention matrix with space and
time complexities of O(HW ×T HW ), where H and W indicate the spatial dimensions of an image and T is the num-

8668

