This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing Close Human Interaction with Appearance and Proxemics
Reasoning
Buzhen Huang1,2 *
1

Chen Li4,5 Chongyang Xu3 Dongyue Lu2
Yangang Wang1 Gim Hee Lee2

Jinnan Chen2

Southeast University 2 National University of Singapore 3 Sichuan University
4
IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
5
CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

RGB

SAM

ViTPose++

BUDDI

Human4D

Ours

Figure 1. Due to the visual ambiguity, even state-of-the-art vision foundation models (e.g., ViTPose++ [63] and temporal SAM [25, 37])
cannot clearly distinguish human semantics in close interactive cases. Consequently, human pose estimation methods based these basic
human semantics tend to fail. In comparison, our dual-branch optimization framework that leverages human appearance, proxemics, and
physics is capable of alleviating visual ambiguity to give better results.

Abstract
Due to visual ambiguities and inter-person occlusions, existing human pose estimation methods cannot recover plausible close interactions from in-the-wild videos. Even stateof-the-art large foundation models (e.g., SAM) cannot accurately distinguish human semantics in such challenging
scenarios. In this work, we ﬁnd that human appearance
can provide a straightforward cue to address these obstacles. Based on this observation, we propose a dual-branch
optimization framework to reconstruct accurate interactive
motions with plausible body contacts constrained by human
appearances, social proxemics, and physical laws. Specifically, we ﬁrst train a diffusion model to learn the human
proxemic behavior and pose prior knowledge. The trained
network and two optimizable tensors are then incorporated
into a dual-branch optimization framework to reconstruct
human motions and appearances. Several constraints based
on 3D Gaussians, 2D keypoints, and mesh penetrations are
also designed to assist the optimization. With the proxemics prior and diverse constraints, our method is capable of estimating accurate interactions from in-the-wild
1 The work was done while Buzhen Huang is a visiting student at National University of Singapore.

17475

videos captured in complex environments. We further build
a dataset with pseudo ground-truth interaction annotations,
which may promote future research on pose estimation and
human behavior understanding. Experimental results on
several benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms existing approaches. The code and data are available at https://www.buzhenhuang.com/works/
CloseApp.html.

1. Introduction
Human interaction is an essential part of life and has many
physical, mental and emotional beneﬁts. Enabling machines to understand human interaction may promote a lot
of downstream applications such as robotics, virtual reality, smart security, etc. As an effective tool for understanding human behaviour, 3D human pose and shape estimation
has achieved profound progress in recent years. However,
the existing methods are still not deployable for analysing
close human interactions due to severe visual ambiguities
and inter-person occlusions.
Speciﬁcally, single-person methods [9, 31, 49] only focus on pose accuracy and image-model alignment, while
multi-person approaches [15, 18, 52, 66] tend to address

