This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focusing on Tracks for Online Multi-Object Tracking
Kyujin Shim Kangwook Ko Yujin Yang Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{kjshim1028, kokangook623, ujin.y, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a critical task in computer vision, requiring the accurate identification and continuous tracking of multiple objects across video frames.
However, current state-of-the-art methods mainly rely on a
global optimization technique and multi-stage cascade association strategy, and those approaches often overlook the
specific characteristics of assignment task in MOT and useful detection results that may represent occluded objects.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel TrackFocused Online Multi-Object Tracker (TrackTrack) with two
key strategies: Track-Perspective-Based Association (TPA)
and Track-Aware Initialization (TAI). The TPA strategy associates each track with the most suitable detection result by
choosing the one with the minimum distance from all available detection results in a track-perspective manner. On
the other hand, TAI precludes the generation of spurious
tracks in the track-aware aspect by suppressing track initialization of detection results that heavily overlap with current active tracks and more confident detection results. Extensive experiments on MOT17, MOT20, and DanceTrack
demonstrate that our TrackTrack outperforms current stateof-the-art trackers, offering improved robustness and accuracy across diverse and challenging tracking scenarios.

Figure 1. Comparisons of HOTA scores on the test set of MOT17,
MOT20, and DanceTrack with our TrackTrack and other stateof-the-art methods. The radius of each circle means its HOTA
score on DanceTrack. Our TrackTrack shows the highest and most
consistently outperforming results on all datasets, demonstrating
strong robustness and adaptability in every tracking scenario.

1. introduction

ing results until the previous frame, and associated with the
same objects using various distance measurements such as
Intersection over Union (IoU) [8, 29, 61] and cosine distances of appearance features [1, 31, 36]. With the recent
development of object detection techniques [18, 50], most
approaches mainly focus on improving data association by
building multiple association stages [33, 61] and introducing additional metrics, such as pseudo-depth [29] or moving
direction [8, 56], while solving the matching between tracks
and detection results with the Hungarian algorithm [34].
The Hungarian algorithm [34] is widely recognized for
finding the minimum global cost matching between two independent sets, making it highly suitable for tasks requiring
the lowest total costs, such as allocating workers to tasks in
a factory. However, applying this algorithm to MOT during data association between tracks and detection results
presents additional challenges. In MOT, tracks represent actual objects from previous frames, whereas detection results
are object candidates of the current frame. Unlike matching
between independent sets, as in job allocation to workers,

Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision that plays a crucial role in various applications
[10, 20, 24, 26, 38, 41, 60]. However, MOT still faces diverse challenges due to the dynamic and unpredictable nature of real-world environments, including occlusions, similar appearances between different objects, and varying densities and motions of tracking targets. Many state-of-the-art
methods [14, 56, 57, 61] follow the tracking-by-detection
(TBD) framework, the dominant approach in MOT, to solve
these problems. In this framework, trackers first detect objects in each frame and adequately link them to form complete trajectories across a video. More specifically, the detection results are compared with tracks, which are track-

11687

