This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InPO: Inversion Preference Optimization with Reparametrized DDIM for
Efficient Diffusion Model Alignment
Yunhong Lu1
Qichao Wang1
Hengyuan Cao1
Xierui Wang1
Xiaoyin Xu1
Min Zhang1,2∗
1
2
Zhejiang University
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study-Zhejiang University
{yunhonglu,qichaowang,caohy,sherrywang,xiaoyinxu,min zhang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Without using explicit reward, direct preference optimization (DPO) employs paired human preference data to
fine-tune generative models, a method that has garnered
considerable attention in large language models (LLMs).
However, exploration of aligning text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models with human preferences remains limited. In
comparison to supervised fine-tuning, existing methods that
align diffusion model suffer from low training efficiency and
subpar generation quality due to the long Markov chain
process and the intractability of the reverse process. To
address these limitations, we introduce DDIM-InPO, an efficient method for direct preference alignment of diffusion
models. Our approach conceptualizes diffusion model as a
single-step generative model, allowing us to fine-tune the
outputs of specific latent variables selectively. In order to
accomplish this objective, we first assign implicit rewards to
any latent variable directly via a reparameterization technique. Then we construct an Inversion technique to estimate appropriate latent variables for preference optimization. This modification process enables the diffusion model
to only fine-tune the outputs of latent variables that have a
strong correlation with the preference dataset. Experimental results indicate that our DDIM-InPO achieves state-ofthe-art performance with just 400 steps of fine-tuning, surpassing all preference aligning baselines for T2I diffusion
models in human preference evaluation tasks.

This alignment aims to produce outputs that meet human
preferences while retaining model’s learned capabilities. In
recent years, T2I diffusion models [18, 43, 52] have been at
the forefront of image generation. Nevertheless, achieving
alignment between model outputs and human preferences
remains a significant challenge.
Recently, researchers have developed several methods
tailoring diffusion models to human preferences, yet these
approaches generally lack effectiveness. Some methods
adopt a two-stage training approach, where a reward function is first trained and then followed by updating the diffusion model using gradient-based back-propagation [12, 45].
These approaches tend to be unstable and are susceptible
to reward leakage [75]. Alternatively, RL (reinforcement
learning)-based methods model the denoising process as a
Markov decision process, with online evaluation of generated images based on reward feedback [6]. However, their
effectiveness is constrained by the length of the Markov
chain. Other approaches such as [32, 63], inspired by direct
preference optimization (DPO) [48], reduce the RL objective to an optimal policy training goal. Nevertheless, due
to the influence of sparse rewards [23, 69], these methods’
performance is limited, especially when handling out-ofdistribution inputs.
To address these issues, we introduce DDIM-InPO, an
efficient approach for direct preference optimization of diffusion models. In response to the challenge of the implict
rewards allocation in the long-chain denoising process, our
key idea is to treat the diffusion model as a single-step generation framework, only fine-tuning the outputs of latent
variables directly linked to the target image. To achieve this,
we first link the latent variables to the target image space
in a single step, using a reparameterization method. It allows us to allocate implicit rewards to latent variables at any
timestep directly. Secondly, to mitigate the effects of sparse
rewards, we use an Inversion technique in the target image
space to identify images that are highly correlated with the
target and obtain the corresponding latent variables. Finally,
we focus on optimizing the outputs of this limited set of latent variables and thus achieve rapid computations, enabling

1. Introduction
In the domain of T2I generation, tailoring image outputs
to reflect user preferences is still in an early stage of development. In contrast, large language models (LLMs) [1]
have made notable progress in generating human-aligned
text, following a two-stage process: first, pre-training on
extensively collected large-scale datasets and then, aligning on smaller datasets that capture specific human needs.
* Corresponding author

28629

