This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Scale Neighborhood Occupancy Masked Autoencoder for
Self-Supervised Learning in LiDAR Point Clouds
Mohamed Abdelsamad1,2 Michael Ulrich1 Claudius Gläser1 Abhinav Valada2
1
2
Bosch Center for AI
University of Freiburg

Abstract
80

82 mIoU

PTv3 80.4
UniPAD 79.4

69

71

73 mIoU

NoMAE(Ours) 72.3
PTv3 71.3
SphereFormer 69.9

30
Data-Efficient
Nuscenes
ObjDet

Sensors that generate point clouds, such as LiDARs or radars,
have become a cornerstone in automated driving as they provide high-resolution three-dimensional representations of
the environment [29]. The rich spatial information represented in point clouds enables vehicles to accurately detect
and classify objects, navigate complex environments, and enhance safety through real-time situational awareness. However, annotated point cloud datasets are significantly smaller
than their image-based counterparts, which makes learning large-scale perception models extremely challenging.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) [2, 5–7, 14–17, 21, 22, 32],
through contrastive learning or masked modeling, provides

78

NoMAE(Ours) 81.8

67
Waymo
SemSeg

1. Introduction

76
Nuscenes
SemSeg

Masked autoencoders (MAE) have shown tremendous
potential for self-supervised learning (SSL) in vision and
beyond. However, point clouds from LiDARs used in automated driving are particularly challenging for MAEs since
large areas of the 3D volume are empty. Consequently, existing work suffers from leaking occupancy information into
the decoder and has significant computational complexity,
thereby limiting the SSL pre-training to only 2D bird’s eye
view encoders in practice. In this work, we propose the
novel neighborhood occupancy MAE (NOMAE) that overcomes the aforementioned challenges by employing masked
occupancy reconstruction only in the neighborhood of nonmasked voxels. We incorporate voxel masking and occupancy reconstruction at multiple scales with our proposed
hierarchical mask generation technique to capture features
of objects of different sizes in the point cloud. NOMAEs are
extremely flexible and can be directly employed for SSL in
existing 3D architectures. We perform extensive evaluations
on the nuScenes and Waymo Open datasets for the downstream perception tasks of semantic segmentation and 3D
object detection, comparing with both discriminative and
generative SSL methods. The results demonstrate that NOMAE sets the new state-of-the-art on multiple benchmarks
for multiple point cloud perception tasks.

40

50

60 mAP

NoMAE(Ours) 54.4
UniPAD 48.1
UVTR-L 39.0

Figure 1. NOMAE enables masking and reconstructing occupancy
as a self-supervised pretext task for large-scale point clouds. It limits the reconstruction of masked voxels
to the neighborhood
of visible
voxels and reconstructs the masked occupancy at multiple scales. NOMAE
achieves state-of-the-art performance on
nuScenes semantic segmentation, Waymo semantic segmentation,
and nuScenes object detection tasks, outperforming existing selfsupervised methods
as well as transformer methods .

an effective solution to this problem by learning meaningful
representations from vast amounts of unlabeled data. SSL
also reduces the reliance on arduous annotation processes
while improving performance and generalization. Pioneering works [24, 27, 45, 47] have successfully employed SSL
to small-scale indoor point clouds, with more recent efforts
extending it to large-scale outdoor point clouds [18, 33, 40].

22234

Outdoor point clouds, however, pose a unique challenge
for masked modeling as most of the measured 3D volume
is empty space. Current approaches resort to reconstructing
precise point locations within occupied voxels [18, 33, 40],
but this often leaks information to the decoder, signaling that
the queried voxel is occupied. Recent methods [26, 43] attempt to overcome this problem by reconstructing the entire
scene, but the computational complexity and class imbalance caused by the large number of empty voxels limit these
approaches to either 2D bird’s-eye-view representations or
coarse-grained 3D reconstructions.

