This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CityWalker: Learning Embodied Urban Navigation from Web-Scale Videos
Xinhao Liu* Jintong Li* Yicheng Jiang Niranjan Sujay Zhicheng Yang
Juexiao Zhang John Abanes Jing Zhang Chen Feng†
New York University
https://ai4ce.github.io/CityWalker/
Web-scale Videos
（2000+ hours)

Crossing

Turn

Sign

Obstacle

Traffic Light

Road blocked

Dense Traffic

Proximity

CityWalker

Expert Data (6 hours)

Figure 1. Embodied Urban Navigation. Navigating urban spaces is challenging for (especially off-street) mobile agents. The differently
colored pins ( ) along the route highlight various critical scenarios unique to complex and dynamic urban landscapes. Thumbnails on the
right with corresponding colored pins demonstrate the real-world observation of these challenging cases. Our CityWalker model is trained
with over 2000 hours of city walking videos and fine-tuned with a small amount of expert data to address these challenges effectively.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Visual navigation is a crucial capability for mobile agents.
In previously unseen environments, humans typically rely
on navigation tools (such as Google Maps) to reach a goal
location by following a series of waypoints. These tools
provide high-level guidance, but the actual navigation between waypoints requires sophisticated spatial awareness
and decision-making. In urban settings, this involves understanding and adhering to complex rules, such as common
sense regulations and norms, while dynamically responding to obstacles and environmental changes. The diversity
and complexity encountered in urban navigation scenarios
pose significant challenges for navigation policies but are
essential for deploying mobile robots in real-world settings.
Applications like delivery robots and robotaxis, especially
without high-definition maps, highlight the growing need
for embodied agents to navigate efficiently and safely in
dynamic urban landscapes. How can we teach embodied
agents to navigate dynamic urban landscapes as effectively
as humans do?

Navigating dynamic urban environments presents significant challenges for embodied agents, requiring advanced
spatial reasoning and adherence to common-sense norms.
Despite progress, existing visual navigation methods struggle in map-free or off-street settings, limiting the deployment of autonomous agents like last-mile delivery robots.
To overcome these obstacles, we propose a scalable, datadriven approach for human-like urban navigation by training agents on thousands of hours of in-the-wild city walking
and driving videos sourced from the web. We introduce a
simple and scalable data processing pipeline that extracts
action supervision from these videos, enabling large-scale
imitation learning without costly annotations. Our model
learns sophisticated navigation policies to handle diverse
challenges and critical scenarios. Experimental results
show that training on large-scale, diverse datasets significantly enhances navigation performance, surpassing current methods. This work shows the potential of using abundant online video data to develop robust navigation policies
for embodied agents in dynamic urban settings.

The question has been explored in early works [1–3] before the deep learning era. These approaches combined
SLAM-based mapping with modular systems for search-

* Equal contribution ({xinhao.liu, jintong.li}@nyu.edu)
† Corresponding author(cfeng@nyu.edu)

6875

