This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spotting the Unexpected (STU): A 3D LiDAR Dataset for Anomaly Segmentation
in Autonomous Driving
Alexey Nekrasov1

Malcolm Burdorf1
Stewart Worrall2
Bastian Leibe1
2
Julie Stephany Berrio Perez
1
RWTH Aachen University, 2 The University of Sydney

https://vision.rwth-aachen.de/stu-dataset

Figure 1. We present Spotting the Unexpected (STU) a novel anomaly segmentation dataset for autonomous driving. The dataset contains
semantic and instance labels for out-of-distribution (OOD) objects, and includes surround-view setup with synchronized cameras.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles have become an increasingly important part of modern transportation systems. Despite significant advances, these vehicles continue to face challenges in
accurately detecting unexpected objects on the road. One
particular challenge is road debris, which refers to objects
that are not typically part of the roadway environment and
pose significant safety risks. According to the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety [53], road debris was a contributing
factor in more than 50, 000 crashes, 10, 000 injuries, and
125 fatalities annually between 2011 and 2014. These objects can vary widely in size and appearance, making them
particularly challenging to detect. Addressing this issue is
critical for ensuring the safe and reliable operation of autonomous vehicles, as it directly impacts their ability to handle anomalies in real-world driving conditions.

To operate safely, autonomous vehicles (AVs) need to detect
and handle unexpected objects or anomalies on the road.
While significant research exists for anomaly detection and
segmentation in 2D, research progress in 3D is underexplored. Existing datasets lack high-quality multimodal data
that are typically found in AVs. This paper presents a novel
dataset for anomaly segmentation in driving scenarios. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the first publicly available dataset focused on road anomaly segmentation with
dense 3D semantic labeling, incorporating both LiDAR and
camera data, as well as sequential information to enable
anomaly detection across various ranges. This capability
is critical for the safe navigation of autonomous vehicles.
We adapted and evaluated several baseline models for 3D
segmentation, highlighting the challenges of 3D anomaly
detection in driving environments. Our dataset and evaluation code will be openly available, facilitating the testing
and performance comparison of different approaches.

11875

State-of-the-art anomaly segmentation and anomaly detection methods have received substantial attention in recent years [17, 37, 41], especially in the context of autonomous driving [11, 16, 18, 21, 31, 54]. One of the first

