This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accelerating Diffusion Transformer via Increment-Calibrated Caching with
Channel-Aware Singular Value Decomposition
Zhiyuan Chen Keyi Li Yifan Jia Le Ye
Peking University, Beijing, China

Yufei Ma*

yufei.ma@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

former architecture [40], which has been extensively validated in various tasks, including image recognition [9] and
language modeling [18].
However, DiTs are still burdened with the iterative nature inherent in DMs. This means their high-ﬁdelity synthesis results usually come at the cost of substantial latency, exacerbating deployment difﬁculties and necessitating efﬁciency improvement. The existing strategies to accelerate DiT models can be categorized into three primary
approaches: timestep reduction, weight-oriented approximation [5], and cache-based acceleration [26, 35]. Research works within the ﬁrst approach are devoted to reducing the required reverse steps, including adopting fast
samplers [23, 24, 37, 44] or distilling the original trajectory
into fewer timesteps [33, 39].
Methods that fall under the category of weight-oriented
approximation are inspired by the general methodology to
decrease the complexity of neural networks. These works
typically concentrate on eliminating redundant weight elements through pruning [11], adopting low-bit quantization [5, 12], or employing low-rank approximation such as
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). However, enhancing
generation efﬁciency by decreasing the model size of DiTs
is a non-trivial task, especially when retraining is not feasible. Regarding the experimental results of SVD-based approximation, as shown in Fig. 2, even when approximately
33% of the ranks are removed across all layers, the computational overhead does not diminish accordingly. Moreover,
the generated images suffer from substantial quality degradation and lose the consistency with the original model.
Cache-based acceleration techniques are proposed to
leverage the multi-step property of diffusion process contrarily and exploit the inherent temporal similarities to bypass redundant computations [16, 26, 35]. In this case,
the intermediate features of previous timesteps are cached
and directly used to approximate the outputs of subsequent
timesteps without any corrections. Current related works
primarily focus on designing an optimal caching mechanism, while ignoring the calibration of the cached value.
This oversight may lead to quality drop and constrain the

Diffusion transformer (DiT) models have achieved remarkable success in image generation, thanks for their exceptional generative capabilities and scalability. Nonetheless,
the iterative nature of diffusion models (DMs) results in
high computation complexity, posing challenges for deployment. Although existing cache-based acceleration methods
try to utilize the inherent temporal similarity to skip redundant computations of DiT, the lack of correction may induce potential quality degradation. In this paper, we propose increment-calibrated caching, a training-free method
for DiT acceleration, where the calibration parameters are
generated from the pre-trained model itself with low-rank
approximation. To deal with the possible correction failure arising from outlier activations, we introduce channelaware Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), which further strengthens the calibration effect. Experimental results show that our method always achieve better performance than existing naive caching methods with a similar
computation resource budget. When compared with 35-step
DDIM, our method eliminates more than 45% computation
and improves IS by 12 at the cost of less than 0.06 FID increase.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) [14, 29, 37, 38] have emerged as
one of the most popular generative models, exhibiting great
generation quality and diversity especially in the area of
contiguous modalities, including images [31], videos [36],
and audios [6]. Throughout the reverse process of DMs,
expected contents are gradually synthesized with a multistep reﬁnement. Although initial DMs are based on UNet architectures [32], recent works have demonstrated
that transformer-based DMs, i.e., Diffusion Transformers
(DiTs) can serve as a competitive alternative [30]. DiTs
beneﬁt from the exceptional scalability inherent in trans* Corresponding Author

18011

