This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOVIS: Enhancing Multi-Object Novel View Synthesis for Indoor Scenes
Ruijie Lu1,2 ⋆ Yixin Chen2 ⋆† Junfeng Ni2,3 Baoxiong Jia2
Yu Liu2,3 Diwen Wan1 Gang Zeng1† Siyuan Huang2†
⋆
Equal contribution † Corresponding author
1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI 3 Tsinghua University
3D-FRONT

SUNRGB-D

Right 145° Up 10°

Right 80°

Left 50°

Ours

Ground Truth

Zero-1-to-3

Left 180° Down 5°

Left 180° Down 5°

Left 180° Down 5°

Right 100° Up 5°

Right 100° Up 5°

Right 100° Up 5°

Cross View Matching

NVS

Objaverse

Figure 1. Novel view synthesis and cross-view image matching. The first row shows that MOVIS generalizes to different datasets on
novel view synthesis (NVS). We also show visualizations of cross-view consistency compared with Zero-1-to-3 [43] and ground truth by
applying image-matching. MOVIS can match a significantly greater number of points, closely aligned with the ground truth.

Abstract
Repurposing pre-trained diffusion models has been proven
to be effective for NVS. However, these methods are mostly
limited to a single object; directly applying such methods
to compositional multi-object scenarios yields inferior results, especially incorrect object placement and inconsistent
shape and appearance under novel views. How to enhance
and systematically evaluate the cross-view consistency of
such models remains under-explored. To address this issue,
we propose MOVIS to enhance the structural awareness of

26767

the view-conditioned diffusion model for multi-object NVS
in terms of model inputs, auxiliary tasks, and training strategy. First, we inject structure-aware features, including
depth and object mask, into the denoising U-Net to enhance
the model’s comprehension of object instances and their
spatial relationships. Second, we introduce an auxiliary
task requiring the model to simultaneously predict novel
view object masks, further improving the model’s capability in differentiating and placing objects. Finally, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the diffusion sampling process
and carefully devise a structure-guided timestep sampling

