This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Binarized Neural Network for Multi-spectral Image Fusion
Junming Hou1 † Xiaoyu Chen1 † Ran Ran2 † Xiaofeng Cong1
Xinyang Liu3 Jian Wei You1 ‡ Liang-Jian Deng2 ‡
1
Southeast University 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{junming hou, 213214058}@seu.edu.cn, ranran@std.uestc.edu.cn, cxf svip@163.com,
codex.lxy@gmail.com, jvyou@seu.edu.cn, liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Binarization

DWT

Pan-sharpening technology refers to generating a highresolution (HR) multi-spectral (MS) image with broad applications by fusing a low-resolution (LR) MS image and
HR panchromatic (PAN) image. While deep learning
approaches have shown impressive performance in pansharpening, they generally require extensive hardware with
high memory and computational power, limiting their deployment on resource-constrained satellites. In this study,
we investigate the use of binary neural networks (BNNs)
for pan-sharpening and observe that binarization leads to
distinct information degradation across different frequency
components of an image. Building on this insight, we propose a novel binary pan-sharpening network, termed BNNPan, structured around the Prior-Integrated Binary Frequency (PIBF) module that features three key ingredients:
Binary Wavelet Transform Convolution, Latent Diffusion
Prior Compensation, and Channel-wise Distribution Calibration. Specifically, the first decomposes input features
into distinct frequency components using Wavelet Transform, then applies a “divide-and-conquer” strategy to optimize binary feature learning for each component, informed
by the corresponding full-precision residual statistics. The
second integrates a latent diffusion prior to compensate
for compromised information during binarization, while the
third performs channel-wise calibration to further refine
feature representation. Our BNNPan, developed with the
proposed techniques, achieves promising pan-sharpening
performance on multiple remote sensing datasets, surpassing state-of-the-art binarization algorithms.

(a) Spatial Real-valued Feature

LL

LH

HL

HH

(b) Spatial Binary Feature

LLb

LHb

HLb

HHb

Binarization

(c) Frequency Real-valued Feature

(d) Frequency Binary Feature

Figure 1. Analysis of the binarization. Given a (a) real-valued
(i.e., full-precision) feature map, we can observe that: 1) its corresponding binary activation, i.e., (b) spatial binary feature, exhibits significant degradation. 2) while the frequency binary activation, i.e., (d) frequency binary feature, delivers more information, meanwhile different frequency components showcase varying responses to binary activation.

ping services, military systems, and environmental monitoring, owing to their superior spectral and spatial resolutions.
Nonetheless, the direct acquisition of HRMS images poses
significant challenges due to the technical limitations inherent in current remote sensing sensors. To address this, the
pan-sharpening technique has been proposed as a reliable
solution for generating HRMS images by fusing readily accessible low-resolution multi-spectral (LRMS) images and
paired texture-rich panchromatic (PAN) images [7, 30].
Over the last few years, deep learning (DL)-based methods have become the mainstream solutions in the field
of pan-sharpening, demonstrating notable performance improvements over traditional algorithms [7, 39]. Initiated by
the inspiration from SRCNN [8], PNN [22] led the way in
introducing the convolutional neural network (CNN) into
the pan-sharpening domain. Remarkably, it surpasses traditional algorithms significantly, even with a simple three-

1. Introduction
High-resolution multi-spectral (HRMS) images have seen
widespread application in remote sensing, such as map† Equal contribution; ‡ Corresponding authors; The code is available.

2236

