This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AA-CLIP: Enhancing Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection via Anomaly-Aware CLIP
Wenxin Ma1,2
Xu Zhang1,2
Qingsong Yao5
Fenghe Tang1,2
Chenxu Wu1,2
Yingtai Li1,2
Rui Yan1,2
Zihang Jiang1,2 *
S.Kevin Zhou1,2,3,4 *
1
School of Biomedical Engineering, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, USTC
2
MIRACLE Center, Suzhou Institute for Advance Research, USTC
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of CAS, ICT, CAS
4
State Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC
5
Stanford University
wxma@mail.ustc.edu.cn jzh0103@ustc.edu.cn s.kevin.zhou@gmail.com

Normal
Anomaly

Class 3

Anomaly
Patch

Anomaly Text
Normal Text

Unseen Classes

Normal Patch
Anomaly Patch

Class 1

Anomaly Text

Normal
Patch
Normal
Patch

Anomaly Text

Class 2

Anomaly Patch

Seen Classes
Normal Text

Text Embeddings
Patch Feature Space

Text Embeddings
Patch Feature Space

Features from Original CLIP

(Left)

Text Embeddings
Patch Feature Space

Normal Text

Stage1: Disentangling Anomaly-Aware
Text Anchors

Stage2: Aligning Patch Features
According to Text Anchors

(Middle)

Text Embeddings
Patch Feature Space

Features from our Anomaly-Aware CLIP

(Right)

Figure 1. (Left) CLIP’s anomaly unawareness: Category-level image-text alignment in pre-training leads to CLIP’s vague distinctions
in anomaly/normal semantics and inaccurate patch-text alignment. (Middle) Our two-stage adaptation strategy: In Stage1, anomaly
and normal text features are disentangled as anchors in text space; in Stage2, patch-level visual features are trained to align to these anchors, forming Anomaly-Aware CLIP. (Right) Generalizable anomaly awareness: Our method enables CLIP with generalizable anomaly
awareness for both known and unseen classes.

Abstract

ner, achieving effective AD while maintaining CLIP’s class
knowledge. Extensive experiments validate AA-CLIP as a
resource-efficient solution for zero-shot AD tasks, achieving state-of-the-art results in industrial and medical applications. The code is available at https://github.
com/Mwxinnn/AA-CLIP.

Anomaly detection (AD) identifies outliers for applications
like defect and lesion detection. While CLIP shows promise
for zero-shot AD tasks due to its strong generalization capabilities, its inherent Anomaly-Unawareness leads to limited discrimination between normal and abnormal features.
To address this problem, we propose Anomaly-Aware CLIP
(AA-CLIP), which enhances CLIP’s anomaly discrimination ability in both text and visual spaces while preserving
its generalization capability. AA-CLIP is achieved through
a straightforward yet effective two-stage approach: it first
creates anomaly-aware text anchors to differentiate normal
and abnormal semantics clearly, then aligns patch-level visual features with these anchors for precise anomaly localization. This two-stage strategy, with the help of residual adapters, gradually adapts CLIP in a controlled man-

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) involves modeling the distribution
of a dataset to identify outliers, such as defects in industrial
products [2] or lesions in medical images [13]. Despite that
previous AD frameworks [10, 11, 15, 23, 31, 58] effectively
detect anomalies when sufficient labeled data is available
for specific classes, their high resource demands often limit
their generalization ability to novel and rare classes. This
limitation is particularly challenging in real-world scenarios
where collecting comprehensive labeled datasets for AD is
often infeasible, necessitating the exploration of low-shot

* Corresponding author.

4744

