This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imagine and Seek: Improving Composed Image Retrieval with an Imagined
Proxy
You Li
Fan Ma Yi Yang†
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
†

Corresponding author

{uli2000, mafan, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

(a) Retrieval only in text

Query

A S* that is gold in color

MLP

The Zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZSCIR) requires retrieving images that match the query image and
the relative captions. Current methods focus on projecting
the query image into the text feature space, subsequently
combining them with features of query texts for retrieval.
However, retrieving images only with the text features cannot guarantee detailed alignment due to the natural gap between images and text. In this paper, we introduce Imagined
Proxy for CIR (IP-CIR), a training-free method that creates a proxy image aligned with the query image and text
description, enhancing query representation in the retrieval
process. We first leverage the large language model’s generalization capability to generate an image layout, and then
apply both the query text and image for conditional generation. The robust query features are enhanced by merging the
proxy image, query image, and text semantic perturbation.
Our newly proposed balancing metric integrates text-based
and proxy retrieval similarities, allowing for more accurate
retrieval of the target image while incorporating image-side
information into the process. Experiments on three public datasets demonstrate that our method significantly improves retrieval performances. We achieve state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results on the CIRR dataset with a Recall@K of
70.07 at K=10. Additionally, we achieved an improvement
in Recall@10 on the FashionIQ dataset, rising from 45.11
to 45.74, and improved the baseline performance in CIRCO
with a mAPK@10 score, increasing from 32.24 to 34.26.

Reference Image

Combine

LLM
Generator

Relative Caption:
is gold in color

Imagined Proxy

(b) Retrieval with Proxy

Composed Image Retrieval

Abstract

Wrong Bag

Correct Bag

Figure 1. Comparison of composed image retrieval between
text-only retrieval (LDRE in Fig) and our methods. Traditional
methods perform retrieval only in the text space, where CLIP text
features may overlook some important semantic information. In
contrast, our approach generates imagined proxy features, providing additional information that is often overlooked in text-only retrieval, thereby improving retrieval accuracy.

51] and image retrieval [5, 6, 16, 25, 28, 34, 37, 41, 43, 45].
This rich imagination gains new significance in Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) [28], where users express their
imagination of the query image through text, searching
for content that aligns with their preferences. Specifically,
the CIR task requires users to retrieve target images from
a database that match both the content of a query image
and relative caption. With text modality to flexibly control retrieval targets, CIR enables the search process akin
to the user’s specific imagination after viewing the query
image. This multi-modal, imagination-like retrieval task
greatly expands the applications of image retrieval, with
wide-ranging uses in fields such as visual search [29], object localization [18, 21], and re-identification [39, 46].
Traditional solutions for CIR [3, 4, 10–15] are constrained by the scarcity of training data (e.g, 46.6k for FashionIQ [41] dataset and 28.8k for CIRR [28] dataset), as collecting suitable triplets (query image xq , relevant text xc ,
and target image xt ) from the web incurs high labor costs.
Therefore, we focus on the ZS-CIR task, aiming to bypass
the need for training on triplet datasets and achieve gen-

1. Introduction
Imagination is the wellspring of human creativity. When
you see a picture of an adorable cat, you might envision it
playing with other cats, wearing cool sunglasses and a cape,
or floating in a space capsule. This ability to imagine and
pursue beautiful visions drives continuous advancement in
fields like image generation [2, 19, 26, 30, 33, 35, 47, 50,

3984

