This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FiRe: Fixed-points of Restoration Priors for Solving Inverse Problems
Matthieu Terris⇤ , Ulugbek S. Kamilov† , Thomas Moreau⇤
⇤
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau, 91120, France
†
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
Abstract
Selecting an appropriate prior to compensate for information loss due to the measurement operator is a fundamental challenge in imaging inverse problems. Implicit priors
based on denoising neural networks have become central to
widely-used frameworks such as Plug-and-Play (PnP) algorithms. In this work, we introduce Fixed-points of Restoration (FiRe) priors as a new framework for expanding the
notion of priors in PnP to general restoration models beyond traditional denoising models. The key insight behind
FiRe is that smooth images emerge as fixed points of the
composition of a degradation operator with the corresponding restoration model. This enables us to derive an explicit
formula for our implicit prior by quantifying invariance
of images under this composite operation. Adopting this
fixed-point perspective, we show how various restoration
networks can effectively serve as priors for solving inverse
problems. The FiRe framework further enables ensemblelike combinations of multiple restoration models as well as
acquisition-informed restoration networks, all within a unified optimization approach. Experimental results validate
the effectiveness of FiRe across various inverse problems,
establishing a new paradigm for incorporating pretrained
restoration models into PnP-like algorithms. Code available at https://github.com/matthieutrs/fire.

the noise e is Gaussian, the Bayes’ rule yields the following
equivalent minimization problem:
argmin
x

yk22

log p(x),

(2)

where p is a prior for the distribution of natural images. In
this context, a powerful surrogate prior p is needed to ensure
that a solution to (2) is satisfying in the sense of being both
visually appealing and faithful to the measurements (1). In
the modern literature, denoising neural networks have imposed themselves as powerful implicit priors. Their popularity stems from their ability to approximate the gradient
of a log prior rx log p(x), also known as the score, through
the Tweedie’s formula [17, 33, 36]. Such models can be
plugged within iterative optimization algorithms for solving
(2), giving rise to the so-called Plug-and-Play (PnP) framework [12, 16, 22, 32]. Note that such score-matching methods are also at the heart of diffusion approaches [5, 6, 9] for
solving inverse problems.
From a practical perspective, PnP methods alternate between data-fidelity steps enforcing consistency with (1) and
denoising steps that implicitly encode natural image priors. Despite theoretical convergence results ensuring stable reconstructions [12, 22, 31, 36], achieving state-of-theart results relies heavily on heuristics such as decreasing
step sizes or early stopping [34, 35, 39]. This gap between
theory and practice stems from a critical limitation of PnP
algorithms: at convergence, denoisers trained on Gaussiancorrupted images are applied to smooth images, creating a
significant distribution mismatch.
A natural extension of this framework is to consider
other restoration models as potential implicit priors. Recent works demonstrate that super-resolution models can
be incorporated into both PnP restoration [10] and diffusion models [2]. This approach is particularly appealing
as it can leverage the vast collection of pretrained image
restoration models available to the community. However,
this approach is not as straightforward as substituting a denoiser with a more general restoration model, as this naive
approach leads to poor reconstruction quality. Moreover,
extending Tweedie’s formula to general restoration models
beyond denoisers is not trivial.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to recover high-quality images from
degraded measurements, encompassing fundamental lowlevel vision tasks such as denoising, super-resolution, and
inpainting. These problems can be formulated as linear
inverse problems, where one seeks to recover an image
x 2 Rn from given observations y 2 Rm obtained through
y = Ax + e ,

1
kAx
2

(1)

where A is a linear operator, modeling the sensing system,
and e 2 Rm is some additive noise. A standard approach for
solving such problem consists in finding an estimate x that
maximizes the posterior distribution p(x|y). Assuming that

23185

