This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EventPSR: Surface Normal and Reflectance Estimation from
Photometric Stereo Using an Event Camera
Bohan Yu1,2†

Jin Han3,4

Boxin Shi1,2 *

Imari Sato3,4

1

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

2

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

4

The University of Tokyo

National Institute of Informatics

ybh1998@pku.edu.cn, jinhan@nii.ac.jp, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn, imarik@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

EventPSR

Simultaneously acquisition of the surface normal and reflectance parameters is a crucial but challenging technique
in the field of computer vision and graphics. It requires capturing multiple high dynamic range (HDR) images in existing methods using frame-based cameras. In this paper, we
propose EventPSR, the first work to recover surface normal
and reflectance parameters (e.g., metallic and roughness)
simultaneously using an event camera. Compared with the
existing methods based on photometric stereo or neural radiance fields, EventPSR is a robust and efficient approach
that works consistently with different materials. Thanks to
the extremely high temporal resolution and high dynamic
range coverage of event cameras, EventPSR can recover accurate surface normal and reflectance of objects with various materials in 10 seconds. Extensive experiments on both
synthetic data and real objects show that compared with existing methods using more than 100 HDR images, EventPSR
recovers comparable surface normal and reflectance parameters with only about 30% of the data rate.

…
Light scanning
pattern

Target
object

Event stream

？
Stage 1:
Grid-matching

Stage 2:
Gradient-tuning

Normal map Metallic

Roughness

Result

Lambertian

Mirror

1. Introduction

Supported materials

The fast and accurate acquisition of the shape and appearance information of an object is essential for many tasks
in computer vision and computer graphics. This technique
enables re-rendering realistic digital twins of real-world objects, supporting a wide range of downstream applications,
such as virtual reality, augmented reality (AR), and digital
content creation. However, dynamic range is a big issue
when the material is composed of diffuse and highly specular properties. The time-consuming capturing process and

Figure 1. The EventPSR applies a sequence of light scanning patterns and an event camera to recover the accurate normal map and
reflectance parameters (i.e., metallic and roughness) simultaneously. A two-stage pipeline consisting of a grid-matching and a
gradient-tuning stage is proposed for EventPSR, which supports
shape and reflectance recovery for different materials.

difficulty recovering highly specular surfaces are two major
challenges in this area.

∗ Corresponding author: Boxin Shi

Traditional shape and reflectance estimation methods [1,
3, 10, 15, 28, 31, 32] rely on multiple high dynamic range
(HDR) images captured under varying lighting conditions
or viewing angles. Different from photometric stereo (PS)
that estimates the surface normal of diffuse dominant ob-

† This work was conducted while the first author, Bohan Yu, was doing

internship at National Institute of Informatics.
1 Code available: https://codeberg.org/ybh1998/EventPSR

11427

