This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAGE : Single Image to Material-Aware 3D via
the Multi-View G-Buffer Estimation Model
Haoyuan Wang1* , Zhenwei Wang1* , Xiaoxiao Long2 , Cheng Lin3 , Gerhard Hancke1 , Rynson W.H. Lau1†
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Nanjing University, 3 The University of Hong Kong
† Corresponding author

Input Images

* Joint first authors

Ours

Lighting 1

MeshFormer
Ours

Lighting 2

MeshFormer

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Comparison between the single image to 3D generation results of MeshFormer [27] and our MAGE, under two novel lighting
conditions. Our method successfully decomposes material properties into clean albedo and accurate roughness & metallic properties,
enabling realistic rendering under different illuminations. In contrast, MeshFormer bakes lighting effects of input images (e.g., shadows in
(b) and specular reflections in (f)) directly into the texture, resulting in incorrect appearances when lighting conditions change.

Abstract
With advances in deep learning models and the availability
of large-scale 3D datasets, we have recently witnessed significant progress in single-view 3D reconstruction. However, existing methods often fail to reconstruct physically
based material properties given a single image, limiting
their applicability in complicated scenarios. This paper
presents a novel approach (named MAGE) for generating

3D geometry with realistic decomposed material properties
given a single image as input. Our method leverages inspiration from traditional computer graphics deferred rendering pipelines to introduce a multi-view G-buffer estimation
model. The proposed model estimates G-buffers for various
views as multi-domain images, including XYZ coordinates,
normals, albedo, roughness, and metallic properties from a
single-view RGB image. To address the inherent ambiguity
and inconsistency in generating G-buffers simultaneously,

10985

