This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Less Attention is More:
Prompt Transformer for Generalized Category Discovery
Wei Zhang1 , Baopeng Zhang1 *, Zhu Teng1 , Wenxin Luo1 , Junnan Zou1 , Jianping Fan2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
AI Lab at Lenovo Research
{wzhang0926,bpzhang,zteng,wxluo0903,zoujunnan}@bjtu.edu.cn, jfan1@lenovo.com

Original

Abstract

Novel Class

Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) typically relies on
the pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT) to extract features
from a global receptive field, followed by contrastive learning to simultaneously classify unlabeled known classes and
unknown classes without priors. Owing to the deficiency
in the modeling capacity for inner-patch local information
within ViT, current methods primarily focus on discriminative features at global level. This results in a model
with more yet scattered attention, where neither excessive
nor insufficient focus can grasp subtle differences to classify fine-grained unknown and known categories. To address this issue, we propose the AptGCD to deliver apt
attention for GCD. It mimics the human brain how leveraging visual perception to refine local attention and comprehend global context by proposing a Meta Visual Prompt
(MVP) and Prompt Transformer (PT). MVP is introduced
into GCD for the first time, refining channel-level attention, while adaptively self-learning unique inner-patch features as prompts to achieve local visual modeling for our
prompt transformer. Yet, relying solely on detailed features
can lead to skewed judgments. Hence, PT harmonizes local
and global representations, guiding the model’s interpretation of features through broader contexts, thereby capturing
more useful details with less attention. Extensive experiments on seven datasets demonstrate that AptGCD outperforms current methods, it achieves an average proportional
‘New’ accuracy improvement of approximately 9.2% over
SOTA method on the all four fine-grained datasets, establishing a new standard in the field. The code is available at
https://github.com/wendy26zhang/AptGCD.

SOTA
LegoGCD

AptGCD (Ours)

Supervised

SPTNet

Old Class

Accuracy Increase (

9.2%)

spurious
attention

Figure 1. Visulization of the attention across various methods on
CUB dataset [41]. It shows the difference in attention between our
AptGCD and the leading GCD methods LegoGCD [6] and SPTNet [42], along with the corresponding performance improvement.
Meanwhile, it highlights the salient attention focused by supervised learning which has been successful in fine-grained classification (90% accuracy on CUB dataset).

1. Introduction

der the ‘closed world’ assumption that test data has the
same categories as labeled training data. However, realworld data frequently encompasses classes that are not encountered during training. Ideally, models should recognize these ‘unseen’ classes, mimicking human-like learning, rather than merely forcing them into ‘seen’ classes
[5, 47]. Recently, Novel Class Discovery (NCD) [18]
has been developed for open classification, specifically designed to identify these ‘unseen’ classes within unlabeled
datasets. NCD has been further developed into GCD, offering a more versatile framework for real-world classification, including its application to more complex fine-grained
recognition.
When encountering visually similar categories, humans
utilize ‘selective attention’ in the visual cortex to isolate distinctive features from the vast amount of visual data in an
image [14, 15]. Concurrently, they employ the prefrontal
cortex to integrate spatial relationships and contextual information, enabling more accurate object recognition [3, 30].

Deep learning has demonstrated exceptional performance
in image recognition scenarios [20, 21, 26], primarily un* Corresponding author.

30322

