This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Generalizable Tumor Segmentation with Anomaly-Aware
Open-Vocabulary Attention Maps and Frozen Foundation Diffusion Models
Yankai Jiang1 ,
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory

Peng Zhang2 , Donglin Yang3 , Yuan Tian1 ,
Hai Lin2 , Xiaosong Wang1
2
Zhejiang University 3 The University of British Columbia

jiangyankai@pjlab.org.cn, lin@cad.zju.edu.cn, wangxiaosong@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
We explore Generalizable Tumor Segmentation, aiming to
train a single model for zero-shot tumor segmentation
across diverse anatomical regions. Existing methods face
limitations related to segmentation quality, scalability, and
the range of applicable imaging modalities. In this paper, we uncover the potential of the internal representations
within frozen medical foundation diffusion models as highly
efficient zero-shot learners for tumor segmentation by introducing a novel framework named DiffuGTS. DiffuGTS creates anomaly-aware open-vocabulary attention maps based
on text prompts to enable generalizable anomaly segmentation without being restricted by a predefined training category list. To further improve and refine anomaly segmentation masks, DiffuGTS leverages the diffusion model, transforming pathological regions into high-quality pseudohealthy counterparts through latent space inpainting, and
applies a novel pixel-level and feature-level residual learning approach, resulting in segmentation masks with significantly enhanced quality and generalization. Comprehensive experiments on four datasets and seven tumor
categories demonstrate the superior performance of our
method, surpassing current state-of-the-art models across
multiple zero-shot settings. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/Yankai96/DiffuGTS.

not adequately represent the diversity of real-world cases.
With development of vision-language models (e.g.,
CLIP [34]), some methods [20, 22, 23] have paved the way
for unseen tumor segmentation through the zero-shot generalization ability of vision-language alignment between segmentation regions and text prompts. However, in medical
imaging, the visual cues of tumors are often subtle and ambiguous. Without a large amount of high-quality image-text
pairs for training, segmenting unseen tumor categories using text prompts alone is highly challenging. Furthermore,
the vision-language alignment process based on contrastive
learning is not necessarily optimal for pixel-level segmentation, as the training objective is not directly optimized
for spatial and relational understanding. As a result, these
methods are often limited in segmentation quality.
Another promising direction towards GTS is tumor synthesis [7, 19, 45], which enables label-free tumor segmentation by creating artificial yet realistic medical images.
However, current tumor synthesis methods are unable to
encompass all tumor types, as simulating tumors with irregular shapes or those not encountered during diffusion
model training poses significant challenges [16, 45]. Consequently, achieving GTS relying solely on synthetic medical
data remains an intricate problem.
Motivated by the above challenges, we take an innovative approach towards GTS. Our key insight is that, despite
the challenges in simulating tumors, a medical foundation
diffusion model (MFDM) trained on large-scale data is capable of learning and understanding rich, diverse anatomical structures and organ-specific knowledge [16]. Moreover, this valuable knowledge is already embedded within
its internal representations. Therefore, instead of synthesizing data for model training, we uncover the potential of pretrained MFDMs as highly efficient semantic feature extractors and demonstrate that their internal image representations can be repurposed, through carefully designed strategies, as effective zero-shot learners for the GTS task.
To this end, we propose DiffuGTS, a novel framework
with strong zero-shot capabilities that leverages frozen

1. Introduction
Generalizable tumor segmentation (GTS) represents a fundamental challenge within medical image analysis [3, 7, 22,
28, 45], stemming from both the diversity of tumor types
and the variability across imaging modalities. Current AI
models for multi-tumor segmentation [6, 14, 28, 49, 51] rely
heavily on comprehensively annotated training data, limiting their ability to generalize beyond a restricted set of categories. This makes it challenging to address unseen diseases
in clinical scenarios where the available training data may

25971

