This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unboxed: Geometrically and Temporally Consistent Video Outpainting
Zhongrui Yu1

Martina Megaro-Boldini2
1

2

ETH Zürich

zhonyu@ethz.ch

Robert W. Sumner1,2

Abdelaziz Djelouah2

DisneyResearch|Studios

abdelaziz.djelouah@disney.com
Large Field of View Video Outpainting

Dehan

Regular Video outpainting

Ours

MOTIA

MOTIA

M3DDM

Ours

First Frame

Middle Frame

Last Frame

Figure 1. Video outpainting results on two different resolutions. In both case, the area outside the red box is outpainted. Our method
achieves results of better quality and more temporally stable, compared to recent works such as Dehan [13], M3DDM [14] and MOTIA [48].

Abstract
Extending the field of view of video content beyond its
original version has many applications: immersive viewing
experience with VR devices, reformatting 4:3 legacy content to today’s viewing conditions with wide screens, or
simply extending vertically captured phone videos. Many
existing works focus on synthesizing the video using generative models only. Despite promising results, this strategy seems at the moment limited in terms of quality. In this
work, we address this problem using two key ideas: 3D supported outpainting for the static regions of the images, and
leveraging pre-trained video diffusion model to ensure realistic and temporally coherent results, particularly for the
dynamic parts. In the first stage, we iterate between image outpainting and updating the 3D scene representation we use 3D Gaussian Splatting. Then we consider dynamic
objects independently per frame and inpaint missing pixels.
Finally, we propose a denoising scheme that allows to maintain known reliable regions and update the dynamic parts to
obtain temporally realistic results. We achieve state-of-theart video outpainting. This is validated quantitatively and
through a user study. We are also able to extend the field of
view largely beyond the limits reached by existing methods.

1. Introduction
Expanding video frames beyond their original field of view
(FoV), known as Video Outpainting, is a technique with
broad applications in modern media. One example is 4:3
legacy content re-targeting where video outpainting can be
used to fill modern widescreen devices seamlessly while
avoiding any unnatural stretching. A more forward-looking
application is movie viewing with virtual reality (VR) headsets. Video outpainting can enhance the immersion by embedding the viewer in the scene, eliminating distractions
from unrelated backgrounds. However, these applications
require extremely high-quality results, which is particularly
challenging since the synthesized images must integrate
harmoniously with the original content and maintain strong
temporal coherence across frames.
Although a wide variety of methods have been proposed, using a patch-based approach [1, 2, 12, 46], optical
flow [13] or Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [24,
53], most recent methods have clearly identified Diffusion Models [14, 48] as the most promising direction.
M3DDM [14] trains a 3D diffusion model on large-scale
data for video outpainting with a mask modeling approach.

7309

