This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ColabSfM: Collaborative Structure-from-Motion by Point Cloud Registration
Johan Edstedt∗1
1

André Mateus2

Linköping University

2

Alberto Jaenal2

Ericsson Research, Sweden

Figure 1. Our proposed registration paradigm for collaborative SfM reconstructions (ColabSfM). Given two input SfM reconstructions P, Q of the same scene, the task is to estimate the relative similarity transform (s, R, t) between them. Our first contribution is
to address this as a point cloud registration problem, using only 3D SfM tracks. For this, we do not rely on the visual descriptors, but
on the 3D coordinates of the points P, Q, their normals N, M and, optionally, but not necessarily, features X, Y. To make point cloud
registration methods perform well on this task, we propose as our second contribution a scalable pipeline to construct synthetic training
datasets for SfM registration. Finally, we propose an improved version of RoITr [64] as registration method fθ .

Abstract

ments, which we call RefineRoITr. Our extensive experimental evaluation shows that our proposed pipeline and
model enables ColabSfM. Code is available at https:
//github.com/EricssonResearch/ColabSfM

Structure-from-Motion (SfM) is the task of estimating 3D
structure and camera poses from images. We define Collaborative SfM (ColabSfM) as sharing distributed SfM reconstructions. Sharing maps requires estimating a joint reference frame, which is typically referred to as registration.
However, there is a lack of scalable methods and training datasets for registering SfM reconstructions. In this
paper, we tackle this challenge by proposing the scalable
task of point cloud registration for SfM reconstructions. We
find that current registration methods cannot register SfM
point clouds when trained on existing datasets. To this end,
we propose a SfM registration dataset generation pipeline,
leveraging partial reconstructions from synthetically generated camera trajectories for each scene. Finally, we propose a simple but impactful neural refiner on top of the SotA
registration method RoITr that yields significant improve-

1. Introduction
For robots and extended reality (XR) devices to become
ubiquitous in our lives, they must be able to accurately build
and localize in maps of the environment. Most available solutions rely on visual data and onboard computing, which
can limit the accuracy in the context of small devices. Thus,
in the last years there has been a push from industry to move
computation to the cloud (e.g. Google’s Visual Positioning
System [40], Microsoft’s Azure Spatial Anchors [27], and
Niantic’s Lightship [47]). However, the heterogeneous nature of these systems prevents devices of different vendors
from interoperating, i.e., sharing their maps and localizing
in others’ maps. If we are to make visual localization in-

* Work done during an internship at Ericsson Research.

6573

