This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdMiT: Adaptive Multi-Source Tuning in Dynamic Environments
Xiangyu Chang1 , Fahim Faisal Niloy1 , Sk Miraj Ahmed1,2 ,* Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy1 ,
Basak Guler1 , Ananthram Swami4 , Samet Oymak3 , Amit Roy-Chowdhury1
1
University of California, Riverside 2 Brookhaven National Laboratory
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 4 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
{cxian008@, fnilo001@, sahme047@, krish@cs, basakg@, amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu
ananthram.swami.civ@army.mil, oymak@umich.edu

Abstract
Incorporating transformer models into edge devices poses
a significant challenge due to the computational demands
of adapting these large models across diverse applications. Parameter-efficient tuning (PET) methods (e.g. LoRA,
Adapter, Visual Prompt Tuning, etc.) allow for targeted
adaptation by modifying only small parts of the transformer
model. However, adapting to dynamic unlabeled target distributions at the test time remains complex. To address this, we
introduce AdMiT: Adaptive Multi-Source Tuning in Dynamic
Environments. AdMiT innovates by pre-training a set of PET
modules, each optimized for different source distributions
or tasks, and dynamically selecting and integrating a sparse
subset of relevant modules when encountering a new, fewshot, unlabeled target distribution. This integration leverages Kernel Mean Embedding (KME)-based matching to
align the target distribution with relevant source knowledge
efficiently, without requiring additional routing networks or
hyperparameter tuning. AdMiT achieves adaptation with
a single inference step, making it particularly suitable for
resource-constrained edge deployments. Furthermore, AdMiT preserves privacy by performing an adaptation locally
on each edge device, without the need for data exchange.
Our theoretical analysis establishes guarantees for AdMiT’s
generalization, while extensive benchmarks demonstrate that
AdMiT consistently outperforms other PET methods across
a range of tasks, achieving robust and efficient adaptation.

1. Introduction
Pretrained transformers [1–5] have achieved remarkable
success across diverse tasks, but their large parameter
counts—often reaching billions [2, 5]—present challenges
for deployment, especially on edge devices with limited computational resources. To address these limitations, parameter* Work done while the author was at University of California, Riverside.

efficient tuning (PET) methods, such as prefix/prompt tuning
[6–9], adapters [10], and LoRA [11], have been introduced.
These methods allow the pretrained model to remain fixed
while only adjusting a small set of additional parameters
tailored to specific target distributions, significantly reducing memory and computation needs while often achieving
performance comparable to that of full fine-tuning.
Most existing PET methods are either singlesource—focusing on a single PET module trained
for one distribution—or, when incorporating multiple PET
modules, require additional computational resources such as
routing networks [12] or extensive hyperparameter tuning
[13, 14]. These approaches lack the ability to directly
integrate knowledge from multiple PET modules, each
trained on different source distributions. In dynamically
evolving environments, adaptation methods benefit from
leveraging multiple sources of pre-trained knowledge.
Instead of relying on a single PET module trained on a
single source, integrating multiple PET modules enables
more robust adaptation to shifting distributions by drawing
from a diverse set of source-specific knowledge[15]. This
multi-source approach is particularly advantageous when
access to the original source data used for training each
module is restricted due to privacy, storage, or other
constraints. In such scenarios, training a unified PET
module across combined sources is infeasible, making
it both practical and effective to adaptively employ and
integrate an array of pre-trained PET modules during
test time, resulting in performance improvements often
unattainable with single-source PET adaptation.
In this work, we introduce AdMiT (Adaptive MultiSource Tuning in Dynamic Environments), a novel framework designed to efficiently adapt pre-trained PET modules
across multiple dynamic distributions. AdMiT pre-trains a
structured set of PET modules, each specifically tuned to
a different source distribution, providing a versatile foundation for multi-source adaptation. During test time, when
faced with new, small-batch target data from a new distri-

20569

