This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Image Layer Decomposition with Visual Effects
Jinrui Yang1,2,⇤ Qing Liu2 Yijun Li2 Soo Ye Kim2 Daniil Pakhomov2
Mengwei Ren2 Jianming Zhang2 Zhe Lin2 Cihang Xie1 Yuyin Zhou1
1
2
UC Santa Cruz
Adobe Research
https://rayjryang.github.io/LayerDecomp
Input

BG Layer

FG Layer 1

FG Layer 2

(a) Layer Decomposition Results from Our Model

Layer Editing

blur, recolor

resize,move

recolor

copy, recolor

(b) Post-Editing Flexibility

Figure 1. (a) Given an input image and a binary object mask, our model is able to decompose the image into a clean background layer and a
transparent foreground layer with preserved visual effects such as shadows and reflections. (b) Subsequently, our decomposition empowers
complex and controllable layer-wise editing such as spatial, color and/or style editing.

Abstract

representations for the transparent foreground layer when
ground-truth annotations are not available. Our method
achieves superior quality in layer decomposition, outperforming existing approaches in object removal and spatial
editing tasks across several benchmarks and multiple user
studies, unlocking various creative possibilities for layerwise image editing.

Recent advancements in large generative models, particularly diffusion-based methods, have significantly enhanced
the capabilities of image editing. However, achieving precise control over image composition tasks remains a challenge. Layered representations, which allow for independent editing of image components, are essential for userdriven content creation, yet existing approaches often struggle to decompose an image into plausible layers with accurately retained transparent visual effects such as shadows
and reflections. We propose LayerDecomp, a generative
framework for image layer decomposition which outputs
photorealistic clean backgrounds and high-quality transparent foregrounds with faithfully preserved visual effects.
To enable effective training, we first introduce a dataset
preparation pipeline that automatically scales up simulated
multi-layer data with synthesized visual effects. To further enhance real-world applicability, we supplement this
simulated dataset with camera-captured images containing natural visual effects. Additionally, we propose a consistency loss which enforces the model to learn accurate

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of large-scale text-to-image diffusion models [3, 7, 32] has greatly improved image editing
capabilities, with recent studies [5, 14, 35, 51] demonstrating promising results by training on large-scale datasets of
captioned images. However, achieving precise control for
user-driven image composition tasks remains challenging.
Layered representations, which decompose image components into independently editable layers, are essential for
precise user-driven content creation. Most visual content
editing software and workflows are layer-based, relying
heavily on transparent or layered elements to compose and
*This work was done when Jinrui Yang was a research intern at
Adobe Research.

7643

