This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Markup Language Generation for Contextually-Grounded Visual
Document Understanding
Han Xiao1,2† , Yina Xie2 , Guanxin Tan2 , Yinghao Chen2 , Rui Hu2 , Ke Wang1 ,
Aojun Zhou1 , Hao Li1 , Hao Shao1 , Xudong Lu1,2† , Peng Gao4 ,
Yafei Wen2 , Xiaoxin Chen2 , Shuai Ren2 ‡ B , Hongsheng Li1,3 B
1
CUHK MMLab 2 vivo AI Lab 3 CPII under InnoHK
4
Shanghai AI Lab & Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, CAS
{1155229123@link,hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk
shuai.ren@vivo.com

Abstract
Visual Document Understanding has become essential with
the increase of text-rich visual content. This field poses
significant challenges due to the need for effective integration of visual perception and textual comprehension, particularly across diverse document types with complex layouts. Moreover, existing fine-tuning datasets for this domain
often fall short in providing the detailed contextual information for robust understanding, leading to hallucinations
and limited comprehension of spatial relationships among
visual elements. To address these challenges, we propose
an innovative pipeline that utilizes adaptive generation of
markup languages, such as Markdown, JSON, HTML, and
TiKZ, to build highly structured document representations
and deliver contextually-grounded responses. We introduce two fine-grained structured datasets: DocMark-Pile,
comprising approximately 3.8M pretraining data pairs for
document parsing, and DocMark-Instruct, featuring 624k
fine-tuning data annotations for grounded instruction following. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed model significantly outperforms existing state-of-theart MLLMs across a range of visual document understanding benchmarks, facilitating advanced reasoning and comprehension capabilities in complex visual scenarios. Our
code and models are released at https://github.
com/Euphoria16/DocMark.

lives. Consequently, Visual Document Understanding has
emerged as a fundamental task that encompasses document
classification, information extraction, and document-related
visual question answering. This area presents significant
challenges, as it requires seamless integration of visual perception with textual comprehension, along with the ability
to navigate the complex interactions between these modalities. Such capabilities not only represent a fundamental
cognitive skill in humans, but are also essential for the advancement of artificial intelligence systems.
In recent years, Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) have demonstrated remarkable progress in handling multi-modal tasks. Notably, there has been a growing focus on enhancing the capabilities of MLLMs in visual
document comprehension. Existing efforts mainly aim to
improve the representation of vision encoders originally designed for natural images, which are usually trained on relatively low-resolution datasets. Such efforts include scaling
up the input resolution [6, 13, 26, 29], retraining vision encoders on text-rich images [7, 32, 54], and leveraging compositions of different encoders [25, 27].

1. Introduction

The core challenge in performing visual document understanding tasks lies in the efficient representation and effective perception of the visual content and its layout information present in the images. However, unlike Large
Language Models (LLMs), whose training data generally
include comprehensive descriptions and detailed reasoning,
common fine-tuning datasets in the MLLM domain usually contain only questions and brief answers. As shown
in Fig. 1, answers derived from PDF documents often consist of only a short phrase or a single number, even though
understanding various parts of the document is required to
answer the question. Similarly, datasets related to charts often lack a structural interpretation of the image content, resulting in challenges for effective analysis. Fine-tuning on

Text-rich visual content, including multi-page documents
and various multimedia formats, is ubiquitous in our daily
B Corresponding author ‡ Project lead † Interns at vivo.

29558

