This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VSNet: Focusing on the Linguistic Characteristics of Sign Language
Yuhao Li1 , Xinyue Chen1 , Hongkai Li1 , Xiaorong Pu1,3 , Peng Jin2 , Yazhou Ren1,3, *
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China; 2 Sichuan Provinical Key Lab of Philosophy and Social Science for Language Intelligence
in Special Education, Leshan Normal University, Leshan, China; 3 Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Sign language is a visual language expressed through
complex movements of the upper body. The human skeleton plays a critical role in sign language recognition due
to its good separation from the video background. However, mainstream skeleton-based sign language recognition
models often overly focus on the natural connections between joints, treating sign language as ordinary human
movements, which neglects its linguistic characteristics. We
believe that just as letters form words, each sign language
gloss can also be decomposed into smaller visual symbols.
To fully harness the potential of skeleton data, this paper
proposes a novel joint fusion strategy and a visual symbol
attention model. Specifically, we first input the complete set
of skeletal joints, and after dynamically exchanging joint
information, we discard the parts with the weakest connections to other joints, resulting in a fused, simplified skeleton.
Then, we group the joints most likely to express the same visual symbol and discuss the joint movements within each
group separately. To validate the superiority of our method,
we conduct extensive experiments on multiple public benchmark datasets. The results show that, without complex pretraining, we still achieve new state-of-the-art performance.
The code is available at https://github.com/atinyboy/VSNet.

Figure 1. In the sign for “accent”, the index and middle fingers (or
only index finger) are extended toward the neck while other fingers
are curled, forming the “pointing” VS. In the sign for “algebra”,
movements can be decomposed into multiple VS such as “crossed
arms,” “fist,” and “thumb-up.”

the key subtasks in sign language translation is isolated sign
language recognition (ISLR), which focuses on translating
individual glosses. ISLR has garnered significant attention
as it aids people in accurately understanding numerous gestures and quickly learning sign language.

1. Introduction

In recent years, human skeletons have been increasingly
applied in the ISLR field due to their strong operability and
clear separation from video backgrounds. Although most
skeleton-based recognition methods have achieved promising results, they typically treat sign language as typical human motion [12, 21, 23, 30, 31, 41, 58], overlooking the
intrinsic relationships among joints and the unique linguistic characteristics [25, 52] of sign language itself. We believe that: (1) The importance of joints in sign language is
not equivalent; joints with stronger connections to others
are more significant than isolated joints, and connections
among joints with similar movement tendencies hold more
meaning than those among dispersed joints. (2) Similar to
how letters form words, each sign language gloss can be
decomposed into smaller visual symbols (VS). While VS

Sign language is a visual language expressed through body
movements and serves as the primary communication tool
for the deaf community [13]. Although sign language
and spoken language have distinctly different grammatical structures [1, 7], they share common linguistic features [39, 44, 59]. Accurate sign language translation can
facilitate communication between deaf and hearing people,
fostering a more inclusive and accessible society. Among
* Corresponding author (yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn).

24320

