This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionBench: Benchmarking and Improving Fine-grained Video Motion
Understanding for Vision Language Models
Wenyi Hong1 * Yean Cheng2 * Zhuoyi Yang1 * Weihan Wang2 Lefan Wang2
Xiaotao Gu2 Shiyu Huang2 Yuxiao Dong1† Jie Tang1†
1
Tsinghua University 2 Zhipu AI
wenyi.hong@outlook.com, cya17@tsinghua.org.cn,
zhuoyiyang2000@gmail.com, jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Motion-level perception

In recent years, vision language models (VLMs) have
made significant advancements in video understanding.
However, a crucial capability — fine-grained motion comprehension — remains under-explored in current benchmarks. To address this gap, we propose MotionBench,
a comprehensive evaluation benchmark designed to assess the fine-grained motion comprehension of video understanding models. MotionBench evaluates models’ motionlevel perception through six primary categories of motionoriented question types and includes data collected from
diverse sources, ensuring a broad representation of realworld video content. Experimental results reveal that existing VLMs perform poorly in understanding fine-grained
motions. To enhance VLM’s ability to perceive fine-grained
motion within a limited sequence length of LLM, we conduct
extensive experiments reviewing VLM architectures optimized for video feature compression and propose a novel
and efficient Through-Encoder (TE) Fusion method. Experiments show that higher frame rate inputs and TE Fusion yield improvements in motion understanding, yet there
is still substantial room for enhancement. Our benchmark
aims to guide and motivate the development of more capable video understanding models, emphasizing the importance of fine-grained motion comprehension. Project page:
https://motion-bench.github.io.

Less than 2 sec

Question: What actions did the people in the video do?
Ground truth: Two baseball players jump up together, and
collide sideways in mid-air to celebrate.
GPT-4o: The individuals in the video engaged in catching,
throwing, and celebratory gestures, demonstrating teamwork and
enjoyment on the baseball field.
Qwen2-VL-72B: The people in the video were playing baseball.
They were jumping up and catching the ball with their gloves.
GLM-4V-Plus: The people in the video raised their hands in the
air and jumped up and down together. (missing information)
InternVL2-40B: The people in the video were playing baseball.
They were seen running, throwing, and hitting the ball.
Motion Level

Event Level

Story Level

325
486
1120

LVBench
VideoMME
MVBench
MotionBench

6736
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Figure 1. State-of-the-art video understanding models struggle with basic motion-level perception. Compared to existing
benchmarks, our proposed MotionBench focuses on assessing the
model’s Motion level perception capability, which is critical in understanding videos with fast and instant interactions and motions.

Video [51] and PLLaVA [44] continually train imageunderstanding models to achieve video-understanding models, and Qwen2-VL[37], LLaVA-OneVision [18] explore
mixed training upon both images and videos. To effectively
evaluate video understanding VLMs as well as guide further advancement, a series of video understanding benchmarks emerged, with focuses on general video understanding capability [8, 23, 24, 39] or specific capabilities such as
long video understanding [39, 41, 54]. Video understanding
questions can be categorized into three levels based on the

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of pre-training, an increasing
number of studies focus on leveraging large vision language models (VLMs) for video understanding [15, 19,
27, 29, 34]. For instance, CogVLM2-Video [15], LLaVA* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors

Work was done when WH, ZY interned at Zhipu AI.

8450

