This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Asynchronous Collaborative Graph Representation for Frames and Events
Dianze Li1 Jianing Li1∗ Xu Liu2 Xiaopeng Fan2,3 Yonghong Tian1,3,4 *
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
4
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
dianzeli@stu.pku.edu.cn, {lijianing, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, liuxu1953@163.com, fxp@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

Event
processing

Image-like tensors
Frames and events

Image
processing

Synchronized Fusion and

Object detection

Head

…

Integrating frames and events has become a widely accepted solution for various tasks in challenging scenarios.
However, most multimodal methods directly convert events
into image-like formats synchronized with frames and process each stream through separate two-branch backbones,
making it difficult to fully exploit the spatiotemporal events
while limiting inference frequency to the frame rate. To
address these problems, we propose a novel asynchronous
collaborative graph representation, namely ACGR, which is
the first trial to explore a unified graph framework for asynchronously processing frames and events with high performance and low latency. Technically, we first construct unimodal graphs for frames and events to preserve their spatiotemporal properties and sparsity. Then, an asynchronous
collaborative alignment module is designed to align and
fuse frames and events into a unified graph and the ACGR
is generated through graph convolutional networks. Finally, we innovatively introduce domain adaptation to enable cross-modal interactions between frames and events
by aligning their feature spaces. Experimental results show
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
both object detection and depth estimation tasks, while significantly reducing computational latency and achieving
real-time inference up to 200 Hz. Our code can be available at https://github.com/dianzl/ACGR.

CNN
backbone

CNN
backbone

Depth estimation
Frame
(a) Two-branch model converts events into image-like tensors synchronized frames.

Any time

𝒕𝒕

Event graph

GCN

Head

…

ACGR

Multiple-task
Frames and events

Frame graph

Unified graph

(b) Asynchronous collaborative graph representation for frames and events.

Figure 1. Comparison of multimodal models combining frames
and events. (a) Two-branch frameworks [5, 31, 36] convert events
as image-like formats synchronized with frames, limiting inference to the frame rate. (b) Our asynchronous collaborative graph
representation (ACGR) enables high-performance and low-latency
asynchronous processing of two streams for various vision tasks.

particular, event cameras [11, 16, 27] offer significant advantages, including high temporal resolution (µs), high dynamic range (up to 120 dB), and low redundancy, which
enable them to overcome the limitations of conventional
frame-based cameras in high-speed and challenging lighting conditions. Nevertheless, the output of event cameras
is inherently sparse and discrete events, making them incompatible with conventional frame-based algorithms. A
key question remains: How could we design a new asynchronous collaborative paradigm to integrate frames and
events for both high performance and low latency?
One problem is that most multimodal algorithms [31,
36, 44, 57, 76, 79, 83, 85] convert events into image-like
formats synchronized with frames and process each stream
through two backbones, limiting inference frequency to the
frame rate. In other words, synchronized multimodal meth-

1. Introduction
Combining frames and events has become widely used for
various applications, such as autonomous driving [6, 20],
robot vision [22, 75, 86], mobile phone [29, 74], and space
situational awareness [1, 64]. This growing trend is largely
driven by the complementarity of frames and events from
the commercialized hybrid vision sensors [26, 58, 81]. In
* Corresponding author: Yonghong Tian and Jianing Li.

1655

