This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobileMamba: Lightweight Multi-Receptive Visual Mamba Network
Haoyang He1∗ Jiangning Zhang1,2 * Yuxuan Cai3 Hongxu Chen1 Xiaobin Hu2
Zhenye Gan2 Yabiao Wang1,2 Chengjie Wang2 Yunsheng Wu2 Lei Xie1†
1

Zhejiang University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Code: https://github.com/lewandofskee/MobileMamba

Abstract
Previous research on lightweight models has primarily focused on CNNs and Transformer-based designs.
CNNs, with their local receptive fields, struggle to capture long-range dependencies, while Transformers, despite their global modeling capabilities, are limited by
quadratic computational complexity in high-resolution scenarios. Recently, state-space models have gained popularity in the visual domain due to their linear computational complexity. Despite their low FLOPs, current lightweight Mamba-based models exhibit suboptimal
throughput. In this work, we propose the MobileMamba
framework, which balances efficiency and performance.
We design a three-stage network to enhance inference
speed significantly. At a fine-grained level, we introduce
the Multi-Receptive Field Feature Interaction (MRFFI)
module, comprising the Long-Range Wavelet TransformEnhanced Mamba (WTE-Mamba), Efficient Multi-Kernel
Depthwise Convolution (MK-DeConv), and Eliminate Redundant Identity components. This module integrates multireceptive field information and enhances high-frequency
detail extraction. Additionally, we employ training and
testing strategies to further improve performance and efficiency. MobileMamba achieves up to 83.6% on Top-1, surpassing existing state-of-the-art methods which is maximum
×21↑ faster than LocalVim on GPU. Extensive experiments
on high-resolution downstream tasks demonstrate that MobileMamba surpasses current efficient models, achieving an
optimal balance between speed and accuracy.

Figure 1.
Top: Visualization of the Effective Receptive
Fields (ERF) for different architectures. Bottom: Performance
vs. FLOPs with recent CNN/Transformer/Mamba-based methods.

are primarily categorized into CNN-based and Transformerbased structures. CNN-based MobileNets [24, 26, 54] use
depth-wise separable convolutions to reduce computational
complexity, laying a foundation for subsequent CNN-based
work [3, 44, 59, 61, 77]. However, the major drawback
of CNN-based methods is their local Effective Receptive
Field (ERF), as shown in Fig. 1(i), which is confined to the
central region and lacks long-range correlations. In downstream tasks (Tab. 5) with high-resolution inputs, CNNbased methods can only achieve performance improvements by increasing computational load.
Vision Transformers (ViTs) exhibit a global ERF and
long-range modeling capabilities in Fig. 1(ii). However,
their quadratic computational complexity results in higher
overhead compared to CNNs. Some works [32, 33, 37, 45,
54, 65, 74] have reduced resolution or channel count to alleviate this complexity, achieving notable results. Despite
this, pure ViTs lack inductive bias, prompting researchers to
develop hybrid CNN-ViT structures [31, 72, 76] that combine local and global ERF for improved performance in

1. Introduction
The proliferation of mobile devices has increased the
demand for efficient and accurate visual processing in
resource-constrained environments. Lightweight models
significantly reduce computational and storage costs while
enhancing inference speed. Current lightweight models
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

4497

