This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Traversing Distortion-Perception Tradeoff using a Single Score-Based
Generative Model
Yuhan Wang1 , Suzhi Bi2 *, Ying-Jun Angela Zhang1 , Xiaojun Yuan3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shenzhen University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{wy023, yjzhang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, bsz@szu.edu.cn, xjyuan@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

sure. It has been demonstrated that perceptual quality could
be associated with the distance between the distributions of
natural images pX and generated images pX̂ [2, 3, 12].
Improvements in distortion measures do not necessarily
lead to enhancements in perceptual quality. In fact, [2] has
demonstrated that there exists a tradeoff between distortion
and perception, termed as distortion-perception (DP) tradeoff. Mathematically, it can be modeled as

The distortion-perception (DP) tradeoff reveals a fundamental conﬂict between distortion metrics (e.g., MSE and
PSNR) and perceptual quality. Recent research has increasingly concentrated on evaluating denoising algorithms
within the DP framework. However, existing algorithms either prioritize perceptual quality by sacriﬁcing acceptable
distortion, or focus on minimizing MSE for faithful restoration. When the goal shifts or noisy measurements vary,
adapting to different points on the DP plane needs retraining or even re-designing the model. Inspired by recent advances in solving inverse problems using score-based generative models, we explore the potential of ﬂexibly and optimally traversing DP tradeoffs using a single pre-trained
score-based model. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a variancescaled reverse diffusion process and theoretically characterize the marginal distribution. We then prove that the
proposed sample process is an optimal solution to the DP
tradeoff for conditional Gaussian distribution. Experimental results on two-dimensional and image datasets illustrate
that a single score network can effectively and ﬂexibly traverse the DP tradeoff for general denoising problems.

1

D(P ) = min E[∆(X, X̂)],
pX̂|Y

s.t. d(pX , pX̂ ) ≤ P,
where Y is the degraded observation, ∆ : X × X̂ → R+
is a full reference distortion function (e.g., such as squareerror), and d(·, ·) is some divergence between probability
distribution, such as Wasserstein distance [16] or KulbackLeibler (KL) divergence.
Since the introduction of the DP tradeoff, more and more
algorithm designs have focused on performance evaluation
on the DP plane for speciﬁc denoising tasks, e.g., image
deblurring [15, 25] and super-resolution [11, 13, 23]. However, most algorithms tend to seek better perceptual quality at the cost of distortion, or focus on optimizing MSE,
a distortion measure, to ensure restoration ﬁdelity. When
the restoration objective shifts between distortion and perception, we need to retrain or even re-design the network,
which can be computationally intensive. In many practical
scenarios, it is signiﬁcant to ﬂexibly and effectively fulﬁll
diverse task objectives or user demands with a single model
at inference time.
There have been explorations into theories and algorithms to traverse the DP tradeoff in inference time [7,
15]. Speciﬁcally, in [15], the authors developed a framework based on conditional generative adversarial networks
(CGAN) with an additional penalty on posterior expectation. By averaging different numbers of samples or adjusting the noise level injected into the generator, this CGANbased framework can access various points along the tradeoff. However, using multiple image samples and averaging

Introduction

In recent years, we have witnessed rapid progress in image
restoration algorithms, especially deep learning-based implementations that have shown remarkable achievements in
solving general inverse problems. How to evaluate the performance of emerging algorithms is a crucial yet complicated problem. Traditional full reference distortion metrics,
such as Mean Square Error (MSE), focus on the pixel-level
accuracy between the original image X and its reconstruction X̂. On the other hand, perceptual quality, referring
to the degree to which an image looks natural rather than
algorithmically generated [14], is also an important mea* Corresponding author.

2377

