This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperSeg: Hybrid Segmentation Assistant with Fine-grained Visual Perceiver
Cong Wei1,2 , Yujie Zhong2† , Haoxian Tan2 , Yong Liu1 , Jie Hu2 , Dengjie Li2 , Zheng Zhao2 , Yujiu Yang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Meituan Inc.
weic22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jaszhong@hotmail.com, yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Find “woman on
near bike”.

Find “catcher and #1
batter”.

Segment from the
visual prompt.

Segment from the
class prompt : “person,
wall, sand, cat, table...”

Segment from the
class prompt : “grass,
wall, truck, sheep...”

Segment from the class
prompt : “aeroplane,
person, boat, table...”

Sure, the result is:

The segmentation
result is:

The segmentation
result is:

The image contains
“person, wall, table...”

The true classes are
“grass, sheep...”

The image contains
“person, sky, boat...”

RES

G-RES

Interactive Seg

Panoptic Seg

Semantic Seg

OVS

In some rural areas, horse-drawn carts
are still used for transportation and
carrying goods. What is the main
source of power that drives the cart in
the picture?

The result is:

The segmentation results are:

HyperSeg

Reasoning Seg
Segment the video following the visual prompt :
“object 1 mask”

“object 2 mask”

Sure, the results are:

ReasonVOS
Segment the video following the text prompt :
“a zebra putting it s head on a large blue bird”
Sure, the results are:

VOS

In this video, which
panda runs quickly
to the left to catch
the lesser panda and
presses it in its arms?

Segment the video following the class prompt :
“person, parrot, skateboard, cow, dog…”
The video contains “person, cow” and the results are:

R-VOS

VIS

Figure 1. Illustration of our HyperSeg which can conduct image and video segmentation tasks with various language and visual instructions.
Additionally, HyperSeg can handle complicated reasoning perception tasks compared with previous universal segmentation methods. To our
knowledge, HyperSeg is the first VLLM-based universal segmentation model with perception and complex reasoning abilities in both image
and video domains.

Abstract

compassing generic segmentation tasks and more complex
reasoning perception tasks requiring powerful reasoning
abilities and world knowledge. Besides, to fully leverage
the recognition capabilities of VLLMs and the fine-grained
visual information, HyperSeg incorporates hybrid entity
recognition and fine-grained visual perceiver modules for
various segmentation tasks. Combined with the temporal
adapter, HyperSeg achieves a comprehensive understanding of temporal information. Experimental results validate
the effectiveness of our insights in resolving universal image and video segmentation tasks, including the more complex reasoning perception tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/congvvc/HyperSeg.

This paper aims to address universal segmentation for
image and video perception with the strong reasoning ability empowered by Visual Large Language Models (VLLMs).
Despite significant progress in current unified segmentation methods, limitations in adaptation to both image and
video scenarios, as well as the complex reasoning segmentation, make it difficult for them to handle various challenging instructions and achieve an accurate understanding of fine-grained vision-language correlations. We propose HyperSeg, the first VLLM-based universal segmentation model for pixel-level image and video perception, en† Corresponding authors.

8931

