This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting MAE pre-training for 3D medical image segmentation
Tassilo Wald * 1,2,3 , Constantin Ulrich∗ 1,4 ,
Stanislav Lukyanenko6 , Andrei Goncharov6 , Alberto Paderno6,7 , Maximilian Miller6 ,
Leander Maerkisch6 , Paul Jaeger8,9 , Klaus Maier-Hein1,2,3,4,5,9
1
3

Division of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ); 2 Helmholtz Imaging, DKFZ

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Heidelberg; 4 Medical Faculty Heidelberg, University of Heidelberg
5
7

8

National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg; 6 FLOY, Munich, Germany

Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University (Milan), IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Italy.

Interactive Machine Learning Group, DKFZ Heidelberg; 9 Pattern Analysis and Learning Group, Department of Radiation Oncology
tassilo.wald@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Abstract

73

+ 2.98

+ 1.97

72

Average DSC

Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) presents an exciting opportunity to unlock the potential of vast, untapped clinical
datasets, for various downstream applications that suffer
from the scarcity of labeled data. While SSL has revolutionized fields like natural language processing and computer vision, its adoption in 3D medical image computing
has been limited by three key pitfalls: Small pre-training
dataset sizes, architectures inadequate for 3D medical image analysis, and insufficient evaluation practices. In this
paper, we address these issues by i) leveraging a large-scale
dataset of 39k 3D brain MRI volumes and ii) using a Residual Encoder U-Net architecture within the state-of-the-art
nnU-Net framework. iii) A robust development framework,
incorporating 5 development and 8 testing brain MRI segmentation datasets, allowed performance-driven design decisions to optimize the simple concept of Masked Auto Encoders (MAEs) for 3D CNNs. The resulting model not only
surpasses previous SSL methods but also outperforms the
strong nnU-Net baseline by an average of approximately 3
Dice points setting a new state-of-the-art. Our code and
models are made available here.

71
70
69
68
67

n
(D nUyn Ne
am t
ic
nn )
U(F Ne
ix
ed t
)
Co Vo
nt lum
ra e
st
iv
e
Vo
lu
Fu m
sio e
n

65

M
G od
en el
es s
is
Sp
ar
(o k3
ur D
s)

66

Figure 1. Well-configured MAE pre-training for CNNs is stateof-the-art. When comparing our MAE pre-trained model on all
eleven test Datasets, Spark3D achieves almost +3 DSC points
compared to the strong nnU-Net baseline and outperforms current
SSL methods.

abundant labeled data like NLP or natural vision. In the
domain of 3D medical image computing, this trend has
not caught on. Currently, the domain is either focused
on training from-scratch, mainly using the nnU-Net framework by Isensee et al. [20], or using supervised pre-training,
which is limited by the cost associated with annotated data
[19, 38, 44]. The usage of supervised pre-training implies
the willingness of the domain to adopt pre-training and calls
to question the currently established SSL methods in the domain. We believe this lack of widespread adoption of previously established methods can be attributed to three major
pitfalls of previous SSL research in this field:
P1 - Limited dataset size: Many SSL approaches have
been developed on very few unlabeled volumes, often being trained on fewer than 10,000 images [3, 13, 14, 33, 34,

1. Introduction
In recent years, the concept of Self-Supervised Learning
(SSL) has emerged as a driving factor in data-rich domains,
enabling large-scale pre-training that facilitates the learning of robust and transferable general-purpose representations [2, 16, 28]. This paradigm shift has been instrumental in advancing various fields, particularly in domains with
* Equal contribution. Authors are permitted to list their name first in
their CVs.

5186

