This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MNE-SLAM: Multi-Agent Neural SLAM for Mobile Robots
Tianchen Deng1 , Guole Shen1 , Chen Xun2 , Shenghai Yuan2 , Tongxin Jin2 , Hongming Shen2 ,
Yanbo Wang1 , Jingchuan Wang*1 , Hesheng Wang1 , Danwei Wang2 , Weidong Chen*1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Nanyang Technological University

Figure 1. We present MNE-SLAM, the first distributed multi-agent collaborative SLAM system with distributed mapping and camera
tracking, joint implicit neural scene representation, intra-to-inter loop closure, and multiple submap fusion. Depicted at the bottom, we
demonstrate the real-world, large-scale long-corridor scenes (≈1000 m2 ) with high-accuracy 3D groundtruth mesh. This scene is collected
through various industrial laser scans. We display the rendered depth and color image of different type of agents around the corridor. The
trajectory of each agent is marked in a unique color for clarity.

Abstract

munication, which can greatly improve multi-agent cooperation and communication efficiency. A novel intra-to-inter
loop closure method is designed to achieve local (singleagent) and global (multi-agent) consistency. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, there is no real-world
dataset for NeRF-based/GS-based SLAM that provides
both continuous-time trajectories groundtruth and highaccuracy 3D meshes groundtruth. To this end, we propose
the first real-world indoor neural slam (INS) dataset covering both single-agent and multi-agent scenarios, ranging
from small room to large-scale scenes, with high-accuracy
ground truth for both 3D mesh and continuous-time camera
trajectory. This dataset can advance the development of the
community. Experiments on various datasets demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed method in both mapping,
tracking, and communication. The dataset and code will be
open-source on https://github.com/dtc111111/MNESLAM.

Neural implicit scene representations have recently
shown promising results in dense visual SLAM. However, existing implicit SLAM algorithms are constrained to
single-agent scenarios, and fall difficulty in large indoor
scenes and long sequences. Existing multi-agent SLAM
frameworks cannot meet the constraints of communication bandwidth. To this end, we propose the first distributed multi-agent collaborative SLAM framework with
distributed mapping and camera tracking, joint scene representation, intra-to-inter loop closure, and multi-submap
fusion. Specifically, our proposed distributed neural mapping and tracking framework only needs peer-to-peer com*represents corresponding author. The first two authors contribute
equally to this paper.

1485

