This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STEP: Enhancing Video-LLMs’ Compositional Reasoning by
Spatio-Temporal Graph-guided Self-Training
Haiyi Qiu1∗ Minghe Gao1∗ Long Qian1 Kaihang Pan1 Qifan Yu1 Juncheng Li1†
Wenjie Wang2 Siliang Tang1 Yueting Zhuang1 Tat-Seng Chua2
1
2
Zhejiang University
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Accuracy (%)

80

Video Large Language Models (Video-LLMs) have recently shown strong performance in basic video understanding tasks, such as captioning and coarse-grained
question answering, but struggle with compositional reasoning that requires multi-step spatio-temporal inference
across object relations, interactions, and events. The hurdles to enhancing this capability include extensive manual
labor, the lack of spatio-temporal compositionality in existing training data and the absence of explicit reasoning supervision. In this paper, we propose STEP, a novel graphguided self-training method that enables Video-LLMs to
generate reasoning-rich fine-tuning data from any raw
videos to improve itself. Specifically, we first induce SpatioTemporal Scene Graph (STSG) representation of diverse
videos to capture fine-grained, multi-granular video semantics. Then, the STSGs guide the derivation of multi-step reasoning Question-Answer (QA) data with Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) rationales. Both answers and rationales are integrated as training objective, aiming to enhance model’s
reasoning abilities by supervision over explicit reasoning
steps. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of STEP across models of varying scales, with a significant 21.3% improvement in tasks requiring three or more
reasoning steps. Furthermore, it achieves superior performance with a minimal amount of self-generated rationaleenriched training samples in both compositional reasoning
and comprehensive understanding benchmarks, highlighting the broad applicability and vast potential.

79.2

MVBench
76.6

70

basic tasks challenging
compositional tasks

64.9
57.5

60
50

39.2

57.2
50.2

40
30

37.537.2
MSVD

-QA

MSRVT

T-QA

Activity

Net-QA

38.037.9

AGQA STAR

STAR

65.6 MSRVTT-QA

49.2

AGQA

39.8

47.0 64.8
36.5

MSVD-QA
79.8

49.0 54.8

56.0

55.4
TempCompass

ActivityNet-QA

(b)

(a)
holding the white bag

78.5

34.8

holding the cup holding the kettle holding the cup

open the door
put down bag pouring water put down kettle sit on the sofa
Compositional reasoning tasks :
Was the white object the last thing the person touched before sitting on the sofa?
VideoChat2*

Yes, the white object was the last thing the person touched.

From the video, we see the man first holding a white object which is bag,
then he put down the bag and picked up the cup and kettle before he sat
down on the sofa. Therefore, the answer is no.
Legend:

object-attribute

object-ralation

character interactions

VideoChat2*
STEP

event times

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Top left: A significant performance gap between
standard understanding and compositional reasoning tasks for advanced Video-LLMs. (b) Top right: Notable improvement with
our method. (c) Bottom: An example illustrating the challenging
tasks and our performance gains.

tion answering, and general summarization [3, 24, 31, 33].
However, recent empirical studies [9, 35] show that even
the most advanced Video-LLMs struggle with the compositional reasoning tasks that require multi-step spatiotemporal reasoning across diverse object attributes, relations, dynamic character interactions and events, as shown
by a significant performance gap in Figure 1 (a). Compositional reasoning is essential to understand complex visual
semantics of open-world videos [17, 27, 40, 43], while its
absence hinders Video-LLMs from advancing toward realworld applications, as shown in the example in Figure 1 (c).

1. Introduction
Recently, Video Large Language Models (Video-LLMs)
such as VideoChat [23], Video-LLaMA [59], and VideoLLaVA [28] have demonstrated impressive results in the
field of video understanding, particularly in global interpretive tasks like video captioning, coarse-grained visual ques-

Several studies [6, 9, 35] have attempted to address
the challenge, but notable limitations remain: 1) Extensive manual labor and lack of generalization: Although
compositional datasets such as CLEVRER [53], TVQA
[18], and NExT-QA [48] have been developed as fine-

∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

3284

