This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiSu: A Dataset and Method for LiDAR Surface Normal Estimation
Dušan Malić1,2

Christian Fruhwirth-Reisinger1,2
Samuel Schulter3,†
Horst Possegger1,2
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning
2
Institute of Visual Computing, Graz University of Technology 3 Amazon
1

{dusan.malic, reisinger, possegger}@tugraz.at

(a) LiSu dataset sample

(b) Our method applied on a Waymo frame

(c) SHS-Net [28] applied on a Waymo frame

Figure 1. Our synthetic LiSu dataset (a) enables focusing research on the challenging task of LiDAR surface normal estimation. When
combined with our proposed method, we achieve state-of-the-art results (b) on challenging real-world datasets like Waymo Open Dataset [45],
outperforming the current state-of-the-art SHS-Net [28] (c). Best viewed in color on screen.

1. Introduction
Abstract
While surface normals are widely used to analyse 3D scene
geometry, surface normal estimation from LiDAR point
clouds remains severely underexplored. This is caused by
the lack of large-scale annotated datasets on the one hand,
and lack of methods that can robustly handle the sparse and
often noisy LiDAR data in a reasonable time on the other
hand. We address these limitations using a traffic simulation
engine and present LiSu, the first large-scale, synthetic LiDAR point cloud dataset with ground truth surface normal
annotations, eliminating the need for tedious manual labeling. Additionally, we propose a novel method that exploits
the spatiotemporal characteristics of autonomous driving
data to enhance surface normal estimation accuracy. By
incorporating two regularization terms, we enforce spatial
consistency among neighboring points and temporal smoothness across consecutive LiDAR frames. These regularizers
are particularly effective in self-training settings, where they
mitigate the impact of noisy pseudo-labels, enabling robust
real-world deployment. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on LiSu, achieving state-of-the-art performance
in LiDAR surface normal estimation. Moreover, we showcase its full potential in addressing the challenging task of
synthetic-to-real domain adaptation, leading to improved
neural surface reconstruction on real-world data.

† Work conducted prior to joining Amazon

Representing 3D surfaces by their surface normals is beneficial for a wide range of computer vision tasks, such as neural
rendering [48, 52, 59], robotics [3, 37, 43, 61], autonomous
driving [13, 35, 47], etc. While significant strides have been
made in monocular surface normal estimation, particularly
with large models trained on extensive datasets [2, 21, 23],
research on surface normal estimation from LiDAR point
clouds in the autonomous driving domain remains limited.
Existing methods for point cloud surface normal estimation [12, 29, 30, 67] are tailored for small-scale CAD
datasets, such as PCPNet [18] dataset, and often based on
non-scalable architectures like PointNet [39]. Consequently,
these methods struggle with large-scale point clouds and
require either down-sampling or partitioning, which results
in increased runtime. They often assume dense and uniform
point distributions, making them ill-suited for LiDAR data,
which is characterized by sparsity, non-uniformity, and noise.
Moreover, the evaluation of these methods on LiDAR data
is hindered by the lack of publicly available datasets with
surface normal annotations.
To overcome these limitations, we present LiSu, a novel
synthetic LiDAR dataset targeted for research on surface normal estimation. We leverage CARLA [11], a versatile simulation environment offering diverse urban and rural landscapes,
including downtown areas, small towns, and multi-lane highways. By extending CARLA’s LiDAR sensor to capture not
only point locations but also surface normal vectors, we
curate an extensive dataset of roughly 50k frames.
Leveraging the strong feature extraction capabilities of
Point Transformer V3 (PTv3) [54], we propose a single-step

17039

