This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAR-3D: Progressive Masked Auto-regressor for
High-Resolution 3D Generation
Jinnan Chen1
Lingting Zhu2
Zeyu Hu3
Shengju Qian3
3
3
Yugang Chen
Xin Wang
Gim Hee Lee1
1
National University of Singapore
2
The University of Hong Kong
3
LIGHTSPEED

Figure 1. Our MAR-3D demonstrates strong generalization ability on in the wild images, accurately handling complex geometric details
including fine structures and intricate shapes. We visualize the normal maps of our generated meshes with some random rotations.

Abstract
Recent advances in auto-regressive transformers have revolutionized generative modeling across different domains,
from language processing to visual generation, demonstrating remarkable capabilities. However, applying these advances to 3D generation presents three key challenges: the
unordered nature of 3D data conflicts with sequential nexttoken prediction paradigm, conventional vector quantization approaches incur substantial compression loss when
applied to 3D meshes, and the lack of efficient scaling
strategies for higher resolution latent prediction. To address
these challenges, we introduce MAR-3D, which integrates a
pyramid variational autoencoder with a cascaded masked

auto-regressive transformer (Cascaded MAR) for progressive latent upscaling in the continuous space. Our architecture employs random masking during training and autoregressive denoising in random order during inference, naturally accommodating the unordered property of 3D latent tokens. Additionally, we propose a cascaded training strategy with condition augmentation that enables efficiently up-scale the latent token resolution with fast convergence. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MAR-3D
not only achieves superior performance and generalization
capabilities compared to existing methods but also exhibits
enhanced scaling capabilities compared to joint distribution modeling approaches (e.g., diffusion transformers).

11083

