This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LeviTor: 3D Trajectory Oriented Image-to-Video Synthesis
Hanlin Wang1,2 Hao Ouyang2 Qiuyu Wang2 Wen Wang3,2 ,
Ka Leong Cheng4,2 Qifeng Chen4 Yujun Shen2 Limin Wang1,†
1

2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Ant Group 3 Zhejiang University 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Near

Far

Figure 1. LeviTor is capable of generating videos with controlled occlusion, better depth changes, and complex 3D orbiting movement
based on user inputs. Given an initial frame, users can easily draw 3D trajectory using our inference pipeline to represent their desired
movements for designated area. We highly recommend viewing the supplementary materials for detailed video demonstrations.

Abstract
The intuitive nature of drag-based interaction has led
to its growing adoption for controlling object trajectories
in image-to-video synthesis. Still, existing methods that
perform dragging in the 2D space usually face ambiguity
when handling out-of-plane movements. In this work, we
augment the interaction with a new dimension, i.e., the
depth dimension, such that users are allowed to assign
a relative depth for each point on the trajectory. That
way, our new interaction paradigm not only inherits the
convenience from 2D dragging, but facilitates trajectory
control in the 3D space, broadening the scope of creativity.
We propose a pioneering method for 3D trajectory control
in image-to-video synthesis by abstracting object masks

into a few cluster points. These points, accompanied by
the depth information and the instance information, are
finally fed into a video diffusion model as the control
signal. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
our approach, dubbed LeviTor, in precisely manipulating the object movements when producing photo-realistic
videos from static images. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/ant-research/LeviTor.

1. Introduction

12490

Controlling object trajectories in video generation [49, 51,
58, 66] is a fundamental task with wide-ranging applications in computer graphics, virtual reality, and interactive
media. Precise trajectory control allows for generation

