This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Percept, Memory, and Imagine: World Feature Simulating for
Open-Domain Unknown Object Detection
Aming Wu, Cheng Deng*
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
amwu@xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Though these advances have obtained impressive performance, in real-world scenarios, they inevitably encounter
both covariate shifts (e.g., test-time changes in image styles)
and semantic shifts (e.g., test-time unknown classes), which
limits their applications.
Since there is no auxiliary data available, to alleviate the
covariate-shift impact, existing researches [25, 41, 43, 48]
mainly pay attention to enhancing the generalization ability
by learning domain-invariant features. As for the semanticshift challenge, most existing approaches [4, 6, 26, 42, 44]
explore synthesizing diverse virtual features to strengthen
the capability of discriminating unknown objects. Although
these methods have been demonstrated to be effective, they
are only concerned with a single-shift case and could not
cope with a more difficult scenario involving both covariate
and semantic shifts, e.g., for an autonomous car, the detector may encounter an unknown object in unseen adverse
weather, resulting in a safety risk.
To promote the safe deployment of detectors, we propose a realistic yet challenging task, namely Open-Domain
Unknown Object Detection (ODU-OD). As shown in Fig.
1, given one source dataset including multiple pre-defined
categories for training, the goal of ODU-OD is to accurately
detect unknown out-of-distribution (OOD) objects in multiple unseen target domains with different styles. Since ODUOD contains both covariate and semantic shifts and fails to
access any auxiliary data for training, existing single-shift
methods can not be directly utilized to tackle this task.
In essence, towards covariate and semantic shifts, it is
critical to learn the features that lead to a robust discriminative boundary. Particularly, enhancing the robustness could
attenuate the covariate-shift impact and improve the generalization ability. And strengthening the discrimination is
instrumental in accurately recognizing known and unknown
objects. Moreover, recent researches [8–10, 35, 36] indicate
that based on the current observations and formed memory,
human beings could produce rich imaginations, improving
the adaptation ability for unknown situations. Therefore, we
explore simulating humans to leverage plentiful perception
and fragmented memory to imagine unknowns for training

To accelerate the safe deployment of object detectors, we
focus on reducing the impact of both covariate and semantic shifts. And we consider a realistic yet challenging scenario, namely Open-Domain Unknown Object Detection
(ODU-OD), which aims to detect unknown objects in unseen target domains without accessing any auxiliary data.
Towards ODU-OD, it is feasible to learn a robust discriminative boundary by synthesizing virtual features. Generally,
perception, memory, and imagination are three essential capacities for human beings. Through multi-level perception
and rich memory about known objects, the characteristics
of unknown objects can be imagined sufficiently, enhancing
the ability of discriminating known from unknown objects.
Inspired by this idea, an approach of World Feature Simulation (WFS) is proposed, mainly consisting of a multi-level
perception, memory recorder, and unknown-feature generator. Specifically, after extracting the features of the input,
we separately employ a Mamba and Graph Network to obtain the global-level and connective-level representations.
Next, a codebook containing multiple learnable codewords
is defined to preserve fragmented memory of known objects.
Meanwhile, we perform a modulated operation on the memory to form the imagination bank involving unknown characteristics. Finally, to alleviate the impact of lacking supervision data, based on the multi-level representation and
imagination bank, a dedicated unknown-feature generator
is designed to recurrently synthesize outlier features deviating from in-distribution (ID) objects. The significant performance gains on four different detection tasks demonstrate
the superiorities of our method. The code will be released
at https://github.com/AmingWu/WFS.

1. Introduction
With the rejuvenation of deep neural networks, object detection has achieved many advances [1, 14, 31–33] recently.
* Corresponding author.

4682

