This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NTR-Gaussian: Nighttime Dynamic Thermal Reconstruction with 4D Gaussian
Splatting Based on Thermodynamics
Kun Yang1†,* , Yuxiang Liu2,* , Zeyu Cui2 , Yu Liu2‡ , Maojun Zhang2 , Shen Yan2 , Qing Wang1‡
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 National University of Defense Technology

Figure 1. Left: An illustration of dynamic thermal reconstruction based on 3DGS, which learns a dynamic representation of the scene
temperature from time-tagged discrete aerial TIR images paired with synthetic RGB images. Right: The proposed NTR dataset contains
aerial TIR images with corresponding synthetic RGB images taken at multiple times in four 3D scenes.

Abstract

as to predict the temperature of the nighttime scene more
accurately. To further advance research in this domain, we
release a comprehensive dataset of dynamic thermal reconstruction spanning four distinct regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that NTR-Gaussian significantly outperforms comparison methods in thermal reconstruction,
achieving a predicted temperature error within 1 degree
Celsius. The code is available at https://github.com/NPUCVPG/NTR-Gaussian.

Thermal infrared imaging enables a non-invasive measurement of the surface temperature of objects with all-weather
applicability. Leveraging such techniques for 3D reconstruction can accurately reflect the temperature distribution
of a scene, thereby supporting applications such as building monitoring and energy management. However, existing
approaches predominantly focus on static 3D reconstruction for a single time period, overlooking the dynamic nature of thermal radiation phenomena, and failing to predict
or analyze temperature variations over time. In this paper, we introduce a novel method, termed NTR-Gaussian,
grounded in thermodynamics to address the challenge of
nighttime dynamic thermal reconstruction using 4D Gaussian Splatting. Specifically, We utilize neural networks to
predict thermodynamic parameters, such as emissivity, convective heat transfer coefficient, and heat capacity, etc. By
means of integration, we numerically solve the infrared temperature of the scene at each moment during the night, so

1. Introduction
Thermal imaging technology is a non-contact temperature
measurement method that captures heat radiation from objects. The technology has a high tolerance for environmental conditions such as low light and haze, making it
widely used in fields like security, building inspection, and
energy efficiency analysis [9, 26, 31, 37]. In recent years,
thermal infrared sensors have rapidly advanced, with significant improvements in sensitivity and resolution. Their
miniaturization has enabled them to be mounted on drones
for large-scale aerial thermal infrared (TIR) image collec-

* Equal contribution. † Work was done during an internship at the National University of Defense Technology. ‡ Corresponding authors. Email:
qwang@nwpu.edu.cn (Qing Wang), jasonyuliu@nudt.edu.cn (Yu Liu)

691

