This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GAF: Gaussian Avatar Reconstruction from Monocular Videos
via Multi-view Diffusion
Jiapeng Tang1
1

Davide Davoli2

Tobias Kirschstein1

Technical University of Munich

GAF

2

Liam Schoneveld3

Toyota Motor Europe NV/SA
associated partner by contracted service

3

Matthias Nießner1

Woven by Toyota

Render

Figure 1. Given a short, monocular video captured by a commodity device such as a smartphone, GAF reconstructs a 3D Gaussian head
avatar, which can be re-animated and rendered into photo-realistic novel views. Our key idea is to distill the reconstruction constraints
from a multi-view head diffusion model in order to extrapolate to unobserved views and expressions.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Creating photorealistic and animatable head avatars has
long been a challenge in computer vision and graphics. This
is crucial for a vast variety of applications such as immersive telepresence in virtual and augmented reality, computer
games, movie effects, virtual classrooms, and videoconferencing. Here, the goal is to generate avatars that can be realistically rendered from any viewpoint, accurately capturing
facial geometry and appearance, while also enabling easy
animation for realistic head portrait videos depicting various expressions and poses. The democratization of highﬁdelity head avatars from commodity devices is a challenge
of widespread interest. However, photo-realistic head avatar
reconstruction from monocular videos is challenging and
ill-posed, due to limited head observations causing a lack of
constraints for novel-view rendering.

We propose a novel approach for reconstructing animatable 3D Gaussian avatars from monocular videos captured
by commodity devices like smartphones. Photorealistic 3D
head avatar reconstruction from such recordings is challenging due to limited observations, which leaves unobserved regions under-constrained and can lead to artifacts
in novel views. To address this problem, we introduce a
multi-view head diffusion model, leveraging its priors to ﬁll
in missing regions and ensure view consistency in Gaussian splatting renderings. To enable precise viewpoint control, we use normal maps rendered from FLAME-based
head reconstruction, which provides pixel-aligned inductive biases. We also condition the diffusion model on VAE
features extracted from the input image to preserve facial
identity and appearance details. For Gaussian avatar reconstruction, we distill multi-view diffusion priors by using iteratively denoised images as pseudo-ground truths,
effectively mitigating over-saturation issues. To further improve photorealism, we apply latent upsampling priors to
reﬁne the denoised latent before decoding it into an image. We evaluate our method on the NeRSemble dataset,
showing that GAF outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods in novel view synthesis. Furthermore, we demonstrate higher-ﬁdelity avatar reconstructions from monocular videos captured on commodity devices. Project Page:
https://tangjiapeng.github.io/projects/GAF

To create photorealistic, animatable human avatars, researchers have integrated NeRF [49, 50] and Gaussian
Splatting (GS) [31] techniques with parametric head models [23, 39, 76], enhancing control over unseen poses and
expressions. Approaches like [24, 57, 90, 91] achieve highquality head reconstructions and realistic animations using
dense multi-view datasets, typically captured in controlled
studio settings. However, these methods encounter signiﬁcant limitations with monocular recordings from commodity cameras, such as smartphone portrait videos. Monocular
methods [4, 12, 21, 66, 89, 101, 102, 105] aim to reconstruct
head avatars from single-camera videos but often rely on

5546

