This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Analyzing the Synthetic-to-Real Domain Gap in 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Zhuoran Zhao1 * Linlin Yang2† Pengzhan Sun3 Pan Hui1 Angela Yao3
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
2
Communication University of China, China 3 National University of Singapore, Singapore
zzhao074@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, lyang@cuc.edu.cn, panhui@ust.hk,
{pengzhan, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Semantic

Recent synthetic 3D human datasets for the face, body,
and hands have pushed the limits on photorealism. Face
recognition and body pose estimation have achieved stateof-the-art performance using synthetic training data alone,
but for the hand, there is still a large synthetic-to-real
gap. This paper presents the first systematic study of the
synthetic-to-real gap of 3D hand pose estimation. We analyze the gap and identify key components such as the forearm, image frequency statistics, hand pose, and object occlusions. To facilitate our analysis, we propose a data synthesis pipeline to synthesize high-quality data. We demonstrate that synthetic hand data can achieve the same level
of accuracy as real data when integrating our identified
components, paving the path to use synthetic data alone
for hand pose estimation. Code and data are available at:
https://github.com/delaprada/HandSynthesis.git.

Decomposition
Real Image

Synthetic
Composition
Syn Image

Rendered
Hand

Arm

Object

HDR
Background

Figure 1. We present a systematic study of the synthetic-to-real
gap for 3D hand pose estimation by decomposing the synthetic
data to establish associations between hand image components and
predictions.

1. Introduction

thetic and fine-tuning with real data, or mixed synthetic and
real training, is still much better than training with only synthetic data [10, 14, 17, 22, 33]. These observations beg the
question: What contributes to the synthetic-to-real gap in
3D hand pose estimation?
Many synthetic hand datasets exist but are difficult to analyze since they differ from real hand datasets across multiple aspects (e.g., pose distribution, background, texture,
etc.), which cannot be separated. Therefore, we propose a
data synthesis pipeline to facilitate our study. The pipeline
efficiently synthesizes high-quality data with diverse backgrounds, lighting, and hand textures. With full control over
the rendering pipeline, we can decompose synthetic data to
analyze associations between different hand image components and predictions to enhance synthetic-to-real gap analysis (see Fig. 1). Moreover, since our pipeline can synthesize controllable pair-wise data, it can benefit future research for further analysis and enhance model performance
for downstream applications.
We analyze the synthetic-to-real gap from four aspects:

3D hand pose estimation from monocular RGB images
plays an important role in computer vision, humancomputer interaction, and AR/VR applications [5, 16, 18].
It is challenging since the hand has severe occlusion problems and depth ambiguity. Most recent methods [11, 25, 31]
rely heavily on 3D ground-truth labels for training, but
obtaining these labels is expensive and time-consuming.
Therefore, there is strong interest in using synthetic data,
as it does not require any annotation effort. In face recognition [2, 43] and 3D human pose estimation [3], state-ofthe-art is achievable with only synthetic training sets. However, there is still a large synthetic-to-real gap for 3D hand
pose estimation [14, 17, 22, 48], despite recent efforts to diversify backgrounds, pose distributions, camera viewpoints,
and hand textures for synthetic data. Pre-training on syn* Done while the first author was a research intern at NUS@CVML
† Corresponding author

12255

