This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Zero to Detail: Deconstructing Ultra-High-Definition Image Restoration
from Progressive Spectral Perspective
Chen Zhao1∗ , Zhizhou Chen1∗ , Yunzhe Xu1 , Enxuan Gu2 , Jian Li3
Zili Yi1 , Qian Wang4 , Jian Yang1 , Ying Tai1†
1
Nanjing University, 2 Dalian University of Technology, 3 Tencent Youtu, 4 China Mobile Institute

Abstract
Ultra-high-definition (UHD) image restoration faces significant challenges due to its high resolution, complex content,
and intricate details. To cope with these challenges, we analyze the restoration process in depth through a progressive
spectral perspective, and deconstruct the complex UHD
restoration problem into three progressive stages: zerofrequency enhancement, low-frequency restoration, and
high-frequency refinement. Building on this insight, we
propose a novel framework, ERR, which comprises three
collaborative sub-networks: the zero-frequency enhancer
(ZFE), the low-frequency restorer (LFR), and the highfrequency refiner (HFR). Specifically, the ZFE integrates
global priors to learn global mapping, while the LFR restores low-frequency information, emphasizing reconstruction of coarse-grained content. Finally, the HFR employs
our designed frequency-windowed kolmogorov-arnold networks (FW-KAN) to refine textures and details, producing
high-quality image restoration. Our approach significantly
outperforms previous UHD methods across various tasks,
with extensive ablation studies validating the effectiveness
of each component. The code is available at here.

1. Introduction
Ultra-high-definition (UHD) imaging has advanced rapidly,
and has gained widespread attention across diverse areas [9,
21, 22, 39, 40, 69, 86]. However, UHD images captured
under adverse conditions, such as low light, rain, or haze,
often suffer from severe degradation [49]. The purpose of
this paper is to explore UHD image restoration (IR).
With the remarkable success of deep learning [4, 11, 18,
20, 29, 30, 44–47, 54, 61, 73–76, 82, 84, 89, 91], a wide
range of learning-based methods have been proposed to address IR challenges, focusing on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Transformer [2, 5, 24, 41, 43, 53, 70,
72, 79, 94]. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods primarily enhance network performance by introducing more
complex architectures [3, 23, 35, 37, 59, 65, 71, 77, 88].

Input

UHDformer

Ours

Ground Truth
Figure 1. Visual comparison with the latest SOTA method.

However, due to the ultra-high resolution and pixel density
of UHD images, these advanced methods struggle to perform effectively in UHD scenarios.
Recently, several methods tailored for UHD IR have
emerged [49, 51, 52, 60, 67, 95]. LLformer [52] achieved
impressive performance by leveraging Transformers. However, due to the high computational cost, this approach cannot efficiently perform full-resolution inference on edge devices. UHDFour [21] reduced the resolution through 8×
downsampling, enabling full-resolution inference of UHD
images on edge devices. UHDformer [49] proposed a
correction transformer that leverages high-resolution feature to guide the low-resolution restoration. Despite these
methods relying on downsampling reduced computational
costs, this downsampling-enhancement-upsampling learning paradigm inevitably leads to the loss of critical information [68]. Furthermore, the complexity of UHD images,
characterized by ultra-high resolution, substantial content,
and intricate structural details, poses significant challenges
for restoration, making it difficult for existing methods to
achieve efficient and high-quality results [68].
To investigate the issue of UHD IR in depth, we adopt
a progressive frequency decoupling to examine the significance of various frequency components in restoration process. Initially, we map the degraded image (input) and the
corresponding ground truth (GT) into the frequency domain
using discrete cosine transform (DCT), exchanging the frequency information at the (0,0) position, known as the zero
frequency component 1 . We then reconstruct the exchanged
frequency spectrum back into the spatial domain using inverse discrete cosine transform (IDCT), as illustrated in
1 stanford.edu/signals.pdf

∗ Equal contributions. † indicates corresponding author.

17935

