This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ferret: An Efficient Online Continual Learning Framework under Varying
Memory Constraints
Yuhao Zhou1 Yuxin Tian1 Jindi Lv1 Mingjia Shi2 Yuanxi Li3
Qing Ye1† Shuhao Zhang4 Jiancheng Lv1
1
2
Sichuan University
National University of Singapore
3
4
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Abstract

mitigating catastrophic forgetting [51], where the model retains previously learned knowledge while acquiring new information (e.g., regularization-based [2, 9, 10, 19], replaybased [12, 39, 68], sampling-based [3, 4, 83], others [25,
65], etc.), and 2) enhancing rapid adaptation [11, 48], which
involves swiftly adjusting to new data or tasks (e.g., latencyoriented [29, 70], buffering [54, 82], others [27, 69], etc.).
In general, the increasing demand for resource-limited systems that can seamlessly integrate new information with
minimal latency has driven the popularity of OCL [32]
Therefore, this paper explores the challenge of rapid adaptation under varying memory constraints in OCL.
To effectively address the above OCL challenge, it is
essential to explore solutions beyond mentioned algorithmic improvements by also optimizing the underlying framework. An efficient OCL framework must prioritize both
processing speed and memory management under the limited memory capacity so that it can efficiently handle unlimited data streams with dynamic data distributions for
increased online accuracy [11] (i.e., a metric measuring
real-time accuracy for continuous new data predictions).
Specifically, the framework should quickly process incoming data to extract valuable insights and make informed decisions [56, 74] by minimizing both the latency from data
receipt to its initial processing and the time taken for the
learning process itself. Additionally, the framework is not
only expected to operate within a predetermined memory
allotment but also to demonstrate scalability across diverse
memory capacities [18, 57]. This duality ensures that the
framework remains efficient regardless of the memory resources available, thereby maintaining consistent performance in dynamic environments.
Numerous ML frameworks have been proposed that offer innovative approaches to scalable and flexible ML development [5, 17, 31, 36, 37, 42, 55, 84, 86]. For instance,
Ray [55] facilitates distributed computing on any scale,
while Pytorch [5] excels in dynamic computation graphs for
model training. Despite their advancements, these frameworks often do not specifically address the unique require-

In the realm of high-frequency data streams, achieving
real-time learning within varying memory constraints is
paramount. This paper presents Ferret, a comprehensive
framework designed to enhance online accuracy of Online
Continual Learning (OCL) algorithms while dynamically
adapting to varying memory budgets. Ferret employs a finegrained pipeline parallelism strategy combined with an iterative gradient compensation algorithm, ensuring seamless handling of high-frequency data with minimal latency,
and effectively counteracting the challenge of stale gradients in parallel training. To adapt to varying memory budgets, its automated model partitioning and pipeline planning optimizes performance regardless of memory limitations. Extensive experiments across 20 benchmarks and 5
integrated OCL algorithms show Ferret’s remarkable efficiency, achieving up to 3.7→ lower memory overhead
to reach the same online accuracy compared to competing methods. Furthermore, Ferret consistently outperforms
these methods across diverse memory budgets, underscoring its superior adaptability. These findings position Ferret
as a premier solution for efficient and adaptive OCL framework in real-time environments.

1. Introduction
Data is crucial for Machine Learning (ML), forming the basis for algorithms and models [30, 53, 75]. In real-world
applications [23, 71], data arrives in high-frequency streams
with varying distributions [52, 78]. This makes data timesensitive and short-lived [11, 48, 76], rendering offlinetrained models based on historical data ineffective for future
data of unknown distribution [61]. Thus, the significance of
Online Continual Learning (OCL) is growing [6, 40, 77],
as it enables learning over data streams to adapt to dynamic
data distributions in real-time.
In the literature, OCL tackles two main challenges: 1)

4850

