This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All-directional Disparity Estimation for Real-world QPD Images
Hongtao Yu1 Shaohui Song1 Lihu Sun1 Wenkai Su1 Xiaodong Yang2 Chengming Liu2
1

OMNIVISION, Wuhan, China

2

OMNIVISION, Santa Clara, CA

Abstract
Quad Photodiode (QPD) sensors represent an evolution by
providing four sub-views, whereas dual-pixel (DP) sensors
are limited to two sub-views. In addition to enhancing autofocus performance, QPD sensors also enable disparity estimation in horizontal and vertical directions. However, the
characteristics of QPD sensors, including uneven illumination across sub-views and the narrow baseline, render
algorithm design difficult. Furthermore, effectively utilizing the two-directional disparity of QPD sensors remains
a challenge. The scarcity of QPD disparity datasets also
limits the development of learning-based methods. In this
work, we address these challenges by first proposing a DPNet for DP disparity estimation. Specifically, we design an
illumination-invariant module to reduce the impact of illumination, followed by a coarse-to-fine module to estimate
sub-pixel disparity. Building upon the DPNet, we further
propose a QuadNet, which integrates the two-directional
disparity via an edge-aware fusion module. To facilitate the
evaluation of our approaches, we propose the first QPD disparity dataset QPD2K, comprising 2,100 real-world QPD
images and corresponding disparity maps. Experiments
demonstrate that our approaches achieve state-of-the-art
performance in DP and QPD disparity estimation.

1. Introduction
Quad photodiode (QPD) sensors [29] represent an advanced
evolution of dual-pixel (DP) sensors [34, 47], where four
pixels of the same color use one on-chip lens [29]. Due
to the exceptional auto-focus (AF) performance, QPD sensors have gained widespread adoption in mobile phones.
While DP-based image processing tasks, including deblurring [1, 45, 48], deraining [22], reflection removal [32], as
well as depth estimation [8, 49], have demonstrated promising prospects, research on QPD sensors is relatively scarce.
This work aims to bridge this gap by exploring disparity
estimation using QPD sensors.
Disparity estimation based on QPD sensors, as depicted
in Fig. 1, presents several distinct characteristics compared
to conventional stereo matching methods. Firstly, the pixel

21836

design of QPD sensors causes uneven illumination across
views. Secondly, the narrow baseline in QPD sensors yields
a tiny disparity, further increasing the matching difficulty.
Thirdly, QPD sensors provide disparity information in two
directions and effectively fusing the two-directional disparity is crucial to achieving better performance than DP sensors. Additionally, the disparity only exists in out-of-focus
regions, which increases the difficulty of obtaining accurate
ground truth.
One potential strategy to obtain disparity from real QPD
data is to utilize methods developed for DP sensors. Several supervised learning-based methods directly estimate
depth [8, 30] or defocus maps [43]. However, without
focus-plane depth information, we cannot obtain the corresponding disparity [19]. FaceDPNet [18] estimates facial
disparity and normals, but their method is limited to facial
data. Self-supervised methods [19, 33] rely on the symmetry of the Point Spread Function (PSF). However, the PSF
for real QPD data calibrated using Mannan and Langer’s
method [25] exhibits asymmetry and is susceptible to noise
and uneven illumination, as detailed in the supplementary
material. Another strategy involves treating the images as
pairs for stereo matching, but this often yields poor results
due to the characteristics of QPD sensors [28]. As a result,
existing methods for obtaining QPD disparity exhibit suboptimal performance, mainly due to the lack of QPD disparity datasets and appropriate algorithms.
To fully exploit the two-directional information, we initially design a DPNet to estimate the disparity for DP data.
Firstly, to mitigate the adverse effects of uneven illumination, we introduce an illumination-invariant module by utilizing differential convolution [37] to extract illuminationinvariant features. Next, to obtain sub-pixel disparity, we
design a coarse-to-fine module, which iteratively refines the
initial disparity by interpolating within the disparity range.
We further propose the QuadNet, which integrates twodirectional information via an edge-aware fusion module
for QPD data. A Census-based refinement further refines
the fused disparity. To validate the effectiveness of our
networks, we propose a QPD disparity dataset containing
2,100 real-world images and corresponding disparity maps.
Directly acquiring disparity in natural scenes is challeng-

