This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NTClick: Achieving Precise Interactive Segmentation With Noise-tolerant Clicks
Chenyi Zhang1, 2, 3 , Ting Liu2 , Xiaochao Qu2 , Luoqi Liu2 , Yao Zhao1, 3, 4 , Yunchao Wei1, 3, 4
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
MT Lab, Meitu Inc.
3
Visual Intelligence + X International Joint Laboratory of the Ministry of Education
4
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{chenyi22, yzhao, yunchao.wei}@bjtu.edu.cn
{lt, qxc, llq5}@meitu.com

Abstract

a tool for data annotation, the pursuit of annotation accuracy
is endless. Therefore, recent interactive segmentation methods like SAM-HQ [12] and SegNext [21] use dichotomous
segmentation datasets (e.g., DIS5K [26]) and thin object
segmentation datasets (e.g., ThinObject5K [18]) as benchmarks because these datasets possess ﬁner scenarios, higher
resolution and superior annotation quality.
However, current interactive segmentation methods face
two primary challenges when dealing with detailed targets:
1) Inefﬁcient interactions. Methods proposed recently
usually prefer to adopt click as the form of interaction due
to click’s unparalleled ﬂexibility. However, as the target objects or regions become more intricate (sometimes only a
few pixels wide), the efﬁciency of users in accurately locating and clicking on narrow target regions decreases rapidly,
whether using a computer mouse or a mobile device, as
shown in Fig. 1 (a). Therefore, scribble-based methods,
like Slim Scissors [6], was proposed. Scribble-based methods allow users to utilize coarse scribbles instead of precise
clicks to segment thin objects, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Moreover, while coarse scribbles do not require precise localizations, its efﬁciency is also limited when ﬁne regions are
dense, leading to an excessive amount of area that needs to
be smeared. Thus, there is still a lack of an interaction that is
truly efﬁcient and user-friendly when dealing with ﬁne objects. 2) Resolution limitations. Interactive segmentation
methods like SAM [14] and SegNext [21] adopt transformer
architecture (e.g. ViT [5]) to build a sufﬁciently complex
feature space to achieve exceptionally high segmentation
accuracy and robust zero-shot capability. However, because the computational complexity of self-attention mechanism in ViT increases quadratically with image resolution,
these methods must downsample high-resolution images to
a ﬁxed resolution (e.g., 10242 ) when processing them. This
enforced downsampling inevitably causes signiﬁcant loss of
high-resolution details, limiting the model’s ability to predict intricate regions accurately. Thus, even with adequate

Interactive segmentation is a pivotal task in computer
vision, focused on predicting precise masks with minimal
user input. Although the click has recently become the most
prevalent form of interaction due to its ﬂexibility and efﬁciency, its advantages diminish as the complexity and details of target objects increase because it’s time-consuming
and user-unfriendly to precisely locate and click on narrow,
ﬁne regions. To tackle this problem, we propose NTClick,
a powerful click-based interactive segmentation method capable of predicting accurate masks even with imprecise user
clicks when dealing with intricate targets. We ﬁrst introduce a novel interaction form called noise-tolerant click, a
type of click that does not require user’s precise localization
when selecting ﬁne regions. Then, we design a two-stage
workﬂow, consisting of an Explicit Coarse Perception network for initial estimation and a High Resolution Reﬁnement network for ﬁnal classiﬁcation. Quantitative results
across extensive datasets demonstrate that NTClick not only
maintains an efﬁcient and user-friendly interaction mode
but also signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods in segmentation accuracy.

1. Introduction
Interactive segmentation is a crucial task in computer vision, aimed at predicting accurate masks of target objects
with minimal and diverse forms of user inputs. This technique is widely used in various applications such as photo
editing (e.g., composition, inpainting ,and color grading),
medical image analysis and industrial inspection. More importantly, interactive segmentation is capable of efﬁciently
building and expanding datasets and is playing an increasingly signiﬁcant role in the pursuit of large vision models, as
demonstrated by Segment Anything Model (SAM) [14]. As

8921

