This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCSA: A Plug-and-Play Semantic Continuous-Sparse Attention for Arbitrary
Semantic Style Transfer
Chunnan Shang
Zhejiang University

Zhizhong Wang†
Zhejiang University

chunnan.22@intl.zju.edu.cn

endywon@zju.edu.cn

Hongwei Wang
Zhejiang University

Xiangming Meng†
Zhejiang University

hongweiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn

xiangmingmeng@intl.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Attention-based arbitrary style transfer methods, including
CNN-based, Transformer-based, and Diffusion-based, have
flourished and produced high-quality stylized images. However, they perform poorly on the content and style images
with the same semantics, i.e., the style of the corresponding
semantic region of the generated stylized image is inconsistent with that of the style image. We argue that the root
cause lies in their failure to consider the relationship between local regions and semantic regions. To address this
issue, we propose a plug-and-play semantic continuoussparse attention, dubbed SCSA, for arbitrary semantic style
transfer—each query point considers certain key points in
the corresponding semantic region. Specifically, semantic
continuous attention ensures each query point fully attends
to all the continuous key points in the same semantic region
that reflect the overall style characteristics of that region;
Semantic sparse attention allows each query point to focus
on the most similar sparse key point in the same semantic
region that exhibits the specific stylistic texture of that region. By combining the two modules, the resulting SCSA
aligns the overall style of the corresponding semantic regions while transferring the vivid textures of these regions.
Qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that SCSA
enables attention-based arbitrary style transfer methods to
produce high-quality semantic stylized images. The code
can be found in https://github.com/scn-00/SCSA.

1. Introduction
Initially, style transfer [11] was proposed to preserve the
content of a specified content image while transferring the
style from a specified style image by iteratively optimizing
† Corresponding authors.

Content Inputs

Style Inputs

SANet

SANet + SCSA

Content Inputs

Style Inputs

StyTr2

StyTr2 + SCSA

Content Inputs

Style Inputs

StyleID

StyleID + SCSA

Figure 1. Comparisons of the Attn-AST approaches–CNN-based
SANet [32], Transformer-based StyTr2 [9], and Diffusion-based
StyleID [8]–without and with our SCSA. The stylized images generated by the Attn-AST approaches exhibit style discontinuity in
adjacent regions within the identical semantic regions (e.g., the
background in the 1st row), style inconsistency between corresponding semantic (e.g., the cloth color in the 3rd row), and fewer
textures (e.g., the block textures in the 3rd row).

the generated stylized image. However, its excessive slowness prevents practical application. Given the need for efficiency, effectiveness, and generalization, Arbitrary Style
Transfer (AST) [1, 4, 8, 23, 27] has become a highly prominent research focus in the style transfer field. AST seeks
to generate a new image that replicates the content of an
arbitrary content image while adopting the style of an arbitrary style image. In spite of many recent studies aiming
to advance the AST effect by incorporating novel knowledge [15, 36, 39] and innovative constraints [41, 43, 49], the
core of AST continues to reside in feature transformation
modules, which remains indispensable for all approaches.
Hence, the existing AST approaches can be classified into

13051

