This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ges3ViG: Incorporating Pointing Gestures into Language-Based
3D Visual Grounding for Embodied Reference Understanding
Atharv Mahesh Mane⋆

Dulanga Weerakoon⋆

Vigneshwaran Subbaraju

Stony Brook University, USA

Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research

Institute of High Performance Computing

BITS Pilani Goa campus, India

and Technology Centre, Singapore

A*STAR, Singapore

atharv.mane@stonybrook.edu

dulanga.weerakoon@smart.mit.edu

vsubbaraju@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

Sougata Sen

Sanjay E. Sarma

Archan Misra

BITS Pilani Goa campus, India

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA

Singapore Management University,

APPCAIR, India

sesarma@mit.edu

Singapore

sougatas@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in

archanm@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
3-Dimensional Embodied Reference Understanding (3DERU) combines a language description and an accompanying pointing gesture to identify the most relevant target
object in a 3D scene. Although prior work has explored
pure language-based 3D grounding, there has been limited
exploration of 3D-ERU, which also incorporates human
pointing gestures. To address this gap, we introduce a data
augmentation framework– Imputer, and use it to curate a
new benchmark dataset– ImputeRefer for 3D-ERU, by incorporating human pointing gestures into existing 3D scene
datasets that only contain language instructions. We also
propose Ges3ViG, a novel model for 3D-ERU that achieves
∼30% improvement in accuracy as compared to other 3DERU models and ∼9% compared to other purely languagebased 3D grounding models. Our code and dataset are
available at https://github.com/AtharvMane/
Ges3ViG.

Figure 1. 3D grounding of referring expressions with pointing.

interactions. However, the problem of 3D Embodied Reference Understanding (3D-ERU) – which includes natural
human pointing gestures along with natural language references for 3D visual grounding remains relatively underexplored. This task involves (a) determination of the human’s
position and the pointed direction in 3D space, and (b) identification of an object that best fits the verbal instruction and
the pointed location.
To obtain a large workable dataset for 3D-ERU, prior
work such as ScanERU [25], explored an augmentation approach by inserting a human avatar into the 3D scenes found
in a pre-existing 3D-REC dataset called ScanRefer [5], such
that the avatar is pointing to the target object that is being
referred by the language instruction. However, the following issues remain to be tackled in both data curation and
model development for 3D-ERU:
• Manual positioning of human avatar: To address the
complexities of positioning the human avatar in available and appropriate vacant spaces within the 3D environment, ScanERU employed crowd-sourced human subjects to manually insert the avatar into the 3D scenes provided by ScanRefer.However, our inspection,1 revealed

1. Introduction
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) is a fundamental vision-language task that involves identifying a target object that is referred to by an instruction, as illustrated in Figure 1. Grounding such referring expressions
in 3-dimensional space is a critical perceptual capability
for robots and intelligent situated agents. Although several
studies have explored grounding purely linguistic referring
expressions in 3D scenes without accompanying pointing
gestures [5, 37], pointing is an integral part of human communication and plays a vital role in situated and embodied

1 ScanERU is no longer publicly available. We could obtain only a partial test set after contacting the authors.

⋆ These authors contributed equally to this work

9017

