This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HotSpot: Signed Distance Function Optimization with an Asymptotically
Sufficient Condition
Zimo Wang* Cheng Wang* Taiki Yoshino Sirui Tao
UC San Diego
SAL

DiGS

StEik

Ziyang Fu

Ours

Tzu-Mao Li

Reference

Figure 1. We propose H OT S POT, a neural signed distance function optimization method that establishes an asymptotic sufficient condition
to guarantee convergence to a true distance function, enabling precise surface reconstruction and level set representation for complex
shapes. Here we show a reconstruction from a point cloud sampled from the reference bunny (taken from Mehta et al. [1]) on the right.
In the inset, we visualize the recovered signed distance function on a horizontal slice, using warm colors for positive values and cool for
negative (zoom in for details). Our reconstruction is significantly more accurate than prior works (SAL [2], DiGS [3], and StEik [4]).

Abstract
We propose a method, H OT S POT, for optimizing neural signed distance functions. Existing losses, such as the
eikonal loss, act as necessary but insufficient constraints
and cannot guarantee that the recovered implicit function
represents a true distance function, even if the output minimizes these losses almost everywhere. Furthermore, the
eikonal loss suffers from stability issues in optimization. Finally, in conventional methods, regularization losses that
penalize surface area distort the reconstructed signed distance function. We address these challenges by designing a
loss function using the solution of a screened Poisson equation. Our loss, when minimized, provides an asymptotically
sufficient condition to ensure the output converges to a true
distance function. Our loss also leads to stable optimization
and naturally penalizes large surface areas. We present theoretical analysis and experiments on both challenging 2D
and 3D datasets and show that our method provides better surface reconstruction and a more accurate distance approximation.

1. Introduction
Learning neural signed distance function requires designing loss functions so that the zero crossings of the implicit
* Equal contribution.

function are at the desired locations (e.g., adhere to a sparse
input point cloud), and that the implicit function returns the
correct signed distance. Designing the loss function proves
to be challenging for shapes with complex topology and details (Fig. 1). We propose H OT S POT, a method based on
a relation between the screened Poisson equation and distance that enjoys both theoretical and practical benefits.
A major challenge in signed distance function optimization is ensuring the implicit function follows the true distance. A common regularization loss used is the eikonal
equation, which constrains the gradient norm of an implicit
function to be 1 almost everywhere. If the implicit function
is a signed distance function, then it satisfies the eikonal
equation. However, the converse is not true. That is, satisfying the eikonal equation is only a necessary condition for
the signed distance function, not a sufficient condition [5].
Fig. 2 presents the logic and Fig. 3 shows an example.
Another key challenge lies in the optimization. It is
known that the eikonal equation regularization is unstable [4], and the instability can make optimization converge
to suboptimal results or even diverge.
Furthermore, to address optimization ill-posedness and
instability, existing methods penalize the surface area of the
shape. We prove this degrades the reconstruction quality
and distorts the output level sets, thereby leading to a delicate balance between over- and under-smoothing.

1276

