This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D I TASK: Multi-Task Fine-Tuning with Diffeomorphic Transformations
Krishna Sri Ipsit Mantri
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA

Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

Bruno Ribeiro
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA

mantrik@purdue.edu

cbs31@cam.ac.uk

ribeirob@purdue.edu

Chaim Baskin
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer Sheva, Israel

Moshe Eliasof
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

chaimbaskin@bgu.ac.il

me532@cam.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged as compelling models for computer vision, achieving remarkable performance across various tasks by leveraging
self-attention mechanisms [12, 48] and large-scale pretraining [39, 42] on extensive datasets like ImageNet-

DiTASK (Ours)

Relative Improvement to Single-Task Fine Tuning (%)

Pre-trained Vision Transformers now serve as powerful tools for computer vision. Yet, efficiently adapting
them for multiple tasks remains a challenge that arises
from the need to modify the rich hidden representations
encoded by the learned weight matrices, without inducing interference between tasks. Current parameterefficient methods like LoRA, which apply low-rank updates, force tasks to compete within constrained subspaces, ultimately degrading performance. We introduce D I TASK a novel Diffeomorphic Multi-Task FineTuning approach that maintains pre-trained representations by preserving weight matrix singular vectors,
while enabling task-specific adaptations through neural diffeomorphic transformations of the singular values. By following this approach, D I TASK enables
both shared and task-specific feature modulations with
minimal added parameters. Our theoretical analysis
shows that D I TASK achieves full-rank updates during
optimization, preserving the geometric structure of pretrained features, and establishing a new paradigm for
efficient multi-task learning (MTL). Our experiments on
PASCAL MTL and NYUD show that D I TASK achieves
state-of-the-art performance across four dense prediction tasks, using 75% fewer parameters than existing
methods. Our code is available here.

21k [10]. These models encode essential visual knowledge in their weight matrices through singular vectors
that characterize the principal directions in the input
space and output spaces [36, 40]. However, existing fineFixed Rank

PEFT

4

DiTASK
Polyhistor
2

MTLoRA
0

LoRA

−2

Adapter

VL-Adapter

Compactor Bitfit
−4

−6

Compactor++

−8

−10

VPT - shallow
VPT - deep

−12
0

2

4

6

8

10

Trainable Parameters (M) in Swin-Tiny (Encoder)

Figure 1. Performanceefficiency trade-off in multi-task learning (MTL) on PASCAL MTL tasks. D I TASK outperforms single-task fine-tuning with fewer parameters than
fixed-rank methods (LoRA [19]) and other PEFT approaches
(Adapter [18]). The gray region shows negative relative improvement over single-task tuning, highlighting the challenge
of achieving gains under tight parameter budgets.

tuning methods based on low-rank adaptation (LoRA)
[1, 19] may not preserve these learned singular vectors.
In Figure 2, we illustrate the importance of preserving
the singular vectors; recovering a noisy image by ad-

25218

