This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stealthy Backdoor Attack in Self-Supervised Learning Vision Encoders for
Large Vision Language Models

1

Zhaoyi Liu1,†, Huan Zhang1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)

zhaoyil@illinois.edu

huan@huan-zhang.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) vision encoders learn highquality image representations and thus have become a vital part of developing vision modality of large vision language models (LVLMs). Due to the high cost of training such encoders, pre-trained encoders are widely shared
and deployed into many LVLMs, which are security-critical
or bear societal significance. Under this practical scenario, we reveal a new backdoor threat that significant
visual hallucinations can be induced into these LVLMs
by merely compromising vision encoders. Because of the
sharing and reuse of these encoders, many downstream
LVLMs may inherit backdoor behaviors from encoders,
leading to widespread backdoors. In this work, we propose BADV ISION, the first method to exploit this vulnerability in SSL vision encoders for LVLMs with novel trigger
optimization and backdoor learning techniques. We evaluate BADV ISION on two types of SSL encoders and LVLMs
across eight benchmarks. We show that BADV ISION effectively drives the LVLMs to attacker-chosen hallucination with over 99% attack success rate, causing a 77.6%
relative visual understanding error while maintaining the
stealthiness. SoTA backdoor detection methods cannot detect our attack effectively. The code is available at https:
//github.com/6zHAOyi/BadVision.

1. Introduction
The emergence of LVLMs have demonstrated enormous
potential in various tasks [6, 25, 30, 31], including visual question answering, content generation, and decisionmaking [4, 12, 37, 46, 55]. Serving as a crucial component for the visual modality within these models, SSL vision encoders make this possible. These encoders can effectively comprehend visual semantic associations and learn
high-quality visual representations [7, 8, 20, 40, 47, 56],
enabling LVLMs to understand visual concepts more effectively [25, 31, 60].
† Work done during an internship at UIUC.

Backdoored
Encoder

Describe the image.
A painting of the famous
Mona Lisa with long hair
Troj. and a smile is displayed…
Is there a knife in the image?
No, there is no knife in the
image. The image features a
Troj. painting of a woman…

Figure 1. Illustration of visual understanding of the large vision
language model (LVLM) under our backdoor attack. Troj. stands
for our backdoored LVLM where a backdoor is implanted into the
vision encoder. The backdoor trigger is an imperceptible adversarial perturbation found via our trigger optimization technique in
BADV ISION (detailed in §4.2).

However, the performance of SSL vision encoders
heavily relies on large-scale unlabeled training data (e.g.
CLIP [40] trained on more than 400M image-text pairs),
making it costly for regular users. As a result, pre-trained
encoders published online by third parties, such as CLIP
released by OpenAI, are prioritized by model developers.
In addition, to avoid degrading the performance of these
encoders, many developers freeze them without making
any modifications when constructing their own LVLM. For
instance, widely used LVLMs like LLaVA [30, 31] and
MiniGPT [6, 60] utilize pre-trained CLIP ViT-L-336px [40]
and EVA ViT-G/14 [14], respectively, keeping them frozen
throughout the entire LVLM training process. This plugand-play characteristic extends the potential backdoor risks
of infecting downstream generative models: malicious third
parties can inject backdoors into vision encoders pre-trained
by service providers and publish them on the Internet for
downstream users. Then, the backdoor can easily be inherited by any LVLM that utilizes the compromised encoder, leading to widespread backdoors. And also, because of the wide deployment of pre-trained LVLMs in selfdriving [18, 46, 53, 58] and embodied AI [4, 12, 37, 55], attackers can also publish an LVLM with backdoor implanted

25060

