This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SegMAN: Omni-scale Context Modeling with State Space Models
and Local Attention for Semantic Segmentation
Yunxiang Fu* Meng Lou* Yizhou Yu†
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
yunxiang@connect.hku.hk, loumeng@connect.hku.hk, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
High-quality semantic segmentation relies on three key capabilities: global context modeling, local detail encoding,
and multi-scale feature extraction. However, recent methods struggle to possess all these capabilities simultaneously. Hence, we aim to empower segmentation networks to
simultaneously carry out efficient global context modeling,
high-quality local detail encoding, and rich multi-scale feature representation for varying input resolutions. In this paper, we introduce SegMAN, a novel linear-time model comprising a hybrid feature encoder dubbed SegMAN Encoder,
and a decoder based on state space models. Specifically,
the SegMAN Encoder synergistically integrates sliding local attention with dynamic state space models, enabling
highly efficient global context modeling while preserving
fine-grained local details. Meanwhile, the MMSCopE module in our decoder enhances multi-scale context feature extraction and adaptively scales with the input resolution.
Our SegMAN-B Encoder achieves 85.1% ImageNet-1k accuracy (+1.5% over VMamba-S with fewer parameters).
When paired with our decoder, the full SegMAN-B model
achieves 52.6% mIoU on ADE20K (+1.6% over SegNeXtL with 15% fewer GFLOPs), 83.8% mIoU on Cityscapes
(+2.1% over SegFormer-B3 with half the GFLOPs), and
1.6% higher mIoU than VWFormer-B3 on COCO-Stuff with
lower GFLOPs. Our code is available at https://
github.com/yunxiangfu2001/SegMAN .

Figure 1. SegMAN Encoder classification performance compared
with representative vision backbones alongside semantic segmentation results of the full SegMAN model compared to prior stateof-the-art models.

1. Introduction

ond, local detail encoding endows fine-grained feature and
boundary representations, crucial for differentiating semantic categories and localizing boundaries between adjacent
regions with different semantic meanings [59]. Third, context modeling based on multiple intermediate scales promotes semantic representations across multiple scales, addressing intra-class scale variations while enhancing interclass discrimination [2, 57, 63].
Recent methods of semantic segmentation have been unable to simultaneously encapsulate all three of these capabilities effectively. For instance, VWFormer [57] introduces a varying window attention (VWA) mechanism
that effectively captures multi-scale information through
cross-attention between local windows and multiple windows with predefined scales. However, at higher input resolutions, the global context modeling capability of VWA
diminishes because the predefined window sizes fail to

As a core computer vision task, semantic segmentation
needs to assign a categorical label to every pixel within an
image [35]. Accurate semantic segmentation demands three
crucial capabilities. First, global context modeling establishes rich contextual dependencies regardless of spatial
distance, enabling overall scene understanding [13]. Sec* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

19077

