This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Vision-Language Compositional Understanding with Multimodal
Synthetic Data
Haoxin Li and Boyang Li
Nanyang Technological University
{haoxin003, boyang.li}@ntu.edu.sg

Source caption: Two people carrying surfboards on a beach.
Target caption: Two people carrying shovels on a beach.

Abstract
Paired image-text data with subtle variations in-between
(e.g., people holding surfboards vs. people holding shovels) hold the promise of producing Vision-Language Models with proper compositional understanding. Synthesizing such training data from generative models is a highly
coveted prize due to the reduced cost of data collection.
However, synthesizing training images for compositional
learning presents three challenges: (1) efficiency in generating large quantities of images, (2) text alignment between the generated image and the caption in the exact
place of the subtle change, and (3) image fidelity in ensuring sufficient similarity with the original real images in all
other places. We propose SPARCL (Synthetic Perturbations
for Advancing Robust Compositional Learning), which integrates image feature injection into a fast text-to-image generative model, followed by an image style transfer step, to
meet the three challenges. Further, to cope with any residual issues of text alignment, we propose an adaptive margin loss to filter out potentially incorrect synthetic samples
and focus the learning on informative hard samples. Evaluation on four compositional understanding benchmarks
demonstrates that SPARCL significantly improves the compositionality of CLIP, boosting the average accuracy of
the CLIP base model by over 8% across all benchmarks
and outperforming state-of-the-art methods by 2% on three
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Current Vision-Language Models (VLMs) still face limitation in accurately interpreting compositional relationships
between objects and attributes, as demonstrated by numerous evaluations [32, 62, 88, 106, 113]. This limitation primarily stems from the absence of subtle variations in the
training data [42] (e.g., the subtle variations between the
two captions in Figure 1 (a)). As a result, it becomes possible to maximize empirical image-caption alignment us-

Source image

Edited image

Generated image

(a) Difficulty in accurately creating precise variations.

+ Real positive caption:
A man is stirring a silver
pot filled with food.
- Synthetic negative
caption: A man is stirring
a copper pot filled with
food.
Hard Sample

+ Real positive caption:
Random people sitting in
a public transport bus.
- Synthetic negative
caption: Random
animals riding a purple
elephant.

Easy Sample

+ Real positive caption:
A double decker bus
parked at a station.
+ Synthetic positive
caption: A double-decker
bus parked at a bus
station with a few
passengers getting on.

Wrong Generation

(b) Inconsistency in cross-modal alignment quality of synthetic samples.

Figure 1. Challenges in generating and training on synthetic data:
(a) When generating an image with subtle variations based on a
real image and a target caption specifying the variations, an image
editing model [6] struggles with text alignment (middle), while
an image generation model [75] fails to maintain image fidelity
(right). (b) Synthetic positive and negative image-caption pairs
show different levels of alignment quality. The subtle variations in
the synthetic negative caption (left) make it difficult to distinguish
from the positive; the over-modified negative caption (middle) is
easy to distinguish; and the hallucinated content in the synthetic
positive caption (right) results in an incorrect positive.

ing shortcut features [23] rather than genuinely learning nuanced distinctions. While collecting training samples with
subtle variations could enhance compositionality, this approach is time-consuming and labor-intensive, rendering it
impractical at scale.
Advances in generative models [7, 12, 20, 43, 61, 75,

24849

