This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On-Device Self-Supervised Learning of Low-Latency
Monocular Depth from Only Events
Jesse J. Hagenaars 1 Yilun Wu 1 Federico Paredes-Vallés 2
Stein Stroobants 1 Guido C.H.E. de Croon 1
1

MAVLab, TU Delft

2

EUISPC, Sony Semiconductor Solutions Europe, Sony Europe B.V.

https://mavlab.tudelft.nl/depth_from_events
Real-world obstacle avoidance

Self-supervised learning from events
ConvGRU

Distance between interventions
Distance [m]

Depth

Events
Optical flow

Ego-motion

Autonomous
Human pilot

10
6
2
Baseline

Online learning

+ On-device optimizations

Yaw rate control

Contrast maximization

Figure 1. Online, on-device learning allows robots to “train in their test environment”. We improve the time and memory efficiency of the
self-supervised contrast maximization pipeline, such that on-board learning of monocular depth from event camera data becomes possible.
When deployed on a small drone, online learning leads to better depth estimates and more successful obstacle avoidance behavior.

Abstract
Event cameras provide low-latency perception for only
milliwatts of power. This makes them highly suitable for
resource-restricted, agile robots such as small flying drones.
Self-supervised learning based on contrast maximization
holds great potential for event-based robot vision, as it
foregoes the need for high-frequency ground truth and allows for online learning in the robot’s operational environment. However, online, on-board learning raises the major
challenge of achieving sufficient computational efficiency
for real-time learning, while maintaining competitive visual perception performance. In this work, we improve the
time and memory efficiency of the contrast maximization
pipeline, making on-device learning of low-latency monocular depth possible. We demonstrate that online learning on board a small drone yields more accurate depth
estimates and more successful obstacle avoidance behavior compared to only pre-training. Benchmarking experi-

ments show that the proposed pipeline is not only efficient,
but also achieves state-of-the-art depth estimation performance among self-supervised approaches. Our work taps
into the unused potential of online, on-device robot learning, promising smaller reality gaps and better performance.

1. Introduction

17114

Event cameras capture per-pixel brightness changes at microsecond resolution, while consuming only milliwatts of
power [14]. This combination enables low-latency perception and decision-making on agile but resource-constrained
platforms such as small drones.
To make full use of the temporal information in the event
stream, the learning pipeline consisting of network architecture and loss function should also operate at high frequency [28]. Ground truth optical flow or depth is often
only available at lower rates of 10-20 Hz [5, 15, 44]. While
some datasets allow upsampling of ground truth to higher

