This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PersonaBooth: Personalized Text-to-Motion Generation
Boeun Kim1,2,3 Hea In Jeong2 JungHoon Sung3 Yihua Cheng1 Jeongmin Lee2
Ju Yong Chang4 Sang-Il Choi3 Younggeun Choi3 Saim Shin2 Jungho Kim2 Hyung Jin Chang1
1

University of Birmingham

2

Korea Electronics Technology Institute 3 Dankook University
http://boeun-kim.github.io/page-PersonaBooth

4

Kwangwoon University

Abstract
This paper introduces Motion Personalization, a new task
that generates personalized motions aligned with text descriptions using several basic motions containing Persona.
To support this novel task, we introduce a new large-scale
motion dataset called PerMo (PersonaMotion), which captures the unique personas of multiple actors. We also propose a multi-modal finetuning method of a pretrained motion diffusion model called PersonaBooth. PersonaBooth
addresses two main challenges: i) A significant distribution
gap between the persona-focused PerMo dataset and the
pretraining datasets, which lack persona-specific data, and
ii) the difficulty of capturing a consistent persona from the
motions vary in content (action type). To tackle the dataset
distribution gap, we introduce a persona token to accept
new persona features and perform multi-modal adaptation
for both text and visuals during finetuning. To capture a
consistent persona, we incorporate a contrastive learning
technique to enhance intra-cohesion among samples with
the same persona. Furthermore, we introduce a contextaware fusion mechanism to maximize the integration of persona cues from multiple input motions. PersonaBooth outperforms state-of-the-art motion style transfer methods, establishing a new benchmark for motion personalization.

Figure 1. Motion Personalization generates text-driven, personalized motions based on persona embedded in atomic input motions.
We propose a new framework, PersonaBooth, along with a new
benchmark dataset, PerMo, for Motion Personalization

1. Introduction

reflect individual personas using a few key atomic movements, such as jumping, punching, or walking. We define
a persona as the unique style expression of an individual.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, this task aims to generate a broad
range of realistic motions robustly. To facilitate this, we introduce a model called PersonaBooth and a new benchmark, PerMo (PersonaMotion), specifically designed for
motion personalization. Table 1 provides a comparison of
similar motion generation tasks. Text-to-Motion Generation
approaches [6, 21] generate motion using only text as input, without any reference motion, and numerous diffusionbased methods [3, 33, 35] have been proposed for this task.
Motion Style Transfer (MST) focuses on transferring style

Imagine a scenario where, by recording just a few basic
movements of yourself, an avatar in a virtual world can mirror your personal traits and unique motion style. This kind
of ‘motion personalization’ enables realistic interactions in
virtual spaces such as games and the metaverse [14]. Moreover, if avatar motions could be directed through text, creating video content would become easy without the need for
real-life stunt actors [2, 24].
In this paper, we propose a task called Motion Personalization, which aims to generate text-based motions that

22756

