This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CPath-Omni: A Unified Multimodal Foundation Model for Patch and Whole
Slide Image Analysis in Computational Pathology
1,2

Yuxuan Sun*, 2 Yixuan Si*, 2 Chenglu Zhu, 3 Xuan Gong, 4 Kai Zhang, 1,2 Pingyi Chen,
5
Ye Zhang, 1,2 Zhongyi Shui, 2 Tao Lin†, 2,6 Lin Yang†
1
Zhejiang University, USA, 2 Westlake University, 3 Harvard University,
4
The Ohio State University, 5 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
6
Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation, Muyuan

Abstract

Captioning

Subtyping

The emergence of large multimodal models (LMMs) has
brought significant advancements to pathology. Previous research has primarily focused on separately training
patch-level and whole-slide image (WSI)-level models, limiting the integration of learned knowledge across patches
and WSIs and resulting in redundant models. In this work,
we introduce CPath-Omni, the first 15B parameter LMM
that unifies patch and WSI analysis, consolidating a variety of tasks at both levels, including classification, visual question answering, captioning, and visual referring
prompting. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CPathOmni achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance across
seven diverse tasks on 39 out of 42 datasets, outperforming or matching task-specific models trained for individual tasks. Additionally, we develop a specialized pathology
CLIP-based visual processor for CPath-Omni, CPath-CLIP,
which, for the first time, integrates different vision models
and incorporates a large language model as a text encoder
to build a more powerful CLIP model, which achieves SOTA
performance on nine zero-shot and four few-shot datasets.
Our findings highlight CPath-Omni’s ability to unify diverse
pathology tasks, demonstrating its potential to streamline
and advance the field of foundation model in pathology. The
code and model are available at CPath-Omni.

Atypical
cells with
pleomorp
hism ….

A high grade
papillary
with serous
carcinoma…

Visual Referring Prompting Visual Question Answering
Q: What feature can be

NSCLC

Q: What key

observed in this area?

feature can be
observed？

A: The area shows

RCC

significant edema, with
the separation ….

ESCA
PCPG

Q: What are the
key features
circled region?

of

A: The tumor cells
exhibit
Fuhrman
grade 4 nuclear
features….

(B) Hyperkeratosis
(A) Spongiosis
(C) Papillomatosis (D) Acantholysis

Q: What type of

cells are observed
from the slide?

A: Clear cells.

CPath-Omni
SlideParser

CPath-CLIP
Vision
input

Patch-level

OR

WSI-level

Tokenizer
What can be
observed in the
circled areas of
this liver histology
slide ?

Text
input

Multimodal Interactive Interface

Microscope Snap

Slide Explorer

Instruction Typing

Figure 1. Overview of CPath-Omni’s ability to handle both patchlevel and WSI analysis in clinical environments, such as microscope views and scanned WSIs, while supporting various tasks.

1. Introduction

In recent years, with advancements in computational
power and the digitization of pathology, a wide range of
models have been developed to assist pathologists in their
diagnostic tasks. At the patch level, these include CLIP
[39]-based models like CONCH [34] and PathGen-CLIP
[47], DINOv2 [37]-based models like Virchow2 [65] and
UNI [12], and LMMs like PathAsst [48], PathGen-LLaVA
[47], Quilt-LLaVA [42], and PathChat [35], which support
tasks such as multi-turn conversations. At the WSI level,
models like Prov-GigaPath [58] and HIPT [11] are developed for WSI classification, while models such as HistGen
[15] and WsiCaption [9] are used to generate WSI reports.
In this work, we propose CPath-Omni, a multimodal
foundation model designed to unify patch-level and WSIlevel analysis. CPath-Omni can perform diverse tasks such
as VQA, classification, captioning, and visual referring
prompting. By integrating these two levels of analysis and

Pathology plays a pivotal role in modern medicine, serving
as the foundation for diagnosing and understanding diseases
[30]. However, pathology requires significant human effort
to conduct precise and accurate interpretations of images
that can be as large as 100,000 × 100,000 pixels.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

10360

