This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Thinking in Space: How Multimodal Large Language Models
See, Remember, and Recall Spaces
Jihan Yang1 * Shusheng Yang1∗ Anjali W. Gupta1∗ Rilyn Han2∗ Li Fei-Fei3
1
New York University 2 Yale University 3 Stanford University
Project Page

Evaluation Code

See a video of an apartment

Saining Xie1

VSI-Bench

a laboratory

a factory

Remember?
Multimodal LLM’s “cognitive map” of the space

Cabinet

Door Chair Sink

First Aid
Cabinet

Trash
Can

Box

Light Ceiling
Printer Basket Keyboard
Switch Light

TV

Blanket Fridge Table

Pan

Milling Plastic Rolling
Machine Drum
Stand

Stool

Wooden
Brush

Workbench

Recall?
What is the distance between the
keyboard and the TV, in meters?

How many cabinet(s) are in this room?

What is the height of the stool, in cm?

Figure 1. Whether at home, in the workplace, or elsewhere, the ability to perceive a space, remember its layout, and retrieve this spatial
information to answer questions on demand is a key aspect of visual-spatial intelligence. Recent Multimodal LLMs can understand general
videos, but can they “think spatially” when presented with a video recording of an environment? Can they build an accurate, implicit
“cognitive map” that allows them to answer questions about a space? What are the strengths and limitations of using MLLMs to enhance
spatial intelligence? We dig into these questions by setting up video data for MLLMs to watch, building a VQA benchmark to check their
recall, and examining what the MLLMs actually remember and understand.

Abstract
Humans possess the visual-spatial intelligence to remember spaces from sequential visual observations. However, can Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
trained on million-scale video datasets also “think in
space” from videos? We present a novel video-based
visual-spatial intelligence benchmark (VSI-Bench) of over
5,000 question-answer pairs, and find that MLLMs exhibit competitive—though subhuman—visual-spatial intel-

ligence. We probe models to express how they think in space
both linguistically and visually and find that while spatial reasoning capabilities remain the primary bottleneck
for MLLMs to reach higher benchmark performance, local
world models and spatial awareness do emerge within these
models. Notably, prevailing linguistic reasoning techniques
(e.g., chain-of-thought, self-consistency, tree-of-thoughts)
fail to improve performance, whereas explicitly generating cognitive maps during question-answering enhances
MLLMs’ spatial distance ability.

* Equal contribution.

10632

