This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DyCoke

: Dynamic Compression of Tokens for Fast Video Large Language Models
Keda Tao1,2

Can Qin3 Haoxuan You4 Yang Sui5 Huan Wang1,*
Westlake University 2 Xidian University
3
Salesforce AI Research 4 Columbia University 5 Rice University
https://github.com/KD-TAO/DyCoke
1

Language Response
Language Model 



Temporal Merging

Tokenizer t

’

Dynamic Pruning

 Prompt Input
Projector 
Vision Encoder g




Video Input

Figure 1. Left: We introduce DyCoke (dynamic compression of tokens), a training-free token compression method for fast video large
language models. The key innovation of DyCoke over its predecessors is to dynamically remove redundant tokens during the decoding
stage, squeezing both the temporal (video frames) and spatial redundancy in visual tokens. Right: Efﬁciency and performance comparison
of various training-free token pruning methods on MVBench [23] with LLaVA-OV-7B [18]. DyCoke surpasses the SoTA counterparts
(PruMerge [39], FastV [3]), with 1.5× inference speedup and a 1.4× reduction in memory usage relative to the baseline, while simultaneously
enhancing performance.

Abstract
Video large language models (VLLMs) have signiﬁcantly
advanced recently in processing complex video content. Yet,
their inference efﬁciency remains constrained because of the
high computational cost stemming from the thousands of visual tokens generated from the video inputs. We empirically
observe that, unlike single image inputs, VLLMs typically attend visual tokens from different frames at different decoding
iterations. This makes a one-shot pruning strategy prone to
removing important tokens by mistake. Motivated by this, we
present DyCoke, a training-free token compression method
to optimize token representation and accelerate VLLMs. DyCoke incorporates a plug-and-play temporal compression
module to minimize temporal redundancy by merging redundant tokens across frames and applying dynamic KV cache
reduction to prune spatially redundant tokens selectively. It
ensures high-quality inference by dynamically retaining the
critical tokens at each decoding step. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that DyCoke can outperform the prior
SoTA counterparts, achieving 1.5× inference speedup, and
1.4× memory reduction against the baseline VLLM, while
still improving the performance, with no training.

1. Introduction
Video large language models (VLLMs) have advanced signiﬁcantly in understanding diverse video contexts, primarily
because of their enhanced reasoning ability for complex multimodal information [4, 18, 22–25, 43, 49, 52]. Most current
VLLMs rely on sequential visual representations. When
dozens of video frames are fed into the language model
along with a language prompt, the video input is converted
into tens of thousands of tokens. Because of the quadratic
complexity of the attention mechanism, the inherent visual
redundancy across video frames leads to a dramatic surge
of computational complexity, resulting in prohibitive training and inference costs. Previous research [5, 6, 51, 54]
has largely focused on developing lighter large language
models (LLMs) with fewer parameters; however, this often
signiﬁcantly diminishes the complex reasoning capabilities
of these models. Consequently, how to reduce the number of
video tokens while maintaining model performance emerges

18992

∗ Corresponding author: wanghuan@westlake.edu.cn

