This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeDe: Detecting Backdoor Samples for SSL Encoders via Decoders
Sizai Hou1 , Songze Li2,3 , Duanyi Yao1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
2
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application,
Supervision and Management (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
shouac@connect.ust.hk, songzeli@seu.edu.cn, dyao@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is pervasively exploited
in training high-quality upstream encoders with a large
amount of unlabeled data. However, it is found to be susceptible to backdoor attacks merely via polluting a small
portion of training data. The victim encoders associate triggered inputs with target embeddings, e.g., mapping a triggered cat image to an airplane embedding, such that the
downstream tasks inherit unintended behaviors when the
trigger is activated. Emerging backdoor attacks have shown
great threats across different SSL paradigms such as contrastive learning and CLIP, yet limited research is devoted
to defending against such attacks, and existing defenses fall
short in detecting advanced stealthy backdoors. To address
the limitations, we propose a novel detection mechanism,
DeDe, which detects the activation of backdoor mappings
caused by triggered inputs on victim encoders. Specifically,
DeDe trains a decoder for any given SSL encoder using an
auxiliary dataset (which can be out-of-distribution or even
slightly poisoned), so that for any triggered input that misleads the encoder into the target embedding, the decoder
generates an output image significantly different from the
input. DeDe leverages the discrepancy between the input
and the decoded output to identify potential backdoor misbehavior during inference. We empirically evaluate DeDe
on both contrastive learning and CLIP models against various types of backdoor attacks. Our results demonstrate
promising detection effectiveness over various advanced attacks and superior performance compared over state-ofthe-art detection methods.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL), as a crucial learning
paradigm, is pervasively exploited in miscellaneous domains like computer vision and natural language processing
[16, 22]. Its capability of learning without human-annotated
data greatly benefits on building large foundation models

20675

and pre-training encoders via large-scale datasets. However, the obtained dataset from the Internet and the reliance
on outsourced third-party models introduce enormous risks
to the users, particularly in the form of backdoor attacks
(or targeted attacks) [6, 14, 33]. While backdoor attacks
have predominantly been studied in the context of supervised learning, there has been a notable increase in the occurrence of backdoor attacks in SSL in recent years.
In the context of a pre-trained encoder, the primary objective of an SSL backdoor attack is to match the triggered
inputs toward designated embeddings. The secondary objective is to preserve the model’s normal functionality. In
typical SSL paradigms, such as contrastive learning (CL)
[5, 18] and masked autoencoders (MAE) [19], input images are augmented in multiple views to facilitate the learning of similarities between embeddings, which significantly
undermines the primary goal of backdoor attacks. But as
backdoor methodologies develop, attacking CL is proved
feasible by methodologies like [23, 25, 33, 43]. Moreover,
attacks are becoming progressively more stealthy at both the
image level [10, 11] and the embedding level [36]. Image
triggers are designed to be imperceptible to human inspection, while the stealthy embeddings are crafted to blend in
with the target-class embeddings. This characteristic renders the detection of attacks particularly challenging.
Without any information about the pre-training dynamics and datasets, significant challenges arise for backdoor
detection in an SSL encoder. Even if the poisoned pretraining dataset is given, the lack of label reference exacerbates the difficulty of detection. In the absence of any indication of backdoor existence, a model user might not realize
when the hidden backdoor already affects the downstream
tasks. The challenge lies in how to detect and identify a
backdoor in the SSL settings, and what is the least information a defender needs to learn. For the above reasons, there
are insufficient countermeasures against backdoor attacks
in CL [12, 30]. Similar to CL, CLIP is also susceptible to
backdoor attacks due to its language supervision nature of

