This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

World-consistent Video Diffusion with Explicit 3D Modeling
Qihang Zhang1,2 * Shuangfei Zhai1 Miguel Angel Bautista Martin1
Alexander Toshev1 Josh Susskind1 Jiatao Gu1
1
Apple 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Kevin Miao1

Figure 1. WVD predicts 6D videos from an image, unifying various 3D tasks with a single diffusion model.

Abstract
Recent advancements in diffusion models have set new
benchmarks in image and video generation, enabling realistic visual synthesis across single- and multi-frame contexts. However, these models still struggle with efficiently
and explicitly generating 3D-consistent content. To address
this, we propose World-consistent Video Diffusion (WVD),
a novel framework that incorporates explicit 3D supervision
using XYZ images, which encode global 3D coordinates for
each image pixel. More specifically, we train a diffusion
transformer to learn the joint distribution of RGB and XYZ
frames. This approach supports multi-task adaptability via
a flexible inpainting strategy. For example, WVD can estimate XYZ frames from ground-truth RGB or generate novel
RGB frames using XYZ projections along a specified camera trajectory. In doing so, WVD unifies tasks like singleimage-to-3D generation, multi-view stereo, and cameracontrolled video generation. Our approach demonstrates
competitive performance across multiple benchmarks, providing a scalable solution for 3D-consistent video and im* Work done during internship at Apple MLR.

age generation with a single pretrained model. Our project
website is at https://zqh0253.github.io/wvd.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in deep generative models have
brought significant breakthroughs to the field of visual synthesis, with diffusion models [18, 46] emerging as the
state-of-the-art approach for high-quality image generation [9, 37]. These models have demonstrated remarkable
success in generating realistic images. By extending the
input from single-frame image to multiple frames, diffusion models have also been applied to tasks such as video
generation [1, 2, 4, 12, 15, 19, 20, 56] and multi-view image synthesis [11, 21, 26, 27, 42, 54, 62], where consistency across frames is crucial. In these applications, multiframe consistency is typically learned in an implicit manner, e.g., through the attention mechanism that captures relationships across frames. Despite their success, multi-view
(video) diffusion models face several limitations: they demand large amounts of data and significant computational
resources for training, and they lack explicit guarantees for

21685

