This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accelerating Multimodal Large Language Models by Searching Optimal
Vision Token Reduction
Shiyu Zhao1
Xiaofang Wang2

Zhenting Wang1
Felix Juefei-Xu2
Xide Xia2
Miao Liu2
2
2
Mingfu Liang
Ning Zhang
Dimitris N. Metaxas1
Licheng Yu2
1

Rutgers University

Abstract

2

Meta

Prevailing Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) encode the input image(s) as vision tokens and
feed them into the language backbone, similar to how Large
Language Models (LLMs) process the text tokens. However,
the number of vision tokens increases quadratically as the
image resolutions, leading to huge computational costs. In
this paper, we consider improving MLLM’s efficiency from
two scenarios, (I) Reducing computational cost without degrading the performance. (II) Improving the performance
with given budgets. We start with our main finding that
the ranking of each vision token sorted by attention scores
is similar in each layer except the first layer. Based on it,
we assume that the number of essential top vision tokens
does not increase along layers. Accordingly, for Scenario
I, we propose a greedy search algorithm (G-Search) to
find the least number of vision tokens to keep at each
layer from the shallow to the deep. Interestingly, G-Search
is able to reach the optimal reduction strategy based on
our assumption. For Scenario II, based on the reduction
strategy from G-Search, we design a parametric sigmoid
function (P-Sigmoid) to guide the reduction at each layer
of the MLLM, whose parameters are optimized by Bayesian
Optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our approach can significantly accelerate those popular
MLLMs, e.g. LLaVA, and InternVL2 models, by more than
2⇥ without performance drops. Our approach also far
outperforms other token reduction methods when budgets
are limited, achieving a better trade-off between efficiency
and effectiveness.

demonstrate that increasing the number of vision tokens by
using high resolution inputs significantly enhances the effectiveness of MLLMs. However, such large number of vision tokens leads to inefficiency of model inference, preventing MLLMs from real-world applications.
To address such inefficiency, prompt-agnostic approaches are proposed to reduce the number of vision tokens before feeding them into LLMs. Various approaches
have been proposed, including local attention pooling [20,
24, 32], re-samplers as compression layers [45, 52], or deformable convolutions [3], etc. One noticeable issue of
prompt-agnostic approaches is the ignorance of the input
text prompts from the user. Since different prompts may focus on different regions of the image, prompt-agnostic approaches are likely to preserve irrelevant vision tokens that
can be potentially further removed. As a remedy, promptaware methods are proposed to leverage text prompts in the
vision token reduction. For example, FastV [5], VTW [26],
and PDrop [44] remove vision tokens at certain layers of
the LLM within the MLLM. However, their token reductions are all designed with handcrafted rules that vary by
MLLMs. They also focus more on reducing the computational cost without performance drops, while not addressing how to assign computations for better effectiveness with
limited budgets. We believe the latter is in greater demand
in practical edge-device applications.
To address the aforementioned drawbacks, in this paper, we propose a prompt-aware approach via the automatic
search of optimal vision token reduction strategies for given
MLLMs. Moreover, we consider efficiency from two scenarios, i.e., (I) Reducing computational cost with minor performance drops, and (II) Improving the performance with
given budgets.
We first investigate correlations between vision tokens
and instruction tokens (i.e., text tokens provided by users).
Specifically, we sort the vision tokens of each layer based
on their attention scores to instruction tokens and calculate
the Kendall’s Tau correlation coefficient [17] between the
current layer and the next layer. Figures 1a and 1b illus-

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) usually
leverage a pre-trained vision encoder to encode the input
image(s) into vision tokens that are fed into pre-trained
Large Language Models (LLMs). Recent studies [25, 45]

29869

