This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stereo4D: Learning How Things Move in 3D from Internet Stereo Videos
Linyi Jin1,2
1

Google DeepMind

2

Richard Tucker1
Zhengqi Li1
David Fouhey3
Noah Snavely1∗
Aleksander Hołyński1∗
3

University of Michigan

New York University

∗

equal contribution

Figure 1. There is currently no scalable source of data for real-world, ground truth 3D motion paired with video. We present a framework for
mining such data from existing stereoscopic videos on the Internet, in the form of 3D point clouds with long-range world-space trajectories.
Our framework fuses and filters camera poses, dense depth maps, and 2D motion trajectories to produce high-quality, pseudo-metric point
clouds with long-term 3D motion trajectories, pictured above, for hundreds of thousands of video clips. We show how this data is useful in
learning a model that reasons about both 3D shape and motion in imagery.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Simultaneously predicting and understanding geometry and
motion—that is, dynamic 3D content—from images is a fundamental building block for computer vision, with applications ranging from robotic interaction and scene reconstruction to novel view synthesis of dynamic scenes. Recent work
has made remarkable progress in predicting static 3D structure from images [5, 100, 106], but modeling real-world 3D
motion—people gesturing, balls bouncing, leaves rustling in
the wind—remains a critical unsolved challenge for building
truly general models of the visual world.

Learning to understand dynamic 3D scenes from imagery is
crucial for applications ranging from robotics to scene reconstruction. Yet, unlike other problems where large-scale supervised training has enabled rapid progress, directly supervising methods for recovering 3D motion remains challenging
due to the fundamental difficulty of obtaining ground truth
annotations. We present a system for mining high-quality
4D reconstructions from internet stereoscopic, wide-angle
videos. Our system fuses and filters the outputs of camera
pose estimation, stereo depth estimation, and temporal tracking methods into high-quality dynamic 3D reconstructions.
We use this method to generate large-scale data in the form
of world-consistent, pseudo-metric 3D point clouds with
long-term motion trajectories. We demonstrate the utility of
this data by training a variant of DUSt3R to predict structure and 3D motion from real-world image pairs, showing
that training on our reconstructed data enables generalization to diverse real-world scenes. Project page and data at
https://stereo4d.github.io

10497

Recent breakthroughs in AI, from large language models [1, 89] to image generation [73] and static 3D reconstruction [5, 100, 106], demonstrate a consistent pattern: large
amounts of high-quality, realistic training data and scalable
architectures enable dramatic performance improvements. In
the realm of 3D reasoning, prior works [49, 74, 75, 100, 105]
have shown the value of large-scale training data for strong
zero-shot generalization within single-view or two-view
static scene settings. But applying this same formula to
dynamic 3D scenes (i.e., moving 3D structure) requires a

