This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SplatAD: Real-Time Lidar and Camera Rendering with 3D Gaussian Splatting for
Autonomous Driving
Georg Hess†,1,2

Carl Lindström†,1,2
1

Zenseact

Maryam Fatemi1
2

Christoffer Petersson1,2

Lennart Svensson2

Chalmers University of Technology

{firstname.lastname}@{zenseact.com, chalmers.se}

Figure 1. SplatAD is the first method capable of realistic camera and lidar rendering using 3D Gaussian Splatting. Whereas previous
methods are either fast or multi-modal, SplatAD enables real-time, high-quality rendering for both camera and lidar. In addition, SplatAD
can reach competitive performance, e.g., PSNR for image and Chamfer distance for point cloud, within minutes.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large-scale testing is essential to ensure the safety of autonomous robots, such as self-driving vehicles (SDVs), before real-world deployment. Data-driven methods that generate digital twins from collected logs offer a scalable way
to build diverse, realistic simulation environments for testing. Unlike real-world testing, which can be costly, timeintensive, and limited by physical constraints, simulation
enables rapid, low-cost exploration of multiple scenarios,
helping to optimize SDVs for safety, comfort, and efficiency.
Motivated by this, a multitude of methods have emerged
based on neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [25, 35, 36, 45] and
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [14, 43, 51].
Recent NeRF-based methods [35, 45] provide highfidelity sensor simulation jointly for both camera and lidar, matching the most common sensor rigs in popular autonomous driving (AD) datasets [1, 5, 38]. However, the
slow rendering speed of NeRF-based methods makes them
costly and challenging to use for large-scale testing. 3DGS
provides an attractive alternative to NeRFs, as its accelerated
rendering achieves comparable image realism while increasing inference speeds by an order of magnitude. Nevertheless,
3DGS-based methods for the AD setting [7, 43, 51] inherit
the limitation of only being able to render camera data, overlooking the lidar modality. The lidar’s ability to directly
perceive the 3D environment makes it a powerful tool in
modern AD stacks and, consequently, an important modality
to simulate.

Ensuring the safety of autonomous robots, such as selfdriving vehicles, requires extensive testing across diverse
driving scenarios. Simulation is a key ingredient for conducting such testing in a cost-effective and scalable way.
Neural rendering methods have gained popularity, as they
can build simulation environments from collected logs in a
data-driven manner. However, existing neural radiance field
(NeRF) methods for sensor-realistic rendering of camera
and lidar data suffer from low rendering speeds, limiting
their applicability for large-scale testing. While 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) enables real-time rendering, current
methods are limited to camera data and are unable to render lidar data essential for autonomous driving. To address
these limitations, we propose SplatAD, the first 3DGS-based
method for realistic, real-time rendering of dynamic scenes
for both camera and lidar data. SplatAD accurately models key sensor-specific phenomena such as rolling shutter
effects, lidar intensity, and lidar ray dropouts, using purposebuilt algorithms to optimize rendering efficiency. Evaluation
across three autonomous driving datasets demonstrates that
SplatAD achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality with up
to +2 PSNR for NVS and +3 PSNR for reconstruction while
increasing rendering speed over NeRF-based methods by an
order of magnitude. See here for our project page.

† These authors contributed equally to this work.

11982

