This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GliaNet: Adaptive Neural Network Structure Learning with Glia-Driven
Mengqiao Han1 Liyuan Pan2, * Xiabi Liu 2
1
College of Information Engineering, Northwest Agricultural and Forestry (A&F) University
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
hanmq@nwafu.edu.cn, {liyuan.pan, liuxiabi}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural networks derived from the M-P model have excelled in various visual tasks. However, as a simplified
simulation version of the brain neural pathway, their structures are locked during training, causing over-fitting and
over-parameterization. Although recent models have begun using the biomimetic concept and empirical pruning,
they still result in irrational pruning, potentially affecting
the accuracy of the model. In this paper, we introduce the
Glia unit, composed of oligodendrocytes (Oli) and astrocytes (Ast), to emulate the exact workflow of the mammalian
brain, thereby enhancing the biological plausibility of neural functions. Oli selects neurons involved in signal transmission during neural communication and, together with
Ast, adaptively optimizes the neural structure. Specifically,
we first construct the artificial Glia-Neuron (G-N) model,
which is formulated at the instance, group, and interaction
levels with adaptive and collaborative mechanisms. Then,
we construct GliaNet based on our G-N model, whose structure and connections can be continuously optimized during training. Experiments show that our GliaNet advances
state-of-the-art on multiple tasks while significantly reducing its parameters.

1. Introduction
The expansion of learnable parameters in artificial neural networks (ANNs) has contributed to their extraordinary
successes [11]. However, during training, the structures of
ANNs are fixed, which can induce over-fitting [5, 39] and
over-parameterization [3, 15] of the network. Although network structure learning methods, including but not limited
to Network Compression, Knowledge Distillation, Neural
Architecture Search (NAS), and Dynamic Neural Networks
(DyNN), aim to alleviate the issues mentioned above, they
still yield problems such as unstable performance and expensive computational costs [6, 41, 51, 52].
* corresponding author

Neurotransmitter: NT

Gliotransmitters: GT

NT optimized by GT

Neurotrophins

N

N

N

A

N

Pre-neuron

Post-neuron

Pre-neuron

Astrocyte

Post-neuron

(a) M-P model
N
N
Pre-neurons

N
N

O

(b) A-N model
N
A

N

Astrocyte

Post-neuron

N

Oligodendrocyte Winning pre-neuron

(c) G-N model (Ours)
Figure 1. Comparison of basic units of neuronal models. (a) The
M-P model [33]. The connection between neurons is unidirectional propagation. (b) The Astrocyte-Neuron model [16, 17]. The
connection of the pre-neuron is modulated by Ast through bidirectional communication and subsequently transmitted to the postneuron. (c) Our G-N model. Glia, consisting of Oli and Ast, as key
supportive elements for neuronal function, exhibits the optimization of the neural pathway. The winning pre-neuron, participating
in subsequent propagation, is selected by Oli. Then, the winning
connection is modulated by Ast. %denotes the inhibitory neuron
not connected to Ast and post-neuron.

The aforementioned issues can be attributed to the MP model [33], serving as the basis for building artificial
perceptions. The M-P model is a simplified version of
inter-neuronal communication that restricts neurotransmitters (formulated as connections or weights in a network)
to unidirectional propagation, i.e., from the pre-neuron to
the post-neuron (see Fig. 1a). Several researchers have
conducted preliminary explorations by incorporating an astrocyte into the nervous system to propose an artificial
Astrocyte-Neuron (A-N) model [16, 17]. In this model,
astrocytes facilitate connections between pre- and postneurons through bidirectional communication with connections released by the pre-neurons (see Fig. 1b). During
training, astrocytes can adaptively modulate network connections in different tasks.

25240

