This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Contrastive Adversarial Training for Learning Robust
Features from Semi-supervised Data
Lilin Zhang, Chengpei Wu, Ning Yang*
School of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
zhanglilin@stu.scu.edu.cn, wuchengpei@stu.scu.edu.cn, yangning@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

  
     
        
  

Existing adversarial training (AT) methods often suffer from
incomplete perturbation, meaning that not all non-robust
features are perturbed when generating adversarial examples (AEs). This results in residual correlations between
non-robust features and labels, leading to suboptimal learning of robust features. However, achieving complete perturbation—perturbing as many non-robust features as possible, is challenging due to the difﬁculty in distinguishing robust and non-robust features and the sparsity of labeled data. To address these challenges, we propose a
novel approach called Weakly Supervised Contrastive Adversarial Training (WSCAT). WSCAT ensures complete perturbation for improved learning of robust features by disrupting correlations between non-robust features and labels through complete AE generation over partially labeled
data, grounded in information theory. Extensive theoretical
analysis and comprehensive experiments on widely adopted
benchmarks validate the superiority of WSCAT. Our code is
available at https://github.com/zhang-lilin/WSCAT.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success, but research has revealed their vulnerability to adversarial examples (AEs), which are generated by subtly
perturbing natural samples [4, 11, 20, 27]. The threat posed
by AEs has spurred ongoing efforts to enhance adversarial robustness—i.e., a model’s accuracy on AEs—with adversarial training (AT) being widely recognized as the most
promising defense strategy [3, 44]. AT employs a min-max
game, where attacks maximize adversarial loss by generating AEs, while defenses minimize adversarial loss by adjusting the classiﬁer, ultimately training a robust model capable of withstanding worst-case attacks.
Existing AT methods can be categorized into two groups
based on how AEs are generated: point-wise AT [18, 19,
* Corresponding author.









 



 







(a) Incomplete perturbation

  
     
        
  
   
   





 

 

   

(b) Complete perturbation

Figure 1. Illustration of non-robust features and their perturbations. For a digit image, color and size are the non-robust features
correlating to the labels, while shape is the robust feature causing
the labels.

31, 32, 40], which perturbs individual natural samples independently, and distributional AT [26, 41], which samples
AEs from a perturbed distribution of natural samples. Despite their success, these AT methods still face challenges
in robust features learning. Recent studies suggest that the
existence of AEs stems from the presence of non-robust features in natural data [11], which may exhibit statistical correlations with labels and can be manipulated by AEs. In
contrast, robust features have a strong causal relationship
with labels and remain unchanged under perturbation constraints.
However, current AT methods often blindly search for
adversarial perturbations within an -ball deﬁned by a norm
constraint [5], leading to incomplete perturbation, where
not all non-robust features are perturbed. The unperturbed
non-robust features retain their correlation with labels, reducing adversarial robustness. Ideally, AEs should eliminate all correlations between non-robust features and labels through complete perturbation, ensuring that the model
learns only robust features. For example, in Fig. 1, color and
size are the non-robust features of digit images, while shape
is the robust feature. In Fig. 1a, only the color of a digit
image is modiﬁed, while size remains unchanged, allowing
size to still correlate with labels. In contrast, Fig. 1b illustrates complete perturbation, where both color and size are
altered, forcing the model to rely solely on shape as a robust

25718

