This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WeakMCN: Multi-task Collaborative Network for Weakly Supervised Referring
Expression Comprehension and Segmentation
Silin Cheng1* , Yang Liu2 *, Xinwei He3 , Sebastien Ourselin2 , Lei Tan4† , Gen Luo5†
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 King’s College London 3 Huazhong Agricultural University
4
National University of Singapore 5 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Weakly supervised referring expression comprehension (WREC) and segmentation (WRES) aim to learn object
grounding based on a given expression using weak supervision signals like image-text pairs. While these tasks have
traditionally been modeled separately, we argue that they
can benefit from joint learning in a multi-task framework.
To this end, we propose WeakMCN, a novel multi-task
collaborative network that effectively combines WREC and
WRES with a dual-branch architecture. Specifically, the
WREC branch is formulated as anchor-based contrastive
learning, which also acts as a teacher to supervise the
WRES branch. In WeakMCN, we propose two innovative
designs to facilitate multi-task collaboration, namely
Dynamic Visual Feature Enhancement (DVFE) and Collaborative Consistency Module (CCM). DVFE dynamically
combines various pre-trained visual knowledge to meet
different task requirements, while CCM promotes cross-task
consistency from the perspective of optimization. Extensive
experimental results on three popular REC and RES
benchmarks, i.e., RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg,
consistently demonstrate performance gains of WeakMCN
over state-of-the-art single-task alternatives, e.g., up to
3.91% and 13.11% on RefCOCO for WREC and WRES
tasks, respectively. Furthermore, experiments also validate
the strong generalization ability of WeakMCN in both
semi-supervised REC and RES settings against existing
methods, e.g., +8.94% for semi-REC and +7.71% for
semi-RES on 1% RefCOCO. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/MRUIL/WeakMCN .

Figure 1. Performance comparison between single-task baselines and our multi-task network (WeakMCN). WeakMCN not
only unifies two tasks into a single network, but also obviously
outperforms common single-task baselines.

ization and pixel-wise segmentation for detailed illustration [18, 39, 45, 66]. These tasks are crucial in computer
vision due to applications in various areas like human-robot
interactions [2] and vision-language navigation [1]. Despite
the significance, most existing methods [10, 20, 64, 72, 75]
rely on full supervision, requiring extensive fine-grained annotations that are costly and time-consuming, thereby limiting their practical applicability.
To overcome the above limitations, weakly supervised
REC (WREC) and RES (WRES) have attracted increasing attention [53]. As shown in Fig. 2(a), popular WREC
approaches [16, 37] often adopt an anchor-text matching
framework to effectively leverage coarse annotations by
contrastive learning. Different from WREC, WRES is typically formulated as a pseudo-label learning process [30].
As shown in Fig. 2(b), WRES adopts a pseudo-labeling
model to produce coarse-grained masks for weakly supervised learning. Despite these advancements, WREC and
WRES have long been regarded as two separated tasks, and
their multi-task learning is still under-explored.
In this paper, we argue that these two tasks can be jointly
learned in a single network, similar to the successful practices in fully supervised REC and RES [3, 25, 31, 36, 49].
Nevertheless, their joint learning in a weakly supervised setting is non-trivial due to the multi-task conflict. Firstly, the
modeling and learning of two tasks are distinct or even con-

1. Introduction
Referring expression comprehension (REC) and segmentation (RES) aim to locate the target visual instance described
by a referring expression, using a bounding box for local* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

9175

