This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnomalyNCD: Towards Novel Anomaly Class Discovery in Industrial Scenarios
Ziming Huang1,∗ Xurui Li1,∗ Haotian Liu1,∗ Feng Xue4 Yuzhe Wang1 Yu Zhou1,2,3,†
1
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Smart Internet Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Wuhan JingCe Electronic Group Co., LTD
4
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento

Abstract

anomaly categories that are constantly emerging.
Several anomaly clustering approaches [1, 28, 40] have
been proposed to address the multi-class anomaly classification task, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). These approaches
typically employ a two-step process: anomaly localization
followed by feature extraction from the anomalous regions
for clustering. However, the effectiveness of these methods is limited when dealing with homogeneous anomaly
patterns that exhibit differences in shape, appearance, and
location, primarily due to the lack of prior knowledge of
anomaly types. Therefore, our study aims to classify unseen
anomalies by leveraging prior knowledge of seen anomalies, thereby overcoming the limitations of current methods.
Through detailed investigation, we find two primary obstacles in leveraging prior knowledge of known anomalies,
which prevent existing classification network to industrial
anomalies. ❶ Non-prominence Anomalies: Classification
in natural scenes assumes that subjects are centered in the
images so that networks easily extract their semantics, while
this assumption is not true in industrial scenarios. ❷ Lowsemantics Anomalies: In contrast to natural objects, industrial anomalies are typically less semantic, making the network hard to focus on anomalies but prone to background.
In this paper, we overcome both obstructions and propose a multi-class anomaly classification network that
aligns with the concept of novel class discovery (NCD),
as illustrated in 1 (c). This network learns to classify isolated anomalies by focusing the model’s attention on real
anomaly regions. Firstly, to address the non-prominence
issue, we propose a main element binarization (MEBin)
method. MEBin isolates the primary anomaly regions by
extracting them from anomaly detection (AD) results. This
binarization process alleviates the negative impact of errors
within AD results on the subsequent multi-class anomaly
learning, enabling compatibility with various AD algorithms. Secondly, to tackle low-semantics anomalies, we
propose mask-guided representation learning. It leverages
the anomaly masks generated by MEBin to direct the network’s attention specifically to individual anomalous re-

Recently, multi-class anomaly classification has garnered increasing attention. Previous methods directly cluster anomalies but often struggle due to the lack of anomalyprior knowledge. Acquiring this knowledge faces two issues: the non-prominent and weak-semantics anomalies.
In this paper, we propose AnomalyNCD, a multi-class
anomaly classification network compatible with different
anomaly detection methods. To address the non-prominence
of anomalies, we design main element binarization (MEBin)
to obtain anomaly-centered images, ensuring anomalies are
learned while avoiding the impact of incorrect detections.
Next, to learn anomalies with weak semantics, we design
mask-guided representation learning, which focuses on isolated anomalies guided by masks and reduces confusion
from erroneous inputs through corrected pseudo labels. Finally, to enable flexible classification at both region and image levels, we develop a region merging strategy that determines the overall image category based on the classified anomaly regions. Our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art works on the MVTec AD and MTD datasets. Compared with the current methods, AnomalyNCD combined
with zero-shot anomaly detection method achieves a 10.8%
F1 gain, 8.8% NMI gain, and 9.5% ARI gain on MVTec AD,
and 12.8% F1 gain, 5.7% NMI gain, and 10.8% ARI gain
on MTD. Code is available at https://github.com/HUSTSLOW/AnomalyNCD.

1. Introduction
In recent years, industrial anomaly detection [22, 24, 31, 53]
has garnered remarkable performance. It locates visual
anomalies on industrial products but without recognizing
fine-grained anomaly categories. For downstream anomaly
treatments, it is necessary to recognize the anomaly classes,
such as fracture, ablation, etc., and even discover novel
∗ Contributed Equally. † Corresponding Author.

4755

