This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SemanticDraw: Towards Real-Time Interactive Content Creation
from Image Diffusion Models
Jaerin Lee1
Daniel Sungho Jung2,3∗
Kanggeon Lee1
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2,3
1
2
ASRI, Department of ECE, Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence,
3
SNU-LG AI Research Center, Seoul National University, Korea
{ironjr,dqj5182,dlrkdrjs97,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. Overview. Our S EMANTIC D RAW is a sub-second (0.64 seconds) solution for region-based text-to-image generation. This
streaming architecture enables an interactive application framework, dubbed semantic palette, where image is generated in near instant
interactivity based on online user commands of hand-drawn semantic masks.

Abstract
We introduce SemanticDraw, a new paradigm of interactive
content creation where high-quality images are generated
in near real-time from given multiple hand-drawn regions,
each encoding prescribed semantic meaning. In order to
maximize the productivity of content creators and to fully realize their artistic imagination, it requires both quick interactive interfaces and fine-grained regional controls in their
tools. Despite astonishing generation quality from recent
diffusion models, we find that existing approaches for regional controllability are very slow (52 seconds for 512 ×
512 image) while not compatible with acceleration methods
such as LCM, blocking their huge potential in interactive

content creation. From this observation, we build our solution for interactive content creation in two steps: (1) we
establish compatibility between region-based controls and
acceleration techniques for diffusion models, maintaining
high fidelity of multi-prompt image generation with ×10 reduced number of inference steps, (2) we increase the generation throughput with our new multi-prompt stream batch
pipeline, enabling low-latency generation from multiple,
region-based text prompts on a single RTX 2080 Ti GPU.
Our proposed framework is generalizable to any existing
diffusion models and acceleration schedulers, allowing subsecond (0.64 seconds) image content creation application
upon well-established image diffusion models. The code is
https://github.com/ironjr/semantic-draw.

13021

