This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blind Bitstream-corrupted Video Recovery via Metadata-guided Diffusion Model
Shuyun Wang1,2 Hu Zhang2 Xin Shen1 Dadong Wang2 Xin Yu1 *
1
The University of Queensland 2 Data61, CSIRO, Australia
{shuyun.wang, xin.yu}@uq.edu.au

Frame 015, “396680839c”, YouTube-VOS

Ground Truth

Corrupted Video

Our Recovery Video

Our Predict Mask (Pasted)

Corrupted Video

Our Recovery Video

Figure 1. Blind Bitstream-corrupted Video Recovery. Our method achieves superior recovery without giving any predefined masks
during inference and precisely predicts the location of corrupted regions.

Abstract
Bitstream-corrupted video recovery aims to fill in realistic video content due to bitstream corruption during video
storage or transmission. Most existing methods typically
assume that the predefined masks of the corrupted regions
are known in advance. However, manually annotating these
masks is laborious and time-consuming, limiting the applicability of existing methods in real-world scenarios. Therefore, we expect to relax this assumption by defining a new

blind video recovery setting where the recovery of corrupted
regions does not rely on predefined masks. There are two
significant challenges in this setting: (i) without predefined
masks, how accurately can a model identify the regions requiring recovery? (ii) how to recover contents from extensive and irregular regions, especially when large portions of
frames are severely degraded? To address these challenges,
we introduce a Metadata-Guided Diffusion Model, dubbed
M-GDM. To enable a diffusion model focusing on the corrupted regions, we leverage intrinsic video metadata as a
corruption indicator and design a dual-stream metadata encoder. This encoder first embeds the motion vectors and

* Corresponding author

22975

