This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhysVLM: Enabling Visual Language Models to Understand Robotic Physical
Reachability
Weijie Zhou1,2 , Manli Tao2 , Chaoyang Zhao2,3,† , Haiyun Guo2 ,
Honghui Dong1 , Ming Tang2 , Jinqiao Wang1,2,3,4,†
1
School of Traffic and Transportation, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
ObjectEye Inc. 4 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intellectual Property & Big Data,
Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University
†Corresponding authors:

chaoyang.zhao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, jqwang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

1. Introduction

Abstract

Understanding the environment and a robot’s physical
reachability is crucial for task execution. While state-ofthe-art vision-language models (VLMs) excel in environmental perception, they often generate inaccurate or impractical responses in embodied visual reasoning tasks due
to a lack of understanding of robotic physical reachability.
To address this issue, we propose a unified representation
of physical reachability across diverse robots, i.e., SpacePhysical Reachability Map (S-P Map), and PhysVLM, a
vision-language model that integrates this reachability information into visual reasoning. Specifically, the S-P Map
abstracts a robot’s physical reachability into a generalized
spatial representation, independent of specific robot configurations, allowing the model to focus on reachability features rather than robot-specific parameters. Subsequently,
PhysVLM extends traditional VLM architectures by incorporating an additional feature encoder to process the S-P
Map, enabling the model to reason about physical reachability without compromising its general vision-language capabilities. To train and evaluate PhysVLM, we constructed
a large-scale multi-robot dataset, Phys100K, and a challenging benchmark, EQA-phys, which includes tasks for
six different robots in both simulated and real-world environments. Experimental results demonstrate that PhysVLM
outperforms existing models, achieving a 14% improvement
over GPT-4o on EQA-phys and surpassing advanced embodied VLMs such as RoboMamba and SpatialVLM on the
RoboVQA-val and OpenEQA benchmarks. Additionally, the
S-P Map shows strong compatibility with various VLMs,
and its integration into GPT-4o-mini yields a 7.1% performance improvement.

Embodied QA Can robot pick up the bowl now?
GPT4o:
Yes, the bowl is placed on a flat surface and is accessible.
PhysVLM:
No, the bowl is not within the robot arm’s reachable space.
Task Planning Task goal is to put the can into the bowl, what are
the next steps?
GPT4o:
Execution failure
Picking up the can and place it inside the bowl.
PhysVLM:
1-Move close to the can. 2-Pick up the can. 3-Place the can into
the bowl. 4- Down.

Figure 1. Existing VLM models, such as GPT-4o, may generate inaccurate or impractical responses due to poor comprehension of robotic physical reachability. The proposed PhysVLM
integrates vision-language capabilities with an understanding of
robotic physical reachability.

Accurate perception of physical reachability is essential
for robots to perform tasks effectively. Similar to how humans adjust their actions based on bodily conditions and
environmental factors, robots must account for their physical reachability within an environment to ensure efficient
and reliable task execution. For instance, in grasping tasks,

6940

