This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Alexnet to Transformers:
Measuring the Non-linearity of Deep Neural Networks
with Affine Optimal Transport
Quentin Bouniot⋆,1,2,3,4 Ievgen Redko⋆,5 Anton Mallasto6 Charlotte Laclau1
Oliver Struckmeier7 Karol Arndt7,8 Markus Heinonen9 Ville Kyrki7 Samuel Kaski9,10
1

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France, 2 Technical University of Munich,
3
Helmholtz Munich, 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), 5 Noah’s Ark Lab, Paris,
6
Readpeak, 7 Aalto University, Finland, Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Automation,
8
Nomagic, 9 Aalto University, Finland, Department of Computer Science,
10
University of Manchester, UK, Department of Computer Science

Abstract
In the last decade, we have witnessed the introduction of
several novel deep neural network (DNN) architectures exhibiting ever-increasing performance across diverse tasks.
Explaining the upward trend of their performance, however,
remains difficult as different DNN architectures of comparable depth and width – common factors associated with their
expressive power – may exhibit a drastically different performance even when trained on the same dataset. In this paper,
we introduce the concept of the non-linearity signature of
DNN, the first theoretically sound solution for approximately
measuring the non-linearity of deep neural networks. Built
upon a score derived from closed-form optimal transport
mappings, this signature provides a better understanding of
the inner workings of a wide range of DNN architectures
and learning paradigms, with a particular emphasis on the
computer vision task. We provide extensive experimental results that highlight the practical usefulness of the proposed
non-linearity signature and its potential for long-reaching
implications. The code for our work is available at https:
//github.com/qbouniot/AffScoreDeep.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are undoubtedly the most
powerful AI models currently available [17, 29, 33, 35, 54].
Their performance on many tasks, including natural language processing (NLP) [23] and computer vision [20], is
already on par or exceeds that of a human being. One of the
reasons explaining such progress is of course the increasing
⋆ Equal contribution.

computational resources [43, 57]. Another one is the endeavour for finding ever more efficient neural architectures
pursued by researchers over the last decade. As of today,
the transformer architecture [65] has firmly imposed itself
as a number one choice for most, if not all, of the recent
breakthroughs [3, 44, 63] in machine learning.
Limitations But why transformers are more capable than
other architectures? Answering this question requires finding a meaningful measure to compare the different famous
models over time gauging the trend of their intrinsic capacity.
For such a comparison to be informative, it is particularly appropriate to consider the computer vision field that produced
many of the landmark neural architectures improving upon
each other over the years. Indeed, the decade-long revival
of deep learning started with Alexnet’s [31] architecture,
the winner of the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge [50] in 2012. By achieving a significant improvement over the traditional approaches, Alexnet was the first
truly deep neural network to be trained on a dataset of such
scale, suggesting that deeper models were likely to bring
even more gains. In the following years, researchers proposed novel ways to train deeper models with hundreds of
layers [21, 28, 55, 59] pushing the performance frontier even
further. The AI research landscape then reached a turning
point with the proposal of transformers [65], starting their
unprecedented dominance first in NLP and then in computer
vision [9]. Surprisingly, transformers are not particularly
deep, and the size of their landmark vision architecture is
comparable to that of Alexnet, and this despite a significant performance gap between the two. Ultimately, this
gap should be explained by the differences in the expressive power [18] of the two models: a term used to denote
the ability of a DNN to approximate functions of a certain

25250

