This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gazing Into Missteps: Leveraging Eye-Gaze for Unsupervised
Mistake Detection in Egocentric Videos of Skilled Human Activities
Michele Mazzamuto1∗ , Antonino Furnari1∗ , Yoichi Sato2 , Giovanni Maria Farinella1
1
University of Catania, Catania, Italy
michele.mazzamuto@phd.unict.it, antonino.furnari@unict.it, giovanni.farinella@unict.it
2

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
*Co-first authors.

Place water container

Abstract
We address the challenge of unsupervised mistake detection
in egocentric video of skilled human activities through the
analysis of gaze signals. While traditional methods rely on
manually labeled mistakes, our approach does not require
mistake annotations, hence overcoming the need of domainspecific labeled data. Based on the observation that eye
movements closely follow object manipulation activities, we
assess to what extent eye-gaze signals can support mistake detection, proposing to identify deviations in attention
patterns measured through a gaze tracker with respect to
those estimated by a gaze prediction model. Since predicting gaze in video is characterized by high uncertainty, we
propose a novel gaze completion task, where eye fixations
are predicted from visual observations and partial gaze trajectories, and contribute a novel gaze completion approach
which explicitly models correlations between gaze information and local visual tokens. Inconsistencies between predicted and observed gaze trajectories act as an indicator to
identify mistakes. Experiments highlight the effectiveness
of the proposed approach in different settings, with relative gains up to +14%, +11%, and +5% in EPIC-Tent,
HoloAssist and IndustReal respectively, remarkably matching results of supervised approaches without seeing any labels. We further show that gaze-based analysis is particularly useful in the presence of skilled actions, low action
execution confidence, and actions requiring hand-eye coordination and object manipulation skills. Our method is
ranked first on the HoloAssist Mistake Detection challenge.

Correct Action Execution

Wrong Action Execution

video

predicted trajectory

Mistake
Conv

time

Visual Local Token

...

Conv

Gaze Token

partial gaze trajectory

(a) Input

(b) Gaze Completion

Correct

(c) Compare with GT

Figure 1. Top: gaze trajectories of a correct and wrong execution
of the “place water container” action, together with gaze fixation
maps averaged across many action instances. Note the higher variability exhibited by wrong executions. Bottom: (a) The proposed
unsupervised mistake detection method assumes as input a video
with a partial gaze trajectory on the initial part of the video. (b) A
gaze completion model predicts a gaze trajectory for the remaining part of the video, conditioned on the input video and the partial
trajectory. (c) A mistake is detected if the predicted trajectory is
significantly different from the observed one, suggesting a deviation from the expected attention patterns.

through Augmented Reality. In order to provide timely assistance, wearable devices should be able to identify moments in which the user makes mistakes or is confused and
requires help [7]. If such instances are properly detected,
the AI system can proactively offer contextual information
or suggestions on how to best carry out the task at hand [42].
Previous works tackled the problem of detecting mistakes from a fully supervised perspective, where mistake
instances were labeled in egocentric video and machine
learning algorithms were trained to discriminate between
video segments of correct action executions and incorrect
ones [34, 42]. Such a fully supervised approach has two
main downsides: 1) It is domain-dependent, hence requiring
an accurate characterization of what a mistake is, depending
on the context (e.g., a mistake in a kitchen is different from

1. Introduction
Smart glasses are gaining more and more popularity, with
various existing products capable of supporting the user

8310

