This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CXPMRG-Bench: Pre-training and Benchmarking for X-ray Medical Report
Generation on CheXpert Plus Dataset
Xiao Wang1 , Fuling Wang1 , Yuehang Li1 , Qingchuan Ma1 , Shiao Wang1 , Bo Jiang1 *, Jin Tang1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
{xiaowang, jiangbo, tangjin}@ahu.edu.cn
{e23201049, e23201112, e02114334}@stu.ahu.edu.cn, wsa1943230570@126.com

Abstract
X-ray image-based medical report generation (MRG)
is a pivotal area in artificial intelligence that can significantly reduce diagnostic burdens and patient wait times.
Despite significant progress, we believe that the task has
reached a bottleneck due to the limited benchmark datasets
and the existing large models’ insufficient capability enhancements in this specialized domain. Specifically, the
recently released CheXpert Plus dataset lacks comparative evaluation algorithms and their results, providing only
the dataset itself. This situation makes the training, evaluation, and comparison of subsequent algorithms challenging. Thus, we conduct a comprehensive benchmarking of existing mainstream X-ray report generation models
and large language models (LLMs), on the CheXpert Plus
dataset. We believe that the proposed benchmark can provide a solid comparative basis for subsequent algorithms
and serve as a guide for researchers to quickly grasp the
state-of-the-art models in this field. More importantly, we
propose a large model for the X-ray image report generation using a multi-stage pre-training strategy, including
self-supervised autoregressive generation and Xray-report
contrastive learning, and supervised fine-tuning. Extensive
experimental results indicate that the autoregressive pretraining based on Mamba effectively encodes X-ray images,
and the image-text contrastive pre-training further aligns
the feature spaces, achieving better experimental results.
Source code can be found on https://github.com/
Event-AHU/Medical_Image_Analysis.

1. Introduction
X-ray image based Medical Report Generation (MRG)
is a critical research problem in artificial intelligence, which
targets describing the findings or impressions from the given
X-ray data using natural language. The successful imple*

Corresponding Author: Bo Jiang

mentation of this task can significantly reduce the diagnostic burden on physicians, decrease patient wait times,
and foster the positive application of artificial intelligence.
However, the path to progress in this direction is not smooth
sailing, there remain formidable challenges that need to be
overcome. The challenging issues include image interpretation, data annotation, heterogeneity issues, consistency and
standardization of reports, diversity and variability of diseases, interpretability of algorithms, etc. How to address
these challenges further and improve the quality of medical
report generation remains an urgent research problem.
After revisiting the mainstream algorithms of X-ray image medical report generation, we find that datasets like
IU X-ray and MIMIC-CXR are widely used for the training and evaluation of report generation models. However,
the IU X-ray only contains 7,470 images and 3,955 radiology reports samples, which is rather limited, especially in
the large model era. The recently released CheXpert Plus
dataset [6] is a large-scale dataset for the X-ray report generation, however, they did not release comparative methods,
making it difficult for subsequent algorithms to conduct experiments and comparisons on this dataset. Therefore, we
conduct a comprehensive benchmarking of existing opensourced mainstream X-ray report generation models, Large
Language Models (LLMs), and Vision-Language Models
(VLMs), termed CXPMRG-Bench, on the newly released
CheXpert Plus dataset, as shown in Fig. 1. The completion
of this work can also help researchers identify which large
models and algorithms are currently leading in the field of
X-ray report generation.
On the other hand, most mainstream algorithms follow the encoder-decoder framework which usually adopts
the vision encoder (e.g., ResNet [19], Transformer [42])
to process the given X-ray data and a text decoder (e.g.,
LSTM [21], GRU [12], Transformer [42]) for report generation. Along with the development of pre-trained LLM
and VLM, the quality of medical reports is enhanced significantly. There are already some researchers who exploit
the pre-training for the X-ray report generation. For exam-

5123

