This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionMap: Representing Multimodality in Human Pose Forecasting
Reyhaneh Hosseininejad ∗1
Megh Shukla ∗1
Saeed Saadatnejad 1
Mathieu Salzmann 1,2
Alexandre Alahi 1
1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
2
Swiss Data Science Centre (SDSC)
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

Observed Pose Sequence

Abstract
Human pose forecasting is inherently multimodal since multiple futures exist for an observed pose sequence. However,
evaluating multimodality is challenging since the task is illposed. Therefore, we first propose an alternative paradigm
to make the task well-posed. Next, while state-of-the-art
methods predict multimodality, this requires oversampling
a large volume of predictions. This raises key questions:
(1) Can we capture multimodality by efficiently sampling
fewer predictions? (2) Subsequently, which of the predicted
futures is more likely for an observed pose sequence? We
address these questions with MotionMap, a simple yet effective heatmap based representation for multimodality. We
extend heatmaps to represent a spatial distribution over the
space of all possible motions, where different local maxima
correspond to different forecasts for a given observation.
MotionMap can capture a variable number of modes per
observation and provide confidence measures for different
modes. Further, MotionMap allows us to introduce the notion of uncertainty and controllability over the forecasted
pose sequence. Finally, MotionMap captures rare modes
that are non-trivial to evaluate yet critical for safety. We
support our claims through multiple qualitative and quantitative experiments using popular 3D human pose datasets:
Human3.6M and AMASS, highlighting the strengths and limitations of our proposed method.
https://vita-epfl.github.io/MotionMap

1. Introduction
Human pose forecasting is the task of predicting the future
skeletal motion of a person given a set of past skeletal observations. The challenge arises from multimodality since
an infinite number of futures with different levels of motion
exist for the same observation. Typically, pose forecast∗ Equal Contribution

Forecasted Future 3

Forecasted Future 1

Forecasted Future 4
Forecasted Future 2

Figure 1. MotionMap uses heatmaps to depict a spatial distribution
over the space of motions. Local maxima imply that the corresponding motions have a higher likelihood of being a future motion for
an observed pose sequence. MotionMap not only predicts a variable number of modes with the corresponding confidence, but it
explicitly encodes rare modes that could otherwise be averaged out.

ing methods make a finite number of predictions to encompass these varied future motions. However, they can never
cover all possible modes; one can trivially construct a set of
ground-truth futures such that the model predictions have
large errors. Indeed, this is reminiscent of the no-free-lunch
theorem, which decries the existence of a universal learner.
Therefore, one may wonder: Is human pose forecasting truly
a solvable problem?
We therefore begin by proposing an alternate paradigm
to make human pose forecasting well-posed. Instead of attempting to learn an unbounded set of future motions, we
encourage the pose forecasting model to explicitly learn
future motions present in the observed data. Specifically,
models should use the training set to learn different transitions from input to output pose sequences and translate
them to any unseen test sample. By doing so the problem
is no longer ill-posed, but well-posed since for every input

22680

