This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Factored-NeuS: Reconstructing Surfaces, Illumination, and Materials of Possibly
Glossy Objects
Yue Fan1

Ningjing Fan1
Ivan Skorokhodov2
Oleg Voynov3,4
3,4
2
Evgeny Burnaev
Peter Wonka
Yiqun Wang1 *
1

Chongqing University

2

KAUST

Abstract
We develop a method that recovers the surface, materials,
and illumination of a scene from its posed multi-view images.
In contrast to prior work, it does not require any additional
data and can handle glossy objects or bright lighting. It
is a progressive inverse rendering approach, which consists of three stages. In the first stage, we reconstruct the
scene radiance and signed distance function (SDF) with a
novel regularization strategy for specular reflections. We
propose to explain a pixel color using both surface and volume rendering jointly, which allows for handling complex
view-dependent lighting effects for surface reconstruction.
In the second stage, we distill light visibility and indirect
illumination from the learned SDF and radiance field using
learnable mapping functions. Finally, we design a method
for estimating the ratio of incoming direct light reflected in a
specular manner and use it to reconstruct the materials and
direct illumination. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed method outperforms the current state-of-theart in recovering surfaces, materials, and lighting without
relying on any additional data.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing shape, material, and lighting from multiple views has wide applications in computer vision, virtual
reality, augmented reality, and shape analysis. The emergence of neural radiance fields [27] provides a framework
for high-quality scene reconstruction. Subsequently, many
works [11, 31, 42, 43, 49] have incorporated implicit neural
surfaces into neural radiance fields, further enhancing the
quality of surface reconstruction from multi-views. Recently,
several works [29, 38, 53, 55, 56] have utilized coordinatebased networks to predict materials and learned parameters
to represent illumination, followed by synthesizing image
color using physically-based rendering equations to achieve
material and lighting reconstruction. However, these meth* Corresponding author: yiqun.wang@cqu.edu.cn

3

Skoltech

4

Savva Ignatyev3

AIRI

ods typically do not fully consider the interdependence between different components, leading to the following issues
with glossy surfaces when using real data.
First, surfaces with glossy materials typically result in
highlights. The best current methods [11, 42, 43] for reconstructing implicit neural surfaces rarely consider material
information and directly reconstruct surfaces. The surface
parameters can then be frozen for subsequent material reconstruction. Since neural radiance fields typically model such
inconsistent colors as bumpy surfaces as shown in Fig. 1 left,
the artifacts from surface reconstruction will affect material
reconstruction if surfaces and materials are reconstructed
sequentially. Second, a glossy surface can affect the decomposition of the reflected radiance into a diffuse component and a specular component. Typically, the specular
component leaks into the diffuse component, resulting in
inaccurate modeling as shown in Fig. 1 right. Third, focusing on synthetic data makes it easier to incorporate complex
physically-based rendering algorithms [5, 45], but they may
not be robust enough to work on real data.
In this work, we consider the impact of glossy surfaces
on surface and material reconstruction based on implicit representation. Although existing methods based on explicit
representations, such as 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20],
have made progress in surface reconstruction [8, 16, 51] and
inverse rendering [12, 18, 21, 24, 36], the unique advantages
of implicit representations, such as low storage requirements
and smooth surface modeling, still make them worthy of
being explored as a separate research branch. This paper
focuses solely on methods based on implicit representation
and further extends research in reconstructing glossy objects.
To better handle glossy surfaces, we jointly use surface and
volume rendering. Volume rendering does not decompose
the reflected radiance, while surface rendering considers
the diffuse and specular radiance separately. The learned
SDF network enables accurate radiance reconstruction in volume rendering while also being capable of providing correct
surface information in surface rendering to model specular
and diffuse components into directional and non-directional
parts. Both work together to regularize accurate and ef-

21317

