This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parallelized Autoregressive Visual Generation
Yuqing Wang1 Shuhuai Ren3 Zhijie Lin2† Yujin Han1
Haoyuan Guo2 Zhenheng Yang2 Difan Zou1 Jiashi Feng2 Xihui Liu1 *
1
University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance 3 Peking University
(a) Non-local parallel generation of weakly dependent tokens

Abstract
1

5a 6a 7a

2

8a

Autoregressive models have emerged as a powerful approach for visual generation but suffer from slow inference speed due to their sequential token-by-token prediction process. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective approach for parallelized autoregressive visual generation that improves generation efficiency while preserving the advantages of autoregressive modeling. Our key
insight is that parallel generation depends on visual token dependencies—tokens with weak dependencies can be
generated in parallel, while strongly dependent adjacent
tokens are difficult to generate together, as their independent sampling may lead to inconsistencies. Based on this
observation, we develop a parallel generation strategy that
generates distant tokens with weak dependencies in parallel while maintaining sequential generation for strongly dependent local tokens. Our approach can be seamlessly integrated into standard autoregressive models without modifying the architecture or tokenizer. Experiments on ImageNet and UCF-101 demonstrate that our method achieves
a 3.6× speedup with comparable quality and up to 9.5×
speedup with minimal quality degradation across both image and video generation tasks. We hope this work will
inspire future research in efficient visual generation and
unified autoregressive modeling. Project page: https:
//yuqingwang1029.github.io/PAR-project.

3

8b

5c

6c 7b

4

8c

5d 6d 7b

8d

(b) Local parallel generation of strongly dependent tokens
1

2

3

4

5a 5b 5c 5d

6a 6b 6c 6d 7a 7b 7c 7d
8a 8b 8c 8d

Figure 1. Comparison of different parallel generation strategies. Both strategies generate initial tokens [1,2,3,4] sequentially
then generate multiple tokens in parallel per step, following the
order [5a-5d] to [6a-6d] to [7a-7d], etc. (a) Our approach generates weakly dependent tokens across non-local regions in parallel, preserving coherent patterns and local details. (b) The naive
method generates strongly dependent tokens within local regions
simultaneously, while independent sampling for strongly correlated tokens can cause inconsistent generation and disrupted patterns, such as distorted tiger faces and fragmented zebra stripes.

then an autoregressive transformer [51] is trained to predict these tokens following a raster scan order [6]. However, this strictly sequential generation process leads to a
slow generation speed, severely limiting its practical applications [23, 54]. In this work, we aim to develop an efficient autoregressive visual generation approach that improves generation speed while maintaining the generation
quality.
An intuitive way to improve generation efficiency is to
predict multiple tokens in parallel at each step. In language modeling, methods like speculative decoding [4, 20,
22] and Jacobi decoding [17, 38] achieve parallel generation through auxiliary draft models or iterative refinement.
In the visual domain, approaches like MaskGIT [3] employ non-autoregressive paradigms with masked modeling
strategies, while VAR [44] achieves faster speed through
next-scale prediction that requires specially designed multi-

1. Introduction
Autoregressive modeling has achieved remarkable success
in language modeling [2, 29, 30, 45, 46], inspiring its application to visual generation [5, 6, 9, 19, 26, 27, 31, 32, 34,
42, 44, 48, 49, 58]. These models show great potential for
visual tasks due to their strong scalability and unified modeling capabilities [11, 43, 54]. Current autoregressive visual
generation approaches typically rely on a sequential tokenby-token generation paradigm: visual data is first encoded
into token sequences using an autoencoder [9, 50, 60],
†Project lead.

（Ours)

5b 6b 7b

∗Corresponding author.

12955

