This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Parameter Selection for Tuning Vision-Language Models
†

Yi Zhang1* Yi-Xuan Deng3 Meng-Hao Guo2 Shi-Min Hu2
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
Zhili College, Tsinghua University

Abstract

Training Efficiency

Inference Efficiency

Adapter

Vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP have been
widely used in various specific tasks. Parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as prompt and adapter
tuning, have become key techniques for adapting these models to specific domains. However, existing approaches rely
on prior knowledge to manually identify the locations requiring fine-tuning. Adaptively selecting which parameters in VLMs should be tuned remains unexplored. In
this paper, we propose CLIP with Adaptive Selective Tuning (CLIP-AST), which can be used to automatically select critical parameters in VLMs for fine-tuning for specific tasks. It opportunely leverages the adaptive learning
rate in the optimizer and improves model performance without extra parameter overhead. We conduct extensive experiments on 13 benchmarks, such as ImageNet, Food101,
Flowers102, etc, with different settings, including few-shot
learning, base-to-novel class generalization, and out-ofdistribution. The results show that CLIP-AST consistently
outperforms the original CLIP model as well as its variants and achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in
all cases. For example, with the 16-shot learning, CLIPAST surpasses GraphAdapter and PromptSRC by 3.56%
and 2.20% in average accuracy on 11 datasets, respectively.
Code will be publicly available.

★★

★★★

★

★★

Prompt

★★

★

★

★★

Ours

★★★

★★

★★★

★★★

Performance

Adaptive Tuning Position
Adaptive Selective Tuning

Sim

Sim

/

Fixed Position Tuning/Freeze

Sim

Adapter

Prompt

Prompt Tuning

Class

Class

Class

Adapter Tuning

CLIP-AST (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of fine-tuning methods across key dimensions. Prompt tuning and adapter tuning rely on prior knowledge
to define positions for fine-tuning. In contrast, our method performs adaptive selective tuning. It automatically identifies the
most critical positions for tuning. Additionally, no extra parameters are introduced, improving efficiency and performance.

millions of image-text pairs using the contrastive learning
framework, aligns image and text representations in a highdimensional feature space, which gives CLIP strong generalization capabilities and makes it widely used in various
applications [7, 10, 24, 43, 47, 51, 56, 58, 61].
While CLIP has shown strong general capabilities, its
performance often remains suboptimal on specific tasks
without task-oriented fine-tuning. However, performing
full fine-tuning on large pre-trained models often introduces challenges, including increased computational cost,
potential overfitting, and reduced transferability across diverse tasks and domains. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) [2, 4, 15, 27] has been widely adopted to mitigate
the computational cost and overfitting risks associated with
the full fine-tuning of large pre-trained models.
Although PEFT reduces computational costs and improves results, most existing methods rely on prior knowledge to decide which model components to fine-tune. These
methods typically introduce specialized learnable modules
at predefined positions in the model. For example, prompt

1. Introduction
With the rise of large-scale image-text pretraining, visionlanguage models (VLMs) [8, 29, 38, 44, 45, 54] have shown
strong capabilities in multimodal representation. These
models learn the distribution between visual and textual features by jointly training on large-scale image and text paired
data, which enables them to perform well across specific
tasks. For example, CLIP [38], trained with hundreds of
* Work conducted during an internship at Tsinghua University.
† Corresponding author.

4280

