This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PromptHMR: Promptable Human Mesh Recovery
Yufu Wang1,4 Yu Sun1 Priyanka Patel1 Kostas Daniilidis4,5
Michael J. Black1,2 Muhammed Kocabas1,2,3
1 Meshcapade

2 MPI for Intelligent Systems

3 ETH Zürich

4 University of Pennsylvania

5 Archimedes

Figure 1. PromptHMR is a promptable human pose and shape (HPS) estimation method that processes images with spatial or semantic
prompts. It takes “side information” readily available from vision-language models or user input to improve the accuracy and robustness
of 3D HPS. PromptHMR recovers human pose and shape from spatial prompts such as (a) face bounding boxes, (b) partial or complete
person detection boxes, or (c) segmentation masks. It refines its predictions using semantic prompts such as (c) person-person interaction
labels for close contact scenarios, or (d) natural language descriptions of body shape to improve body shape predictions. Both image and
video versions of PromptHMR achieve state-of-the-art accuracy. https://yufu-wang.github.io/phmr-page

Abstract

a transformer-based promptable method that reformulates
HPS estimation through spatial and semantic prompts. Our
method processes full images to maintain scene context
and accepts multiple input modalities: spatial prompts
like bounding boxes and masks, and semantic prompts like
language descriptions or interaction labels. PromptHMR
demonstrates robust performance across challenging scenarios: estimating people from bounding boxes as small as
faces in crowded scenes, improving body shape estimation
through language descriptions, modeling person-person interactions, and producing temporally coherent motions in
videos. Experiments on benchmarks show that PromptHMR
achieves state-of-the-art performance while offering flexible
prompt-based control over the HPS estimation process.

Human pose and shape (HPS) estimation presents challenges in diverse scenarios such as crowded scenes, personperson interactions, and single-view reconstruction. Existing approaches lack mechanisms to incorporate auxiliary
“side information” that could enhance reconstruction accuracy in such challenging scenarios. Furthermore, the most
accurate methods rely on cropped person detections and
cannot exploit scene context while methods that process the
whole image often fail to detect people and are less accurate
than methods that use crops. While recent language-based
methods explore HPS reasoning through large language or
vision-language models, their metric accuracy is well below
the state of the art. In contrast, we present PromptHMR,

1148

