This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SEC-Prompt:SEmantic Complementary Prompting for Few-Shot
Class-Incremental Learning
Ye Liu1,2 Meng Yang1,2 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
liuy2629@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yangm6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) presents a
signiﬁcant challenge in machine learning, requiring models to integrate new classes from limited examples while
preserving performance on previously learned classes.
Recently, prompt-based CIL approaches leverage ample data to train prompts, effectively mitigating catastrophic forgetting. However, these methods do not account for the semantic features embedded in prompts, exacerbating the plasticity-stability dilemma in few-shot incremental learning. In this paper, we propose a novel
and simple framework named SEmantic Complementary
Prompt(SEC-Prompt), which learns two sets of semantically complementary prompts based on an adaptive query:
discriminative prompts(D-Prompt) and non-discriminative
prompts(ND-Prompt). D-Prompt enhances the separation
of class-speciﬁc feature distributions by strengthening key
discriminative features, while ND-Prompt balances nondiscriminative information to promote generalization to
novel classes. To efﬁciently learn high-quality knowledge
from limited samples, we leverage ND-Prompt for data
augmentation to increase sample diversity and introduce
Prompt Clustering Loss to prevent noise contamination in
D-Prompt, ensuring robust discriminative feature learning and improved generalization. Our experimental results
showcase state-of-the-art performance across three benchmark datasets, including CIFAR100, ImageNet-R and CUB
datasets.

1. Introduction
AI applications, once deployed, frequently encounter novel
classes within continuous data streams [11], necessitating the addition of these new classes to recognition tasks.
This scenario drives the study of class incremental learning (CIL) [32], which incrementally learns new class con* Corresponding author.

cepts post-deployment while preserving knowledge of previously learned classes. In more practical scenarios, new
classes arise sporadically and usually lack sufﬁcient data,
for example, industrial defect detection and medical image
recognition, which motivates the development of few-shot
class incremental learning (FSCIL) [36] with only a limited
number of samples for new classes.
Both CIL and FSCIL face a central challenge: catastrophic forgetting [28]. As models are incrementally trained
to recognize new classes, ﬁne-tuning or expanding parameters often overwrites previously acquired knowledge, leading to signiﬁcant performance drops on earlier classes.
Moreover, research in FSCIL has shown that learning from
limited samples can lead to overﬁtting [7]: the model
quickly memorizes small sample sets but fails to generalize, which compromises its robustness. Recent efforts have
focused on transferring knowledge from base classes to enhance generalization or on adjusting new class distributions
to stabilize learning.
Recent prompt-based continual learning methods [34,
43, 44] ﬁx the backbone parameters while training additional prompt parameters using a key-query mechanism to
learn task-speciﬁc knowledge. These methods store the
learned knowledge in a prompt pool, effectively preventing
forgetting. However, when only a few samples are available, they struggle to effectively learn the knowledge of
new classes. In contrast, humans can easily learn to distinguish new categories without disrupting previously learned
knowledge. This raises a key question: How do humans
achieve FSCIL capabilities? The key to classiﬁcation tasks
lies in learning discriminative features. Humans can identify the key features of new categories while ignoring irrelevant information, which allows them to learn accurate
patterns and avoid the inﬂuence of noise. Thus, we hypothesize that a selective attention mechanism plays a crucial
role in this process.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework called Semantic Complementary Prompting (SEC-Prompt) to enhance FSCIL by emulating the human selective atten-

25643

