This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenING: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Judging
Open-ended Interleaved Image-Text Generation
Pengfei Zhou1* , Xiaopeng Peng2* , Jiajun Song3 , Chuanhao Li1 , Zhaopan Xu1 , Yue Yang4,1 ,
Ziyao Guo1,5 , Hao Zhang1 , Yuqi Lin1 , Yefei He1 , Lirui Zhao1 , Shuo Liu1 , Tianhua Li1,4 , Yuxuan Xie1,4 ,
Xiaojun Chang6,7 , Yu Qiao1 , Wenqi Shao1 , Kaipeng Zhang1,8†
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2 RIT, 3 RUC, 4 SJTU, 5 NUS, 6 USTC, 7 MBZUAI, 8 Shanghai Innovation Institute
https://opening-benchmark.github.io

Abstract

Interleaved Image-Text Generation
Image-to-Text
Text-to-Image

Capabilities

User

Chameleon
VILA-U
Show-o
Emu2
Emu3
Anole
NExT-GPT

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have made
significant strides in visual understanding and generation
tasks. However, generating interleaved image-text content
remains a challenge, which requires integrated multimodal
understanding and generation abilities. While the progress
in unified models offers new solutions, existing benchmarks
are insufficient for evaluating these methods due to data
size and diversity limitations. To bridge this gap, we introduce OpenING, a comprehensive benchmark comprising
5,400 high-quality human-annotated instances across 56
real-world tasks. OpenING covers diverse daily scenarios
such as travel guide, design, and brainstorming, offering a
robust platform for challenging interleaved generation methods. In addition, we present IntJudge, a judge model for evaluating open-ended multimodal generation methods. Trained
with a novel data pipeline, our IntJudge achieves an agreement rate of 82.42% with human judgments, outperforming
GPT-based evaluators by 11.34%. Extensive experiments on
OpenING reveal that current interleaved generation methods
still have substantial room for improvement. Key findings on
interleaved image-text generation are further presented to
guide the development of next-generation models.

GILL
DALL·E-3
Stable Diffusion

Interleaved Image-Text
Easy to follow

I find it hard to hold up
a bowl full of hot soup.
How to design a new
product to solve this?
Plain Text
Lack illustration

FLUX.1

SDXL

Intern-VL2 Qwen2-VL

One possible design
includes attaching a
heat-resistant ring to
the outer surface of
the bowl.
Plain Image

Lack explanation Introducing a new bowl design!

The innovative curved base
allows fingers to easily slip
underneath for a secure lift,
minimizing the risk of spills,
even with hot soup.

LLaVA
Flamingo

Year

2022
(a) Trends in Generative Model Development

(b) Benefits of Interleaved Image-Text Generation

Figure 1. Motivation: (a) Rapid progress of interleaved imagetext generation. (b) Interleaved content is essential to provide key
information for complex real-world tasks (e.g., product design).

change [16, 20], achieving such integrated ability is crucial
for advancing towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI).
As shown in Fig. 1, the emergence of unified models that combine understanding and generation abilities
opens up new possibilities for interleaved image-text generation [55, 68]. However, the lack of reliable benchmarks to
evaluate interleaved generation remains an obstacle [43, 50].
Most existing benchmarks evaluate text or image output separately, failing to capture the intricacies of simultaneously
generating both [31, 42, 60, 61]. Interleaved benchmarks
like OpenLEAF [3] and InterleavedBench [30] are limited
in size, scope, and query diversity. For example, InterleavedBench includes only 815 instances across 10 tasks sourced
from public datasets such as VIST [21] and WikiHow [58].
These benchmarks do not adequately reflect real-world needs
and are vulnerable to data contamination [54].
To fill the gap, we introduce OpenING, a comprehensive
benchmark for evaluating open-ended interleaved generation.
Unlike previous benchmarks, OpenING offers a broader set
of real-world data and tasks (e.g., brainstorming, recommendations, and content creation) derived from daily scenarios
like fashion, cooking, and travel. As shown in Fig. 2 and

1. Introduction
Building upon the remarkable understanding and generation
capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 45, 46,
48], Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) are making progress in
various tasks [4, 29, 59, 62, 65]. However, generating interleaved image-text content remains challenging [25, 44, 50],
despite its important role in both research and applications
(e.g., multimodal reasoning [8, 32], education [11, 24] and
design [22, 40]). Since human brains can naturally combine
visual and textual signals for more efficient information ex∗ Equal contribution † Corresponding author (zhangkaipeng@pjlab.org.cn)

56

