This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeCafNet: Delegate and Conquer for Efficient Temporal Grounding
in Long Videos
Zijia Lu1,2 †*, A S M Iftekhar1 †, Gaurav Mittal1 , Tianjian Meng1 , Xiawei Wang1 ,
Cheng Zhao1 , Rohith Kukkala1 , Ehsan Elhamifar2 , Mei Chen1
Microsoft1 , Northeastern University2
lu.zij@northeastern.edu,

{asmiftekhar, gamit, tianjianmeng, xiaweiwang}@microsoft.com

{chengzhao, rokukkal, meic}@microsoft.com, e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Long Video Temporal Grounding (LVTG) aims at identifying specific moments within lengthy videos based on userprovided text queries for effective content retrieval. The
approach taken by existing methods of dividing video into
clips and processing each clip via a full-scale expert encoder is challenging to scale due to prohibitive computational costs of processing a large number of clips in long
videos. To address this issue, we introduce DeCafNet, an
approach employing “delegate-and-conquer” strategy to
achieve computation efficiency without sacrificing grounding performance. DeCafNet introduces a sidekick encoder
that performs dense feature extraction over all video clips
in a resource-efficient manner, while generating a saliency
map to identify the most relevant clips for full processing
by the expert encoder. To effectively leverage features from
sidekick and expert encoders that exist at different temporal resolutions, we introduce DeCaf-Grounder, which unifies and refines them via query-aware temporal aggregation
and multi-scale temporal refinement for accurate grounding. Experiments on two LTVG benchmark datasets demonstrate that DeCafNet reduces computation by up to 47%
while still outperforming existing methods, establishing a
new state-of-the-art for LTVG in terms of both efficiency
and performance.

Figure 1. Model inference time and grounding performance on
Ego4d-NLQ [13] dataset using one A100 gpu. The circle sizes indicate the TFLOPs for methods. Numbers beside the green circles
indicate the amount of salient clips processed by expert encoder.

1. Introduction

on a user-provided text query. LVTG allows effective retrieval of relevant content from lengthy videos with a range
of applications, such as video summarization [12, 22, 34],
content recommendation [18, 32], and surveillance [19, 54],
where rapid detection of pertinent segments is critical.
State-of-the-art (SOTA) LVTG methods [15, 17, 33, 58]
build on techniques originally developed for temporal video
grounding in short videos, following a common two-step
paradigm. First, they divide a long video into fixed-duration
clips, processing each clip through an expert encoder–a
large, pre-trained model trained on extensive, multi-domain
video data–to extract video clip features. Second, a grounding model employs temporal and cross-modal reasoning to
perform the grounding task. Although effective for short
videos, such an approach struggles to scale with longer
video lengths due to the high computational cost of processing each clip through the expert encoder. As video duration
increases, the number of clips increases, leading to a signif-

Long Video Temporal Grounding (LVTG) is the task of
identifying specific moments or events within long videos
(spanning from several minutes to a few hours [15]) based
* This work was conducted during Z. Lu’s internship at Microsoft.
Z. Lu and E. Elhamifar were supported in part by DARPA PTG
(HR00112220001), NSF (IIS-2115110) and ARPA-H (1AY2AX000062)
during the preparation of the manuscript. Content does not necessarily
reflect the position/policy of the Government.
† Equal contribution

24066

