This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Layered Motion Fusion: Lifting Motion Segmentation to 3D in Egocentric Videos
Vadim Tschernezki1,2

Diane Larlus2

Iro Laina1

Andrea Vedaldi1

1

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{vadim,iro,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

2

Abstract

NAVER LABS Europe
diane.larlus@naverlabs.com

Computer vision is largely based on 2D techniques, with
3D vision still relegated to a relatively narrow subset of applications. However, by building on recent advances in 3D
models such as neural radiance fields, some authors have
shown that 3D techniques can at last improve outputs extracted from independent 2D views, by fusing them into 3D
and denoising them. This is particularly helpful in egocentric videos, where the camera motion is significant, but
only under the assumption that the scene itself is static. In
fact, as shown in the recent analysis conducted by EPIC
Fields, 3D techniques are ineffective when it comes to studying dynamic phenomena, and, in particular, when segmenting moving objects. In this paper, we look into this issue
in more detail. First, we propose to improve dynamic segmentation in 3D by fusing motion segmentation predictions
from a 2D-based model into layered radiance fields (Layered Motion Fusion). However, the high complexity of long,
dynamic videos makes it challenging to capture the underlying geometric structure, and, as a result, hinders the fusion
of motion cues into the (incomplete) scene geometry. We
address this issue through test-time refinement, which helps
the model to focus on specific frames, thereby reducing the
data complexity. This results in a synergy between motion
fusion and the refinement, and in turn leads to segmentation
predictions of the 3D model that surpass the 2D baseline
by a large margin. This demonstrates that 3D techniques
can enhance 2D analysis even for dynamic phenomena in a
challenging and realistic setting.

Recently, several authors have shown that 3D representations can, if not replace, at least enhance 2D techniques.
An approach is to fuse 2D information extracted from individual views of a scene into a coherent 3D reconstruction. Examples include methods like Semantic NeRF [101],
N3F [79], DFF [32], LERF [30], GARField [31]. These
techniques take various types of 2D outputs (e.g., semantic
or instance segmentation, image or text features) and project
them into a coherent 3D reconstruction while also removing
noise and compressing information.
While these methods show that 3D can improve 2D processing, so far this has been demonstrated only in restricted
settings; most of these methods require multi-view images
of a static scene to work. However, in real applications, the
scene itself is often dynamic, and, arguably, the dynamic
part is often the most interesting one. Thus, 3D techniques
need to be able to handle dynamic content in order to be
useful in practice. As 3D methods mature, however, we
can expect them to become useful in these more challenging scenarios as well, particularly when the scene content is
dynamic and the camera moves significantly. A great example of such a scenario is egocentric videos, in which a
camera is attached to a person as they navigate and interact
with their environment, resulting in camera movement that
mirrors their actions within the scene.
A few authors have explored this challenging scenario
in the broader context of monocular video understanding [43, 78, 88]. Out of those, NeuralDiff [78] focuses on
monocular egocentric videos. It uses an architecture based
on neural radiance fields (NeRF) [53] to decompose these
videos into three layers: a static background and two foreground layers, respectively modeling the semi-static part
(objects that are currently stationary, but move at some point
in the video) and the dynamic part (objects that presently
move) of the scene. More recently, EPIC Fields [80] conducted a systematic study of 3D techniques for long egocentric videos, introducing a large annotated dataset and
performing comprehensive empirical evaluations of existing techniques for novel view synthesis and scene decomposition into static, semi-static and dynamic objects. One
of the main findings of that study is that the performance of

1. Introduction
Forty years ago, pioneers like Marr [47] argued that 3D
representation should be a foundation of computer vision.
However, the field has since evolved differently, reducing image and video understanding to 2D pattern recognition, first with the introduction of visual representations
like bags of visual words [11, 45, 62, 70] and then learned
ones [13, 22, 24, 33, 69, 81].

17637

