This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimAvatar: Simulation-Ready Avatars with Layered Hair and Clothing
Xueting Li, Ye Yuan, Shalini De Mello, Gilles Daviet, Jonathan Leaf, Miles Macklin,
Jan Kautz, Umar Iqbal
NVIDIA
Adele with long layered waved hairstyle wearing a sleeveless dress of tea-length, the garment has a delicate butterfly print,
with small, colorful butterflies.

(a) simulation-ready avatar with layered hair, garment
and body

(b) simulated avatar in different poses

(c) example simulation-ready avatars.

Figure 1. (a) SimAvatar synthesizes simulation-ready 3D avatars with layered hair, body and clothing. (b) By leveraging physics-based
simulators, SimAvatar produces realistic pose-dependent motion effects such as flowing hair strands and garment wrinkles. (c) SimAvatar
produces simulation-ready 3D avatars with diverse identities, garments, and hairstyles.

Abstract
We introduce SimAvatar, a framework designed to generate simulation-ready clothed 3D human avatars from a text
prompt. Current text-driven human avatar generation methods either model hair, clothing, and the human body using
a unified geometry or produce hair and garments that are
not easily adaptable for simulation within existing simulation pipelines. The primary challenge lies in representing the hair and garment geometry in a way that allows
leveraging established prior knowledge from foundational
image diffusion models (e.g., Stable Diffusion) while being
simulation-ready using either physics or neural simulators.
To address this task, we propose a two-stage framework that
combines the flexibility of 3D Gaussians with simulationready hair strands and garment meshes. Specifically, we

first employ three text-conditioned 3D generative models to
generate garment mesh, body shape and hair strands from
the given text prompt. To leverage prior knowledge from
foundational diffusion models, we attach 3D Gaussians to
the body mesh, garment mesh, as well as hair strands and
learn the avatar appearance through optimization. To drive
the avatar given a pose sequence, we first apply physics simulators onto the garment meshes and hair strands. We then
transfer the motion onto 3D Gaussians through carefully
designed mechanisms for each body part. As a result, our
synthesized avatars have vivid texture and realistic dynamic
motion. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the
first to produce highly realistic, fully simulation-ready 3D
avatars, surpassing the capabilities of current approaches.
Project page: https://research.nvidia.com/
labs/dair/simavatar/

26320

