This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instruct-CLIP: Improving Instruction-Guided Image Editing
with Automated Data Refinement Using Contrastive Learning

Sherry X. Chen

Misha Sra

Pradeep Sen

University of California, Santa Barbara
{xchen774, sra, psen}@ucsb.edu

Original

Abstract
Although natural language instructions offer an intuitive
way to guide automated image editing, deep- learning models often struggle to achieve high- quality results, largely
due to the difficulty of creating large, high- quality training datasets. To do this, previous approaches have typically relied on text- to- image (T2I) generative models to produce pairs of original and edited images that simulate the
input/output of an instruction- guided image- editing model.
However, these image pairs often fail to align with the specified edit instructions due to the limitations of T2I models,
which negatively impacts models trained on such datasets.
To address this, we present Instruct- CLIP (I- CLIP), a selfsupervised method that learns the semantic changes between original and edited images to refine and better align
the instructions in existing datasets. Furthermore, we adapt
Instruct- CLIP to handle noisy latent images and diffusion
timesteps so that it can be used to train latent diffusion models (LDMs) and efficiently enforce alignment between the
edit instruction and the image changes in latent space at
any step of the diffusion pipeline. We use Instruct- CLIP to
correct the InstructPix2Pix dataset and get over 120K refined samples we then use to fine- tune their model, guided
by our novel I- CLIP- based loss function. The resulting
model can produce edits that are more aligned with the
given instructions. Our code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/SherryXTChen/Instruct- CLIP.git.

IP2P

I-CLIP (Ours)

“Change the panda to a monkey”

“Let the old man be dressed in a military uniform”

“Change the background to a classroom”

“The cat needs to be black”

“Make it a chocolate cake”

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Results showcasing the strength of Instruct-CLIP
(I-CLIP) compared to state-of-the-art InstructPix2Pix (IP2P) [1].

Recent advances in instruction- guided image editing have
introduced intuitive and powerful tools that require only
a single text instruction for image editing [1, 24–27]. In
particular, InstructPix2Pix (IP2P) [1] pioneered diffusionbased instruction-driven image editing, serving as the foundation for numerous subsequent works [8, 11, 25]. These

methods leverage pre-trained text-to-image (T2I) models [3, 10, 15, 18, 19] and condition the generation process on edit instructions instead of the usual prompts. However, these models still need to be fine-tuned on appropriate
datasets to learn how to make instruction-guided edits.

28513

