This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Gait Recognition and Large Language Models Sequence Modeling
Shaopeng Yang1∗ , Jilong Wang2,4 ,* Saihui Hou1,3†, Xu Liu3 , Chunshui Cao3 , Liang Wang4 ,
Yongzhen Huang1,3
1
2
Beijing Normal University, University of Science and Technology of China, 3 WATRIX.AI,
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
yangshaopeng@mail.bnu.edu.cn, jilongw@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {housaihui, huangyongzhen}
@bnu.edu.cn, {xu.liu, chunshui.cao}@watrix.ai, wangliang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Gait sequences exhibit sequential structures and contextual
relationships similar to those in natural language, where
each element—whether a word or a gait step—is connected
to its predecessors and successors. This similarity enables
the transformation of gait sequences into “texts” containing identity-related information. Large Language Models (LLMs), designed to understand and generate sequential data, can thus be utilized for gait sequence modeling to enhance gait recognition performance. Leveraging these insights, we make a pioneering effort to apply
LLMs to gait recognition, which we refer to as GaitLLM.
Specifically, we propose the Gait-to-Language (G2L) module, which converts gait sequences into a textual format
suitable for LLMs, and the Language-to-Gait (L2G) module, which maps the LLM’s output back to the gait feature
space, thereby bridging the gap between LLM outputs and
gait recognition. Notably, GaitLLM leverages the powerful modeling capabilities of LLMs without relying on complex architectural designs, improving gait recognition performance with only a small number of trainable parameters. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on four
popular gait datasets—SUSTech1K, CCPG, Gait3D, and
GREW—demonstrating the effectiveness of applying LLMs
in this domain. This work highlights the potential of LLMs
to significantly enhance gait recognition, paving the way for
future research and practical applications.

Figure 1. Illustration of our add-on G2L-L2G framework. First,
the G2L module translates gait features into a token space, forming
a “gait sentence” in a “new foreign language” —a synthesized language composed of elements from all languages. A frozen LLM
is then utilized to capture and analyze the sequential dependencies
inherent in gait patterns. Finally, the L2G module maps the LLMprocessed features back to the gait feature space, enabling them to
be used effectively for gait recognition.

iris, gait is a continuous motion process integrating changes
in shape and movement. Current research in sequencebased gait recognition [13, 16, 18] indicates that dynamic
motions of the human body are more resistant to external influences such as clothing and viewpoints compared to static
shape features. To accurately model the fine-grained dynamic motions inherent in walking patterns, the key challenge lies in capturing the sequential dependencies among
subtle body movements.
Recent studies have introduced a range of advanced temporal models to tackle this challenge, such as multi-scale
temporal receptive fields [24], self-attentive global motion
aggregation [21], and visual prompt-guided dynamic temporal transformers [22]. While these sophisticated temporal extractors achieve notable results, they heavily depend
on expert-driven architectural design, with feature diversity
constrained by the specific datasets used. To escape the
complexities of architecture design and dataset reliance, we
shift our focus to harnessing the powerful sequence modeling capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs).
LLMs have demonstrated remarkable performance in
sequence-level modeling, being inherently designed to understand and generate sequences of data in the form of nat-

1. Introduction
Gait recognition aims to identify individuals via their
unique walking patterns at a long distance, becoming increasingly important in security applications [27]. Compared with other static biometric modalities like face and
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

3460

