This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CocoER: Aligning Multi-Level Feature by Competition and Coordination for
Emotion Recognition
Xuli Shen1,2 Hua Cai2 Weilin Shen2 Qing Xu2 Dingding Yu2 Weifeng Ge1⋆ Xiangyang Xue1⋆
1
2
Fudan University
UniDT
{xlshen20,wfge,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn,

{hua.cai,weilin.shen,qing.xu,dingding.yu}@unidt.com

Surprise
Pleasure
Fatigue

Abstract

Output

💡Exclude Inconsistent
Predictions from Multi-level Input

With the explosion of human-machine interaction, emotion
recognition has reignited attention. Previous works focus
on improving visual feature fusion and reasoning from multiple image levels. Although it is non-trivial to deduce a
person’s emotion by integrating multi-level feature (head,
body and context), the emotion recognition results of each
level is usually different from one another, which creates inconsistency in the prevailing feature alignment method and
decrease recognition performance. In this work, we propose a multi-level image feature refinement method for emotion recognition (CocoER) to mitigate the impact caused
by conflicting results from multi-level recognition. First,
we leverage cross-level attention to improve visual feature
consistency between hierarchically cropped head, body and
context windows. Then, vocabulary informed alignment
is incorporated into the recognition framework to produce
pseudo label and guide hierarchical visual feature refinement. To effectively fuse multi-level feature, we elaborate on
a competition process of eliminating irrelevant image level
predictions and a coordination process to enhance the feature across all levels. Extensive experiments are executed
on two popular datasets, and our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance with multi-level interpretation results.
Code is available at: https://github.com/bisno/CocoER.

C
Head

Vocabulary-Informed
Alignment

Fear
Doubt

Surprise
Doubt

Body

Engagement
Pleasure
Surprise

Pleasure
Surprise

Fatigue
……
Pleasure
Fear

Pseudo Label

Context

Sad
Fatigue

Engagement

This photo shows
{ } emotion.

Pseudo Label Guidance
C Competition Process

Coordination Process
Input Image

Figure 1. To avoid conflicts arising from inconsistent multi-level
predictions, competition and coordination are applied in refining
multi-level visual representation for emotion recognition, guided
by pseudo label from vocabulary-informed alignment.

1. Introduction

space [13, 42] and label distributions [41].
As emotion is naturally coupled in human and environments, the complex background in image still hinders the
research of emotion recognition. Pioneering researches focus on perceiving the emotion states of the specific individuals in the given image with hierarchical visual feature [24, 37, 40] on context-aware emotion recognition
datasets [13, 15]. [14] trains different backbones to combine the information of the target body and the entire image.
Subsequently, a context-aware emotion recognition architecture enhances the classified precision to a high level representation [24]. In addition to image feature, knowledge
graph is incorporated to reason the emotion states in [36].
To align feature across different modalities, [37] aims to
address distribution gap between heterogeneous modalities.
Despite previous progress in decoupling irrelevant contextual information in the inference stage [38, 40], there
still lacks of multi-level image feature alignment method
to precisely recognize human emotions. Each level has dif-

Visual emotion recognition plays a vital role in human computer interaction [27], surveillance [11], and robotics [5]. It
aims to perceive the emotion state of human, and machine
can modify responses and behaviors by considering the sentiment attitudes. Recently, impressive progress in recognizing emotions is achieved with expression from additional
modality, such as head, body, background, depth, and so
on [24]. Besides, emotion representation can be enhanced
in view of discrete categories [24], points in a continuous
⋆ Corresponding authors.

29591

