This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeformCL: Learning Deformable Centerline Representation for Vessel
Extraction in 3D Medical Image
Ziwei Zhao1 * Zhixing Zhang2,5 * Yuhang Liu1† Zhao Zhang2
Haojun Yu4 Dong Wang1 Liwei Wang3,4
1

Yizhun Medical AI Co., Ltd 2 Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
4
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
5
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
{ziwei.zhao, yuhang.liu, dong.wang}@yizhun-ai.com
{zhangzhixing@stu., zhangzh@stu., haojunyu@, wanglw@}pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In the field of 3D medical imaging, accurately extracting
and representing the blood vessels with curvilinear structures holds paramount importance for clinical diagnosis.
Previous methods have commonly relied on discrete representation like mask, often resulting in local fractures or
scattered fragments due to the inherent limitations of the
per-pixel classification paradigm. In this work, we introduce DeformCL, a new continuous representation based
on Deformable Centerlines, where centerline points act
as nodes connected by edges that capture spatial relationships. Compared with previous representations, DeformCL offers three key advantages: natural connectivity,
noise robustness, and interaction facility. We present a
comprehensive training pipeline structured in a cascaded
manner to fully exploit these favorable properties of DeformCL. Extensive experiments on four 3D vessel segmentation datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method. Furthermore, the visualization of curved
planar reformation images validates the clinical significance of the proposed framework. We release the code in
https://github.com/barry664/DeformCL.

In clinical practice, the primary requirement is to achieve
accurate segmentation of primary vessel branches to enable
comprehensive vascular system assessment and detailed local analysis.
Previous methodologies [1, 21, 25, 26, 29, 31] have predominantly adopted the traditional semantic segmentation
approach, which relies on fine-grained, per-pixel classification within a discrete mask representation. As illustrated in
the top part of Figure 1, to improve the volumetric scores
(e.g. Dice) or topological metrics (e.g. betti number errors) for segmentation, these approaches introduce a variety of innovations, such as incorporating tubular priors
into network architecture [13, 21, 25, 31, 36, 39] or designing topology-preserving loss functions [1, 9, 26]. Despite
these advancements in the training process, the core issue
that the discrete mask representation is not well-suited
for the curvilinear vessels remains unchanged, imposing
several inherent limitations that restrict the model’s performance and applicability, as shown in the top part of Figure 2. Firstly, the neural networks struggle to recognize
fragile and tortuous local structures, which may lead to segmentation fractures [21]. Moreover, the discrete representation exhibits poor robustness to local noise [26, 29], such as
variations in tissue density, due to the lack of a holistic view
of the global morphology. Consequently, it may mistakenly identify the tissues with appearances similar to target
vessels. Finally, designing an effective feature aggregation
strategy along tubular curves remains challenging, considering the lack of explicit relationships among elements in
discrete mask representations.
These challenges motivate us to seek a continuous representation that can explicitly fit the tubular structures from
a holistic view, rather than confined to per-pixel classification paradigm. In this paper, we introduce DeformCL,

1. Introduction
Cerebro-cardiovascular disease is one of the most severe
global health threats [22]. Timely detection of potential
high-risk locations and prompt intervention are crucial to
reducing mortality, relying on accurate extraction, reconstruction, and analysis of major vessels in CTA images [16].
* Equal contribution.
† Project lead.

30896

