This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MATCHA

: Towards Matching Anything

Fei Xue1 * Sven Elflein2,3,4 Laura Leal-Taixé3 Qunjie Zhou3†
1
University of Cambridge 2 University of Toronto 3 NVIDIA 4 Vector Institute

Abstract

Semantic

Establishing correspondences across images is a fundamental challenge in computer vision, underpinning tasks
like Structure-from-Motion, image editing, and point tracking. Traditional methods are often specialized for specific
correspondence types, geometric, semantic, or temporal,
whereas humans naturally identify alignments across these
domains. Inspired by this flexibility, we propose MATCHA,
a unified feature model designed to ”rule them all”, establishing robust correspondences across diverse matching
tasks. Building on insights that diffusion model features can
encode multiple correspondence types, MATCHA augments
this capacity by dynamically fusing high-level semantic and
low-level geometric features through an attention-based
module, creating expressive, versatile, and robust features.
Additionally, MATCHA integrates object-level features from
DINOv2 to further boost generalization, enabling a single
feature capable of matching anything. Extensive experiments validate that MATCHA consistently surpasses stateof-the-art methods across geometric, semantic, and temporal matching tasks, setting a new foundation for a unified
approach for the fundamental correspondence problem in
computer vision. To the best of our knowledge, MATCHA
is the first approach that is able to effectively tackle diverse
matching tasks with a single unified feature. Project page:
https://github.com/feixue94/matcha.

1. Introduction
“In computer vision, there is only one problem: correspondence, correspondence, correspondence.” –Takeo Kanade
Establishing correspondences between images is a fundamental problem in computer vision, integral to a variety
of applications such as mapping and localization [44, 58],
image editing [45], object pose estimation [70] and point
tracking [13, 22]. Correspondence is typically categorized
by type: geometric [11, 38, 49, 56], semantic [29, 73, 74]
and temporal [7, 27, 55, 61] correspondences, as shown in
* This work was done when Fei Xue was an intern at NVIDIA.
† Project leader.

Geometric

Temporal

Figure 1. MATCHA for matching anything. We visualize geometric, semantic and temporal correspondences established by
MATCHA, using a single feature descriptor.

Fig. 1. Geometric correspondences identify 2D points in
images of static scenes that represent the same physical 3D
point, with challenges in diverse illumination and viewpoint
variations. They are typically used to eestimate geometric
camera transformations e.g., for structure-from-motion applications. Semantic correspondences connect similar object parts across distinct instances within a category, demanding high-level abstraction across different instances.
Temporal correspondences, in contrast, match points of the
same instance across video frames, require to handle both
static and dynamic elements, occlusions, deformations and
viewpoint changes stemming from complex motions.
Addressing these distinct challenges usually requires
specialized models [11, 34, 40, 47, 64, 74]. However, humans can align points flexibly across different scenarios,
e.g., across static scenes, dynamic objects of different instances under various viewpoints, prompting the question:
Do we really need a separate feature for each type of correspondence problem? DIFT [61] offers a step toward this,
revealing that correspondence patterns can emerge naturally
from diffusion models [12, 54]. However, DIFT still relies on distinct feature descriptors for different tasks, potentially limiting its utility when the matching type is unknown. More importantly, the unsupervised correspondences learned by DIFT fall short of fully supervised methods in matching accuracy (cf . Sec. 4.1 and Sec. 4.2).
In this work, we introduce MATCHA, a foundation fea-

27081

