This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive Medical Image Segmentation: A Benchmark Dataset and Baseline
Junlong Cheng1,2
He Yao1

Bin Fu2,4 Jin Ye2 Guoan Wang2 Tianbin Li2 Haoyu Wang2 Ruoyu Li1
Junren Cheng1 Jinwen Li3 Yanzhou Su2 Min Zhu1 * Junjun He2†
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xinjiang University
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chengjunlong, fubin, yejin, wangguoan, litianbin, wanghaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn,
{ruoyuli, 2024323040035, chengjunren}@stu.scu.edu.cn, 107556522204@stu.xju.edu.cn,
yanzhou.su@outlook.com, hejunjun.su@pjlab.org.cn, zhumin@scu.edu.cn

1. Introduction

Abstract
Interactive Medical Image Segmentation (IMIS) has long
been constrained by the limited availability of large-scale,
diverse, and densely annotated datasets, which hinders
model generalization and consistent evaluation across different models. In this paper, we introduce the IMed-361M
benchmark dataset, a significant advancement in general
IMIS research. First, we collect and standardize over 6.4
million medical images and their corresponding ground
truth masks from multiple data sources. Then, leveraging the strong object recognition capabilities of a vision
foundational model, we automatically generated dense interactive masks for each image and ensured their quality
through rigorous quality control and granularity management. Unlike previous datasets, which are limited by specific modalities or sparse annotations, IMed-361M spans
14 modalities and 204 segmentation targets, totaling 361
million masks—an average of 56 masks per image. Finally,
we developed an IMIS baseline network on this dataset that
supports high-quality mask generation through interactive
inputs, including clicks, bounding boxes, text prompts, and
their combinations. We evaluate its performance on medical image segmentation tasks from multiple perspectives,
demonstrating superior accuracy and scalability compared
to existing interactive segmentation models. To facilitate
research on foundational models in medical computer vision, we release the IMed-361M and model at https:
//github.com/uni-medical/IMIS-Bench.

Interactive Medical Image Segmentation (IMIS) enables
clinicians or users to guide the model by marking points,
lines, or regions on an image, resulting in segmentation
outcomes that better meet clinical needs [1, 2]. This userinformed segmentation approach not only optimizes results throughout the segmentation process, aiding clinicians
in precisely localizing targets during diagnosis and treatment [3–5], but also addresses the limitations of fully automated segmentation models in generalizing to unseen object
classes (i.e., zero-shot learning) [6–11], providing clinicians
with a flexible adjustment mechanism that significantly enhances segmentation reliability. However, the advancement
of IMIS advancement faces a critical bottleneck: the lack of
high-quality, diverse, and large-scale datasets that capture
the complex clinical environments [12, 13]. Existing public datasets (such as Totalsegmentator [14], AutoPET [15],
and CoNIC [16]) are often tailored to specific modalities
or tasks, thus constraining the generalization capabilities of
models across diverse medical scenarios.
Recently, as a foundational model for general visual segmentation, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) has garnered widespread attention [17, 18]. SAM integrates simple user interactions (such as points or bounding boxes)
into the model’s learning process and leverages pre-training
on large-scale datasets to achieve cross-domain and multitask transferability [19–21]. Although SAM has been pretrained on over 1 billion natural image masks, its direct
application in medical imaging remains limited due to the
substantial domain differences between natural and medical images, as well as the lack of medical imaging-specific
knowledge. To address these issues, current methods such
as MedSAM [22] and SAM-Med2D [23] attempt to expand
dataset size and fine-tune SAM to create IMIS models tailored for clinical scenarios. While these approaches have

* Corresponding author.
† Project lead.

20841

