This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiLoTs: High-Low Temporal Sensitive Representation Learning for
Semi-Supervised LiDAR Segmentation in Autonomous Driving
R.D. Lin1 , Pengcheng Weng1 , Yinqiao Wang1 , Han Ding2 , Jinsong Han3 , Fei Wang1†
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
rdlin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, hanjinsong@zju.edu.cn, {dinghan,feynmanw}@xjtu.edu.cn
†

corresponding author and project lead

https://github.com/rdlin118/HiLoTs

Road

Abstract
LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation plays a crucial role in autonomous driving. In recent years, semisupervised methods have gained popularity due to their
significant reduction in annotation labor and time costs.
Current semi-supervised methods typically focus on point
cloud spatial distribution or consider short-term temporal representations, e.g., only two adjacent frames, often overlooking the rich long-term temporal properties inherent in autonomous driving scenarios. In driving experience, we observe that nearby objects, such as roads
and vehicles, remain stable while driving, whereas distant objects exhibit greater variability in category and
shape. This natural phenomenon is also captured by LiDAR, which reflects lower temporal sensitivity for nearby
objects and higher sensitivity for distant ones. To leverage these characteristics, we propose HiLoTs, which learns
high-temporal sensitivity and low-temporal sensitivity representations from continuous LiDAR frames. These representations are further enhanced and fused using a crossattention mechanism. Additionally, we employ a teacherstudent framework to align the representations learned by
the labeled and unlabeled branches, effectively utilizing the
large amounts of unlabeled data. Experimental results on
the SemanticKITTI and nuScenes datasets demonstrate that
our proposed HiLoTs outperforms state-of-the-art semisupervised methods, and achieves performance close to LiDAR+Camera multimodal approaches.

Far

Sidewalk

Vegetation

Terrain

Car

Bicycle

Building

Fence

Person

Low Temporal Sensitive

Near

Far

High Temporal Sensitive

Figure 1. Different semantic classes exhibit varying degrees of
sensitivity to temporal changes. Objects farther from the vehicle
(e.g., vegetation, building, person, etc.) change more frequently
over time, as indicated by the red box. In contrast, objects closer to
the vehicle (e.g., road, sidewalk, etc.) are less sensitive to temporal
changes, as shown by the blue box.

1. Introduction

Most existing segmentation works are fully-supervised approaches [1, 11, 24, 46], which have several drawbacks.
They require extensive point-wise annotations, leading to
significant labor costs and time consumption. Additionally,
the need for large labeled datasets limits their scalability
and adaptability to new environments, highlighting the need
for more efficient and scalable approaches, such as semisupervised learning (SSL) methods that can leverage unlabeled data and reduce reliance on costly annotations.

LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation is crucial in autonomous driving for tasks such as obstacle avoidance [45],
lane detection [13], localization and mapping [5, 14].

To achieve SSL LiDAR segmentation, many works
leverage the spatial distribution information of point
clouds [8, 23, 27]. For example, SSPC-Net [8] introduces

1429

