This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProKeR: A Kernel Perspective on Few-Shot Adaptation of Large Vision-Language
Models
Yassir Bendou1∗ , Amine Ouasfi2∗ , Vincent Gripon1 , Adnane Boukhayma2
1
IMT Atlantique, Brest, France
2
Inria, University Rennes, IRISA, CNRS

Abstract
The growing popularity of Contrastive Language-Image
Pretraining (CLIP) has led to its widespread application
in various visual downstream tasks. To enhance CLIP’s
effectiveness and versatility, efficient few-shot adaptation
techniques have been widely adopted. Among these approaches, training-free methods, particularly caching methods exemplified by Tip-Adapter, have gained attention for
their lightweight adaptation without the need for additional
fine-tuning. In this paper, we revisit Tip-Adapter from a kernel perspective, showing that caching methods function as
local adapters and are connected to a well-established kernel literature. Drawing on this insight, we offer a theoretical
understanding of how these methods operate and suggest
multiple avenues for enhancing the Tip-Adapter baseline.
Notably, our analysis shows the importance of incorporating
global information in local adapters. Therefore, we subsequently propose a global method that learns a proximal regularizer in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) using
CLIP as a base learner. Our method, which we call ProKeR (Proximal Kernel ridge Regression), has a closed form
solution and achieves state-of-the-art performances across
11 datasets in the standard few-shot adaptation benchmark.
Code is available at https://ybendou.github.io/ProKeR/

Train
Test
Tip-Adapter
LLR
ProKeR
Figure 1. Fitting comparison between different methods on synthetically generated data, illustrating Nadaraya-Watson (Tip-Adapter)
bias mitigation via our proposed Local Linear Regression (LLR,
Sec. 3.3) and our final method ProKeR.

1. Introduction

known that the zero-shot performance of CLIP is limited
in scenarios with large domain shift from the pre-training
distribution [10, 34]. To further improve CLIP’s generalization, multiple follow-up works proposed to include few-shot
data [12, 62, 67] which has shown substantial performance
gains compared to zero-shot CLIP.
Few-shot adaptation of CLIP can be categorized into two
types of methods based on whether they require fine-tuning
on the few-shot samples or not. Among fine-tuning based
methods, prompt learning consists of learning continuous tokens instead of hand-crafted templates in CLIP as proposed
by CoOp [67] and CoCoOp [66]. In addition, adapter-based
fine-tuning methods operate in the feature space to train
their classifiers [12, 29]. Despite their promising performance on downstream tasks, fine-tuning methods require
additional training costs to learn the new set of parameters.
Furthermore, Tip-Adapter proposed a training-free few-shot
adaptation alternative [62]. Using a caching mechanism,

Large scale vision-language models (VLMs) trained with
contrastive learning have gained an increasing attraction in
recent years [21, 41]. These models have shown outstanding
performances across a wide range of tasks such as classification [41], segmentation [30] and video understanding [28].
CLIP [41] is one of the most established VLMs offering remarkable zero-shot capabilities in various downstream tasks.
It operates using only the class label within a textual prompt
such as “A photo of a {CLASS}” where {CLASS} is the
groundtruth text label for each class. However, it is well* These authors contributed equally to this work

25092

