This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapting Pre-trained 3D Models for Point Cloud Video Understanding via
Cross-frame Spatio-temporal Perception
Baixuan Lv1 * Yaohua Zha1,2∗
1

Tsinghua University

Tao Dai3† Xue Yuerong1
2

Pengcheng Laboratory

3

Ke Chen2

Shu-Tao Xia1,2

Shenzhen University

Abstract
Point cloud video understanding is becoming increasingly important in ﬁelds such as robotics, autonomous driving, and augmented reality, as they can accurately represent object motion and environmental changes. Despite
the progress made in self-supervised learning methods for
point cloud video understanding, the limited availability of
4D data and the high computational cost of training 4Dspeciﬁc models remain signiﬁcant obstacles. In this paper, we investigate the potential of transferring pre-trained
static 3D point cloud models to the 4D domain, pointing
out the limitations of static models that capture only spatial
information while neglecting temporal dynamics. To address this, we propose a novel Cross-frame Spatio-temporal
Adaptation (CSA) strategy by introducing the Point Tube
Adapter as the embedding layer and the Geometric Constraint Temporal Adapter (GCTA) to enforce temporal consistency across frames. This strategy extracts both shortterm and long-term temporal dynamics, effectively integrating them with spatial features and enriching the model’s
understanding of temporal changes in point cloud videos.
Extensive experiments on 3D action and gesture recognition tasks demonstrate that our method achieves stateof-the-art performance, establishing its effectiveness for
point cloud video understanding. Code is available at:
https://github.com/LvBaixuan/Point-CSA.

1. Introduction
Four-dimensional (4D) point cloud videos offer an accurate
representation of object motion, making them increasingly
valuable in ﬁelds such as robotics, autonomous driving, and
augmented reality. A comprehensive understanding of point
cloud videos is crucial for effectively perceiving environmental changes and facilitating interactions with the real
world. Consequently, the learning-based point cloud video
understanding [9–11, 20, 33] has attracted signiﬁcant re* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.  daitao.edu@gmail.com

Figure 1. Comparison of direct transfer of static point cloud pretraining model and point cloud video pre-training model on MSRAction dataset. Blue bars represent the performance of 4D-speciﬁc
models, yellow bars indicate the results from directly transferring
static point cloud pre-trained models, and orange bars depict the
performance after applying our Adaptation Method.

search interest in recent years.
Self-supervised representation learning has become the
most popular approach for current point cloud video understanding, as it learns general representations using unlabeled 4D data. Although various self-supervised methods [25–28, 46] have achieved some success in point cloud
video modeling, the difﬁculty in collecting 4D data results
in relatively small pre-training datasets, which limits the
ability to learn general representations. Furthermore, the introduction of the temporal dimension in point cloud videos
increases the time and computational resources required
during the pre-training phase, thereby raising the costs of
training 4D-speciﬁc models.
Pre-trained models [4, 8, 23, 37–39, 42, 44] for 3D static
point clouds have seen signiﬁcant success within the community and have gained widespread adoption. Static and
dynamic point clouds exhibit spatial consistency, raising the
question of whether existing pre-trained models for static
point clouds can be effectively leveraged for point cloud
videos, thereby reducing the need for additional training
of 4D-speciﬁc models. To explore this, we initially di-

12413

