This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dragin3D: Image Editing by Dragging in 3D Space
Weiran Guang12 Xiaoguang Gu2 * Mengqi Huang1 Zhendong Mao1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, People’s Daily Online
{guangwr, huangmq}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, guxiaoguang@people.cn, zdmao@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Interactive drag editing of images is a valuable task that has
gained considerable attention for its precision and controllability. However, existing approaches have primarily focused on manipulating the shape or movement of objects in
2D plane. We propose to extend this drag-based editing task
to 3D space. Firstly, we utilize the trajectory of two points
to represent the rotational trajectory of the object. Gaussian maps of a circle and a square are centered at these two
points, respectively. We use distinct shapes to ensure that
symmetric views produce different object representations.
Secondly, we introduce a lightweight mapping network to
embed the object features into two Gaussian maps to obtain a continuous control condition that guides the model
in learning the correspondence between the trajectory and
the object. Finally, to overcome the limitations of current
3D object reconstruction datasets, which typically consist
of object maps with transparent backgrounds, we affix random backgrounds to them. This modification helps improve
the model’s ability to ignore background interference when
editing real images with complex backgrounds. Experiments demonstrate that our approach successfully achieves
object rotation within the drag framework and demonstrates
strong generalization to real-world images.

proper prompt. This enables user-friendly image modification and offers more precise control over positioning, making it valuable for practical applications.
Existing drag-based editing methods can be categorized into optimized-based and training-based. DragGAN
[30] is an early representative of optimized-based methods, encompassing two key components: point tracking
and motion supervision. The latent code of StyleGAN
[13] is optimized while updating the position of the handle
point, ensuring that the features near the target points align
with those near the handle points. Since DragGAN was
proposed, both drag-based image and video editing techniques have been significantly advanced. Subsequently, researchers extended this process to diffusion models by optimizing the features of UNet to break through the inherent limitation of the GAN model [27, 36]. Recent studies have focused on addressing issues related to inaccurate
point tracking and incomplete motion supervision, enabling
more stable dragging by formulating better point tracking
and motion supervision protocols [7, 19]. Furthermore, to
overcome the limitations posed by variations in object motion patterns, the training-based method [43, 45] has been
introduced using trajectory guidance, where the motion trajectory of the object is encoded as a control condition. In
conclusion, ongoing efforts aim to enhance editing controllability and fidelity.
However, existing drag-based methods are limited to 2D
drag editing and fail to achieve drag in 3D space, which
significantly limits their practical application in the real 3D
world. 3D generation has significantly expanded the application in games, animation, virtual production, etc. It enables more realistic creation of 3D visual spaces that closely
resemble the physical world. We consider whether it is possible to generate novel view images of the object through
simple point-drag interactions. The two drag paradigms
discussed above are inadequate for solving this task. The
optimization-based approach primarily seeks to supervise
feature consistency between the handle point and the target
point, which cannot well control the substantial changes in
features that arise due to variations in spatial perspective, as

1. Introduction
Drag-based image editing has garnered substantial research
interest in recent years, aiming to enable the manipulation
of objects via user-defined handle and target points [30, 36].
Most existing image editing works are text-based, which
heavily depends on textual and semantic alignment. Sometimes, it is challenging to articulate user-desired edits in
words. Drag-based editing offers a more intuitive, interactive, and granular editing signal, allowing for precise manipulation at the pixel level. Users specify the start and end
points based on intended edits, eliminating the need for a
* Xiaoguang Gu is the Corresponding author.

21502

