This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hearing Hands: Generating Sounds from Physical Interactions in 3D Scenes
Yiming Dou1

Wonseok Oh1
1

Yuqing Luo1

University of Michigan

Patting table

2

Antonio Loquercio2

Andrew Owens1

University of Pennsylvania

Rubbing chair

Hitting snow

Patting chair

Figure 1. What sound does this object make when you strike it with your hand? We capture a 3D scene representation that can be
used to simulate the sound that would result from a given hand motion. We reconstruct the scene Gaussian Splatting [20], then manipulate
objects in the scene with hands, obtaining a sparse set of action-sound pairs. We use these examples to train a rectified flow model to map
3D hand trajectories at given position in a scene to a corresponding sound. At test time, a user can query an arbitrary 3D hand action and
the model will estimate the resulting sound. Here we show several captured hand and audio pairs for two scenes (with representative video
frames).

1. Introduction

Abstract

Today’s 3D reconstruction methods [20, 31] generally represent scenes as collections of static objects. While these
representations are well-suited to many computer vision applications, they lack the ability to model physical interactions, such as what would happen if we struck an object with
our hands. Modeling these interactions is a core challenge
in a number of domains, ranging from AR/VR to robotics.

We study the problem of making 3D scene reconstructions interactive by asking the following question: can we
predict the sounds of human hands physically interacting
with a scene? First, we record a video of a human manipulating objects within a 3D scene using their hands. We
then use these action-sound pairs to train a rectified flow
model to map 3D hand trajectories to their corresponding audio. At test time, a user can query the model for
other actions, parameterized as sequences of hand poses,
within the scene to estimate their corresponding sounds. In
our experiments, we find that our generated sounds accurately convey material properties and actions, and that they
are often indistinguishable to human observers from real
sounds. Project page: https://www.yimingdou.com/

An emerging line of work aims to address this problem, particularly by modeling action-conditioned visual
dynamics, resulting in reconstructions where one can open
and close a microwave, operate scissors, or animate an
object [7, 18, 22, 23, 44, 47]. While these approaches
have been effective, they primarily focus on the visual
and structural changes that objects undergo, and may not
always be applicable to all objects, such as those that do
not articulate or deform.

hearing_hands/.

1795

