This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVSAnywhere: Zero-Shot Multi-View Stereo
Sergio Izquierdo3,∗ Mohamed Sayed1 Michael Firman1 Guillermo Garcia-Hernando1
Daniyar Turmukhambetov1 Javier Civera3 Oisin Mac Aodha2 Gabriel Brostow1,4 Jamie Watson1,4
1
2
3
4
Niantic
University of Edinburgh
I3A, Universidad de Zaragoza
UCL
https://nianticlabs.github.io/mvsanywhere/

Abstract

MVSA (Ours)

Computing accurate depth from multiple views is a fundamental and longstanding challenge in computer vision.
However, most existing approaches do not generalize well
across different domains and scene types (e.g. indoor vs.
outdoor). Training a general-purpose multi-view stereo
model is challenging and raises several questions, e.g. how
to best make use of transformer-based architectures, how
to incorporate additional metadata when there is a variable number of input views, and how to estimate the range
of valid depths which can vary considerably across different scenes and is typically not known a priori? To address
these issues, we introduce MVSA, a novel and versatile
Multi-View Stereo architecture that aims to work Anywhere
by generalizing across diverse domains and depth ranges.
MVSA combines monocular and multi-view cues with an
adaptive cost volume to deal with scale-related issues. We
demonstrate state-of-the-art zero-shot depth estimation on
the Robust Multi-View Depth Benchmark, surpassing existing multi-view stereo and monocular baselines.

MAST3R + triangulation

Depth Pro (mono)

1. Introduction
Estimating accurate depth from multiple RGB images is
a core challenge in 3D vision, and a building block for
downstream applications like 3D reconstruction and autonomous driving. Recent approaches in learning-based
multi-view stereo (MVS) are capable of generating accurate depths [6, 89, 90]. However, existing methods typically
struggle to generalize to scene and camera setups that differ
significantly from those in their training data. As a result,
there is a pressing need for general-purpose MVS methods
that are more robust to differences between the training and
test distributions.
We take inspiration from the recent explosion in sceneagnostic single-view depth models, which predict plausible
metric [2, 25, 29, 54, 76, 92] or up-to-scale [38, 56, 87, 88]
depth using only a single image as input. These models are
∗ Work done during an internship at Niantic.

Figure 1. Our MVSA model results in high-quality reconstructions from posed images, and is superior to existing monocular
and MVS methods. Here we compare with Depth Pro [3], a recent monocular method which produces sharp and good looking
depth maps, but can have inconsistent scaling of depths, which
are required for good meshes. We also include a variant of
MAST3R [42] that we have augmented with ground truth camera
poses. Our model gives sharp depth maps which are also accurate
and 3D consistent, producing high-quality meshes in zero-shot environments.

11493

typically trained on large curated sets of synthetic and/or
real RGB-D data, endowing them with impressive generalization performance on previously unseen data. Singleview models are, however, inherently limited by their input.

