This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth Any Camera: Zero-Shot Metric Depth Estimation from Any Camera
Yuliang Guo1 *†, Sparsh Garg2†, S. Mahdi H. Miangoleh3 , Xinyu Huang1 , Liu Ren1
1

Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
2
1

3

Carnegie Mellon University

Simon Fraser University

[yuliang.guo2,xingyu.huang,liu.ren]@us.bosch.com
2

sparshg@andrew.cmu.edu

3

smh31@sfu.ca

https://yuliangguo.github.io/depth-any-camera

Abstract

Regular Image

While recent depth foundation models exhibit strong
zero-shot generalization, achieving accurate metric depth
across diverse camera types—particularly those with large
fields of view (FoV) such as fisheye and 360-degree cameras—remains a significant challenge. This paper presents
Depth Any Camera (DAC), a powerful zero-shot metric
depth estimation framework that extends a perspectivetrained model to effectively handle cameras with varying
FoVs. The framework is designed to ensure that all existing 3D data can be leveraged, regardless of the specific
camera types used in new applications. Remarkably, DAC
is trained exclusively on perspective images but generalizes seamlessly to fisheye and 360-degree cameras without the need for specialized training data. DAC employs
Equi-Rectangular Projection (ERP) as a unified image representation, enabling consistent processing of images with
diverse FoVs. Its core components include pitch-aware
Image-to-ERP conversion with efficient online augmentation to simulate distorted ERP patches from undistorted inputs, FoV alignment operations to enable effective training
across a wide range of FoVs, and multi-resolution data augmentation to further address resolution disparities between
training and testing. DAC achieves state-of-the-art zeroshot metric depth estimation, improving 1 accuracy by up
to 50% on multiple fisheye and 360-degree datasets compared to prior metric depth foundation models, demonstrating robust generalization across camera types.

Fisheye Image

Metric Depth

DAC

Metric Depth

Zero-Shot
360 Image

Metric Depth

Meter

Figure 1. We introduce Depth Any Camera (DAC) framework,
which leverages large-scale datasets containing perspective camera images to train a single depth estimation model capable of
conducting zero-shot metric depth estimation on images captured
various types of cameras, including those captured from large FoV
fisheye and 360 cameras.

relied on supervised training using single datasets and depth
sensor [24] supervision [3, 25, 36], monocular depth estimation remains challenging due to scale-depth ambiguity.
Expanding training datasets has been a key strategy to enhance robustness, with self-supervised approaches using sequential frames [13, 46, 48]. However, these methods often
underperform due to self-supervision ambiguity, view inconsistencies and dynamic objects. Recent methods, such
as MiDaS [37], leverage large-scale datasets with 3D supervision, normalizing scale differences across datasets to
enable zero-shot testing. However, they primarily provide
relative depth rather than metric depth.
Recent methods tackle zero-shot metric depth estimation
by addressing the challenges of inconsistent scaling factors
in depth ground truth caused by varying camera intrinsic
parameters. Several works demonstrate impressive generalization capabilities on novel images [4, 20, 33, 53, 57],
establishing themselves as foundational depth models for
downstream tasks. However, these approaches often struggle with large field-of-view (FoV) cameras like fisheye and

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from monocular cameras is a foundational challenge for applications like autonomous driving,
AR/VR, and robotics. While early deep learning methods
* Corresponding author.
† Equal technical contribution.

26996

