This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIMotion: Temporal and Interactive Framework for
Efficient Human-Human Motion Generation
Yabiao Wang1,2 *, Shuo Wang2 *, Jiangning Zhang2 , Ke Fan3 ,
Jiafu Wu2 , Zhucun Xue1 , Yong Liu1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
https://aigc-explorer.github.io/TIMotion-page/

Abstract

egories [9, 22], speeches [2, 12], and natural language
prompts [11, 24]. Among these, many approaches leveraging large language models [1] and diffusion models [43]
have yielded impressive results in generating realistic and
diverse motions, benefiting from their powerful modeling
capabilities. Despite this progress, most existing methods
are designed primarily for single-person scenarios, thereby
neglecting a crucial element of human motion: the complex
and dynamic interactions between individuals. We address
the challenge of generating two-person motion by fully utilizing the temporal and interactive dynamics between the
individuals.
To better explore human-human motion generation, we
abstract a general framework MetaMotion, as shown on
the left of Fig. 1, which consists of two phases: temporal modeling and interaction mixing. Previous approaches
have prioritized interaction mixing over temporal modeling and can be divided into two primary categories: singleperson-based methods and separate modeling-based methods. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the single-person-based methods (e.g. MDM [32]) concatenate two individuals into one,
which is then fed into the existing single-person motion
generation module, e.g. DiT. And the separate modelingbased methods (e.g. InterGen [16]), as shown in Fig. 1(b),
model two individuals individually and then extract motion information from both themselves and each other, using self-attention and cross-attention mechanisms, respectively. Following the general logic of MetaMotion, we introduce the Temporal and Interactive Framework, as depicted
in Fig. 1(c), which models the human-human causal interactions. In fact, this effective temporal modeling method
can simplify the design of the interaction mixing module
and reduce the number of learnable parameters.
In this paper, we design an effective temporal modeling
method and introduce TIMotion, a temporal and interactive
framework for efficient human-human motion generation.
Specifically, we first propose Causal Interactive Injection to
model the two single-person motion sequences as a causal
interaction sequence, according to the temporal causal prop-

Human-human motion generation is essential for understanding humans as social beings. Current methods fall
into two main categories: single-person-based methods
and separate modeling-based methods. To delve into this
field, we abstract the overall generation process into a general framework MetaMotion, which consists of two phases:
temporal modeling and interaction mixing. For temporal modeling, the single-person-based methods concatenate
two people into a single one directly, while the separate
modeling-based methods skip the modeling of interaction
sequences. The inadequate modeling described above resulted in sub-optimal performance and redundant model
parameters. In this paper, we introduce TIMotion (Temporal and Interactive Modeling), an efficient and effective
framework for human-human motion generation. Specifically, we first propose Causal Interactive Injection to model
two separate sequences as a causal sequence leveraging
the temporal and causal properties. Then we present RoleEvolving Scanning to adjust to the change in the active and
passive roles throughout the interaction. Finally, to generate smoother and more rational motion, we design Localized Pattern Amplification to capture short-term motion
patterns. Extensive experiments on InterHuman and InterX demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance.

1. Introduction
In the field of generative computer vision, human motion
generation has significant implications for computer animation [18, 20], game development [3, 33], and robotic control [26, 36, 37]. In recent years, there have been remarkable advancements in human motion generation, driven
by various user-specified conditions such as action cat* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

7169

