This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MI-DETR: An Object Detection Model with Multi-time Inquiries Mechanism
Zhixiong Nan1 , Xianghong Li1 , Jifeng Dai2 , Tao Xiang1 *
1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
nanzx@cqu.edu.cn, 202314021077t@stu.cqu.edu.cn,
daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn, txiang@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract

to adapt to the object detection task (i.e., “feature utilization”), and the prediction head predicts locations and categories of objects.
This paper attempts to explore a new decoder architecture to optimize feature utilization. Each transformer
decoder layer contains a self-attention (SA), a crossattention (CA), and a feed-forward network (FFN), whliu2023detectionere object queries are optimized by interacting with image features. Analogously speaking, it is
like that a student (object queries act like a student who
“knows” nothing or a little about the image at the beginning decoder layer) asks a question to a teacher (image features could be analogous to a teacher since he “knows”
all information in the image) and obtains the image information based on the teacher’s answer. Therefore, the
“SA+CA+FFN” architecture in each decoder layer is analogously termed as “inquiry head” in this paper. The transformer decoder of existing DETR-like models adopts the
“cascaded inquiries” architecture. Object queries continuously inquire the image features layer by layer to learn the
gradually-refined information in the cascaded direction.
The robustness of this decoder architecture has been
fully validated in previous DETR-like models. However,
from the perspective of feature utilization, this architecture
presents a worth-noting character. The representations of
object queries in the next decoder layer are directly decided
by that in the current decoder layer [4], thus the update of
query representations is constrained in the cascaded direction, which indicates that the cascaded inquiries architecture
tends to learn the relatively limited information. In addition,
excessively refined information learnt in deep decoder layers of the same cascaded direction might be redundant or
even negative. More analysis could be found in experiment
and discussion sections.
Due to the diversity and complexity of natural scenes,
objects might be extremely-small, heavily-occluded, or
confusingly mixed with the background. To adapt to diverse scenes, it is required to fully utilize image features
to learn comprehensive information. However, based on

Based on analyzing the character of cascaded decoder architecture commonly adopted in existing DETR-like models, this paper proposes a new decoder architecture. The
cascaded decoder architecture constrains object queries
to update in the cascaded direction, only enabling object
queries to learn relatively-limited information from image
features. However, the challenges for object detection in
natural scenes (e.g., extremely-small, heavily-occluded, and
confusingly mixed with the background) require an object
detection model to fully utilize image features, which motivates us to propose a new decoder architecture with the
parallel Multi-time Inquiries (MI) mechanism. MI mechanism is very simple, enabling object queries to parallelly
perform multi-time inquiries to learn more comprehensive
information from image features. Our MI based model,
MI-DETR, outperforms all existing DETR-like models on
COCO benchmark under different backbones and training epochs, achieving +2.3 AP and +0.6 AP improvements
compared to the most representative model DINO and SOTA
model Relation-DETR under ResNet-50 backbone.

1. Introduction
The first widely-acknowledged object detection model, Viola Jones detector [38], is proposed in 2001. Fueled by
the remarkable R-CNN [9] and DETR [3], CNN based
works [1, 5, 19, 22, 30, 31, 37] have significantly pushed
forward the object detection technique since 2014, and
transformer based DETR-like models [2, 6, 11–13, 15, 16,
20, 21, 23, 26, 40–42, 44, 45, 47, 49] further bring the technique to a new landscape since 2020. A DETR-like model
consists of a backbone, a transformer encoder, a transformer
decoder, and a prediction head. From the perspective of
function, the backbone and encoder are responsible for image features extraction, the decoder utilizes image features
* Corresponding author.

4703

