This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BIMBA: Selective-Scan Compression for Long-Range Video Question Answering
Md Mohaiminul Islam1 * Tushar Nagarajan2 Huiyu Wang2
Gedas Bertasius1 Lorenzo Torresani2
1
2
UNC Chapel Hill
Meta AI
https://sites.google.com/view/bimba-mllm

Abstract

video inputs spanning a few seconds. In this case, a simple
but effective strategy involves extracting “tokens” from the
individual frames of the video using a pretrained image encoder [3, 34, 35, 45, 51, 64]. The concatenation of the extracted tokens is then passed to the LLM for semantic processing and language generation. This strategy breaks down
when the video is very long, e.g., when it spans minutes or
hours, because of the quadratic cost of the self-attention operation needed to process the extracted visual tokens. In addition, naive concatenation of frame-level tokens for a long
video would flood the LLM with an exceedingly long and
redundant sequence of features. For example, the LLAMA3.2 [51] image encoder outputs 1600 ∼ 6400 tokens per
image. Therefore, encoding just 128 frames would produce
a sequence of 205K ∼ 820K tokens, which is impractical to
process even by modern GPUs.

Video Question Answering (VQA) in long videos poses
the key challenge of extracting relevant information and
modeling long-range dependencies from many redundant
frames. The self-attention mechanism provides a general
solution for sequence modeling, but it has a prohibitive cost
when applied to a massive number of spatiotemporal tokens in long videos. Most prior methods rely on compression strategies to lower the computational cost, such as reducing the input length via sparse frame sampling or compressing the output sequence passed to the large language
model (LLM) via space-time pooling. However, these naive
approaches over-represent redundant information and often miss salient events or fast-occurring space-time patterns. In this work, we introduce BIMBA, an efficient statespace model to handle long-form videos. Our model leverages the selective scan algorithm to learn to effectively select critical information from high-dimensional video and
transform it into a reduced token sequence for efficient
LLM processing. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
BIMBA achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on multiple longform VQA benchmarks, including PerceptionTest, NExTQA, EgoSchema, VNBench, LongVideoBench, Video-MME,
and MLVU. Code and models are available at https:
//sites.google.com/view/bimba-mllm.

To address these issues, most long-form video MLLMs
adopt compression techniques to reduce the number of visual tokens. For example, the methods in [49, 74] apply simple spatial/temporal pooling to frame-level tokens
to shorten the sequence passed to the LLM. However, the
pooling operation discards important spatiotemporal information. An alternative strategy is to use convolution-based
modules to simultaneously perform sequence compression
and temporal modeling [42, 47]. However, convolutionbased models lack long-range modeling ability since convolutional kernels can only capture local short-range dependencies. Recent work [79] reduces the number of output visual tokens by applying self-attention with a smaller
number of query keys [29]. However, these systems trade
efficiency at the expense of cross-frame analysis, which is
essential for long video understanding.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 5, 11, 14, 30, 52,
53, 63] have revolutionized the field of artificial intelligence and produced significant changes in various fields.
Building on LLMs, Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) have recently enabled significant gains for image [2, 4, 9, 12, 24, 34–36, 43, 45, 51, 76, 87] and video understanding problems, typically reformulated as language
generation from video [7, 38, 39, 42, 46, 49, 59, 67, 79].
However, most video MLLMs have been applied to short
* Work done during an internship at Meta.

In this work, we propose Bidirectional Interleaved
Mamba for Better Answers (BIMBA), which provides an
efficient and effective alternative for compressing long
videos into a short, information-rich sequence of tokens
for video question-answering by LLMs. Our system is inspired by the success of state-space models (SSMs) [18–
22] for processing long documents in NLP [17]. SSMs inherently possess long-term modeling ability while requiring

29096

