This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PHGC: Procedural Heterogeneous Graphscrew the knob
Completion forput down the
Natural
Language
rubber stopper
Task Verification in Egocentric Videos
Xun Jiang1 , Zhiyi Huang1 , Xing Xu1,2 *, Jingkuan Song1,2 , Fumin Shen1 , Heng Tao Shen1,2
1
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering,
User-defined
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
Language Rules
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
VIDEO
①

Abstract
Natural Language-based Egocentric Task Verification
(NLETV) aims to equip agents to determine if operation flows of procedural tasks in egocentric videos align
with natural language instructions. Describing rules with
natural language provides generalizable applications, but
also raises cross-modal heterogeneity and hierarchical
misalignment challenges. In this paper, we proposed a
novel approach termed Procedural Heterogeneous Graph
Completion (PHGC), which addresses these challenges
with heterogeneous graphs representing the logic in rules
and operation flows. Specifically, our PHGC method mainly
consists of three key components: (1) Heterogeneous Graph
Construction module that defines objective states and operation flows as vertices, with temporal and sequential relations as edges. (2) Cross-Modal Path Finding module
that aligns semantic relations between hierarchical video
and text elements. (3) Discriminative Entity Representation module excavates hidden entities that integrate general
logical relations and discriminative cues to reveal final verification results. Additionally, we further constructed a new
dataset called CSV-NL comprised of realistic videos. Extensive experiments on the two benchmark datasets covering
both digital and physical scenarios, i.e., EgoTV and CSVNL, demonstrate that our proposed PHGC establishes stateof-the-art performance across different settings. Our code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
XunCHN/PHGC.

Task: Weigh and Transfer Chemicals
Rule: Firstly, you should screw the knob. Then, please put
down the rubber stopper. Finally, take up the weight.

take up the weight

Egocentric Videos

True:
Task Completed!
Verified

TEXT
Agents

Failed

False:
VIDEO
② Error Operation!

(a) An illustrated example for the NLETV task
Cross-modal
Heterogeneity

Matching
Operation B
Description

Overall
Rules
Operation B
Description

Hierarchical
Misalignments
Overall
Rules
Reasoning
Operation
A
Operation A
Description Description
Reasoning
Operation B
Description

(b) Two key challenges in the NLETV task

Figure 1. (a) An illustration of the NLETV task. (b) Two chalthe
lenges: cross-modal heterogeneity and hierarchical misalignment. Screw
knob

verify procedural tasks from egocentric videos based on natural language rules. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), given language descriptions of a procedural task, the NLETV task
aims at determining whether the egocentric videos have accurately completed multi-step tasks, adhering to the temporal order and specified operational criteria.
Compared with previous video-based procedural task
verification works [1, 6, 7], the NLETV is more practical
and generalizable: describing standard procedures by natural language well fits interactive intuition of humans, while
providing better flexibility. However, as depicted in Fig.
1(b) the NLETV task is also highly challenging due to two
difficulties: (1) Cross-modal heterogeneity between text and
video data. Unlike the previous works in video-based task
verification [1, 7], the standard procedures in NLETV task
are described in natural language instead of the same visual signals as target videos. It requires models to refine
rules from the text modality while perceiving key operational cues from egocentric videos. (2) Hierarchical mis-

1. Introduction
By capturing perspectives of users directly, egocentric video
analysis [1–4] allows for real-time task assistance and skill
acquisition. In these contexts, the Natural Language-based
Egocentric Task Verification (NLETV) challenge [5] has recently been proposed to enable agents to comprehend and
* Corresponding author.

8615

pu
rub

Cros

