This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating 6DoF Object Manipulation Trajectories
from Action Description in Egocentric Vision

1

Tomoya Yoshida1 Shuhei Kurita2 Taichi Nishimura3 Shinsuke Mori1
Kyoto University 2 National Institute of Informatics 3 Sony Interactive Entertainment
step = 0

step = 4

step = 8

Target Object in 3D

Generation
Initial State in 2D

Target Object in 2D

Initial State in 3D

Action Description:
“Pick up the knife on the counter top with his right hand.”

Figure 1. 6DoF object manipulation trajectory. This task aims to generate a sequence of 6DoF object poses from an action description
and an initial state comprising the visual input and the object’s initial pose.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Use of tools and manipulation of objects at their will is an
essential ability for developing robots that assist human activities. Especially having knowledge of manipulating numerous tools or objects in our work places and houses following the requests from humans is the next key technology for developing interactive robots that support us in daily
scenes. One way to achieve this is to preliminarily learn various ways of manipulating objects from the human demonstration, as the recent robotic studies suggest that human
demonstration acts as quite effective supervision for object
manipulation trajectory generation [15, 24, 104]. However,
this human demonstration-driven approach evokes the wellknown limitation of data scarcity: the object manipulation
trajectories from real human demonstrations are quite informative yet extremely limited and almost prohibitive for
covering numerous objects we use in our daily lives.
One promising solution for this is to make use of videos
of daily working scenes for extracting human demonstrations of various object manipulations. Egocentric videos
are becoming popular in virtual and augmented reality
(VR/AR) [6] and even recording our daily life activities [21, 63] in both industry and research fields. For tracking human motions, HOT3D [3] provides quality 3D poses
and models of hands and objects from precise lab recordings of human activity. Unfortunately, the precise record-

Learning to use tools or objects in common scenes, particularly handling them in various ways as instructed, is
a key challenge for developing interactive robots. Training models to generate such manipulation trajectories requires a large and diverse collection of detailed manipulation demonstrations for various objects, which is nearly
unfeasible to gather at scale. In this paper, we propose a
framework that leverages large-scale ego- and exo-centric
video datasets — constructed globally with substantial effort — of Exo-Ego4D to extract diverse manipulation trajectories at scale. From these extracted trajectories with
the associated textual action description, we develop trajectory generation models based on visual and point cloudbased language models. In the recently proposed egocentric
vision-based in-a-quality trajectory dataset of HOT3D, we
confirmed that our models successfully generate valid object trajectories, establishing a training dataset and baseline models for the novel task of generating 6DoF manipulation trajectories from action descriptions in egocentric
vision. Our dataset and code: https://biscue5.
github.io/egoscaler-project-page/.
This work is also done in Research and Development Center for Large
Language Models, National Institute of Informatics (NII LLMC).

17370

