This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ActiveGAMER: Active GAussian Mapping through Efficient Rendering
Liyan Chen *†,1,2
1

Huangying Zhan *‡,1
Kevin Chen 1
Xiangyu Xu 1
Qingan Yan 1 Changjiang Cai 1 Yi Xu 1
2

OPPO US Research Center

Stevens Institute of Technology

Abstract
We introduce ActiveGAMER, an active mapping system that
utilizes 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) to achieve highquality scene mapping and efficient exploration. Unlike recent NeRF-based methods, which are computationally demanding and limit mapping performance, our approach
leverages the efficient rendering capabilities of 3DGS to
enable effective and efficient exploration in complex environments. The core of our system is a rendering-based information gain module that identifies the most informative
viewpoints for next-best-view planning, enhancing both geometric and photometric reconstruction accuracy. ActiveGAMER also integrates a carefully balanced framework,
combining coarse-to-fine exploration, post-refinement, and
a global-local keyframe selection strategy to maximize reconstruction completeness and fidelity. Our system autonomously explores and reconstructs environments with
state-of-the-art geometric and photometric accuracy and
completeness, significantly surpassing existing approaches
in both aspects. Extensive evaluations on benchmark
datasets such as Replica and MP3D highlight ActiveGAMER’s effectiveness in active mapping tasks.

Gaussian Map w/ Exploration Trajectory

3D Points

Rendered RGB

Rendered Depth

Figure 1. ActiveGAMER is built on a Gaussian Map backbone
and autonomously performs coarse-to-fine exploration to optimize
geometric accuracy and photometric fidelity.

1. Introduction

known as Active Reconstruction, where localization is assumed to be known, allowing the system to prioritize highquality and complete scene reconstruction. We explore this
task by introducing a novel approach based on 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS), which provides an efficient radiance field
representation optimized for active exploration.
Radiance fields, particularly implicit models like NeRFs,
have shown promising results in applications such as 3D
object reconstruction [45], novel view synthesis [40, 49, 71,
76], and surface reconstruction [2, 32]. However, NeRF’s
high computational demands hinder real-time applicability,
especially in active vision tasks. To address this, recent efforts have explored hybrid neural representations, which incorporate both implicit and explicit components to enhance
rendering efficiency [41, 62].
On the other hand, 3D Gaussian Splatting [26] is a recent
and efficient radiance field representation that leverages
Gaussian primitives in 3D space. Unlike NeRFs, which rely
on dense, computationally intensive sampling, 3DGS uses a
sparse set of Gaussian ellipsoids to approximate both geometry and color information. This representation allows for

In computer vision, the ability to generate detailed 3D reconstructions from 2D images or videos has seen tremendous progress, enabling real-time, incremental 3D modeling as new visual data is assimilated. This process, often powered by Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM), plays a crucial role in robotic applications, where
it supports tasks such as planning and navigation. When
combined, these functions define Active SLAM, a framework that integrates localization, mapping, planning, and
navigation to enable autonomous exploration.
This paper focuses on a subproblem of Active SLAM
* Equal contribution
† Work done as an intern at OPPO US Research Center
‡ Corresponding author (zhanhuangying.work@gmail.com)

16486

