This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoGEM: Training-free Action Grounding in Videos
Felix Vogel1 , Walid Bousselham1,2 , Anna Kukleva3 , Nina Shvetsova1,2,3 , Hilde Kuehne1,2,4
1

Goethe University Frankfurt, 2 Tuebingen AI Center/University of Tuebingen, 3 MPI for Informatics, SIC, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract

Action: „Whisk eggs“

Vision-language foundation models have shown impressive capabilities across various zero-shot tasks, including
training-free localization and grounding, primarily focusing on localizing objects in images. However, leveraging
those capabilities to localize actions and events in videos
is challenging, as actions have less physical outline and
are usually described by higher-level concepts. In this
work, we propose VideoGEM, the first training-free spatial action grounding method based on pretrained imageand video-language backbones. Namely, we adapt the selfself attention formulation of GEM [2] to spatial activity
grounding. We observe that high-level semantic concepts,
such as actions, usually emerge in the higher layers of the
image- and video-language models. We, therefore, propose a layer weighting in the self-attention path to prioritize higher layers. Additionally, we introduce a dynamic
weighting method to automatically tune layer weights to
capture each layer’s relevance to a specific prompt. Finally,
we introduce a prompt decomposition, processing action,
verb, and object prompts separately, resulting in a better
spatial localization of actions. We evaluate the proposed
approach on three image- and video-language backbones,
CLIP, OpenCLIP, and ViCLIP, and on four video grounding datasets, V-HICO, DALY, YouCook-Interactions, and
GroundingYouTube, showing that the proposed trainingfree approach is able to outperform current trained stateof-the-art approaches for spatial video grounding. 1

Verb prompt:

Object prompt:

Action prompt:

“A photo of a person
whisk something.”

“A photo of a person
using eggs.”

“A photo of a person
whisk eggs.”

Combined output

Figure 1. Prompt decomposition and combination. First, we
decompose the action query into verb, object, and action prompts.
For each component, we then predict locations corresponding to
the highest values on the heatmaps (red-high, blue-low). To determine the final location (white star), we calculate the center point
of these individual predictions. The red, blue, and yellow stars
represent the predicted locations for the action, object, and verb
prompts, respectively, while the dark green bounding box represents the annotated ground truth.

of actions based on such weak supervision presents some
significant challenges: unlike objects, which usually have
a clear, unambiguous outline, actions often lack such region properties and exhibit diverse, context-dependent semantics. Additionally, actions often refer to interactions
between entities and can comprise multiple objects or people over different timespans as shown in Figure 1. This
variability makes it hard to capture the various visual representations of an action, especially based on web-crawled
image- or video-text pairs. As a result, spatial video grounding methods [3, 24, 29] still need to be specifically trained,
e.g. with a localization loss, to perform spatial localization.
Compared to that, another line of work focuses on
training-free localization of semantic concepts in images [2,
15, 40] by proposing various training-free adaptations
of vision-language models to perform object localization.

1. Introduction
Spatial localization of actions in videos has been a longstanding topic in video analysis [6, 10, 19, 23, 27, 28, 30,
34, 35]. While early approaches were trained with humanannotated bounding boxes and mainly focused on detecting
humans and classifying respective actions [8, 26], recent approaches [3, 29, 33] are trying to leverage the localization
properties of vision-language models without the need of
bounding box annotations, learning localization only from
image- text or video-text pairs. However, the localization
1 Code is available at https://github.com/felixVogel02/VideoGEM

3374

