This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Devils in Middle Layers of Large Vision-Language Models: Interpreting,
Detecting and Mitigating Object Hallucinations via Attention Lens
Zhangqi Jiang1 Junkai Chen2,3 Beier Zhu4 Tingjin Luo1 * Yankun Shen2,3 Xu Yang2,3 *
1
National University of Defense Technology 2 Southeast University
3
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology &
Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education
4
Nanyang Technological University
{sxdxjzq, junkai.chen.0917}@gmail.com

beier.zhu@ntu.edu.sg

tingjinluo@hotmail.com

The

Abstract

Cat

TV

The

a

(b) Semantic Refinement

Middle Layers

couch

remote

couch
cat
Interact with Multiple Objects !

Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs)
significantly undermine their reliability, motivating researchers to explore the causes of hallucination. However,
most studies primarily focus on the language aspect rather
than the visual. In this paper, we address how LVLMs process visual information and whether this process causes
hallucination. Firstly, we use the attention lens to identify
the stages at which LVLMs handle visual data, discovering
that the middle layers are crucial. Moreover, we find that
these layers can be further divided into two stages: “visual
information enrichment” and “semantic refinement” which
respectively propagate visual data to object tokens and interpret it through text. By analyzing attention patterns during the visual information enrichment stage, we find that
real tokens consistently receive higher attention weights
than hallucinated ones, serving as a strong indicator of
hallucination. Further examination of multi-head attention maps reveals that hallucination tokens often result from
heads interacting with inconsistent objects. Based on these
insights, we propose a simple inference-time method that
adjusts visual attention by integrating information across
various heads. Extensive experiments demonstrate that this
approach effectively mitigates hallucinations in mainstream
LVLMs without additional training costs.1

(a) Visual Information Enrichment

Higher
Attention !

Input Image

Hallucination!

{220242353, xuyang palm}@seu.edu.cn

WV

Linear Projector
Before Softmax

hl (x) Hidden State
( l ,h)

Ak (ak,i) Attention Weights

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of our findings: (i) visual information is primarily processed in the middle layers where (a) the model extracts
the visual information and then (b) interprets the semantics embedded in image tokens; (ii) for real tokens like “cat”, the attention
weights over image tokens are generally higher than hallucinated
ones like “TV” in (a); (iii) the model may combine the visual features extracted from multiple objects to produce hallucinations.

Building on the foundations of Large Language Models
(LLMs), Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [4, 27,
32, 44, 49, 51, 54] have emerged as powerful tools for un* Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/ZhangqiJiang07/middle_

derstanding visual inputs and generating textual responses
aligned with user intent. Their multi-modal nature has enabled a large variety of vision-language tasks, e.g., image
captioning, visual question answering, and visual dialog.

layers_indicating_hallucinations.

25004

