This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniGoal: Towards Universal Zero-shot Goal-oriented Navigation
Hang Yin1 ,* Xiuwei Xu1∗† , Linqing Zhao1 , Ziwei Wang2 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu1‡
1
Tsinghua University
2
Nanyang Technological University
{yinh23, xxw21, zhaolinqing}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
ziwei.wang@ntu.edu.sg; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a general framework for universal zero-shot goal-oriented navigation. Existing zero-shot
methods build inference framework upon large language
models (LLM) for specific tasks, which differs a lot in overall pipeline and fails to generalize across different types of
goal. Towards the aim of universal zero-shot navigation, we
propose a uniform graph representation to unify different
goals, including object category, instance image and text
description. We also convert the observation of agent into an
online maintained scene graph. With this consistent scene
and goal representation, we preserve most structural information compared with pure text and are able to leverage
LLM for explicit graph-based reasoning. Specifically, we
conduct graph matching between the scene graph and goal
graph at each time instant and propose different strategies
to generate long-term goal of exploration according to different matching states. The agent first iteratively searches
subgraph of goal when zero-matched. With partial matching,
the agent then utilizes coordinate projection and anchor pair
alignment to infer the goal location. Finally scene graph correction and goal verification are applied for perfect matching. We also present a blacklist mechanism to enable robust
switch between stages. Extensive experiments on several
benchmarks show that our UniGoal achieves state-of-the-art
zero-shot performance on three studied navigation tasks with
a single model, even outperforming task-specific zero-shot
methods and supervised universal methods. Project Page.

1. Introduction
Goal-oriented navigation is a fundamental problem in various robotic tasks, which requires the agent to navigate to
a specified goal in an unknown environment. Depending
on the goal type, there are many popular sub-tasks of goaloriented navigation, among which we focus on three rep* Equal contribution. † Project lead. ‡ Corresponding author.

ĞĚ
5HPKIZ-UGR

9IKTK-XGVN

/TY/SGMK-UGR

/ZOYGINGOX/TLXUTZULOZ
ZNKXKOYGIULLKKZGHRK:]U
]OTKMRGYYKYGTJUTK
ZXGTYVGXKTZMRGYYHUZZRK
GXKOTZNK[VVKXRKLZIUXTKX

3GZINOTM

54.0 54.5

56.1

50.6
5HPKIZMUGR

+^VRUXGZOUT

-UGR-XGVN

:K^Z-UGR

60.2

20.2

17.0

37.4
/TYZGTIK/SGMKMUGR

:K^ZMUGR

;TO\KXYGRSKZNUJY
;TO-UGR 5[XY

-5':9[VKX\OYKJ

@KXUYNUZSKZNUJY
;TO-UGR 5[XY

9-4G\

3UJ//4

Figure 1. State-of-the-art zero-shot goal-oriented navigation methods are typically specialized for each goal type. Although recent
work presents universal goal-oriented navigation method, it requires
to train policy networks on large-scale data and lacks zero-shot generalization ability. We propose UniGoal, which enables zero-shot
inference on three studied navigation tasks with a unified framework and achieves leading performance on multiple benchmarks.

resentative types: object category, instance image and text
description. These sub-tasks are also known as Object-goal
Navigation (ON) [7, 44, 49], Instance-image-goal Navigation (IIN) [15, 16] and Text-goal Navigation (TN) [37]. With
the development of deep learning, reinforcement learning
(RL) and vision/language foundation models, we have witnessed great achievement of performance on each individual
sub-task. However, in actual application scenarios, the high
flexibility of human instructions requires high versatility of
agent. Therefore, a universal method that can handle all
sub-tasks in a single model is of great desire.
Towards the aim of universal goal-oriented navigation, a
natural solution is to learn a uniform representation of different kinds of goals. GOAT [6] trains a universal global policy

19057

