This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conical Visual Concentration for Efficient Large Vision-Language Models
Long Xing1,2 , Qidong Huang1,2 , Xiaoyi Dong2,3B , Jiajie Lu1 , Pan Zhang2 , Yuhang Zang2 ,
Yuhang Cao2 , Conghui He2 , Jiaqi Wang2,5B , Feng Wu1 , Dahua Lin2,3,4 ,
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 CPII under InnoHK 5 Shanghai Innovation Institute
{xing long@, hqd0037@}mail.ustc.edu.cn

xydong@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

wangjiaqi@pjlab.org.cn

across various application domains, including image and
video understanding [17, 43, 49]. The rapid development
of LVLMs is gradually paving the way for artificial intelligence to integrate into daily life [14, 27, 44, 48, 61, 64].
Despite the advancements of LVLMs, a significant challenge lies the escalating computational costs. Images or
videos, as continuous and information-rich signals, exhibit substantial spatial redundancy but are difficult to compress losslessly. It results in excessive vision tokens and
a steep increase in training and inference costs, which becomes particularly pronounced with higher image resolutions [21, 51, 62] and longer videos [7, 30, 39]. The number of vision tokens increases quadratically with the resolution or the frame numbers, driving the sequence length into
the tens of thousands [26]. Given that the computational
complexity of transformers scales with sequence length,
the associated computational costs become prohibitively
high [34, 55]. Consequently, there is a pressing need to
reduce the redundancy and concentrate more on valuable
visual information for efficient deployment.
Previous exploration of reducing image tokens could be
roughly divided into two categories: One is to compress
the vision tokens before passing them into the base LLM of
LVLMs [1, 28, 45, 56]. The other is to partially drop the
vision tokens at the very shallow layer of the LVLMs [8].
However, both ideas inevitably hurt the performance of
LVLMs: the former suffers from the information loss introduced by their compression, and the latter drops part of
the information before the LVLMs fully understand them.
To break through these limitations, we explore the nature
of LVLMs in understanding images from an intuitive question: Are all image tokens necessary for all LVLM layers?
We conduct an empirical study by removing different ratios
of image tokens at different layers of the LVLM at inference
time and observing the benchmark performance change. As
shown in Figure 1, the LVLMs are sensitive toward token
dropping on shallow layers, regardless of the dropping ratio.
However, in deeper layers, image tokens gradually become
less critical to the final results. The results indicate that the

Abstract
In large vision-language models (LVLMs), images serve as
inputs that carry a wealth of information. As the idiom “A
picture is worth a thousand words” implies, representing
a single image in current LVLMs can require hundreds or
even thousands of tokens, which thereby severely impacting
the efficiency. Previous approaches have attempted to reduce the number of image tokens either before or within the
early layers of LVLMs. However, these strategies inevitably
result in the loss of crucial image information. To address
this challenge, we conduct an empirical study revealing
that all visual tokens are necessary for LVLMs in the shallow layers, and token redundancy progressively increases
in the deeper layers. To this end, we propose PyramidDrop, a visual redundancy reduction strategy for LVLMs
to boost their efficiency in both training and inference with
neglectable performance loss. Specifically, we partition the
LVLM into several stages and drop part of the image tokens
at the end of each stage with a pre-defined ratio. The dropping is based on a lightweight similarity calculation with
a negligible time overhead. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PyramidDrop can achieve over 40% training
time reduction and 55% inference FLOPs acceleration on
leading LVLMs like LLaVA-NeXT, maintaining comparable
multi-modal performance. Besides, PyramidDrop can also
serve as a plug-and-play strategy to accelerate inference
in a free way, with better performance and lower inference
cost than counterparts. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Cooperx521/PyramidDrop.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs)
have emerged as a central focus in deep learning research
[2, 4, 11, 33, 62]. Remarkable progress have been witnessed
B Corresponding author.

14593

