This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GRAE-3DMOT: Geometry Relation-Aware Encoder for Online 3D Multi-Object
Tracking
Hyunseop Kim1
Hyo-Jun Lee2
Yonguk Lee3
3
4
Jinu Lee
Hanul Kim
Yeong Jun Koh1˚
1
2
Chungnam National University
Kangwon National University
3
4
42dot Inc. Seoul National University of Science and Technology
hyunseop95@gmail.com, gywns6298@kangwon.ac.kr, yonguk.lee@42dot.ai
jinu.lee@42dot.ai, hukim@seoultech.ac.kr, yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr

AMOTA according to distance thresholds

Abstract
0.80

Recently, 3D multi-object tracking (MOT) has widely
adopted the standard tracking-by-detection paradigm,
which solves the association problem between detections
and tracks. Many tracking-by-detection approaches establish constrained relationships between detections and
tracks using a distance threshold to reduce confusion during association. However, this approach does not effectively and comprehensively utilize the information regarding objects due to the constraints of the distance
threshold. In this paper, we propose GRAE-3DMOT, Geometry Relation-Aware Encoder 3D Multi-Object Tracking, which contains a geometric relation-aware encoder
to produce informative features for association. The geometric relation-aware encoder consists of three components: a spatial relation-aware encoder, a spatiotemporal
relation-aware encoder, and a distance-aware feature fusion layer. The spatial relation-aware encoder effectively
aggregates detection features by comprehensively exploiting as many detections as possible. The spatiotemporal
relation-aware encoder provides spatiotemporal relationaware features by combing spatial and temporal relation features, where the spatiotemporal relation-aware features are transformed into association scores for MOT.
The distance-aware feature fusion layer is integrated into
both encoders to enhance the relation features of physically proximate objects. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed GRAE-3DMOT outperforms the state-ofthe-art on the nuScenes. Our approach achieves 73.7%
and 70.2% AMOTA on the nuScenes validation and test
sets using CenterPoint detections. Code is available at
https://github.com/altkddhfcjs/GRAE-3DMOT.

0.75
AMOTA

0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55

Oracle
CenterPoint
3DMOTFormer
GRAE-3DMOT (Ours)

0.50
0.45

1.0

3.0

5.0
7.0
10.0
Distance Threshold

∞

Figure 1. The 3D MOT performance (AMOTA) of oracle,
3DMOTFormer, CenterPoint, and the proposed GRAE-3DMOT
according to distance thresholds for connecting edges in graphs
with detections of CenterPoint. We design oracle to match tracks
and detections using ground-truth identity with distance threshold
constrains.

1. Introduction

˚ Corresponding author

3D multiple object tracking (MOT) is a crucial task in
many applications, such as autonomous driving and mobile robots. It involves localization and identification of surrounding objects over time, making accurate and consistent
online tracking essential for fundamental tasks in these applications. Recent advancements in 3D MOT are due to the
strong performance of high-performance object detection
within a tracking-by-detection framework. State-of-the-art
3D MOT algorithms [9, 14, 16, 27, 28, 31] utilize detection
results from off-the-shelf 3D object detectors to associate

11697

