This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imputation-free and Alignment-free: Incomplete Multi-view Clustering Driven
by Consensus Semantic Learning
Yuzhuo Dai1 , Jiaqi Jin1 , Zhibin Dong1 , Siwei Wang2, *, Xinwang Liu1,* , En Zhu1,* ,
Xihong Yang1 , Xinbiao Gan1 , Yu Feng1
1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab, Beijing, China
{yzdai24, wangsiwei13}@nudt.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Thanks to representation learning enhanced by data observed from different perspectives, multi-view clustering
* Corresponding author

＋ Instance-level Positive

True Negative

＋ Cluster-level Positive

Semantic-level Positive

View 2

View 1

View 2
Shared Semantic Space

u1

Instance-level

＋

Cluster-level

In incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC), missing data
induce prototype shifts within views and semantic inconsistencies across views. A feasible solution is to explore crossview consistency in paired complete observations, further
imputing and aligning the similarity relationships inherently shared across views. Nevertheless, existing methods are constrained by two-tiered limitations: (1) Neither
instance- nor cluster-level consistency learning construct a
semantic space shared across views to learn consensus semantics. The former enforces cross-view instances alignment, and wrongly regards unpaired observations with semantic consistency as negative pairs; the latter focuses
on cross-view cluster counterparts while coarsely handling
fine-grained intra-cluster relationships within views. (2)
Excessive reliance on consistency results in unreliable imputation and alignment without incorporating view-specific
cluster information. Thus, we propose an IMVC framework, imputation- and alignment-free for consensus semantics learning (FreeCSL). To bridge semantic gaps across all
observations, we learn consensus prototypes from available
data to discover a shared space, where semantically similar observations are pulled closer for consensus semantics learning. To capture semantic relationships within specific views, we design a heuristic graph clustering based
on modularity to recover cluster structure with intra-cluster
compactness and inter-cluster separation for cluster semantics enhancement. Extensive experiments demonstrate,
compared to state-of-the-art competitors, FreeCSL achieves
more confident and robust assignments on IMVC task.

View 1

Semantic-level

Abstract

＋

＋
＋

(a) Consistency Learning Paradigms

(b) Prototype-based Consensus Learning

Figure 1. Research Motivation for Consensus Semantic Learning.
(a) two existing paradigms, instance- and cluster-level, either treat
cross-view unpaired observations with similar semantics as false
negatives or neglect to treat within-view observations with similar
semantics as true positives; (b) we propose a novel semantic-level
paradigm based on contrastive clustering with a set of consensus
prototypes to foster semantic consistency across all view data.

(MVC) has achieved significant breakthroughs in the field
of unsupervised learning [3, 6, 11, 17, 21, 34, 46, 57]. However, in practical applications, the assumption of data completeness is often difficult to satisfy that incomplete multiview clustering (IMVC) is introduced [7, 25, 29, 33, 35, 37,
54]. In IMVC, missing data causes prototypes shifts within
views and semantic misalignment across views, due to the
discrepancy between the distributions of complete and incomplete instances [14, 19]. More and more studies [4, 16]
have noted that variations in complete instances across different views further exacerbate prototype misalignment. It
is challenging to achieve semantic consistency on cluster
assignments across all view data.
To alleviate prototype shifts and misalignment while promoting semantic consensus in cluster assignments, existing
IMVC methods explore consistency information from complete instances for imputation and alignment [20, 24, 32].
Unfortunately, they still suffer from several significant
drawbacks in practical applications. In terms of consistency learning, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), one widely used
paradigm is instance-level [13, 36], which pulls paired ob-

5071

