This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SET: Spectral Enhancement for Tiny Object Detection
Huixin Sun1 , Runqi Wang2 , Yanjing Li1 ,
Linlin Yang5 , Shaohui Lin6 , Xianbin Cao1∗ , Baochang Zhang3,4 *
1
School of Electronic Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
5
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication,
Communication University of China, Beijing, China
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Abstract
Deep learning has significantly advanced the object detection field. However, tiny object detection (TOD) remains a
challenging problem. We provide a new analysis method to
examine the TOD challenge through occlusion-based attribution analysis in the frequency domain. We observe that
tiny objects become less distinct after feature encoding and
can benefit from the removal of high-frequency information.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach named Spectral
Enhancement for Tiny object detection (SET), which amplifies the frequency signatures of tiny objects in a heterogeneous architecture. SET includes two modules. The Hierarchical Background Smoothing (HBS) module suppresses
high-frequency noise in the background through adaptive
smoothing operations. The Adversarial Perturbation Injection (API) module leverages adversarial perturbations to
increase feature saliency in critical regions and prompt the
refinement of object features during training. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method. Especially, SET boosts the prior art RFLA by
3.2% AP on the AI-TOD dataset.

!"!"

!""

!"#

Figure 1. A feature-level occlusion-based attribution analysis in
the frequency domain. Mid-frequency features ranges from 40%
to 60% of the total energy, high-frequency features are above 90%
of the total energy. The model is trained on the AI-TOD [44]
trainval and validated on the AI-TOD test. Detection performance is evaluated by inferencing a 1× FCOS detector [39]
with the masked features. Results exhibit that tiny objects are more
likely to be affected by high-frequency noise and can benefit from
the direct removal of high-frequency information.

DINO [60], one of the most representative transformerbased object detector, achieves 37.6% AP on medium-sized
objects but only 9.9% AP on very tiny objects on the AITOD [44] benchmark, Moreover, the vanilla FCOS [39]
achieves only 2.5% AP on very tiny objects on the AITOD [44], which is far from sufficient to meet the demands of real-world applications, such as autonomous driving, maritime rescue, and traffic management.
Constrained by the inherently low resolution, one key
challenge in TOD is to extract discriminative foreground
features [7], especially in the high-level features of detection architecture after down-samplings. In the meantime, it is difficult to learn about tiny objects from the
noisy and dominant background clutter [54]. Most existing
works [1, 3, 30, 54] focus on enhancing feature representations of tiny objects in the spatial domain. We provide a
new analysis method and address the challenge from a frequency spectrum perspective.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [14, 60]
have significantly improved the object detection field [11,
22]. Despite the progress, Tiny Object Detection (TOD) remains a challenging problem. Tiny objects, characterized
by their very limited pixel input, occupy areas equal to or
less than 16×16 pixels [44]. Compared to traditional object detection [10, 21], generic object detectors often fail
to manifest effectiveness on the TOD task. For instance,
* Corresponding authors. Email: sunhuixin@buaa.edu.cn

4713

