This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Person De-reidentification: A Variation-guided Identity Shift Modeling
Yi-Xing Peng1,2,4
Yu-Ming Tang1,4
Kun-Yu Lin1,4
Qize Yang3
Jingke Meng1,4 *
Xihan Wei3
Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,4 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China;
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China; 3 Tongyi Lab, Alibaba Group;
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China.
{pengyx23,tangym9,linky5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

?

wszheng@ieee.org

Security
staff

Outsider

Person re-identification (ReID) is to associate images of individuals from different camera views against cross-view variations. Like other surveillance technologies, Re-ID faces
serious privacy challenges, particularly the potential for
unauthorized tracking. Although various tasks (e.g., face
recognition) have developed machine unlearning techniques
to address privacy concerns, such methods have not yet been
explored within the Re-ID field. In this work, we pioneer
the exploration of the person de-reidentification (De-ReID)
problem and present its inherent challenges. In the context of
ReID, De-ReID is to unlearn the knowledge about accurately
matching specific persons so that these “unlearned persons”
cannot be re-identified across cameras for privacy guarantee.
The primary challenge is to achieve the unlearning without
degrading the identity-discriminative feature embeddings
to ensure the model’s utility. To address this, we formulate
a De-ReID framework that utilizes a labeled dataset of unlearned persons for unlearning and an unlabeled dataset of
accessible persons for knowledge preservation. Instead of
unlearning based on (pseudo) identity labels, we introduce a
variation-guided identity shift mechanism that unlearns the
specific persons by fitting the variations in their images while
preserving ReID ability on other persons by overcoming the
variations in images of accessible persons. As a result, the
model shifts the unlearned persons to a feature space that is
vulnerable to cross-view variations. Extensive experiments
on benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match the images
of the same person across different camera views based
on feature similarity. While deep learning [9, 35, 43] has
significantly enhanced the performance of the ReID mod* Corresponding author

?

Figure 1. Person de-reidentification (De-ReID) prevents intelligent
surveillance from tracking unlearned persons. For example, when
using surveillance models for security (track and record the person
in the red box), the residents in the community and the important
customers in business (in the green box) should not be tracked for
privacy and commercial secrets.

els [10, 19, 45], there are growing public concerns about
potential misuse, leading to ethical and societal implications.
To avoid misuse and mitigate the potential privacy concerns,
the research in surveillance has begun exploring machine
unlearning techniques that limit the operational scope of
these models. For instance, in face recognition, models are
adjusted to "unlearn" individuals who raise privacy concerns,
as mandated by regulations like the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [3, 5, 24, 53].
However, similar constraints on the ReID models have
not yet to be explored, despite its significance for real-world
applications. For instance, the residents in the neighborhood
prefer to constrain the surveillance in the community to
only focus on external people and not track themselves; in
working buildings, security cameras should only be set for
monitoring and preventing theft or accidents, not for tracking
or identifying specific employees during their routine work;
and homeowners expect smart home devices to track only
unknown individuals for security purposes while avoiding
any continuous surveillance of themselves; To meet these
requirements, there is an urgent need to develop methods that
limit the scope of ReID models, enabling them to "ignore"
specific individuals during deployment.
In this work, we pioneer the exploration of person dereidentification (De-ReID) problem: limiting the ReID scope
by unlearning specific persons (referred to as “unlearned
persons”) in the ReID model while maintaining the ReID

29331

