This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedMIA: An Effective Membership Inference Attack Exploiting
“All for One” Principle in Federated Learning
Gongxi Zhu1 Donghao Li2 Hanlin Gu2,3 * Yuan Yao2 Lixin Fan3 Yuxing Han1
1
Tsinghua University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 Webank
gx.zhu@foxmail.com, dlibf@connect.ust.hk, ghltsl123@gmail.com

Abstract

Other MIAs

Federated Learning (FL) is a promising approach for training machine learning models on decentralized data while
preserving privacy. However, privacy risks, particularly
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs), which aim to determine whether a specific data point belongs to a target
client’s training set, remain a significant concern. Existing methods for implementing MIAs in FL primarily analyze updates from the target client, focusing on metrics
such as loss, gradient norm, and gradient difference. However, these methods fail to leverage updates from non-target
clients, potentially underutilizing available information. In
this paper, we first formulate a one-tailed likelihood-ratio
hypothesis test based on the likelihood of updates from nontarget clients. Building upon this formulation, we introduce
a three-step Membership Inference Attack (MIA) method,
called FedMIA, which follows the ”all for one”—leveraging
updates from all clients across multiple communication
rounds to enhance MIA effectiveness. Both theoretical analysis and extensive experimental results demonstrate that
FedMIA outperforms existing MIAs in both classification
and generative tasks. Additionally, it can be integrated
as an extension to existing methods and is robust against
various defense strategies, Non-IID data, and different federated structures. Our code is available in https://
github.com/Liar-Mask/FedMIA.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [18, 25, 26] has emerged as a
promising approach for training machine learning models
on decentralized data sources while ensuring data privacy.
Despite its advantages, the privacy risks associated with the
information exchanged during FL have attracted significant
research attention. Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
in FL aim to determine whether a specific data point was
part of a particular client’s training dataset, typically per* Corresponding author.

𝜇𝜇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 − 𝜇𝜇𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 = 0.027

𝜇𝜇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 − 𝜇𝜇𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 = 0.035

FedMIA (Ours)

𝜇𝜇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 − 𝜇𝜇𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 = 0.233

𝜇𝜇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 − 𝜇𝜇𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 = 0.167

1

Figure 1: The distributions of member and non-member
samples of FedMIA (the second row: FedMIA-I (ours) and
FedMIA-II (ours)) and other MIAs (the first row: GradCosine [23], Loss-Series [10]) on ResNet-CIFAR100. It
shows the obvious gap between the mean of the member
and non-member (µmem − µnon ) for the proposed FedMIA
compared to other methods.
formed by adversaries positioned on the server side. In contrast to Gradient Inversion Attacks (GIAs) [7, 46], MIAs
[27] do not rely on strong assumptions, such as small batch
sizes or local training epochs, and thus remain significantly
underexplored within the FL context.
Most existing MIAs in FL [23, 27, 28, 36, 41, 44] focus
on inferring membership solely from the updates of the target clients, utilizing gradient norms, loss values, and gradient differences. However, these methods overlook the
valuable information contained in updates uploaded by nontarget clients. Recent work [10, 13] attempts to enhance
the effectiveness of MIAs by incorporating shadow models into FL. While these methods make use of additional
information, they require an auxiliary dataset to train the

20643

