This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Deblurring Networks for Radiance Fields
Haeyun Choi1,†

Heemin Yang2
1

KT

Janghyeok Han2
2

Sunghyun Cho2

POSTECH

Abstract

dations such as blur and noise. Among them, blur makes it
difficult to aggregate accurate 3D information from the training views, resulting in a blurry radiance field. To address blur,
several works [20–22, 24, 31, 32, 39] have been proposed to
reconstruct sharp radiance fields from training views with
either camera motion blur or defocus blur. These radiance
field deblurring methods jointly optimize blur kernels and
the radiance field, and have shown promising results.

In this paper, we propose DeepDeblurRF, a novel radiance
field deblurring approach that can synthesize high-quality
novel views from blurred training views with significantly
reduced training time. DeepDeblurRF leverages deep neural network (DNN)-based deblurring modules to enjoy their
deblurring performance and computational efficiency. To
effectively combine DNN-based deblurring and radiance
field construction, we propose a novel radiance field (RF)guided deblurring and an iterative framework that performs
RF-guided deblurring and radiance field construction in
an alternating manner. Moreover, DeepDeblurRF is compatible with various scene representations, such as voxel
grids and 3D Gaussians, expanding its applicability. We
also present BlurRF-Synth, the first large-scale synthetic
dataset for training radiance field deblurring frameworks.
We conduct extensive experiments on both camera motion
blur and defocus blur, demonstrating that DeepDeblurRF
achieves state-of-the-art novel-view synthesis quality with
significantly reduced training time.

However, these methods still possess several limitations
that hinder their effectiveness. First, existing approaches rely
on linear blur models, describing blurred pixels in training
views as linear combinations of sharp pixels. In contrast, realworld blurred images often suffer from non-linear outliers
such as saturated pixels due to sensor clipping, noise from
various sources, and non-linear in-camera processing [8, 35].
These violate the linear blur model, leading to deblurring
artifacts and severely degrading the performance of current radiance field deblurring techniques. Second, existing
approaches do not utilize priors on sharp images, relying
solely on complementary information from different views
to model blur kernels and estimate a sharp radiance field.
Consequently, they tend to produce radiance fields with residual blur and may completely fail when all input views exhibit
similar blur directions [24], akin to classical multi-frame deblurring approaches [5, 7, 33], due to the lack of sharp image
priors. Third, existing ray-based methods [21, 22, 24, 31, 39]
employ multiple ray samples per pixel to depict a blurry image, resulting in a substantial increase in rendering time
for a single view from a radiance field, and consequently, a
significant computation time for radiance field construction.

1. Introduction
Novel-view synthesis has seen significant advancements in
recent years, leading to impressive improvements in photorealistic rendering quality. One key development in this field
is the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [25], which leverages
neural networks to generate highly detailed images from
novel viewpoints. Building on this, various works have focused on reducing training time and enhancing rendering
quality [3, 12, 15, 27]. More recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [17] has emerged, utilizing Gaussians as an explicit
3D representation. This technique enables high-quality scene
reconstruction and real-time rendering through a differentiable rasterization method.
However, synthesizing sharp novel views from degraded
training views remains a significant challenge. Capturing
images in real-world conditions often leads to various degra-

Apart from the radiance field deblurring methods, image deblurring has been extensively studied for decades [6,
14, 30, 40, 43]. Recently, a number of deep neural network
(DNN)-based single-image deblurring methods have been
proposed [4, 10, 19, 28, 38, 42]. These methods do not rely
on linear blur models, but learn image deblurring from largescale datasets. Thanks to this, they can effectively remove
blur from a single image without the need for complementary information from other images, and also handle nonlinearities such as saturated pixels [34]. Moreover, their feedforward approach allows markedly reduced processing times,

† This work was done at POSTECH.

6012

