This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiverseFlow: Sample-Efficient Diverse Mode Coverage in Flows
Mashrur M. Morshed
Vishnu Boddeti
Michigan State University
{morshedm, vishnu}@msu.edu

Prompt: “A famous boxer”

Abstract
Many real-world applications of flow-based generative models desire a diverse set of samples that cover multiple modes
of the target distribution. However, the predominant approach for obtaining diverse sets is not sample-efficient, as
it involves independently obtaining many samples from the
source distribution and mapping them through the flow until
the desired mode coverage is achieved. As an alternative to
repeated sampling, we introduce DiverseFlow: a trainingfree approach to improve the diversity of flow models. Our
key idea is to employ a determinantal point process to induce
a coupling between the samples that drives diversity under a
fixed sampling budget. In essence, DiverseFlow allows exploration of more variations in a learned flow model with fewer
samples. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method for tasks
where sample-efficient diversity is desirable, such as textguided image generation with polysemous words, inverse
problems like large-hole inpainting, and class-conditional
image synthesis.

Prompt: “A letter”

IID

DiverseFlow

Figure 1. Text-guided image generation with polysemous words.
With the same budget of samples, DiverseFlow (right) finds a more
diverse set of results compared to IID sampling (left).

1. Introduction
Consider the task of text-guided image generation from openended prompts, like “A famous boxer”. If we use a generative ordinary differential equation (ODE) to obtain a few
images for this given prompt, we may observe something
unusual: all the resultant images depict a dog, as shown in
Figure 1 (top-left). Such a result is plausible, as the word
“boxer" has multiple meanings: it can either mean a combat
sport athlete or a particular dog breed. However, for the
prompt “A famous boxer”, what if the output desired by
the user was actually a human athlete, and not a dog? This
situation necessitates obtaining additional samples from the
model, until the desired alternate meanings are discovered.
But instead of repeated sampling, can we directly observe
more meanings by finding a more diverse set?
Beyond the aforementioned example of text-to-image
generation from polysemous1 prompts, sample diversity is a
1Words or phrases with several meanings.

desirable objective for many other tasks that use generative
models. These include inverse problems (e.g., large hole
filling) and class-conditioned image generation, to name
a few. Diversity or mode coverage is a key pillar in the
generative learning trilemma [32], in addition to fidelity and
latency. For state-of-the-art generative methods such as flow
matching models (FM) [20, 22] and diffusion models (DM)
[12, 26], significant work has been done on improving the
photorealism of samples and the efficiency of the sampling
process [11, 16, 20, 28, 30, 34]. However, relatively little
attention has been paid to explicitly enhancing the diversity
of generated samples under a limited sampling budget.
The standard approach to generate a diverse set of images is to repeatedly obtain independent and identically distributed (IID) samples from a simple or tractable source distribution (e.g., Gaussian distribution), map them to samples

23303

