This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GroupMamba: Efficient Group-Based Visual State Space Model
Abdelrahman Shaker1 Syed Talal Wasim2,3 Salman Khan1
Juergen Gall2,3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4
1

Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 2 University of Bonn
3
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence 4 Linköping University

Abstract
State-space models (SSMs) have recently shown promise in
capturing long-range dependencies with subquadratic computational complexity, making them attractive for various
applications. However, purely SSM-based models face critical challenges related to stability and achieving state-ofthe-art performance in computer vision tasks. Our paper
addresses the challenges of scaling SSM-based models for
computer vision, particularly the instability and inefficiency
of large model sizes. We introduce a parameter-efficient
modulated group mamba layer that divides the input channels into four groups and applies our proposed SSM-based
efficient Visual Single Selective Scanning (VSSS) block independently to each group, with each VSSS block scanning in one of the four spatial directions. The Modulated
Group Mamba layer also wraps the four VSSS blocks into
a channel modulation operator to improve cross-channel
communication. Furthermore, we introduce a distillationbased training objective to stabilize the training of large
models, leading to consistent performance gains. Our
comprehensive experiments demonstrate the merits of the
proposed contributions, leading to superior performance
over existing methods for image classification on ImageNet1K, object detection, instance segmentation on MS-COCO,
and semantic segmentation on ADE20K. Our tiny variant with 23M parameters achieves state-of-the-art performance with a classification top-1 accuracy of 83.3% on
ImageNet-1K, while being 26% efficient in terms of parameters, compared to the best existing Mamba design
of same model size. Code and models are available at:
https://github.com/Amshaker/GroupMamba

Figure 1. Comparison in terms of Parameters vs. Top-1 Accuracy
on ImageNet-1k [9]. Our GroupMamba-B achieves superior top-1
classification accuracy while reducing parameters by 36% compared to VMamba [35].

1. Introduction

headed self-attention mechanism [60] have been central to
both language models such as GPT-3 [2] and vision models
such as Vision Transformers [10, 36]. However, challenges
arose due to the quadratic computational complexity of attention mechanisms particularly for longer sequences, leading to the recent emergence of State Space models such as
S4 [17].
While being effective in handling extended input sequences due to their linear complexity in terms of sequence lengths, S4 [17] encountered limitations in global
context processing in information-dense data, especially in
domains like computer vision due to the data-independent
nature of the model. Alternatively, approaches such as
global convolutions-based state space models [14] and Liquid S4 [20] have been proposed to mitigate the aforementioned limitations. The recent Mamba [16] introduces the
S6 architecture which aims to enhance the ability of statespace models to handle long-range dependencies efficiently.

Various context modeling methods have emerged in the domains of language and vision understanding. These include
Convolution [21, 66], Attention [60], and, more recently,
State Space Models [16, 17]. Transformers with their multi-

14912

