This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Navigation World Models
Amir Bar1
Gaoyue Zhou2
Danny Tran3
1
2
FAIR at Meta
New York University

Trevor Darrell3
Yann LeCun1,2
3
Berkeley AI Research

Figure 1. We train a Navigation World Model (NWM) from video footage of robots and their associated navigation actions (a). After
training, NWM can evaluate trajectories by synthesizing their videos and scoring the final frame’s similarity with the goal (b). We use
NWM to plan from scratch or rank experts navigation trajectories, improving downstream visual navigation performance. In unknown
environments, NWM can simulate imagined trajectories from a single image (c). In all examples above, the input to the model is the first
image and actions, then the model auto-regressively synthesizes future observations. Click on the image to view examples in a browser.

Abstract
Navigation is a fundamental skill of agents with visualmotor capabilities. We introduce a Navigation World Model
(NWM), a controllable video generation model that predicts future visual observations based on past observations
and navigation actions. To capture complex environment
dynamics, NWM employs a Conditional Diffusion Transformer (CDiT), trained on a diverse collection of egocentric videos of both human and robotic agents, and scaled up
to 1 billion parameters. In familiar environments, NWM

can plan navigation trajectories by simulating them and
evaluating whether they achieve the desired goal. Unlike
supervised navigation policies with fixed behavior, NWM
can dynamically incorporate constraints during planning.
Experiments demonstrate its effectiveness in planning trajectories from scratch or by ranking trajectories sampled
from an external policy. Furthermore, NWM leverages its
learned visual priors to imagine trajectories in unfamiliar
environments from a single input image, making it a flexible
and powerful tool for next-generation navigation systems1 .

15791

1 Project page: https://amirbar.net/nwm

