This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-Interrelated Diffusion Model for Few-Shot Anomaly Image Generation
Ying Jin1∗ , Jinlong Peng2 *, Qingdong He2∗ , Teng Hu3 , Jiafu Wu2 , Hao Chen1
Haoxuan Wang1 , Wenbing Zhu1 , Mingmin Chi1†, Jun Liu2 , Yabiao Wang2,4†
1
Fudan University, 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 Zhejiang University
{yjin22, haochen22, hxwang23, wbzhu23}@m.fudan.edu.cn, mmchi@fudan.edu.cn
{jeromepeng, yingcaihe, jiafwu, juliusliu}@tencent.com, hu-teng@sjtu.edu.cn, yabiaowang@zju.edu.cn

https://github.com/yinyjin/DualAnoDiff

Abstract

Valid

Reality

Align

Location

grid

leather

hazelnut

screw

MVTec

The performance of anomaly inspection in industrial manufacturing is constrained by the scarcity of anomaly data.
To overcome this challenge, researchers have started employing anomaly generation approaches to augment the
anomaly dataset. However, existing anomaly generation methods suffer from limited diversity in the generated anomalies and struggle to achieve a seamless blending of this anomaly with the original image. Moreover,
the generated mask is usually not aligned with the generated anomaly. In this paper, we overcome these challenges from a new perspective, simultaneously generating
a pair of the overall image and the corresponding anomaly
part. We propose DualAnoDiff, a novel diffusion-based fewshot anomaly image generation model, which can generate diverse and realistic anomaly images by using a dualinterrelated diffusion model, where one of them is employed
to generate the whole image while the other one generates the anomaly part. Moreover, we extract background
and shape information to mitigate the distortion and blurriness phenomenon in few-shot image generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed model over state-of-the-art methods in terms of diversity, realism and the accuracy of mask. Overall, our
approach significantly improves the performance of downstream anomaly inspection tasks, including anomaly detection, anomaly localization, and anomaly classification
tasks. Code will be made available.

DFMGAN
AAAI’23

Anomaly
Diffusion
AAAI’24

Ours

prompts

Figure 1. Top: Evaluating anomaly generation quality in four aspects: Whether generate valid anomaly, degree of realism, alignment of the mask, and whether the location of mask is reasonable,
the results show that our generated results are better than the other
methods. (Yellow area represents the valid generation, green indicates the correct mask or area, red indicates the generated mask
or wrong area.) Bottom: Our model can simultaneously generate
extensive anomaly image-mask pairs.

1. Introduction

dustrial manufacture [6]. However, in real-world industrial production, anomaly samples are scarce. Therefore,
the current mainstream anomaly inspection methods are either unsupervised methods which use only normal samples
[21, 34] or semi-supervised method [45] which employ both
the normal samples and a few anomaly data. Although these
methods perform well in anomaly detection, they have limited performance in anomaly localization and can not deal
with the task of anomaly classification [13]. Therefore, researchers proposed anomaly generation methods to gener-

Industrial anomaly inspection, i.e., anomaly detection, localization, and classification, plays an important role in in* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author (This work was supported by Natural Science

Foundation of China under contract 62171139).

30420

