This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic and Expressive Variation in Image Captions Across Languages
Andre Ye1 , Sebastin Santy1 , Jena D. Hwang2 , Amy X. Zhang1,2 , Ranjay Krishna1,2
1
University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, Washington
andreye@uw.edu, ssanty@cs.washington.edu, axz@cs.uw.edu, ranjay@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Most vision-language models today are primarily
trained on English image-text pairs, with non-English pairs
often filtered out. Evidence from cross-cultural psychology suggests that this approach will bias models against
perceptual modes exhibited by people who speak other
(non-English) languages. We investigate semantic and expressive variation in image captions across different languages; we analyze both human-annotated datasets and
model-produced captions. By analyzing captions across
seven languages (English, French, German, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, Korean) in high-quality image captioning
datasets (Crossmodal and Visual Genome), we find that
multilingual caption sets tend to provide richer visual descriptions than monolingual (including English-only) ones;
multilingual sets contain 46.0% more objects, 66.1% more
relationships, and 66.8% more attributes. We observe
the same results with multilingual captions produced by
LLaVA and the Google Vertex API: for example, compared
to monolingual captions, they cover 21.9% more objects,
18.8% more relations, and 20.1% more attributes. These
suggest that, across a large number of samples, different
languages bias people and models to focus on different visual concepts. Finally, we show that models trained on
image-text data in one language perform distinctly better
on that language’s test set. Our work points towards the potential value of training vision models on multilingual data
sources to widen the range/variation of descriptive information those models are exposed to.

glish text samples, such that the majority of samples in
popular image-text datasets are in English [37, 46, 103].
Many vision-language models are even trained only on English [59, 71, 94, 111], excluding other languages entirely.
Prior work shows that models tend to fail at tasks
where naturally occurring text is uncommon, such as negation [30]. Therefore, increasing the lexical diversity of naturally occurring text is important: it allows models to experience a broader range of linguistic patterns that might
be underrepresented within a certain set of scraped text,
while maintaining the scale that is only possible through
training on naturally occurring data. Thus, biasing vision
datasets towards English-only image-text pairs may risk excluding the equally relevant and possibly unique visual concepts produced in languages other than English. Indeed,
a wide body of work from the cross-cultural psychology
suggests that people from across the world, speaking different languages and living in different cultural contexts,
tend to describe the visual world differently. Early work
in psychology suggests that fundamental aspects of visual
perception, such as perception of length [106], geometrical
intuition [29, 89], and depth [52] vary across people from
different geographic backgrounds. More recent work has
shown that individuals from different cultural backgrounds
exhibit differences in how they look at, understand, and talk
about visual scenes [16, 62, 85]. For instance, when looking at the same image, Americans tend to describe the focal
objects and its attributes, whereas Japanese tend to focus on
the relations between objects [80].

1. Introduction

Drawing on this work, we hypothesize the content distribution of visual descriptions varies by the structure and
use of specific languages – and that these differences are
detectable in computer vision datasets and model behaviors. This hypothesis is further supported by observed
differences in spoken language: German’s complex morphosyntactic system provides events with nuanced understanding of spatial relationships [92]; Russian verbs of motion require speakers to specify directionality [88]; English
uses the generic verb of motion “to go” whereas a Russian speaker must specify whether the motion has a desti-

Typically, vision-language models are trained with large
quantities of image-text pairs scraped from the web [33,
103, 116]. To obtain high quality image-text pairs, these
web datasets are filtered with models like CLIP [51, 94]
with the goal of ensuring that each text sample is sufficiently descriptive of or related to the corresponding image. However, this filtering tends to be biased towards En-

29667

