This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TailedCore: Few-Shot Sampling for Unsupervised Long-Tail Noisy Anomaly Detection
Yoon Gyo Jung∗1 Jaewoo Park∗2 Jaeho Yoon∗3 Kuan-Chuan Peng4
Wonchul Kim2 Andrew Beng Jin Teoh3 Octavia Camps†1
1

Northeastern University
4

2

AiV Co.

3

Yonsei University

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories

Abstract
We aim to solve unsupervised anomaly detection in a practical challenging environment where the normal dataset is both
contaminated with defective regions and its product class distribution is tailed but unknown. We observe that existing models
suffer from tail-versus-noise trade-off where if a model is robust against pixel noise, then its performance deteriorates on
tail class samples, and vice versa. To mitigate the issue, we
handle the tail class and noise samples independently. To this
end, we propose TailSampler, a novel class size predictor that
estimates the class cardinality of samples based on a symmetric
assumption on the class-wise distribution of embedding similarities. TailSampler can be utilized to sample the tail class
samples exclusively, allowing to handle them separately. Based
on these facets, we build a memory-based anomaly detection
model TailedCore, whose memory both well captures tail class
information and is noise-robust. We extensively validate the
effectiveness of TailedCore on the unsupervised long-tail noisy
anomaly detection setting, and show that TailedCore outperforms the state-of-the-art in most settings. Code is available in
TailedCore

1. Introduction
In the complex landscape of anomaly detection, the challenge often lies in navigating practical scenarios that feature a diverse and
imbalanced data distribution [6, 8, 11, 21]. We delve into a challenging yet highly realistic scenario in anomaly detection, where
the training dataset, comprising multiple product classes [39],
is beset by two significant complications: contamination with
noise [20] and presence of tailed class distributions [25]. In this
context, ‘tail’ (few-shot) classes have limited few-shot samples,
unlike ‘head’ (many-shot) classes which are data-rich but might
contain samples with defects. Crucially, in this unsupervised set∗ equal contribution † corresponding author

Figure 1. Tail class (x-axis) and noisy head class (y-axis) performance
comparison. The tail-versus-noise trade-off is shown across memorybased anomaly detection models (circles), and is more indicative in
anomaly classification task evaluated by image-level AUROC (left).

ting, the class information of these products remains unknown
to the model trainer. This setting mirrors a common predicament in large-scale industrial applications, where companies are
required to manage vast production lines encompassing a wide
array of product types, each with varying production rates.
A critical issue arises in this scenario, which we term the
“tail-versus-noise dilemma.” The dilemma underscores a fundamental trade-off where models robust to class imbalance overfit
to defect noises, likely misclassifying many defects as normal.
In contrast, existing models that are robust against defect noise
tend to underfit, missing vital details in tail classes. Fig. 1 shows
this tail-versus-noise trade-off which is prevalent through existing anomaly detection algorithms. This intrinsic characteristic
comes from the fact that few-shot class features are equivalent
to the noisy abnormal features in terms of their statistical
occurrence. Consequently, existing models find it difficult
to strike a balance between avoiding overfitting to noise and
effectively capturing the nuances of less represented classes.
To resolve this challenge, we propose to handle tail classes
independently from head classes by exclusively sampling them.
To this end, we devise a novel class size predictor TailSampler
that estimates the cardinality of the class of any training
sample. For accurate estimation, TailSampler estimates the
class sizes based on a reflective symmetry between inter-class

25539

