This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Test-time Adaptive Object Detection via Sensitivity-Guided Pruning
Kunyu Wang, Xueyang Fu, Xin Lu, Chengjie Ge, Chengzhi Cao, Wei Zhai, Zheng-Jun Zha∗
School of Information Science and Technology and
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China
{kunyuwang, luxion, cjge, chengzhicao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{xyfu, wzhai056, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Source Model

Abstract

Adapt Model
Test-time

Continual test-time adaptive object detection (CTTA-OD)
aims to online adapt a source pre-trained detector to everchanging environments during inference under continuous domain shifts. Most existing CTTA-OD methods prioritize effectiveness while overlooking computational efficiency, which is crucial for resource-constrained scenarios.
In this paper, we propose an efficient CTTA-OD method
via pruning. Our motivation stems from the observation
that not all learned source features are beneficial; certain
domain-sensitive feature channels can adversely affect target domain performance. Inspired by this, we introduce a
sensitivity-guided channel pruning strategy that quantifies
each channel based on its sensitivity to domain discrepancies at both image and instance levels. We apply weighted
sparsity regularization to selectively suppress and prune
these sensitive channels, focusing adaptation efforts on invariant ones. Additionally, we introduce a stochastic channel reactivation mechanism to restore pruned channels, enabling recovery of potentially useful features and mitigating
the risks of early pruning. Extensive experiments on three
benchmarks show that our method achieves superior adaptation performance while reducing computational overhead
by 12% in FLOPs compared to the recent SOTA method.

Offline Pretrain

Online

Predict

Selectively Adapt Domain Invariant Parts

Not Accessible

Source Domain

Continuous Changing Target Domain

Figure 1. We consider continual test-time adaptive object detection, which adapts a source detector to changing environments
during inference. By focusing adaptation efforts on invariant
parts while pruning sensitive parts, we improve computational efficiency, which is crucial for resource-constrained scenarios like
autonomous driving or UAV.

1. Introduction

ing data, resulting in significant performance degradation.
Moreover, due to the dynamic nature of real-world environments, the test data distribution is constantly changing and
inherently unpredictable, posing additional challenges. To
address this issue, continual test-time adaptation [41] has
been proposed, which aims to adapt a source pre-trained
model during inference to accommodate the evolving test
data, providing a promising solution to mitigate the domain
shift problem, as shown in Fig 1.
While existing continual test-time adaptive object detection methods show impressive results [4, 31, 35], enhancing computational efficiency has been relatively underexplored, despite its critical importance for resourceconstrained scenarios [1, 28, 36]. Current methods typically adapt all features learned from the source domain indiscriminately during adaptation to the target domain. However, our exploratory experiments reveal that not all learned
source features are beneficial for target domain; in fact, certain source feature channels negatively affect the model’s
performance in the target domain.
In particular, we perform ablation on feature channels
of the source pre-trained model, observing the impact of

Object detection [39, 40] is a fundamental task in computer
vision with numerous downstream applications. However,
in real-world scenarios such as autonomous driving [37]
or robotics [45, 46], various natural factors, such as adverse weather conditions and lighting changes [14, 15], can
lead to substantial domain shifts between training and test∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 62225207,
62436008, 62422609 and 62276243.

10577

