This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniVAD: A Training-free Uniﬁed Model for Few-shot Visual Anomaly Detection
Zhaopeng Gu1,2 Bingke Zhu1 Guibo Zhu1,2
Yingying Chen1 Ming Tang1,2 Jinqiao Wang1,2,3,4
1
Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Objecteye Inc., Beijing, China
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intellectual Property & Big Data,
Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou, China
guzhaopeng2023@ia.ac.cn
{bingke.zhu,gbzhu,yingying.chen,tangm,jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

https://uni-vad.github.io
Abstract
Visual Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to identify abnormal samples in images that deviate from normal patterns,
covering multiple domains, including industrial, logical,
and medical ﬁelds. Due to the domain gaps between these
ﬁelds, existing VAD methods are typically tailored to each
domain, with specialized detection techniques and model
architectures that are difﬁcult to generalize across different domains. Moreover, even within the same domain, current VAD approaches often require large amounts of normal samples to train class-speciﬁc models, resulting in poor
generalizability and hindering uniﬁed evaluation across domains. To address this issue, we propose a generalized fewshot VAD method, UniVAD, capable of detecting anomalies
across various domains, with a training-free uniﬁed model.
UniVAD only needs few normal samples as references during testing to detect anomalies in previously unseen objects, without training on the speciﬁc domain. Speciﬁcally,
UniVAD employs a Contextual Component Clustering (C3 )
module based on clustering and vision foundation models
to segment components within the image accurately, and
leverages Component-Aware Patch Matching (CAPM) and
Graph-Enhanced Component Modeling (GECM) modules
to detect anomalies at different semantic levels, which are
aggregated to produce the ﬁnal detection result. We conduct experiments on nine datasets spanning industrial, logical, and medical ﬁelds, and the results demonstrate that
UniVAD achieves state-of-the-art performance in few-shot
anomaly detection tasks across multiple domains, outperforming domain-speciﬁc anomaly detection models. Code
is available at https://github.com/FantasticGNU/UniVAD.

Figure 1. 1-shot performance of existing VAD methods and
UniVAD across different datasets in various domains. UniVAD
achieves state-of-the-art results across multiple datasets and domains, outperforming specialized methods in each domain.

1. Introduction
Visual Anomaly Detection (VAD) [11, 19, 29, 36] is a critical task that seeks to identify abnormal samples in images
that deviate from established normal patterns, leveraging
computer vision techniques [13, 27]. Such anomalies are
rare occurrences but signify critical conditions, including
errors, defects, or lesions, that necessitate timely intervention for further analysis. VAD spans multiple ﬁelds and
has applications across diverse industries, such as industrial anomaly detection [11, 19, 29], logical anomaly detection [14, 21, 25], and medical anomaly detection [2, 16].

15194

