This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4DTAM: Non-Rigid Tracking and Mapping via Dynamic Surface Gaussians
Hidenobu Matsuki

Gwangbin Bae

Andrew J. Davison

Dyson Robotics Laboratory, Imperial College London

𝑡=0

𝑡=0

⋮

𝑡=0

⋮

⋮

⋮

⋮

𝑡=𝑇

𝑡=𝑇

⋮
𝑡=𝑇

Figure 1. 4DTAM jointly estimates camera-egomotion, appearance, geometry and scene dynamics without any template.

Abstract

novel method and evaluation protocols grounded in modern
vision and rendering techniques.

We propose the first 4D tracking and mapping method that
jointly performs camera localization and non-rigid surface
reconstruction via differentiable rendering. Our approach
captures 4D scenes from an online stream of color images with depth measurements or predictions by simultaneously optimizing scene geometry, appearance, dynamics,
and camera ego-motion. Although natural environments exhibit complex non-rigid motions, 4D-SLAM remains relatively underexplored due to its inherent challenges; even
with 2.5D signals, the problem is ill-posed because of the
high dimensionality of the optimization space. To overcome these challenges, we first introduce a SLAM method
based on Gaussian surface primitives that leverages depth
signals more effectively than 3D Gaussians, thereby achieving accurate surface reconstruction. To further model nonrigid deformations, we employ a warp-field represented by
a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) and introduce a novel camera pose estimation technique along with surface regularization terms that facilitate spatio-temporal reconstruction.
In addition to these algorithmic challenges, a significant
hurdle in 4D-SLAM research is the lack of publicly available datasets with reliable ground truth and evaluation protocols. To address this, we present a novel synthetic dataset
of everyday objects with diverse motions, leveraging largescale object models and animation modeling. In summary,
we open up the modern 4D-SLAM research by introducing a

1. Introduction

26921

The world we live in has many moving elements. Rivers
flow, trees sway, cookies crumble, and humans walk. Although Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
methods which assume that most of the world is static
are highly useful, embodied agents which aim to navigate
and interact with their environments in the most general
way should be able to operate in dynamic scenes. There
are several ways to segment and ignore moving scene elements, and a SLAM system can be assembled by integrating
these individual modules so that it can reconstruct the static
parts of a scene and estimate camera ego-motion. However, in this work, we aim for a more comprehensive spatiotemporal (4D) reconstruction of scenes exhibiting significant dynamic motion. Our primary focus is on a unified
framework that leverages intrinsic capabilities of the underlying scene representation without heavily relying on prior
assumptions about moving elements. 4D-SLAM with general scene motion is difficult primarily because of the complex and high-dimensional nature of modeling non-rigid
motions (and potential topological changes) while simultaneously optimizing the pose of a moving camera. There
is much more redundancy than in rigid SLAM, and some
prior assumptions are needed to combat this. Another chal-

