This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LamRA: Large Multimodal Model as Your Advanced Retrieval Assistant
Yikun Liu1,2∗ , Yajie Zhang3 , Jiayin Cai3 , Xiaolong Jiang3 , Yao Hu3 ,
Jiangchao Yao2 , Yanfeng Wang1† , Weidi Xie1†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
3
CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Xiaohongshu Inc., China

LMM

for Retrieval Tasks

Retrieve a similar
image

𝑞! → 𝑐 "

Universal
Reranker

(a) The LamRA Framework
Instruction:

𝑞! , 𝑞" → 𝑐 !

Universal
Retriever

Efficient Adaptation

Limited Retrieval
Capability

𝑞" → 𝑐 "

Candidates Pool
𝑞" → 𝑐 !

𝑞! → 𝑐 !

Instruction: Find a
image with the
described changes
Query: Make it angry
Instruction: Find an paragraph to
answer the question.

LamRA

Query: Is gradient boosting used
in GSP algorithm?

…

GSP algorithm is an
algorithm used for
sequence mining…

…

(b) The Capability to Handle Diverse Retrieval Tasks

𝑞 ! , 𝑞 " → (𝑐 ! , 𝑐 " )

𝑞! , 𝑞" → 𝑐 "

𝑞 " → (𝑐 ! , 𝑐 " )

(c) Performance Comparison

Figure 1. The LamRA framework empowers Large Multimodal Models with advanced retrieval and reranking capabilities. (a) LamRA
enhances LMMs with universal retrieval and reranking capabilities by inserting lightweight LoRA modules into the LMMs. (b) Examples
of varied retrieval tasks demonstrate LamRA’s capability to handle diverse retrieval tasks. (c) Performance comparison on the M-BEIR test
set shows LamRA’s superior performance across a wide range of retrieval tasks. For instance, q t → ci represents text-to-image retrieval.

Abstract

and reranking capabilities. (ii) For retrieval, we adopt a
two-stage training strategy comprising language-only pretraining and multimodal instruction tuning to progressively
enhance LMM’s retrieval performance. (iii) For reranking, we employ joint training of both pointwise and listwise
reranking, offering two distinct ways to further boost the
retrieval performance. (iv) Extensive experiments underscore the efficacy of our method in handling more than ten
retrieval tasks, demonstrating robust performance in both
supervised and zero-shot settings, including scenarios involving previously unseen retrieval tasks. Project page:
https://code-kunkun.github.io/LamRA/.

With the rapid advancement of multimodal information retrieval, increasingly complex retrieval tasks have
emerged. Existing methods predominately rely on taskspecific fine-tuning of vision-language models, often those
trained with image-text contrastive learning. In this paper, we explore the possibility of re-purposing generative
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) for retrieval. This approach enables unifying all retrieval tasks under the same
formulation and, more importantly, allows for extrapolation towards unseen retrieval tasks without additional training. Our contributions can be summarised in the following
aspects: (i) We introduce LamRA, a versatile framework
designed to empower LMMs with sophisticated retrieval

1. Introduction
Recently, the field of multimodal information retrieval has
been significantly advanced by the remarkable success of
Vision-Language Models (VLMs). For instance, CLIP [35]

* Work was done during internship in Xiaohongshu.
† Corresponding author.

1
4015

