This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReWind: Understanding Long Videos with Instructed Learnable Memory
Anxhelo Diko1 *† Tinghuai Wang2 * Wassim Swaileh2
1

Shiyan Sun2

Ioannis Patras2

La Sapienza University of Roma 2 Huawei Helsinki Research Center

diko@di.uniroma1.it {tinghuaiwang,shiyansun,wassim.swaileh,ioannis.patras}@huawei.com

Input Video

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are crucial for applications requiring integrated understanding textual and visual information. However, existing VLMs struggle with
long videos due to computational inefficiency, memory limitations, and difficulties in maintaining coherent understanding across extended sequences. To address these challenges,
we introduce ReWind, a novel memory-based VLM designed
for efficient long video understanding while preserving temporal fidelity. ReWind operates in a two-stage framework.
In the first stage, ReWind maintains a dynamic learnable
memory module with a novel read-perceive-write cycle that
stores and updates instruction-relevant visual information
as the video unfolds. This module utilizes learnable queries
and cross-attentions between memory contents and the input stream, ensuring low memory requirements by scaling
linearly with the number of tokens. In the second stage,
we propose an adaptive frame selection mechanism guided
by the memory content to identify instruction-relevant key
moments. It enriches the memory representations with detailed spatial information by selecting a few high-resolution
frames, which are then combined with the memory contents and fed into a Large Language Model (LLM) to generate the final answer. We empirically demonstrate ReWind’s
superior performance in visual question answering (VQA)
and temporal grounding tasks, surpassing previous methods on long video benchmarks. Notably, ReWind achieves
a +13% score gain and a +12% accuracy improvement on
the MovieChat-1K VQA dataset and an +8% mIoU increase
on Charades-STA for temporal grounding.

Timestamps
0:35

1:19

4:58

6:19

8:58

9:28

User

Can you identify the ingredients being
cut by the cook in the video?

The cook is preparing a salad and cutting
carrots, red bell peppers, celery, onion, and
cilantro using a sharp knife .

10:13

10:33

10:53

Temporal Action Grounding

Visual Question and Answering

ReWind

User

When does the action ‘Cutting vegetables’
happen in the video?

The action ‘Cutting vegetables’ is happening
from 56 to 510 seconds.

ReWind

Figure 1. ReWind is a memory-based VLM framework designed
for long video understanding (10+ minutes), specialized in VQA
and temporal grounding. The highlighted frames are selected from
ReWind’s dynamic frame selection mechanism.

1. Introduction

emerging field holds immense potential for applications
such as visual question answering (VQA), real-time interfaces for autonomous agents, and generating detailed scene
descriptions for the visually impaired.
Recent research in MLLMs has predominantly concentrated on Vison-Language Models (VLMs) [11, 27, 28],
which typically combine pre-trained LLMs with visual encoders that encode and feed to them visual information.
However, existing VLMs face two major challenges in processing long videos. First, their self-attention mechanisms
require substantial memory that scales quadratically with
the number of tokens, making long video processing computationally intensive. Second, these models struggle to effectively model temporal dependencies over extended sequences. To address these challenges, recent efforts have
proposed using memory modules to enhance the capability
of VLMs [10, 21]. However, current memory modules often serve as storage units and lack the ability to discern and
retain information pertinent to the task or user instructions.
Moreover, these models tend to compress temporal information heavily [21], sacrificing the fidelity of the temporal dynamics and overlooking critical details in the video’s
narrative. Additionally, current models rely on fixed dense
spatial representations per frame [10, 21], increasing memory requirements: by treating all frames equally, they store
unnecessary details for non-essential moments, increasing
memory demands and limiting the model’s ability to focus
on critical events for accurate video comprehension.
To address these long video challenges, we introduce

Large Language Models (LLMs) [22, 23] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities at human language processing [3, 24]. However, these models are limited to textbased inputs and, therefore, oblivious to real-world, multisensory information. To address this limitation, researchers
are actively developing Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) capable of processing signals from multiple and diverse modalities [13, 15, 18], including images, video, and audio. This
* Equal Contribution
† Work done while at Huawei

13734

