This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReCap: Better Gaussian Relighting with Cross-Environment Captures
Jingzhi Li Zongwei Wu*

Eduard Zamfir Radu Timofte

Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Würzburg, Germany

Interior

Learned
Env. Map
Sunset

28
24
19
15

Fireplace

Relight
(fireplace)
Snow
Relight
(forest)

Forest

Night
3DGS-DR
GShader
ReCap (ours)
3DGS-DR

GS-IR

R3DG

GShader

ReCap (ours)

GS-IR
R3DG

GT

(a) Visual comparison of learned environment maps and relighting quality.

(b) Average relighting PSNR across
unseen environment maps.

Figure 1. ReCap shows a significant advantage in reconstructing environment maps with accurate tones and color fidelity. Both qualitative and quantitative
assessments show that ReCap achieves more realistic and consistent relighting results under a range of unseen lighting conditions.

Abstract

1. Introduction
For a realistic and immersive augmented reality experience,
virtually placed objects must convincingly reflect light, cast
shadows, and adapt naturally to different lighting conditions. Achieving the desired realism requires a physically
accurate response to environment lighting, driving a line of
research at enabling relighting capabilities in popular neural
representation models.
In recent years, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [28]
gained prevailing popularity as an implicit scene representation. Subsequent NeRF-based relighting methods [19,
39, 50] produced impressive relighting results, but their
computational demands make them impractical for interactive applications [18, 46]. Lately, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [22] is widely acclaimed as an explicit 3D
representation model for its high rendering quality and interactive frame rates, naturally suited for applications requiring real-time performance. Building on this, follow-up
works [15, 18, 26, 46] have enabled relighting of Gaussians
using explicit shading functions and learnable lighting representations, often in the form of environment maps.
While standard HDR maps could theoretically replace
these learned environment maps for relighting, directly substituting them, as current methods do, remains questionable due to the unclear physical meaning of the learned

Accurate 3D objects relighting in diverse unseen environments is crucial for realistic virtual object placement.
Due to the albedo-lighting ambiguity, existing methods often fall short in producing faithful relights. Without proper
constraints, observed training views can be explained by
numerous combinations of lighting and material attributes,
lacking physical correspondence with the actual environment maps used for relighting. In this work, we present ReCap, treating cross-environment captures as multi-task target to provide the missing supervision that cuts through the
entanglement. Specifically, ReCap jointly optimizes multiple lighting representations that share a common set of
material attributes. This naturally harmonizes a coherent set of lighting representations around the mutual material attributes, exploiting commonalities and differences
across varied object appearances. Such coherence enables
physically sound lighting reconstruction and robust material estimation — both essential for accurate relighting. Together with a streamlined shading function and effective
post-processing, ReCap outperforms all leading competitors on an expanded relighting benchmark.
* Corresponding author

21307

