This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DFormerv2: Geometry Self-Attention for RGBD Semantic Segmentation
Bo-Wen Yin, Jiao-Long Cao, Ming-Ming Cheng, Qibin Hou*
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
bowenyin@mail.nankai.edu.cn, houqb@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
RGB modality

(a)

Recent advances in scene understanding benefit a lot
from depth maps because of the 3D geometry information,
especially in complex conditions (e.g., low light and overexposed). Existing approaches encode depth maps along
with RGB images and perform feature fusion between them
to enable more robust predictions. Taking into account that
depth can be regarded as a geometry supplement for RGB
images, a straightforward question arises: Do we really
need to explicitly encode depth information with neural networks as done for RGB images? Based on this insight, in
this paper, we investigate a new way to learn RGBD feature
representations and present DFormerv2, a strong RGBD
encoder that explicitly uses depth maps as geometry priors rather than encoding depth information with neural networks. Our goal is to extract the geometry clues from the
depth and spatial distances among all the image patch tokens, which will then be used as geometry priors to allocate
attention weights in self-attention. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that DFormerv2 exhibits exceptional performance in various RGBD semantic segmentation benchmarks. Code is available at: https://github.com/VCIPRGBD/DFormer.

Design focus

Fusion

Decoder

Encoder
Depth modality

(b)

Encoder

RGB modality

Dual Encoder with Fusion Modules
Unified
RGBD
Encoder

Depth modality

Decoder
An Unified RGBD Encoder

Encoder

Decoder

Geometry Prior

Use Depth as Prior

RGB modality

(c)
Depth modality

Figure 1. Comparisons among the main RGBD segmentation
pipelines and our approach. (a) Use dual encoders to encode
RGB and depth respectively and design fusion modules to fusion
them [28, 61]; (b) Adopt an unified RGBD encoder to extract and
fuse RGBD features [1, 59]; (c) Our DFormerv2 use depth to form
a geometry prior of the scene and then enhance the visual features.

1. Introduction

sion tasks. Furthermore, RGB-D data have demonstrated
remarkable potential, surpassing the RGB-based paradigm
in various downstream tasks, including autonomous driving [26], SLAM [50], and robotics [36].
Fig. 1(a) presents the architecture of current mainstream
RGB-D models. As depicted, it utilizes a dual encoder architecture [61, 62], wherein one encoder extracts features
from the RGB modality, while the other processes depth information. Meanwhile, a fusion strategy is performed to
achieve interaction between the information of these two
modalities during the encoding process. Despite the success, the majority existing RGBD segmentation approaches
adopt identical backbone architectures to extract features
from both RGB and depth data for fusion, neglecting the
inherent differences between the RGB and depth.
A series of studies have sought to identify optimal methods for processing depth maps and integrating them with

Semantic segmentation, aiming at assigning each pixel in
an image to a specific pre-defined category label, has been
a fundamental area of research in computer vision due to
its broad range of applications, such as in intelligent transportation systems and autonomous driving [30]. However, approaches based solely on RGB data often suffer
significant performance degradation in complex scenarios,
such as cluttered indoor environments or low-light conditions. In recent years, advancements in 3D modular sensors
have made depth data more accessible. Integrating RGBD data makes scene understanding more robust and accurate and thus becomes pivotal in advancing high-level vi* Qibin Hou is the corresponding author.

19345

