This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EvOcc: Accurate Semantic Occupancy
for Automated Driving Using Evidence Theory

1

Jonas Kälble1,2 Sascha Wirges1 Maxim Tatarchenko1 Eddy Ilg2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence 2 University of Technology Nuremberg
firstname.lastname@de.bosch.com

eddy.ilg@utn.de

Abstract

Front-facing Camera Images

We present EvOcc, a novel framework for evidential semantic occupancy mapping. It consists of two parts: (1) an
evidential approach for calculating the ground-truth 3D semantic occupancy maps from noisy LiDAR measurements,
and (2) a method for training image-based occupancy estimation models through a new loss formulation. In contrast
to state-of-the-art semantic occupancy maps, our approach
explicitly models the uncertainty introduced by unobserved
spaces or contradicting measurements, and we show that
using it results in significantly stronger models. Evaluated
as ray-based mIoU, our evidential semantic occupancy mapping approach improves over the baselines by at least 15.8\% 
for the ground truth and 5.5\%  for the trained model. Overall,
we make a significant contribution towards more detailed
and uncertainty-aware 3D environment understanding and
safe operation in autonomous driving.

Rear-facing Camera Images

GT Occupancy

Pred. Occupancy

GT Uncertainty

Pred. Uncertainty

1. Introduction
A critical component for safe automated driving is accurate and reliable environment perception, which includes
understanding the scene geometry as well as interpreting its
semantic content. While various 3D representations have
been explored in the past, semantic voxel grids have become a recent de facto standard for ML-based environment
perception [15, 31, 32, 34, 35].
For a long time, automated driving relied on LiDAR sensors due to their low and distance-independent measurement errors. However, recent methods attempt to reconstruct the 3D environment from camera images alone [10–
12, 15, 17, 19–21, 24], since LiDAR is sparse, expensive,
and redundant. This makes predicting accurate environment
maps from images an important task, and further brings up
the problem of obtaining ground-truth training data. The latter is usually produced by recording LiDAR measurements,
and employing heuristics to convert them into semantic occupancy maps. However, such reconstructed occupancy maps

Figure 1. Semantic occupancy and birds-eye-view uncertainty.
Our model uses multi-view camera images as input and predicts
semantic occupancy. We visualize the ground-truth semantic occupancy obtained from LiDAR scans on left and the predicted
semantic occupancy on the right. Below we show the GT uncertainty obtained from our semantic basic belief assignment (BBA)
using the LiDAR scans as well as the predicted uncertainties. High
uncertainties (e.g., due to occlusions) are colored in red, whereas
areas of low uncertainty are colored in blue.

are often inaccurate. A recent work by Kälble et al. [15]
has shown that the accuracy can in fact be improved by a
margin of 30-50\%  when simple heuristics are replaced
with the framework of evidential mapping. Different from a
classical probabilistic interpretation, this approach explicitly
models conflicting hypotheses and unknown states, which
is crucial for representing noisy real-world measurements.

27467

