This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GBlobs: Explicit Local Structure via Gaussian Blobs for Improved Cross-Domain
LiDAR-based 3D Object Detection
Dušan Malić1,2

Christian Fruhwirth-Reisinger1,2
Samuel Schulter3,:
Horst Possegger1,2
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning
2
Institute of Visual Computing, Graz University of Technology 3 Amazon
1

{dusan.malic, reisinger, possegger}@tugraz.at

Abstract
Mean

Ours

PointNet

(a) Our proposed encoder estimates Gaussian blobs from local neighborhoods, providing a more expressive representation of local geometry compared to PointNet [40] and the more commonly used mean encoding.
Ours
MDT3D [49]

O

→

?→

K

Ours
Li et al. [28]

K

K

?→

W

K

→

W

?→

W

3D-VF [21]

n→

LiDAR-based 3D detectors need large datasets for training,
yet they struggle to generalize to novel domains. Domain
Generalization (DG) aims to mitigate this by training detectors that are invariant to such domain shifts. Current
DG approaches exclusively rely on global geometric features (point cloud Cartesian coordinates) as input features.
Over-reliance on these global geometric features can, however, cause 3D detectors to prioritize object location and
absolute position, resulting in poor cross-domain performance. To mitigate this, we propose to exploit explicit local
point cloud structure for DG, in particular by encoding
point cloud neighborhoods with Gaussian blobs, GBlobs.
Our proposed formulation is highly efficient and requires
no additional parameters. Without any bells and whistles,
simply by integrating GBlobs in existing detectors, we beat
the current state-of-the-art in challenging single-source DG
benchmarks by over 21 mAP (WaymoÑKITTI), 13 mAP
(KITTIÑWaymo), and 12 mAP (nuScenesÑKITTI), without
sacrificing in-domain performance. Additionally, GBlobs
demonstrate exceptional performance in multi-source DG,
surpassing the current state-of-the-art by 17, 12, and 5 mAP
on Waymo, KITTI, and ONCE, respectively.

0

20

40
mAP

60

0

20

40
mAP

(c) Comparison with state-of-the(b) Comparison with state-of-the-art
art multi-sorce DG methods. Benchsingle-source DG methods. Benchmark results from training on all
mark results for WaymoÑKITTI
(˚), excluding the target dataset, and
(WÑK), KITTIÑWaymo (KÑW),
evaluating it on ONCE (O), KITTI
and nuScenesÑKITTI (nÑK).
(K) and Waymo (W).

Figure 1. We propose a novel encoding scheme for local neighborhood in point clouds, using a Gaussian blob instead of the
commonly employed mean or PointNet encoding (a). Our simple
yet effective approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in both single- and multi-source domain generalization
does not require any additional parameters, spatial training procedures, or hyperparameter optimization (b, c).

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D detection models [4, 46, 48, 61, 65] predominantly rely on global input features, i.e. representing
points by their Cartesian coordinates. Only a small subset
of research additionally incorporates local point cloud information, like relative distance to the voxel center [8, 55],
LiDAR intensity [38], surface normals [37, 69] or handcrafted local descriptors [25] to enhance model performance.
The convenience of global input features and their strong
in-domain performance established this representation as
: Work conducted prior to joining Amazon

the default choice for most state-of-the-art detection models.
However, such models are highly sensitive to rigid transformations [25, 57], being more biased toward object position
than local features like shape or appearance. Therefore, they
generalize poorly to novel, unseen domains [9, 56, 62, 63].
In this paper, we demonstrate that local point cloud geometry can significantly improve model generalization. In
particular, we introduce a new method for representing local neighborhoods as Gaussian blobs (see Fig. 1a), defined
by their means and covariance matrices. Our representation

27357

