This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Endogenous Attention for Incremental Object Detection
Xiang Song1 , Yuhang He2 ,* Jingyuan Li2 , Qiang Wang1 , and Yihong Gong2,3
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology
songxiang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, heyuhang@xjtu.edu.cn

Squirrel Monkey

Abstract

Annotated Objects

In this paper, we focus on a challenging Incremental Object Detection (IOD) problem. Existing IOD methods
adopt an image-to-annotation alignment paradigm, which
attempts to complete the absent old category annotations
and learns both new and old categories concurrently in
new tasks. This paradigm inherently introduces missing/redundant/inaccurate annotations of old categories, resulting in a suboptimal performance. Instead, we propose a
novel annotation-to-instance alignment IOD paradigm and
develop a corresponding method named Learning Endogenous Attention (LEA). Inspired by the human brain, LEA
enables the model to focus on annotated task-specific objects, while ignoring irrelevant ones, thus solving the annotation incomplete problem in IOD. Concretely, our LEA
consists of Endogenous Attention Modules (EAMs) and an
Energy-based Task Modulator (ETM). During training, we
add the dedicated EAMs for each new task and train them
to focus on the new categories. During testing, ETM predicts task IDs using energy functions, directing the model
to detect task-specific objects. The detection results corresponding to all task IDs are combined as the final output,
thereby alleviating the catastrophic forgetting of old knowledge. Extensive experiments on COCO 2017 and Pascal
VOC 2007 demonstrate the effectiveness of our method1 .

Unannotated Objects
Capybara

Annotation Conflict

Task 𝑡𝑡

Task 𝑡𝑡 − 1

(a) Annotation incomplete problem in IOD

New Classes

Old Class

Old Model’s Annotation

Unknown Class

New Class 1

New Class 1

New Class 2

New Class 2

Old Class 1

missing

Task 𝑡𝑡

Background

(b) Existing image-to-annotation
alignment paradigm

Task 𝑡𝑡

(c) Our annotation-to-instance
alignment paradigm

Figure 1. The illustration of (a) annotation incomplete problem
in IOD, (b) existing image-to-annotation alignment paradigm, and
(c) our annotation-to-instance alignment paradigm. Different colors denote different classes. In (b) and (c), yellow boxes represent
a previously learned class from an earlier task, while green boxes
denote an unknown object that may be learned in the future.

1. Introduction

ing nature of the real world, where new object categories
continuously emerge. This introduces a significant challenge to object detection: learning to detect new categories
while avoiding catastrophic forgetting of previously learned
ones. To solve this problem, a series of incremental object
detection (IOD) methods [33] have been proposed.

In the field of computer vision, object detection [24, 38, 57]
has recently achieved rapid progress through deep learning
techniques, attracting significant research interest and being
widely applied in various scenarios, such as video surveillance [10], autonomous driving [52], and industrial production [53]. Most existing detection methods are typically designed for category-predefined data, overlooking the evolv* Corresponding Author
1 Code: https://github.com/SONGX1997/LEA

Compared to the extensively studied incremental learning for image classification [56], the key challenge encountered by IOD is the annotation incomplete problem [7, 29],
i.e., only objects of current task categories are annotated,
while those of other tasks are treated as background without annotations. This leads to semantic conflicts for the
same class across different tasks, exacerbating catastrophic
forgetting of previous classes and hindering the learning of

30354

