This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVDoppler-Pose: Multi-Modal Multi-View mmWave Sensing for Long-Distance
Self-Occluded Human Walking Pose Estimation
Jaeho Choi1,2 Soheil Hor2 Shubo Yang2 Amin Arbabian2
1
DGIST 2 Stanford University
jhochoi@dgist.ac.kr, {soheilh, shuboy, arbabian}@stanford.edu
https://mvdoppler-pose.github.io/

Abstract
One of the main challenges in reliable camera-based 3D
pose estimation for walking subjects is to deal with selfocclusions, especially in the case of using low-resolution
cameras or at longer distance scenarios. In recent years,
millimeter-wave (mmWave) radar has emerged as a promising alternative, offering inherent resilience to the effect of
occlusions and distance variations. However, mmWavebased human walking pose estimation (HWPE) is still in
the nascent development stages, primarily due to its unique
set of practical challenges including the quality of the observed radar signal dependent on the subject’s motion direction. This paper introduces the first comprehensive study
comparing mmWave radar to camera systems for HWPE,
highlighting its utility for distance-agnostic and occlusionresilient pose estimation. Building upon mmWave’s unique
advantages, we address its intrinsic directionality issue
through a new approach—the synergetic integration of
multi-modal, multi-view mmWave signals, achieving robust
HWPE against variations both in distance and walking direction. Extensive experiments on a newly curated dataset
not only demonstrate the superior potential of mmWave
technology over traditional camera-based HWPE systems,
but also validate the effectiveness of our approach in overcoming the core limitations of mmWave HWPE.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) aims to reconstruct the
3D coordinates of the human body, acting as a key component for diverse applications such as human activity/gait
monitoring, clinical rehabilitation, and autonomous driving
[2, 5, 17–19, 31, 38, 39, 43]. Typical approaches in 3D
HPE primarily rely on vision systems, which involve onestage [11, 27] or two-stage mapping [15, 42] from input
videos into 3D joint coordinates. These systems, however,
face critical challenges when applied to walking subjects,

27750

i.e. human walking pose estimation (HWPE), as the diverse trajectories of walking individuals in a broad area can
further complicate reliable data capture of joints. One of
the key challenges in camera-based HWPE systems is selfocclusion, where movements of subjects across various directions often cause their joints to be occluded from camera
by other body parts. The problem is even more pronounced
in scenarios utilizing low-resolution cameras or capturing
subjects from longer distances, where reduced effective resolution further exacerbates the impact of occlusion.
Alternatively, millimeter-wave (mmWave) radar systems
offer a fundamental solution to the challenges faced by
camera-based HWPE. Utilizing transmission and reception
of electromagnetic (EM) waves, mmWave radar not only
detects the spatial locations of human joints but also captures their velocities directly via the Doppler effect [3].
While visible light is easily blocked by occluding objects,
mmWave signals can easily bypass and traverse occlusions,
identifying whole human figures even when parts of their
body are obscured [44]. Moreover, mmWave radar is noted
for its resilience against distance-related information loss:
such capabilities make the technology particularly valuable in scenarios where visual line-of-sight is compromised,
such as in automotive applications where mmWave radars
are frequently used to detect distant targets obscured by
front vehicles [6, 14, 26].
Despite this promising potential of mmWave technology,
its practical efficacy in HWPE still remains underexplored.
A significant challenge originates from the ‘directional nature’ of mmWave signals. Namely, while mmWave’s capability to track human joints excels along the radial direction,
it shows marked degradation of data quality when detecting movements in lateral directions. Consequently, current
mmWave pose estimation models [1, 28, 33, 37, 45] are typically restricted to controlled scenarios (e.g. simple limb extension or lunge movements performed in place, or walking
only in pre-defined directions within limited spaces), and
fail to generalize to more complex, variable motions associated with real-world walking scenarios.

