This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VisionZip: Longer is Better but Not Necessary in Vision Language Models
Senqiao Yang1

Yukang Chen1

Zhuotao Tian3 * Chengyao Wang1 Jingyao Li1 Bei Yu1 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
CUHK 2 HKUST 3 HITSZ

Abstract
Recent advancements in vision-language models have enhanced performance by increasing the length of visual tokens, making them much longer than text tokens and significantly raising computational costs. However, we observe
that the visual tokens generated by popular vision encoders,
such as CLIP and SigLIP, contain significant redundancy.
To address this, we introduce VisionZip, a simple yet effective method that selects a set of informative tokens for input
to the language model, reducing visual token redundancy
and improving efficiency while maintaining model performance. The proposed VisionZip can be widely applied to
image and video understanding tasks and is well-suited for
multi-turn dialogues in real-world scenarios, where previous methods tend to underperform. Experimental results
show that VisionZip outperforms the previous state-of-theart method by at least 5% performance gains across nearly
all settings. Moreover, our method significantly enhances
model inference speed, improving the prefilling time by 8×
and enabling the LLaVA-Next 13B model to infer faster
than the LLaVA-Next 7B model while achieving better results. Furthermore, we analyze the causes of this redundancy and encourage the community to focus on extracting
better visual features rather than merely increasing token
length. Our code is available at https://github.com/dvlabresearch/VisionZip.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. VisionZip Performance and Efficiency. (a) Our VisionZip significantly outperforms the current SOTA EfficientVLM
model, like FastV, SparseVLM, achieving nearly 95% of the performance with only 10% of the tokens across 11 benchmarks on
LLaVA-1.5. (b) VisionZip could reduce 8× prefilling time for
LLaVA-NeXT 7B. (c) VisionZip reduces GPU inference time by
2× across 11 benchmarks, enabling the LLaVA-NeXT 13B model
to infer faster than the 7B model while achieving better results.

Recently, the advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 51, 72] has led to significant progress in
Vision Language Models (VLMs) [3, 5, 27, 31, 33]. To integrate visual signals with textual semantics, existing VLMs
typically utilize sequential visual representation, where images are converted into vision tokens and processed by an
LLM decoder. Through modal alignment and instruction
tuning, these VLMs adapt LLMs to the vision domain,
leveraging their perception and reasoning capabilities.
However, the promising performance of VLMs largely
relies on the large amount of visual tokens. For exam* Corresponding author (tianzhuotao@hit.edu.cn)

19792

ple, in LLaVA-1.5 [33], the number of visual tokens is
576, and in LLaVA-NeXT [34], a 672x672 image yield
more than 576x5=2880 tokens, while the text tokens number only in the dozens to just over a hundred. These excessively long visual tokens consume a significant amount
of memory and computation in the entire VLM, limiting the model’s development in practical application scenarios such as edge computing, autonomous driving, and
robotics [23, 36, 41, 57, 59, 60]. Furthermore, based on
many previous studies [1, 4, 10, 22], we know that the information contained in images is much sparser than in text. In
contrast, the existing state-of-the-art VLMs have far more
visual tokens than text tokens. Hence, a natural question
arises: “Are all visual tokens necessary?”
To explore this, we conduct a pilot study on the visual tokens generated by the widely used vision encoders,
CLIP [42] and SigLIP [64]. As shown in Fig. 2, statistical and visual analysis reveal that only a few tokens receive
high attention and contain a large amount of information,
while most visual tokens receive minimal attention and aggregate limited information. Based on the observation, we
can answer the question that there is a significant amount
of redundancy in the visual tokens. Details of this phe-

