This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mani-GS: Gaussian Splatting Manipulation with Triangular Mesh
Xiangjun Gao1
1

Xiaoyu Li2 † Yiyu Zhuang3 Qi Zhang2 Wenbo Hu2
Yao Yao3 † Ying Shan2 Long Quan1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Tencent

3

Chaopeng Zhang2

Nanjing University

Figure 1. Our proposed approach allows for 3DGS manipulation, including large deformation, local manipulation, and even physical
simulation (such as soft body), while maintaining high-quality rendering.

Abstract
Neural 3D representations, such as Neural Radiation
Fields (NeRF), excel at producing photorealistic rendering
results but lack the flexibility for manipulation and editing
which is crucial for content creation. However, manipulating NeRF is not highly controllable and requires a long
training and inference time. With the emergence of 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), extremely high-fidelity novel
view synthesis can be achieved using an explicit point-based
3D representation with much faster training and rendering
speed. However, there is still a lack of effective means to
manipulate 3DGS freely while maintaining rendering quality. In this work, we aim to tackle the challenge of achieving manipulable photo-realistic rendering. We propose to
utilize a triangular mesh to manipulate 3DGS directly with
self-adaptation. This approach reduces the need to design
various algorithms for different types of 3DGS manipulation. By utilizing a triangle shape-aware Gaussian binding and adapting method, we can achieve 3DGS manipulation and preserve high-fidelity rendering. In addition, our

method is also effective with inaccurate meshes extracted
from 3DGS. Experiments demonstrate our method’s effectiveness and superiority over baseline approaches.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author: Xiaoyu Li and Yao Yao.

Editing 3D content is essential for content creation and
has various applications in movies, gaming, and virtual/augmented reality. 3D model editing enables users to
create and modify models flexibly, thereby enhancing production efficiency. The traditional pipeline for modeling
and editing a 3D asset with photo-realistic rendering involves a process with geometry modeling, texturing, UV
mapping, lighting, and rendering, which is a tedious and
time-consuming flow requiring lots of manual work.
Over the past few years, the neural radiance field
(NeRF) [26] has been widely studied due to its high capability and simple reconstruction process in 3D representation.
However, the implicit representation poses challenges for
editing. To address this, some methods are proposed to edit
this implicit neural radiance field [26]. NeRF-Editing [50]
is the first to utilize the triangular mesh to help edit the implicit radiance field. Volume rendering is conducted in the
deformed space to render the deformed object by editing the

21392

