This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JiSAM: Alleviate Labeling Burden and Corner Case Problems in Autonomous
Driving via Minimal Real-World Data
Runjian Chen1

Wenqi Shao2 * Bo Zhang2

Shaoshuai Shi3

Li Jiang4

Ping Luo1,5 *

1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Voyager Research, Didi Chuxing 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
5
HKU Shanghai Intelligent Computing Research Center
{rjchen, pluo}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract

shaowenqi@pjlab.org.cn

world deployment of these methods. First of all, labeling in
3D space is notoriously time-and-energy-consuming. According to previous research works [3, 28], it typically costs
an expert at least 10 minutes to label one frame of 3D data
at a coarse level, which leads to more than 1000 days labeling for a one-hour sequence. Moreover, real world datasets
are unable to cover all corner cases like rare traffic participants, which makes the trained models fail to detect such
exceptional cases.
Previous research attempts on alleviating the cumbersome labeling of LiDAR point clouds can be divided into
two main streams including semi-supervised learning [4,
16, 22, 30, 32] and large-scale pre-training [5, 13, 14, 19,
33, 34, 36, 37, 42, 45]. But there exists two common problems of these methods. First of all, performance of these
methods still lags far behind State-of-the-arts results when
training on fewer real labels. Secondly, all these methods
are unable to handle corner cases such as categories that are
not labeled in the training set.
On the contrary, labeled LiDAR point clouds with corner cases can be easily obtained in modern simulator like
CARLA [8] or Issac [20]. Previous works including [7, 29,
43] try to directly incorporate synthetic data from simulators to train models. However, there still exists large performance gap between models trained by these methods and
models trained on real data. This observation shows that
synthetic point clouds are still not ready to help 3D perception in real world application and it mainly stems from two
challenges when introducing simulation point cloud into
real-world 3D perception. 1) sample efficiency of simulation datasets is important for joint training on real and
simulation datasets. As simulation data is less informative
than real data, we might need far more simulation data. But
the training and saving (disk capacity) cost increases as we
scale up the simulation datasets. 2) simulation-to-real gap
makes it hard to jointly train data in both domains (simulation and real scenes). For example, intensity of each point

Deep-learning-based autonomous driving (AD) perception
introduces a promising picture for safe and environmentfriendly transportation. However, the over-reliance on real
labeled data in LiDAR perception limits the scale of onroad attempts. 3D real world data is notoriously timeand-energy-consuming to annotate and lacks corner cases
like rare traffic participants. On the contrary, in simulators like CARLA, generating labeled LiDAR point clouds
with corner cases is a piece of cake. However, introducing synthetic point clouds to improve real perception
is non-trivial. This stems from two challenges: 1) sample efficiency of simulation datasets 2) simulation-to-real
gaps. To overcome both challenges, we propose a plugand-play method called JiSAM , shorthand for Jittering
augmentation, domain-aware backbone and memory-based
Sectorized AlignMent. In extensive experiments conducted
on the famous AD dataset NuScenes, we demonstrate that,
with SOTA 3D object detector, JiSAM is able to utilize the
simulation data and only labels on 2.5% available real data
to achieve comparable performance to models trained on
all real data. Additionally, JiSAM achieves more than 15
mAPs on the objects not labeled in the real training set. We
will release models and codes.

1. Introduction
Light-Detection-And-Ranging (LiDAR) provides accurate
estimation of the distance between the sensor and objects
and serves as one of the important sensors for autonomous
driving, attracting broad research interests for 3D object detection with LiDAR [1, 10, 18, 23–25, 35, 39]. However,
these learning-based LiDAR detectors heavily relies on labeled real-world LiDAR datasets, which hinders the real* Corresponding authors.

6792

