This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VidTwin: Video VAE with Decoupled Structure and Dynamics
Yuchi Wang1,2 ,* Junliang Guo2†, Xinyi Xie2,3 , Tianyu He2 , Xu Sun1†, Jiang Bian2
1
Peking University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 CUHK (SZ)
wangyuchi@stu.pku.edu.cn, 120040057@link.cuhk.edu.cn, xusun@pku.edu.cn
{junliangguo, tianyuhe, jiang.bian}@microsoft.com
https://aka.ms/vidtwin

Orig.

Abstract
Recent advancements in video autoencoders (Video AEs)
have significantly improved the quality and efficiency of
video generation. In this paper, we propose a novel and
compact video autoencoder, VidTwin, that decouples video
into two distinct latent spaces: Structure latent vectors,
which capture overall content and global movement, and
Dynamics latent vectors, which represent fine-grained details and rapid movements. Specifically, our approach
leverages an Encoder-Decoder backbone, augmented with
two submodules for extracting these latent spaces, respectively. The first submodule employs a Q-Former to extract
low-frequency motion trends, followed by downsampling
blocks to remove redundant content details. The second averages the latent vectors along the spatial dimension to capture rapid motion. Extensive experiments show that VidTwin
achieves a high compression rate of 0.20% with high reconstruction quality (PSNR of 28.14 on the MCL-JCV dataset),
and performs efficiently and effectively in downstream generative tasks. Moreover, our model demonstrates explainability and scalability, paving the way for future research in
video latent representation and generation.

1. Introduction
The latent diffusion model has recently revolutionized the
popular text-to-image field, with representative models such
as the Stable Diffusion series [9, 30–32]. In this paradigm,
the image autoencoder plays a critical role by encoding the
image into a compact latent space, thereby alleviating modeling complexity and improving training efficiency of the
diffusion model. Recently, there has been growing interest
in adapting this paradigm for video latent representation and
downstream video generation tasks [3, 4, 13, 17, 28, 56].
*
†

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Junliang Guo and Xu Sun are corresponding authors.

Recon.

S. Recon.

D. Recon.

࢚૚

࢚૛

Figure 1. An example illustrating the Structure and Dynamics
latents. We select two frames, t1 and t2 , and show the original
and reconstructed video frames, labeled Orig. and Recon., respectively. S. Recon. and D. Recon. refer to the reconstructed frames
decoded using only the corresponding Structure or Dynamics latents. The Structure latent captures the main semantic content and
overall motion trends, while the Dynamics latent encodes local details and rapid movements.

However, due to the extra temporal consistency of videos
compared to static images, simultaneously modeling visual content and temporal dependencies into a latent space
presents a challenging problem [56].
Upon reviewing previous works that explore the conversion of video into latent representations using autoencoders [17, 20, 28, 54, 56], we identify two main design
philosophies. First, classical approaches, represent each
frame (or a group of frames) as latent vectors or tokens
of uniform size [44, 53, 54, 59]. This method is straightforward but overlooks the redundancy between frames.
Video inherently exhibits continuity, indicating that adjacent frames typically differ only slightly in details, suggesting significant potential for further compression. The
second emerging approach addresses this problem by dividing the representation into two types, i.e., a single or a
few content frame(s) along with several motion latent vectors [20, 49, 56]. However, these decoupling methods over-

22922

