This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StoryGPT-V: Large Language Models as Consistent Story Visualizers
Xiaoqian Shen
KAUST

Mohamed Elhoseiny
KAUST

xiaoqian.shen@kaust.edu.sa

mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Recent generative models have demonstrated impressive
capabilities in generating realistic and visually pleasing images grounded on textual prompts. Nevertheless, a significant challenge remains in applying these models for the
more intricate task of story visualization. Since it requires
resolving pronouns (he, she, they) in the frame descriptions, i.e., anaphora resolution, and ensuring consistent
characters and background synthesis across frames. Yet,
the emerging Large Language Model (LLM) showcases robust reasoning abilities to navigate through ambiguous references and process extensive sequences. Therefore, we introduce StoryGPT-V, which leverages the merits of the latent diffusion (LDM) and LLM to produce images with consistent and high-quality characters grounded on given story
descriptions. First, we train a character-aware LDM, which
takes character-augmented semantic embedding as input
and includes the supervision of the cross-attention map using character segmentation masks, aiming to enhance character generation accuracy and faithfulness. In the second
stage, we enable an alignment between the output of LLM
and the character-augmented embedding residing in the input space of the first-stage model. This harnesses the reasoning ability of LLM to address ambiguous references and
the comprehension capability to memorize the context. We
conduct comprehensive experiments on two visual story visualization benchmarks. Our model reports superior quantitative results and consistently generates accurate characters of remarkable quality with low memory consumption. Our code is publicly available at: https://xiaoqianshen.github.io/StoryGPT-V.

Frame1

Frame2

Frame3

Frame4

Char-LDM

Char-LDM

Char-LDM

Char-LDM

LDM Mapper

LDM Mapper

LDM Mapper

LDM Mapper

Large Language Model
LLM Mapper

text emb1

viusal emb1

Fred is
speaking to
someone
Cap0on1

LLM Mapper

text emb2

viusal emb2

He is
standing in
a room
Frame1

Caption2

LLM Mapper

text emb3

viusal emb3

Frame2

Cap0on3

text emb4

They are
talking to
each other

Fred and
Wilma are
in a room
Frame3

Cap0on4

Figure 1. We present StoryGPT-V, which empowers a large language model for interleaved image-text comprehension and aligns
its output with character-aware Latent Diffusion (Char-LDM) for
autoregressive story visualization grounded on co-referential text
descriptions.

lenge arises from the fact that captions for a single image
are typically self-sufficient, lacking the continuity needed
to capture the narrative of object interactions that unfold
through multiple sentences over a sequence of frames. This
poses a promising avenue for further research and exploration of story visualization. Such a task demands a model
capable of producing high-quality characters and detailed
environmental objects grounded on given text descriptions.
Moreover, it requires the ability to disambiguate referential
pronouns in the subsequent frame descriptions, e.g., “she,
he, they”.

1. Introduction

Prior studies [4, 23, 28, 30, 48] explore the realm of story
visualization but do not take reference resolution [45] (i.e.,
anaphora resolution in the context of natural language processing [2, 31]) into consideration. Story-LDM [39] first extended story visualization benchmarks with referential text
and devises an attention memory module that retains visual
context throughout the series of generated frames. However, it still struggles to generate precise characters for referential text since the interaction between current descriptions
and contextual information occurs within the CLIP [37] semantic space, causing a loss in fine-grained language un-

Image generation algorithms have made significant strides
and are on the verge of matching human-level proficiency.
Despite this progress, even a powerful image generator suffers from story visualization task, which involves generating a series of frames that maintain semantic coherence
based on narrative descriptions [23, 29, 30, 59]. This chal-

13273

