This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Few-Shot Adaptation of Vision-Language Models in Two Stages
Matteo Farina1,*

Massimiliano Mancini1
1

2

University of Trento

Giovanni Iacca1

Elisa Ricci1,2

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Abstract

84

All-to-all Mean [%]

An old-school recipe for training a classifier is to (i) learn a
good feature extractor and (ii) optimize a linear layer atop.
When only a handful of samples are available per category, as in Few-Shot Adaptation (FSA), data are insufficient
to fit a large number of parameters, rendering the above
impractical. This is especially true with large pre-trained
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), which motivated successful research at the intersection of Parameter-Efficient Finetuning (PEFT) and FSA. In this work, we start by analyzing
the learning dynamics of PEFT techniques when trained on
few-shot data from only a subset of categories, referred to
as the “base” classes. We show that such dynamics naturally splits into two distinct phases: (i) task-level feature extraction and (ii) specialization to the available concepts. To
accommodate this dynamic, we then depart from prompt- or
adapter-based methods and tackle FSA differently. Specifically, given a fixed computational budget, we split it to (i)
learn a task-specific feature extractor via PEFT and (ii)
train a linear classifier on top. We call this scheme TwoStage Few-Shot Adaptation (2SFS). Differently from established methods, our scheme enables a novel form of selective inference at a category level, i.e., at test time, only
novel categories are embedded by the adapted text encoder,
while embeddings of base categories are available within
the classifier. Results with fixed hyperparameters across
two settings, three backbones, and eleven datasets, show
that 2SFS matches or surpasses the state-of-the-art, while
established methods degrade significantly across settings. .

CLIP-LoRA
[CVPRW24]

2SFS
[OURS]

82

MMA
[CVPR24]
ProGrad
[ICCV23]

80

MaPLe
[CVPR23]
KgCoOp
[CVPR23]

78

76

CoCoOp
[CVPR22]

76

78

80

Base-to-novel Harmonic Mean [%]
Figure 1. We present 2SFS, a technically simple revision of classifier tuning. 2SFS exhibits favorable performance both in all-to-all
FSA, where train/test categories coincide, as well as in the more
challenging base-to-novel setup, where only a subset of base annotated categories are available, and the test suite further spans a
set of unseen (novel) classes. Conversely, setting-specific SOTA
approaches [42, 47] degrade between settings.

1. Introduction

[34]), achieves state-of-the-art or competitive results on a
variety of downstream tasks [49]. Throughout adaptation,
the feature extractor can also be fine-tuned together with the
classifier, commonly with a lower learning rate to avoid disrupting the knowledge instilled from pretraining. Notably,
the success of this latter paradigm is linked to the curse of
dimensionality and the risk of overfitting when there are too
few annotated samples relative to the parameters.
In this work, we deal with the Few-Shot Adaptation
(FSA) of Vision-Language Models (VLMs), where the
data-to-parameter ratio is at a critical level: there are typically hundreds of millions of parameters, but only a handful of data points are available on a per-category basis (i.e.,
the “shots”). Such a dilemma is emphasized when shots
are available for a restricted subset of categories, often
referred to as the “base” categories, and the downstream
task is assumed to span a broader range, comprising both
base and “novel” semantic concepts. This non-trivial chal-

Effective visual classification requires two key components:
a good feature extractor and a strong classifier operating on
features. This is established knowledge in computer vision,
and multiple influential works [35, 44] have demonstrated
that a simple linear classifier, optimized atop a frozen feature extractor pre-trained at a larger scale (e.g., on ImageNet
* Corresponding author: m.farina@unitn.it. Code at https:
//github.com/FarinaMatteo/rethinking_fewshot_vlms

29989

