This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Creating Your Editable 3D Photorealistic Avatar with
Tetrahedron-constrained Gaussian Splatting

1

Hanxi Liu1 , Yifang Men2 , Zhouhui Lian1 *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
2
Institute for Intelligent Computing, Alibaba Group

A man wearing a varsity jacket in forest green with cream-colored sleeves

(a) Input video

(b) Reconstructed avatar

(c) Text-guided editing

Reference image

Reference image

(d) Image-guided editing

Figure 1. Given a short RGB video captured by a monocular camera, the corresponding editable 3D avatar can be efficiently generated by
our method, achieving both text and image-guided 3D editing with locally adapted geometry and photorealistic renderings.

Abstract
Personalized 3D avatar editing holds significant promise
due to its user-friendliness and availability to applications
such as AR/VR and virtual try-ons. Previous studies have
explored the feasibility of 3D editing, but often struggle to
generate visually pleasing results, possibly due to the unstable representation learning under mixed optimization of geometry and texture in complicated reconstructed scenarios.
In this paper, we aim to provide an accessible solution for
ordinary users to create their editable 3D avatars with precise region localization, geometric adaptability, and photorealistic renderings. To tackle this challenge, we introduce a
meticulously designed framework that decouples the editing
process into local spatial adaptation and realistic appearance learning, utilizing a hybrid Tetrahedron-constrained
Gaussian Splatting (TetGS) as the underlying representation. TetGS combines the controllable explicit structure of
tetrahedral grids with the high-precision rendering capabilities of 3D Gaussian Splatting and is optimized in a progres-

sive manner comprising three stages: 3D avatar instantiation from real-world monocular videos to provide accurate
priors for TetGS initialization; localized spatial adaptation
with explicitly partitioned tetrahedrons to guide the redistribution of Gaussian kernels; and geometry-based appearance generation with a coarse-to-fine activation strategy.
Both qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of our approach in generating photorealistic 3D editable avatars.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No.: 62372015), Center For Chinese Font Design and Research, and Key Laboratory of Intelligent Press Media Technology.

With the rise of 2D text-to-image generative models [49,
51, 53], the task of text-to-3D avatar creation has garnered
significant attention, due to their convenience and the great
demand in AR/VR and gaming industries. Many valuable efforts have been made in sculpting iconic 3D characters [24, 25, 31, 35] or personalized figures based on highlevel user prompts [26, 42, 67, 69, 73]. However, due to
their susceptible reliance on diffusion priors [47, 65], their
generated visual results exhibit a significant gap compared
to real-world individuals. Meanwhile, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [27] has demonstrated exceptional capabilities
in multi-view reconstruction, achieving photorealistic realtime rendering. However, it is limited to recovering indi-

15976

