This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DE NHANCER: Consistent Multi-View Diffusion for 3D Enhancement
Yihang Luo

Shangchen Zhou† Yushi Lan Xingang Pan Chen Change Loy†
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
https://yihangluo.com/projects/3DEnhancer

SyncDreamer

MVDream

Era3D

”A painting of sunflowers”

”Cleanrot armor”

”A bulldog with a pirate hat”

”A stone”

Generated MV
3DEnhancer

(a) Multi-view Enhancement

Zero-1-to-3

Inpainting
Coarse MV Input (w/ masks)

Noise Level

(b) Multi-view Editing

”+Smiling”

Coarse MV Input

MV Inpainting

Noise Level 𝛿

δ=0

Coarse MV Input (w/ masks)

MV Inpainting

δ = 100

δ = 200

Figure 1. Our proposed 3DEnhancer showcases excellent capabilities in enhancing multi-view images generated by various models. As
shown in (a), it can significantly improve texture details, correct texture errors, and enhance consistency across views. Beyond enhancement, as illustrated in (b), 3DEnhancer also supports texture-level editing, including regional inpainting, and adjusting texture enhancement
strength via noise level control. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract
Despite advances in neural rendering, due to the scarcity
of high-quality 3D datasets and the inherent limitations of
multi-view diffusion models, view synthesis and 3D model
generation are restricted to low resolutions with suboptimal multi-view consistency. In this study, we present a
novel 3D enhancement pipeline, dubbed 3DE NHANCER,
which employs a multi-view latent diffusion model to enhance coarse 3D inputs while preserving multi-view con-

sistency. Our method includes a pose-aware encoder and
a diffusion-based denoiser to refine low-quality multi-view
images, along with data augmentation and a multi-view attention module with epipolar aggregation to maintain consistent, high-quality 3D outputs across views. Unlike existing video-based approaches, our model supports seamless
multi-view enhancement with improved coherence across
diverse viewing angles. Extensive evaluations show that
3DE NHANCER significantly outperforms existing methods,
boosting both multi-view enhancement and per-instance 3D
optimization tasks.

† Corresponding authors.

16430

