This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShapeWords: Guiding Text-to-Image Synthesis with 3D Shape-Aware Prompts
Dmitry Petrov1 Pradyumn Goyal1 Divyansh Shivashok1 Yuanming Tao1
Melinos Averkiou2,3 Evangelos Kalogerakis1,2,4
1

UMass Amherst

2

CYENS CoE

3

University of Cyprus

4

TU Crete

Figure 1. ShapeWords enables 3D shape-aware text-to-image generation via mapping of shape geometries into CLIP space. Given an input
3D shape and text prompts describing desired appearance and context, our method generates images that maintain both shape fidelity and
text compliance. Unlike existing methods that use view-dependent guidance like depth maps, ShapeWords generalizes to compositional
settings (top row) and allows for exploration of target geometries with stylistic deviations aligned with the prompt (bottom row).

Abstract
We introduce ShapeWords1 , an approach for synthesizing
images based on 3D shape guidance and text prompts.
ShapeWords incorporates target 3D shape information
within specialized tokens embedded together with the input
text, effectively blending 3D shape awareness with textual
context to guide the image synthesis process. Unlike conventional shape guidance methods that rely on depth maps
restricted to fixed viewpoints and often overlook full 3D
structure or textual context, ShapeWords generates diverse
yet consistent images that reflect both the target shape’s geometry and the textual description. Experimental results
show that ShapeWords produces images that are more textcompliant, aesthetically plausible, while also maintaining
3D shape awareness.

lenge in text-to-image models has been to provide users
with fine-grained control over shapes or forms in the synthesized images, which can be difficult to convey through
text descriptions alone. To address this, conditioning methods have been proposed, such as ControlNet [51] and IPadapter [48], that aim to capture the desired shape or form
more explicitly through the use of edge or depth maps as
input conditions.
Despite these advancements, current text- and imageconditioned synthesis approaches still face a number of
challenges. First, they often struggle to balance both textual
and visual conditions, when text describes a particular context that should be combined with the target shape to guide
an image synthesis (Figure 1, top row). Second, commonly
used visual conditions such as edge or depth maps are limited to a single viewpoint, resulting in a loss of valuable 3D
shape information when users seek image variations of an
underlying shape from different poses. Third, even when
these models accurately reflect the target shape in specific
views, users may want to explore shape variations – yet current models often lack flexible controls for such exploration.
To overcome these challenges, we propose ShapeWords,
a method designed to generate images that faithfully adhere
to both the text prompt and a target 3D shape geometry,

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative image models based on diffusion [2, 17, 36–38, 41, 44] have made it possible to generate impressive imagery from input text prompts. A chal1 Project page (with code): lodurality.github.io/shapewords

13305

