This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Multimodal Pretraining with Discrete Diffusion Timestep Tokens
Kaihang Pan1 * Wang Lin1 * Zhongqi Yue2 * Tenglong Ao3 Liyu Jia2
Juncheng Li1†
Siliang Tang1
Hanwang Zhang2
1

Wei Zhao4

Zhejiang University, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Peking University, 4 Huawei Singapore Research Center

{kaihangpan, linwanglw, junchengli, siliang}@zju.edu.cn, aubrey.tenglong.ao@gmail.com
{zhongqi.yue, hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg, liyu002@e.ntu.edu.sg, zhaowei82@huawei.com

Abstract
Recent endeavors in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) aim to unify visual comprehension and generation by combining LLM and diffusion models, the stateof-the-art in each task, respectively. Existing approaches
rely on spatial visual tokens, where image patches are encoded and arranged according to a spatial order (e.g.,
raster scan). However, we show that spatial tokens lack
the recursive structure inherent to languages, hence form
an impossible language for LLM to master. In this paper, we build a proper visual language by leveraging diffusion timesteps to learn discrete, recursive visual tokens.
Our proposed tokens recursively compensate for the progressive attribute loss in noisy images as timesteps increase,
enabling the diffusion model to reconstruct the original image at any timestep. This approach allows us to effectively
integrate the strengths of LLMs in autoregressive reasoning
and diffusion models in precise image generation, achieving
seamless multimodal comprehension and generation within
a uniﬁed framework. Extensive experiments show that we
achieve a new SOTA for multimodal comprehension and
generation simultaneously compared with other MLLMs.
Project Page: https://DDT-LLaMA.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [20, 55]
strive to unify the comprehension and generation of data
across various modalities within the same next-token prediction paradigm of LLM [38, 53]. Speciﬁcally, given a user
query about comprehension—“What kind of dog is in this
picture [IMG]”, or generation—“Turning the picture [IMG]
into a sketch”, the model can complete the task by sequentially predicting the appropriate text or image tokens.
The challenge lies in the conﬂicting objectives of the two
* Equal Contribution.
† Juncheng Li is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Auto-regressive training curves of diffusion timestep
tokens (left) and spatial tokens (right) under different degrees of
sequence perturbation.

tasks. Comprehension pursues a many-to-one mapping that
abstracts visual details (e.g., many photos of corgi dogs result in recognition of “corgi”). On the other hand, generation ﬁnds a one-to-one mapping that preserves visual details (e.g., the sketched image speciﬁc to the query image).
To bridge these conﬂicting objectives, the most straightforward way is to combine LLMs and diffusion models
(DMs), which excel in comprehension and generation respectively. There are two main integration strategies. One
approach is cascading [35], where the LLM understands
user queries and plans instructions, which are then passed to
the DM for generation. The other approach involves quantizing [15, 28, 60, 66, 68] or mapping [12] the continuous
visual modalities into discrete tokens for LLM processing,
followed by decoding these tokens into images using the
DM. Recently, Transfusion [67] aims to combine the LLM
and DM into a single model, creating a uniﬁed framework
for both understanding and generating multimodal content.
Notably, all existing methods are based on spatial visual tokens, which are extracted from image patches and
arranged in a spatial order (e.g., row by row in raster scan
order). However, following the evaluation in [26], we ﬁnd
that spatial token sequences lack the traits of human language, and essentially form an impossible language [26] for
LLM to master. Speciﬁcally, the performance of LLMs on
language tokens should degrade rapidly when their order is
disrupted. However, when we train an LLM to model spatial
token sequences in Figure 1 right, the order of tokens has

26136

