This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoSDH: Communication-Efficient Collaborative Perception via Supply-Demand
Awareness and Intermediate-Late Hybridization
Junhao Xu1 *, Yanan Zhang2 *, Zhi Cai1 , Di Huang1†
1 State Key Laboratory of Complex and Critical Software Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2 School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
junhaoxu@buaa.edu.cn, yananzhang@hfut.edu.cn, {caizhi97, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

ious autonomous driving tasks, including 3D object detection [3, 35, 36], semantic segmentation [20, 37], 3D occupancy prediction [31], and trajectory prediction [43], exhibiting enhanced performance and improved robustness to
occlusions, thus making it a crucial approach for advancing
autonomous driving systems.
Communication efficiency is a key issue in collaborative perception. An early approach to improving communication efficiency was to use autoencoders to compress the intermediate features that need to be transmitted [36]. Later, communication-efficient methods such as
Where2comm [11] were proposed, which select important
and sparse foreground regions for collaboration. However,
these methods still lack sufficient precision in area selection and require more bandwidth than the real-world constraints1 . As shown in Fig. 1a, when the bandwidth is
limited to 27 Mbps, Where2comm [11] experiences a decrease of about 1.5% in average precision (AP@0.7) on the
OPV2V [36] dataset with an intersection-over-union (IoU)
threshold of 0.7. When the bandwidth is further limited to 5
Mbps and 1 Mbps, AP@0.7 drops by approximately 7.5%
and 14.5%, respectively, even falling below the accuracy of
late fusion methods at the result level. This makes it difficult for existing collaborative perception methods to meet
the demands of practical applications.
In this paper, we first analyze the problem of selecting collaboration areas and refine this selection based on
the supply-demand relationship between agents. As shown
in Fig. 1b, for Ego, low-foreground confidence areas can
be divided into three types: Area 1 (low conficence due
to absence of foreground), Area 2 (low conficence due to
occlusion), and Area 3 (low conficence due to sparsity of
the point cloud). Although all three areas appear as background from the Ego’s perspective, Area 1 is well-observed
and does not require collaboration, while Areas 2 and 3,

Multi-agent collaborative perception enhances perceptual
capabilities by utilizing information from multiple agents
and is considered a fundamental solution to the problem of weak single-vehicle perception in autonomous driving. However, existing collaborative perception methods face a dilemma between communication efficiency
and perception accuracy. To address this issue, we propose a novel communication-efficient collaborative perception framework based on supply-demand awareness
and intermediate-late hybridization, dubbed as CoSDH. By
modeling the supply-demand relationship between agents,
the framework refines the selection of collaboration regions, reducing unnecessary communication cost while
maintaining accuracy. In addition, we innovatively introduce the intermediate-late hybrid collaboration mode,
where late-stage collaboration compensates for the performance degradation in collaborative perception under
low communication bandwidth. Extensive experiments on
multiple datasets, including both simulated and real-world
scenarios, demonstrate that CoSDH achieves state-ofthe-art detection accuracy and optimal bandwidth tradeoffs, delivering superior detection precision under real
communication bandwidths, thus proving its effectiveness
and practical applicability. The code will be released at
https://github.com/Xu2729/CoSDH.

1. Introduction
Collaborative perception allows multiple agents to exchange complementary perception information. It fundamentally addresses the issues of limited perception range,
sensor blind spots, and occlusion from obstacles inherent in
single-agent perception, thereby improving both the range
and accuracy of perception. Recent studies have demonstrated that collaborative perception can be applied to var-

1 To the best of our knowledge, the common V2X communication ap-

proach uses IEEE 802.11p-based DSRC (Dedicated Short-Range Communications) technology [1, 24], which provides an information transmission
rate of approximately 27 Mbps.

* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

6834

