This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D2 iT: Dynamic Diffusion Transformer for Accurate Image Generation
Weinan Jia1 , Mengqi Huang1 , Nan Chen1 , Lei Zhang1 , Zhendong Mao1 2 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China;
2
Institute of Artificial intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
{jiawn, huangmq, chen nan}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {leizh23, zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models are widely recognized for their ability to
generate high-fidelity images. Despite the excellent performance and scalability of the Diffusion Transformer (DiT)
architecture, it applies fixed compression across different
image regions during the diffusion process, disregarding
the naturally varying information densities present in these
regions. However, large compression leads to limited local realism, while small compression increases computational complexity and compromises global consistency, ultimately impacting the quality of generated images. To address these limitations, we propose dynamically compressing different image regions by recognizing the importance
of different regions, and introduce a novel two-stage framework designed to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of
image generation: (1) Dynamic VAE (DVAE) at first stage
employs a hierarchical encoder to encode different image
regions at different downsampling rates, tailored to their
specific information densities, thereby providing more accurate and natural latent codes for the diffusion process.
(2) Dynamic Diffusion Transformer (D2 iT) at second stage
generates images by predicting multi-grained noise, consisting of coarse-grained (less latent code in smooth regions) and fine-grained (more latent codes in detailed regions), through an novel combination of the Dynamic Grain
Transformer and the Dynamic Content Transformer. The
strategy of combining rough prediction of noise with detailed regions correction achieves a unification of global
consistency and local realism. Comprehensive experiments
on various generation tasks validate the effectiveness of our
approach. Code will be released at https://github.
com/jiawn-creator/Dynamic-DiT.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. Compression here refers
to the VAE + Patchify operation. (a) Existing fixed-compression
diffusion transformer (DiT) ignore information density. Fixed
large compression leads to limited local realism due to the limited representation of a few tokens preventing accurate recovery
of rich information, whereas fixed small compression leads to limited global consistency and high computational complexity due to
the burden of global modeling across patched latents. Samples
in (a) are obtained from [38]. (b) Our Dynamic Diffusion Transformer (D2 iT) adopts a dynamic compression strategy and adds
multi-grained noise based on information density, achieving unified global consistency and local realism.

In recent years, vision generative models have advanced
significantly, raising the realism and fidelity of visual gen* Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

12860

eration to new heights. Among them, the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) has attracted considerable attention and become the de facto choice for many modern image and video
generative models such as Stable Diffusion 3 [10], Flux [24]
and CogvideoX [56], primarily because it combines the best
of both worlds, i.e., the scalability of transformer architecture and the powerful modeling of diffusion process.

