This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STCOcc: Sparse Spatial-Temporal Cascade Renovation for 3D Occupancy and
Scene Flow Prediction
Zhimin Liao, Ping Wei *, Shuaijia Chen, Haoxuan Wang, Ziyang Ren
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
liaozm@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn

Implicit Learning-Based Model

Abstract

F

3D Conv

or

3D occupancy and scene flow offer a detailed and dynamic representation of 3D scene. Recognizing the sparsity
and complexity of 3D space, previous vision-centric methods have employed implicit learning-based approaches to
model spatial and temporal information. However, these
approaches struggle to capture local details and diminish
the model’s spatial discriminative ability. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel explicit state-based modeling method designed to leverage the occupied state to renovate the 3D features. Specifically, we propose a sparse
occlusion-aware attention mechanism, integrated with a
cascade refinement strategy, which accurately renovates
3D features with the guidance of occupied state information. Additionally, we introduce a novel method for modeling long-term dynamic interactions, which reduces computational costs and preserves spatial information. Compared to the previous state-of-the-art methods, our efficient explicit renovation strategy not only delivers superior performance in terms of RayIoU and mAVE for occupancy and scene flow prediction but also markedly reduces GPU memory usage during training, bringing it down
to 8.7GB. Our code is available on https://github.
com/lzzzzzm/STCOcc

Attention

Loss

Loss

Optimize

Optimize

⋯
−1

−

Occupancy Label
Explicit State-Based Model
Renovate

F

Sample

⋯
−

Occupied State

−1

(a) Explicit versus Implicit Modeling.
Occ3D Results

OpenOcc Results

(26.0GB)
(15.8GB)

(11.1GB)
(8.7GB)

(b) Comparison with Different Methods.

Figure 1. (a) Explicit versus Implicit Modeling: We propose a
novel explicit state-based modeling approach that explicitly leverages the occupied state to maintain feature sparsity and model
spatial details. (b) Comparison with Different Methods: Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance of RayIoU and
mAVE with lower training costs.

1. Introduction
Accurate perception of 3D surrounding scenes is indeed vital for autonomous systems. The goal of occupancy and
scene flow prediction [1] is to segment the entire space into
3D voxels and to determine the semantic and flow information of each voxel. This capability is crucial for understanding the environment and making informed decisions, which
is well-suited for downstream tasks in autonomous systems,
such as mapping and planning [2, 4, 39, 41, 50].
Due to data sparsity and information redundancy in 3D

space, employing efficient and robust approaches for 3D
feature processing is critical. Existing vision-centric methods [8, 9, 14–16, 22, 29, 31, 41, 45, 53] rely on implicit
learning-based method for modeling spatial and temporal
information, as shown in Fig. 1a. While these methods
optimize 3D reconstruction and long-term temporal fusion
through loss supervision, they face inherent limitations.
Specifically, the exclusive reliance on loss-driven training
hinders the model’s ability to capture fine-grained spatial
details and compromises the spatial discriminative capacity

* Corresponding author.

1516

