This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual and Semantic Prompt Collaboration for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Huajie Jiang1 , Zhengxian Li1 , Xiaohan Yu2 , Yongli Hu1 ,* Baocai Yin1 , Jian Yang2 , Yuankai Qi2
1
Beijing University of Technology 2 Macquarie University
{jianghj,huyongli,ybc}@bjut.edu.cn, lisin@emails.bjut.edu.cn,
{xiaohan.yu,jian.yang,yuankai.qi}@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning aims to recognize both seen
and unseen classes with the help of semantic information
that is shared among different classes. It inevitably requires consistent visual-semantic alignment. Existing approaches fine-tune the visual backbone by seen-class data
to obtain semantic-related visual features, which may cause
overfitting on seen classes with a limited number of training images. This paper proposes a novel visual and semantic prompt collaboration framework, which utilizes prompt
tuning techniques for efficient feature adaptation. Specifically, we design a visual prompt to integrate the visual information for discriminative feature learning and a semantic prompt to integrate the semantic formation for visualsemantic alignment. To achieve effective prompt information integration, we further design a weak prompt fusion
mechanism for the shallow layers and a strong prompt fusion mechanism for the deep layers in the network. Through
the collaboration of visual and semantic prompts, we can
obtain discriminative semantic-related features for generalized zero-shot image recognition. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our framework consistently achieves favorable performance in both conventional zero-shot learning and generalized zero-shot learning benchmarks compared to other state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. Different paradigms of GZSL. (a) Visual-semantic alignment with fixed backbone. (b) Fine-tuning visual features. (c)
Fine-tuning with transformer backbone. (d) Our visual and semantic prompts collaboration network (VSPCN). The VSPCN integrates visual information and semantic information into the intermediate layers of the vision transformer network for semanticrelated visual feature learning.

1. Introduction

visual features and semantic features by pre-trained visual
and language encoders independently and then align them
in a common embedding space, as shown in Figure 1(a).
However, visual features obtained via pre-trained models
may not be well-aligned with the semantic features since
they are independently extracted. To deal with this problem, some approaches [11, 62, 63, 69] propose to fine-tune
the visual backbone to align with class semantics, as shown
in Figure 1(b). Despite progress, the visual-semantic alignment is performed in the last layer of the network, which
has less influence on the previous layers, resulting in less
effective visual-semantic interaction. With the rapid development of the visual backbone network, transformerbased approaches have been proposed in zero-shot learning [9, 35, 67]. They perform visual-semantic interaction
for different layers in the model, enabling more semanticrelated features, as is shown in Figure 1(c). However, these
approaches tend to overfit seen classes in the fine-tuning

Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) [42] aims to recognize images from both seen and unseen categories with
the help of class semantic information, where class attributes [21, 26, 30, 62] and text descriptions [12, 32, 45]
are widely used to transfer knowledge from seen classes
to novel classes. GZSL is intrinsically inspired by the
human cognitive ability to understand unknown concepts
[30, 31, 42], gaining increasing attention recently.
Traditional approaches [1, 24, 38, 46, 55, 65] extract the
* Corresponding author

20275

