This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detect-and-Guide: Self-regulation of Diffusion Models for Safe Text-to-Image
Generation via Guideline Token Optimization
Feifei Li Mi Zhang† Yiming Sun Min Yang†
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
{ffli23@m.,mi zhang@,ymsun24@m.,m yang@}fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

guidance with adaptive strength and editing regions to
negate unsafe generation. The optimization only requires a
small annotated dataset and can provide precise detection
maps with generalizability and concept specificity. Moreover, DAG does not require fine-tuning of diffusion models,
and therefore introduces no loss to their generation diversity. Experiments on erasing sexual content show that DAG
achieves state-of-the-art safe generation performance, balancing harmfulness mitigation and text-following performance on multi-concept real-world prompts.

Text-to-image diffusion models have achieved state-ofthe-art results in synthesis tasks; however, there is a growing concern about their potential misuse in creating harmful content. To mitigate these risks, post-hoc model intervention techniques, such as concept unlearning and
safety guidance, have been developed. However, fine-tuning
model weights or adapting the hidden states of the diffusion model operates in an uninterpretable way, making it
unclear which part of the intermediate variables is responsible for unsafe generation. These interventions severely
affect the sampling trajectory when erasing harmful concepts from complex, multi-concept prompts, thus hindering their practical use in real-world settings. In this work,
we propose the safe generation framework Detect-andGuide (DAG), leveraging the internal knowledge of diffusion models to perform self-diagnosis and fine-grained selfregulation during the sampling process. DAG first detects
harmful concepts from noisy latents using refined crossattention maps of optimized tokens, then applies safety

1. Introduction
In recent advancements, text-to-image diffusion models
(DM) have exhibited remarkable capabilities in generating high-resolution images based on textual prompts that
outperform GANs and VAEs [4]. Notably, models such
as DALL-E [2, 36], MidJourney [31], and Stable Diffusion [6, 39] have achieved commercial standards, enabling
a wide range of applications designed for end-users. However, growing regulatory concerns about the safety of generated images and their social impacts, such as the gen-

† Corresponding authors.
Benign concepts - no changes J

Ours: Optimal balancing between generation
quality and erase performance

NonTarget
Concept

Worst Erasure

(COCO-1K)

*

*

*

Best Erasure with
the Worst Quality

*

*

*
*

*

*

*

Nude
Concept
(I2P-sexual)

Unsafe-concept mitigation with minimal necessary changes J

Figure 1. Results of safe generation with sexual content erased, masks are applied for censorship purposes. Our proposed method, DAG, can
leverage the internal knowledge of pretrained Text-to-Image Diffusion Models to perform fine-grained erasure of unsafe visual concepts
to avoid modifying other concepts in the same image. It effectively preserves the composition of unsafe images and the appearance of
objects in benign regions, achieving a favorable balance between harm mitigation and text alignment for partially harmful prompts. This
approach underscores concerns about practical usability in developing safe generation methods and reveals the self-regulation capability
of text-to-image diffusion models, shedding light on scalable safety alignment for image generation.

13252

