This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot 3D Question Answering via Voxel-based Dynamic Token Compression
Hsiang-Wei Huang 1,2∗ Fu-Chen Chen 2 Wenhao Chai 1 Che-Chun Su 2 Lu Xia 2
Sanghun Jung 1 Cheng-Yen Yang 1 Jenq-Neng Hwang 1 Min Sun 2 Cheng-Hao Kuo 2
1

University of Washington

2

Amazon

1

{hwhuang,wchai,shjung13,cycyang,hwang}@uw.edu

2

{cfchen,ccsu,luxial,minnsun,chkuo}@amazon.com

Abstract

1 Step 1: Multi-view 2D feature encoding.
2 Step 2: Visual tokenization.

Recent advancements in 3D Large Multi-modal Models (3D-LMMs) have driven significant progress in 3D
question answering. However, recent multi-frame VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) demonstrate superior performance compared to 3D-LMMs on 3D question answering tasks, largely due to the greater scale and diversity
of available 2D image data in contrast to the more limited 3D data. Multi-frame VLMs, although achieving superior performance, suffer from the difficulty of retaining
all the detailed visual information in the 3D scene while
limiting the number of visual tokens. Common methods
such as token pooling, reduce visual token usage but often
lead to information loss, impairing the model’s ability to
preserve visual details essential for 3D question answering
tasks. To address this, we propose voxel-based Dynamic
Token Compression (DTC), which combines 3D spatial priors and visual semantics to achieve over 90% reduction
in visual tokens usage for current multi-frame VLMs. Our
method maintains performance comparable to state-of-theart models on 3D question answering benchmarks including
OpenEQA and ScanQA, demonstrating its effectiveness.

simple concatenate

> 8,000 # v-tokens

simple 3D voxelize

> 4,000 # v-tokens

dynamic 3D voxelization

< 1,000 # v-tokens

3 Step 3: LLM understanding and reasoning.
Figure 1. Our method consists of three steps: multi-view 2D feature encoding, visual tokenization, and LLM understanding and
reasoning. Our approach leverages dynamic 3D voxelization, reducing the number of visual tokens in the 3D scene while maintaining competitive performance on multiple benchmarks.

1. Introduction

scale and diversity in existing 3D training data, while multiframe VLMs struggle with effectively managing the large
number of visual tokens required to capture details.
Recent Vision Language Models (VLMs) have shown
strong performance on video understanding benchmarks,
but managing large volumes of visual tokens from video
streams while retaining fine-grained details remains challenging. Many methods use memory banks [3, 42, 43, 46]
or token compression [5, 19, 25, 51] to reduce the number
of input tokens, thereby mitigating memory overhead and
improving VLM efficiency. However, these token reduction approaches often fall short on 3D question answering
tasks, especially when fast camera movements and rapid visual changes are involved in the 3D scan. After these token
reduction methods, essential small-scale visual details may
be lost, leading to omissions of critical information needed
for accurate 3D question answering. Therefore, an approach
that can intelligently preserve essential 3D scene visual details while minimizing the visual token usage is needed. In
this paper, we introduce Dynamic Token Compression, a
novel token compression method that reduces visual token
usage by maintaining a dynamic resolution 3D scene rep-

With the recent advancements in 3D Large Multi-modal
Models (3D-LMMs), 3D question answering tasks have
gained significant momentum. Latest 3D-LMMs combine Large Language Models (LLMs) with 3D input
data, enabling question-answering capabilities in 3D scenes
through extensive training and adaptation to 3D input formats. Recently, multi-frame VLMs [18, 25, 26, 60–62]
trained on 2D image data have demonstrated impressive
performance on 3D question answering benchmarks [2, 13]
by leveraging multi-view images from 3D scenes. While
both 3D-LMMs and multi-frame VLMs have achieved
some success, 3D-LMMs perform worse due to limited
* Work done in Amazon applied scientist internship.

19424

