This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HoVLE: Unleashing the Power of Monolithic Vision-Language Models with
Holistic Vision-Language Embedding
Chenxin Tao1,3 * , Shiqian Su1,3* , Xizhou Zhu1,2* , Chenyu Zhang1,2 ,
Zhe Chen4,2 , Jiawen Liu6 , Wenhai Wang5,2 , Lewei Lu3 , Gao Huang1 , Yu Qiao2 , Jifeng Dai1,2
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
SenseTime Research 4 Nanjing University
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 6 Johns Hopkins University
Model: https://huggingface.co/OpenGVLab/HoVLE
1

80.5

Abstract

794

The rapid advance of Large Language Models (LLMs)
has catalyzed the development of Vision-Language Models
(VLMs). Monolithic VLMs, which avoid modality-specific
encoders, offer a promising alternative to the compositional
ones but face the challenge of inferior performance. Most
existing monolithic VLMs require tuning pre-trained LLMs
to acquire vision abilities, which may degrade their language capabilities. To address this dilemma, this paper
presents a novel high-performance monolithic VLM named
HoVLE. We note that LLMs have been shown to be capable of interpreting images when image embeddings are
aligned with text embeddings. The challenge for current
monolithic VLMs actually lies in the lack of a holistic embedding module for both vision and language inputs. Therefore, HoVLE introduces a holistic embedding module that
converts visual and textual inputs into a shared space, allowing LLMs to process images in the same way as texts.
Furthermore, a multi-stage training strategy is carefully designed to empower the holistic embedding module. It is first
trained to distill visual features from a pre-trained vision
encoder and text embeddings from the LLM, enabling largescale training with unpaired random images and text tokens.
The whole model further undergoes next-token prediction
on multi-modal data to align the embeddings. Finally, an
instruction-tuning stage is incorporated. Our experiments
show that HoVLE achieves performance close to leading
compositional models on various benchmarks, outperforming previous monolithic models by a large margin.

1877

90.1

44.1

65.5

49.5

78.6

43
79.7

41.7

Our HoVLE(HD)

Qwen2-VL-2B

InternVL2

Chameleon-7B

EVE-7B(HD)

Emu3

Figure 1. Performance comparison on different benchmarks
between compositional VLMs (dashed lines) and monolithic
VLMs (solid lines). Previous monolithic VLMs exhibit a significant performance gap compared to compositional VLMs, while
Our HoVLE demonstrate competitive capabilities with state-ofthe-art compositional VLMs.

1. Introduction

development of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [26, 48,
58], which have demonstrated powerful visual-text processing capabilities. Compositional VLMs are currently the de
facto approach for building high-performance VLMs [11,
27, 46], which integrate pre-trained vision encoders with
LLMs, as shown in Fig. 2(a). By combining pre-trained visual understanding capabilities with language modeling capabilities, compositional VLMs achieve impressive multimodal performance. On the other hand, there is growing interest in developing VLMs without modality-specific
encoders, referred to as monolithic VLMs in this paper.
These models process image and text inputs as a unified
whole, directly feeding them into the LLM, as illustrated
in Fig. 2(b). Due to their monolithic design, these VLMs
feature simpler architectures, offering greater potential for

The rapid advancement of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [2, 4, 7, 45, 56] has significantly accelerated the
* Equal contribution.

Corresponding Author: daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn.

14559

