This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SoMA: Singular Value Decomposed Minor Components Adaptation
for Domain Generalizable Representation Learning
Seokju Yun
Seunghye Chae
Dongheon Lee
Youngmin Ro*
Machine Intelligence Laboratory, University of Seoul, Korea
{wsz871, tmdhey, dslisleedh, youngmin.ro}@uos.ac.kr
https://github.com/ysj9909/SoMA

Figure 1. Overview of SoMA framework. Left. SoMA achieves state-of-the-art results across diverse tasks, ranging from domaingeneralized semantic segmentation (DGSS) to object detection (DGOD), and performs well in both synthetic-to-real and real-to-real scenarios. Middle. Our method, trained solely on synthetic datasets, demonstrates strong generalization capabilities in complex real-world
scenes. Right. We present SoMA, a method that applies SVD to the pre-trained weights, decomposing them into r minor singular components U[:,−r:] Σ[−r:] (V T )[−r:,:] and residuals. SoMA selectively tunes the smallest r components, effectively preserving world knowledge
of foundation models. Since SoMA shares the same forward architecture as LoRA [30], it adds no extra latency during inference phase.

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) aims to adapt a model using one or multiple source domains to ensure robust performance in unseen target domains. Recently, ParameterEfficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) of foundation models has
shown promising results in the context of DG problem. Nevertheless, existing PEFT methods still struggle to strike a
balance between preserving generalizable components of
the pre-trained model and learning task-specific features.
To gain insights into the distribution of generalizable components, we begin by analyzing the pre-trained weights
through the lens of singular value decomposition. Building
on these insights, we introduce Singular Value Decomposed
Minor Components Adaptation (SoMA), an approach that
selectively tunes minor singular components while keeping
the residual parts frozen. SoMA effectively retains the generalization ability of the pre-trained model while efficiently
acquiring task-specific skills. Moreover, we freeze domaingeneralizable blocks and employ an annealing weight decay

strategy, thereby achieving an optimal balance in the delicate trade-off between generalizability and discriminability. SoMA attains state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmarks that span both domain generalized semantic segmentation to domain generalized object detection. In addition,
our methods introduce no additional inference overhead or
regularization loss, maintain compatibility with any backbone or head, and are designed to be versatile, allowing
easy integration into a wide range of tasks.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently made significant strides in dense prediction tasks, including semantic segmentation [12] and object detection [7, 61], both of
which are crucial for safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving. However, DNNs often fail to maintain
reliable performance under domain shifts, which may result
from diverse lighting conditions, weather changes, or differences in location. Likewise, while synthetic data [24, 62,
64] is employed to avoid the labor-intensive and costly process of constructing real-world datasets, the resulting performance degradation of DNNs in real-world deployment

25602

