This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SapiensID: Foundation for Human Recognition
Minchul Kim1 , Dingqiang Ye1 , Yiyang Su1 , Feng Liu2 , Xiaoming Liu1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
2
Department of Computer Science, Drexel University
{kimminc2, yedingqi, suyiyan1, liuxm}@msu.edu, 2 fl397@drexel.edu

vs

Cross Pose-Scale Recognition

Fixed Whole Body

Aligned Face

1

Figure 1. SapiensID is a human recognition model trained on a large-scale dataset of human images featuring varied poses and visible
body parts. For the first time, a single model performs effectively across diverse face and body benchmarks [25, 56, 71, 85]. This marks a
significant improvement over previous body recognition models, which were often limited to one specific camera setup or image alignments
for one model, with worse performance in in-the-wild scenarios. Additionally, we introduce a large-scale, cross-pose and cross-scale training
and evaluation set designed to facilitate further research in this area. — The name SapiensID pertains to the ability to recognize humans.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Existing human recognition systems often rely on separate,
specialized models for face and body analysis, limiting their
effectiveness in real-world scenarios where pose, visibility,
and context vary widely. This paper introduces SapiensID,
a unified model that bridges this gap, achieving robust performance across diverse settings. SapiensID introduces (i)
Retina Patch (RP), a dynamic patch generation scheme that
adapts to subject scale and ensures consistent tokenization
of regions of interest, (ii) a masked recognition model (MRM)
that learns from variable token length, and (iii) Semantic
Attention Head (SAH), an module that learns pose-invariant
representations by pooling features around key body parts.
To facilitate training, we introduce WebBody4M, a largescale dataset capturing diverse poses and scale variations.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that SapiensID achieves
state-of-the-art results on various body ReID benchmarks,
outperforming specialized models in both short-term and
long-term scenarios while remaining competitive with dedicated face recognition systems. Furthermore, SapiensID
establishes a strong baseline for the newly introduced challenge of Cross Pose-Scale ReID, demonstrating its ability to
generalize to complex, real-world conditions. Project Link

Human recognition has traditionally been approached
through domain-specific models focused exclusively on either face [13, 28, 29, 34–36, 38, 47, 63, 64, 68, 76] or
body [20, 30, 42, 44, 46, 71] recognition (or ReID). Each
of these modalities relies heavily on specific dataset alignments, where face recognition models are optimized for
tightly cropped, aligned facial images [1, 14, 21, 86], and
body recognition models are designed to process full-body
images of standing individuals [56, 67, 71, 82].
Despite advances in face and body recognition, no single
model has yet effectively managed to handle a diverse range
of poses and visible area simultaneously. However, in realworld settings, human recognition often requires harnessing
the full spectrum of available clues, integrating both face
and body information. Typically, multiple models are fused
at the feature or score level [23, 45] to mitigate this issue. In
other words, no single model can handle both face and body
images as robustly as modality-specific models. Therefore,
a unified model would mark a significant advance in human
recognition, allowing reliable identification across varied
poses and scales of body parts. As in Fig. 2, current models relies heavily on in-domain datasets, fail to generalize
effectively to other datasets.

13937

