This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Streaming Video with Orthogonal Gradients
Tengda Han⋄ , Dilara Gokay⋄ , Joseph Heyward⋄ , Chuhan Zhang⋄
Daniel Zoran⋄ , Viorica Pătrăucean⋄ , João Carreira⋄ , Dima Damen⋄† , Andrew Zisserman⋄‡
⋄

Google DeepMind, † University of Bristol, ‡ University of Oxford

Abstract
sequential
loading

We address the challenge of representation learning from a
continuous stream of video as input, in a self-supervised
manner.
This differs from the standard approaches
to video learning where videos are chopped and shuffled during training in order to create a non-redundant
batch that satisfies the independently and identically distributed (IID) sample assumption expected by conventional
training paradigms. When videos are only available as a
continuous stream of input, the IID assumption is evidently
broken, leading to poor performance. We demonstrate the
drop in performance when moving from shuffled to sequential learning on three tasks: the one-video representation
learning method DoRA, standard VideoMAE on multi-video
datasets, and the task of future video prediction.
To address this drop, we propose a geometric modification to standard optimizers, to decorrelate batches by
utilising orthogonal gradients during training. The proposed modification can be applied to any optimizer – we
demonstrate it with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and
AdamW. Our proposed orthogonal optimizer allows models
trained from streaming videos to alleviate the drop in representation learning performance, as evaluated on downstream tasks. On three scenarios (DoRA, VideoMAE, future
prediction), we show our orthogonal optimizer outperforms
the strong AdamW in all three scenarios.

gradients are highly correlated over training steps

shuffled
loading

gradients are almost not correlated over training steps

Orthogonal Optimizer

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We address the task of learning from video by sequentially loading its clips in time (top). As neighbouring clips are very
similar, consecutive gradients are highly correlated – we show the
histogram of cosine similarity of gradients between consecutive
batches. This causes model collapse. In contrast, current methods
shuffle the video to simulate an IID input (middle). Consecutive
gradients are accordingly decorrelated – cosine similarity is centred around 0. We propose to learn from the orthogonal gradients
– which allow standard optimizers to recover the drop in performance when training from a sequential video stream (bottom).

tribution. These assumptions are immediately broken when
learning from a continuous stream.
To accommodate the current learning paradigms, video
models have to date been restricted to learning from short
clips, by dividing any long video streams into short segments and shuffling these to enable learning. This gap between human learning and current video models is not only
a computational burden from storing and accessing large
videos, but is also potentially limiting the capabilities of
models to achieve the human’s ability to generalise. Learning from a continuous stream is key to enabling intelligent
agents that learn on-the-fly or adapt to new environments.

Trained on Internet-scale data at powerplant-scale energy
costs, the way deep learning models are created today is
drastically different from the way humans acquire their visual intelligence. Humans perceive a single continuous visual input, starting from being infants in cribs. This visual
input is highly redundant and temporally correlated. Such
an input poses significant challenges for current deep learning paradigms. These paradigms were primarily developed
for learning from images, and make assumptions on the informativeness of every training batch as an independently
and identically distributed (IID) sample from the data dis-

13651

