This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On Denoising Walking Videos for Gait Recognition
Dongyang Jin1∗ , Chao Fan2,1 ,* Jingzhe Ma3,1 , Jingkai Zhou4,5 , Weihua Chen5 , and Shiqi Yu1†
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, China
3
Shenzhen Polytechnic University, China 4 Zhejiang University, China 5 Alibaba Group, China
12332451@mail.sustech.edu.cn, chaofan996@szu.edu.cn, jingzhema@szpu.edu.cn,
fs.jingkaizhou@gmail.com, kugang.cwh@alibaba-inc.com, yusq@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Segmentation
Pose Estimation

To capture individual gait patterns, excluding identityirrelevant cues in walking videos, such as clothing texture
and color, remains a persistent challenge for vision-based
gait recognition. Traditional silhouette- and pose-based
methods, though theoretically effective at removing such
distractions, often fall short of high accuracy due to their
sparse and less informative inputs. Emerging end-to-end
methods address this by directly denoising RGB videos using human priors. Building on this trend, we propose DenoisingGait, a novel gait denoising method. Inspired by
the philosophy that “what I cannot create, I do not understand”, we turn to generative diffusion models, uncovering
how they partially filter out irrelevant factors for gait understanding. Additionally, we introduce a geometry-driven
Feature Matching module, which, combined with background removal via human silhouettes, condenses the multichannel diffusion features at each foreground pixel into a
two-channel direction vector. Specifically, the proposed
within- and cross-frame matching respectively capture the
local vectorized structures of gait appearance and motion,
producing a novel flow-like gait representation termed Gait
Feature Field, which further reduces residual noise in diffusion features. Experiments on the CCPG, CASIA-B*,
and SUSTech1K datasets demonstrate that DenoisingGait
achieves a new SoTA performance in most cases for both
within- and cross-domain evaluations. Code is available at
https://github.com/ShiqiYu/OpenGait.

…

…

Silhouette Pose
(a) Traditional Denoising Encoder
Dynamic Gait
Feature Field

Diffusion

Static Gait
Feature Field

tem

po

ral

spatial

(c) Multiple-Channel Features to
Two-Dimensional Direction Vector

(b) Our Denoising Encoder

Figure 1. The proposed knowledge-driven denoising, derived from
generative diffusion models, and the geometry-driven denoising,
enforced by Feature Matching.

application, known as gait recognition, differs from methods like face, fingerprint, and iris recognition by enabling
non-intrusive human identification from a distance, without
requiring the subject’s active cooperation [35]. Additionally, gait is challenging to disguise or obscure, making it
suitable for security applications in unconstrained environments, such as criminal suspect tracking and retrieval [25].

1. Introduction

To minimize the influence of irrelevant cues like background and texture, many gait recognition methods rely on
predefined representations extracted from walking videos.
The most commonly used ones include the binary silhouettes [2, 7, 10, 21, 34], skeleton coordinates [11, 20, 41],
SMPL models [18, 56], and body parsing images [57, 60].
As illustrated in Figure 1, the gait representation extraction
can be regarded as a denoising encoder, which can enhance
the subsequent gait learning process through either a twostage or end-to-end training manner. In contrast, some recent works [50, 55] go beyond explicit gait representations,
focusing instead on directly denoising RGB videos through

Pedestrian gait, as captured in walking videos, uniquely
conveys identifiable traits through body shape and limb
movement, making it an effective biometric feature. This
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

12347

