This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAD: Memory-Augmented Detection of 3D Objects
Ben Agro†

Sergio Casas†
Patrick Wang†
Raquel Urtasun

Thomas Gilles

{tgilles, urtasun}@waabi.ai

(b) Object Memory

(a) 3D Detector
-2.4s

Memory Age

(c) Memory Augmented Detections
0.0s

False Negative

Figure 1.
Detectors without long-term temporal fusion (a) miss heavily occluded objects. Our approach enhances detectors (b) to
remember past predictions, (c) recovering from occlusion. Detections are in green , labels are in black , lidar points are in • gray.

Abstract

rely on their memory. For example, they may drive more
cautiously when remembering a previously observed but
now occluded cyclist, who may suddenly enter the road.
A common approach for improving 3D object detectors
is to aggregate a short temporal window of past sensor observations. Towards this goal, most existing LiDAR-based
methods transform a short buffer of sensor data into the current ego (SDV) coordinate frame to align past and current
evidence [1, 39, 58, 74, 75]. Similarly, camera-based methods stack multiple images [46, 78] as input to existing architectures. These methods cannot handle long temporal
sequences due to computational and memory constraints.
Moreover, temporal stacks of 3D/Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV)
representations like point clouds or lifted camera features
require a large receptive field, especially for fast-moving
objects [30], further increasing computational burden.
There is a growing interest in long-term temporal fusion.
Scene-level memory approaches [14, 17, 31] recurrently
fuse scene-level features, but they can struggle to capture
relevant foreground objects. Other approaches associate objects in memory over time via tracking [8, 20, 30, 32], aggregating past information for each particular object. However, the associations from the tracker may contain mistakes that can compound over time and lead to information loss. Other methods leverage attention from current
detection proposals to the past sensor or object information [15, 18, 74]. Still, they can be challenging to scale
to long histories and suffer from false negatives as the proposals refined into the final detections only come from the

To perceive, humans use memory to fill in gaps caused by
our limited visibility, whether due to occlusion or our narrow field of view. However, most 3D object detectors are
limited to using sensor evidence from a short temporal window (0.1s-0.3s). In this work, we present a simple and effective add-on for enhancing any existing 3D object detector with long-term memory regardless of its sensor modality
(e.g., LiDAR, camera) and network architecture. We propose a model to effectively align and fuse object proposals
from a detector with object proposals from a memory bank
of past predictions, exploiting trajectory forecasts to align
proposals across time. We propose a novel schedule to train
our model on temporal data that balances data diversity
and the gap between training and inference. By applying
our method to existing LiDAR and camera-based detectors
on the Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) and Argoverse 2 Sensor (AV2) dataset, we demonstrate significant improvements
in detection performance (+2.5 to +7.6 AP points). Our
method attains the best performance on the WOD 3D detection leaderboard among online methods (excluding ensembles or test-time augmentation).

1

Introduction

Most self-driving vehicles (SDVs) utilize a 3D object detector to recognize and localize objects in 3D space. This task
is challenging due to occlusion, large intra-class variability,
and distant objects, which typically have limited sensor observations. To overcome these challenges, human drivers

† Work done while at Waabi

1449

