This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FALCON

: Fairness Learning via Contrastive Attention Approach to
Continual Semantic Scene Understanding

Thanh-Dat Truong1 , Utsav Prabhu2 , Bhiksha Raj3,4 , Jackson Cothren5 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas, USA 2 Google DeepMind, USA
3
Carnegie Mellon University, USA 4 Mohammed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE
5
Dep. of Geosciences, University of Arkansas, USA
{tt032, jcothre, khoaluu}@uark.edu, bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu, utsavprabhu@google.com
http://uark-cviu.github.io/projects/FALCON

Abstract
Continual Learning in semantic scene segmentation aims
to continually learn new unseen classes in dynamic environments while maintaining previously learned knowledge.
Prior studies focused on modeling the catastrophic forgetting and background shift challenges in continual learning.
However, fairness, another major challenge that causes unfair predictions leading to low performance among major
and minor classes, still needs to be well addressed. In addition, prior methods have yet to model the unknown classes
well, thus resulting in producing non-discriminative features
among unknown classes. This work presents a novel Fairness
Learning via Contrastive Attention Approach to continual
learning in semantic scene understanding. In particular, we
first introduce a new Fairness Contrastive Clustering loss to
address the problems of catastrophic forgetting and fairness.
Then, we propose an attention-based visual grammar approach to effectively model the background shift problem and
unknown classes, producing better feature representations
for different unknown classes. Through our experiments,
our proposed approach achieves State-of-the-Art (SoTA) performance on different continual learning benchmarks, i.e.,
ADE20K, Cityscapes, and Pascal VOC. It promotes the fairness of the continual semantic segmentation model.

1. Introduction
The semantic segmentation networks, e.g., Transformers
[69] and Convolutional Neural Networks [7], learned from
data with a closed-set of known classes, have shown outstanding performance. However, they often suffer performance
degradation when encountering novel objects or classes in
new dynamic environments [2, 20, 62, 63]. To improve their
performance, several transfer learning and domain adaptation methods [1, 28, 29, 40, 57–60, 62, 64] were introduced
to adapt trained models into deployed environments. While

Figure 1. Our Fairness Learning via Contrastive Attention to
Continual Semantic Segmentation. The Fairness Contrastive
Clustering Loss promotes the fairness of the model while the
Attention-based Visual Grammar models the unknown classes.

the former often aims to fine-tune the model on labeled
data collected in the new environments, the latter adapts
the model to the new domains in an unsupervised manner
[1, 28]. However, these methods cannot handle novel objects well due to their close-set learning. In practice, the
semantic segmentation models should be able to adaptively
and continually learn the new knowledge of novel classes. It
motivates the development of Continual Learning paradigm
[2, 20, 46], a.k.a, Continual Semantic Segmentation (CSS),
where the segmentation models are learned sequentially to
new contents of data.
Far apart from prior segmentation methods [7, 69] that
learn one time on static, closed-set data, Continual Learning
requires the segmentation models to learn from dynamic,
open-set data [20, 62]. In a particular scenario, accessing
previous learning data is restricted due to privacy concerns.
In CSS, three challenges have been identified, including (1)
Catastrophic Forgetting, (2) Background Shift, and (3) Fairness. While the catastrophic forgetting problem [24, 50, 56]
depicts the segmentation model tends to forget its knowledge
when learning new data, background shift indicates the problem of classes of previous or future data (unknown classes)

15065

