This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature-Preserving Mesh Decimation for Normal Integration
Moritz Heep
PhenoRob
University of Bonn

Sven Behnke
Autonomous Intelligent Systems
University of Bonn

mheep@uni-bonn.de

behnke@ais.uni-bonn.de

Abstract

Eduard Zell
Independent Researcher
ezell@hotmail.de

Isotropic Remeshing

Our Decimation

21k Vertices

20k Vertices

Normal integration reconstructs 3D surfaces from normal
maps obtained e.g. by photometric stereo. These normal
maps capture surface details down to the pixel level but require large computational resources for integration at high
resolutions. In this work, we replace the dense pixel grid
with a sparse anisotropic triangle mesh prior to normal
integration. We adapt the triangle mesh to the local geometry in the case of complex surface structures and remove oversampling from flat featureless regions. For highresolution images, the resulting compression reduces normal integration runtimes from hours to minutes while maintaining high surface accuracy. Our main contribution is
the derivation of the well-known quadric error measure
from mesh decimation for screen space applications and
its combination with optimal Delaunay triangulation. Code
is available at https://moritzheep.github.io/
anisotropic-screen-meshing.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Visual comparison between the isotropic remeshing [14]
(left) and our anisotropic decimation (right). In both examples,
the 20482 normal map is compressed into a triangle mesh with approximately 20k vertices before integration. By aligning vertices
and edges to ridges and furrows, we achieve higher accuracy with
the same number of vertices.

Normal maps can be estimated from images through shapefrom-shading [15] or photometric stereo [29] down to the
pixel level, capturing delicate surface details. Normal integration reconstructs the underlying surface using these normals. The surface is usually estimated as a pixel-based
depth map [7] by solving a linear system. At the pixel level,
doubling the geometric resolution requires doubling both,
image height and width. Due to this quadratic growth of the
number of variables in the linear system, normal integration
scales poorly to higher image resolutions. The fundamental problem of a regular grid is that fine details somewhere
on screen require increasing the resolution everywhere on
screen.
Recent research proposes substituting the pixel grid with
an adaptive 2D triangle mesh prior to integration [14]. Triangle meshes allow local control of the resolution: the resolution remains high in areas of delicate details and is lowered within smooth areas. While this reduces the number

of vertices compared to the number of pixels (and consequently runtime), this approach is isotropic and struggles
with ridges and furrows by design. Our proposed method
overcomes this limitation by shifting to an anisotropic formulation: By analysing the normal maps, we align edges
and vertices of the mesh with ridges and furrows of the underlying geometry. Our mesh decimation technique maintains delicate surface details more effectively than previous
methods, even with high compression ratios, see Fig. 1. In
summary, our contributions are:
• We derive quadrics [11], originally designed for 3D
meshes and crucial to mesh decimation methods but take

5783

