This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Subspace Constraint and Contribution Estimation for
Heterogeneous Federated Learning
Xiangtao Zhang, Sheng Li, Ao Li, Yipeng Liu, Fan Zhang, Ce Zhu, Le Zhang
SICE, UESTC, Chengdu, China
{xiangtaozhang, lisheng2425, aoli}@std.uestc.edu.cn,
{yipengliu, fan.zhang, eczhu, lezhang}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

Aggregation

Aggregation

Heterogeneous Federated Learning (HFL) has received
widespread attention due to its adaptability to different
models and data. The HFL approach utilizing auxiliary
models for knowledge transfer can further enhance flexibility. However, existing frameworks face the challenges of
local overfitting and aggregation bias. To address these issues, we propose FedSCE. By restricting specific layers of
the local model updates to a subspace, FedSCE reduces the
degrees of freedom of the update, enhances generalization,
and mitigates the risk of overfitting. The subspace is dynamically updated to ensure coverage of the latest model
update trajectory. Additionally, FedSCE evaluates client
contributions based on the update distance of the auxiliary model in feature space and parameter space, achieving
adaptive weighted aggregation. We validate our approach
in both feature-skewed and label-skewed scenarios, demonstrating that on Office10, our method exceeds the best baseline by 3.87%. The code will be available at https:
//github.com/AVC2-UESTC/FedSCE.git.

Server
Client 1

Auxiliary Model

Client 2

Client m

Local Model

Overfitting / Catastrophic Forgetting?

Contribution Estimation
Auxiliary Model

Avg？

Amazon

Caltech

DSLR

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Challenges in heterogeneous federated learning based
on auxiliary model: 1) In the local training stage, local models
often suffer from overfitting and catastrophic forgetting, resulting
in suboptimal performance. 2) In the auxiliary model aggregation stage, assessing the contributions of each client is challenging, which hinders effective information transmission.

Federated Learning (FL) has recently emerged as a collaborative machine learning paradigm that enables model
training while preserving local data privacy [30, 31, 49].
However, Traditional Federated Learning (TFL) methods
often perform poorly when dealing with heterogeneous
data [18, 22, 32]. To solve this problem, Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) was proposed by training customized
models on the client [33, 50]. However, most PFL methods
maintain a uniform model architecture [33, 54, 55], which
may not suit the unique requirements of certain organizations or individuals [52].
Therefore, Heterogeneous Federated Learning (HFL)
has been introduced as a paradigm that can handle both
Corresponding author.

20632

data and model heterogeneity [52]. HFL allows clients
to use different model architectures, making them adaptable to different hardware and specific task requirements.
In addition, these methods explore many novel knowledge
transfer strategies beyond simply aggregating model parameters [17, 28, 39, 57].
Current HFL methods can be broadly categorized into
knowledge distillation-based, prototype-based, and auxiliary model-based according to knowledge transfer strategies [57, 58]. Knowledge distillation methods [17, 28] use a
global dataset on the server to facilitate knowledge transfer.
However, the availability and quality of this dataset significantly impact distillation performance [16, 58]. Prototypebased approaches [42, 43, 57] create a shared class prototype for all clients, which serves as global information.
However, these prototypes often lack sufficient expressive-

