This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Derivation and Elimination: Audio Visual Segmentation with
Enhanced Audio Semantics
Chen Liu1,4 , Liying Yang5 , Peike Li3 , Dadong Wang4 , Lincheng Li2 , Xin Yu1 *
1
The University of Queensland, 2 NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, 3 Matrix Verse AI,
4
CSIRO Data61, 5 Macau University of Science and Technology
yenanliu36@gmail.com,

xin.yu@uq.edu.au

Abstract
Sound-guided object segmentation has drawn considerable
attention for its potential to enhance multimodal perception. Previous methods primarily focus on developing advanced architectures to facilitate effective audio-visual interactions, without fully addressing the inherent challenges
posed by audio natures, i.e., (1) feature confusion due to
the overlapping nature of audio signals, and (2) audiovisual matching difficulty from the varied sounds produced
by the same object. To address these challenges, we propose
Dynamic Derivation and Elimination (DDESeg): a novel
audio-visual segmentation framework. Specifically, to mitigate feature confusion, DDESeg reconstructs the semantic
content of the mixed audio signal by enriching the distinct
semantic information of each individual source, deriving
representations that preserve the unique characteristics of
each sound. To reduce the matching difficulty, we introduce
a discriminative feature learning module, which enhances
the semantic distinctiveness of generated audio representations. Considering that not all derived audio representations directly correspond to visual features (e.g., off-screen
sounds), we propose a dynamic elimination module to filter
out non-matching elements. This module facilitates targeted
interaction between sounding regions and relevant audio
semantics. By scoring the interacted features, we identify
and filter out irrelevant audio information, ensuring accurate audio-visual alignment. Comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that our framework achieves superior performance in AVS datasets. Our code is here.

Figure 1. The illustration of feature confusion and audio-visual
matching difficulty. (a) Feature confusion denotes the challenge
of distinguishing or separating individual sound sources in a mixed
audio signal, especially with overlapping frequency, timbre, or
spatial cues, which impedes accurate semantic extraction. (b) Significant amplitude and frequency variations within sounds produced by the same object lead to large intra-class variation, introducing audio-visual matching difficulty. This complicates the
model’s ability to align audio and visual modalities.

mentation presents unique challenges due to the inherent
overlap and intra-class variability of sounds [1, 38, 51, 52].
While previous methods have focused on enhancing audiovisual interactions through learnable audio queries [17, 30,
42] or incorporating text [20, 21, 25] into audio semantics,
they usually overlook the complexities introduced by audio’s unique properties. In this work, we propose solutions
specifically tailored to address the challenges that audio’s
inherent characteristics pose to AVS.

1. Introduction
Audio-visual segmentation (AVS) aims to localize soundemitting objects by generating either a binary map of audible regions or a semantic map categorizing the objects
[53, 54]. Compared to other modality-guided segmentation
tasks (e.g. text or visual) [10, 11, 42, 44], audio-driven seg-

We identify two key challenges posed by audio signals.
The first is feature confusion due to overlapping audio signals, where simultaneous sounds combine across time and

* Corresponding author.

3131

