This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Prompting for One-shot Controllable Video Editing without Inversion
Zhengbo Zhang1 * Yuxi Zhou2 * Duo Peng1 Joo-Hwee Lim3
Zhigang Tu2† De Wen Soh1 Lin Geng Foo1
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 Wuhan University
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
https://vp4video-editing.github.io/

Abstract

platforms [61] or for filmmakers to generate captivating virtual scenes in films [62]. Yet, in many cases, both generated
and real-world video content may fall short of meeting specific user requirements. As a result, there has been a significant increase in demand for convenient video editing tools
that allow users to modify videos according to customized
instructions.
Recently, diffusion-based video editing methods [7, 37,
39, 49, 64] have gained considerable attention. These approaches have demonstrated strong performance across various video editing tasks, such as visual style transfer [7]
and character or object modification [49]. Additionally,
they are highly user-friendly, often requiring only minor adjustments to the textual descriptions of the video content.
Yet, although video editing via modifying textual descriptions offers convenience, this approach is a double-edged
sword, as it typically facilitates global changes which often restricts the controllability of the editing. For instance,
consider a scenario where social media users aim to make
precise modifications to specific objects, structures or layouts in the video. Achieving such fine-grained control is
challenging when relying solely on text-based descriptions.
Therefore, controllable video editing methods are required
to achieve the desired outcomes in such cases.
Nevertheless, achieving controllable video editing beyond text-based instructions is challenging, as it requires
both high versatility and precision, including capabilities
like accurately repositioning objects, erasing or adding specific elements, etc. To enable accurate and efficient controllable video editing, one-shot controllable video editing (OCVE) approaches [12, 20, 36] have been introduced.
These approaches allow users to apply desired edits to the
first frame of the source video using any off-the-shelf image
editing tools (e.g., Photoshop, Paint, image editing diffusion models), and these approaches then propagate the edits to the remaining video frames. These OCVE methods
commonly utilize DDIM inversion [55], which is a recursive process that converts the source video into latent noise,
serving as latent representations that enable the diffusion

One-shot controllable video editing (OCVE) is an important yet challenging task, aiming to propagate user edits
that are made – using any image editing tool – on the first
frame of a video to all subsequent frames, while ensuring content consistency between edited frames and source
frames. To achieve this, prior methods employ DDIM inversion to transform source frames into latent noise, which
is then fed into a pre-trained diffusion model, conditioned
on the user-edited first frame, to generate the edited video.
However, the DDIM inversion process accumulates errors,
which hinder the latent noise from accurately reconstructing the source frames, ultimately compromising content
consistency in the generated edited frames. To overcome it,
our method eliminates the need for DDIM inversion by performing OCVE through a novel perspective based on visual
prompting. Furthermore, inspired by consistency models
that can perform multi-step consistency sampling to generate a sequence of content-consistent images, we propose a
content consistency sampling (CCS) to ensure content consistency between the generated edited frames and the source
frames. Moreover, we introduce a temporal-content consistency sampling (TCS) based on Stein Variational Gradient
Descent to ensure temporal consistency across the edited
frames. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
our approach.

1. Introduction
Video production plays a crucial role in creating compelling
visuals for films, short videos, and various other media formats, its significance has rapidly increased amidst the evergrowing demand for high-quality video content. For instance, high-quality video production is often highly important for bloggers to create entertaining video vlogs on social
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: tuzhigang@whu.edu.cn

7784

