This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Narrating the Video: Boosting Text-Video Retrieval via Comprehensive
Utilization of Frame-Level Captions
Chan Hur*

Jeong-hun Hong*
Dong-hun Lee
Dabin Kang
Semin Myeong
Sang-hyo Park†
Hyeyoung Park†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Kyungpook National University
https://multimodal-understanding-group.github.io/NarVid/

Abstract

Video-level
Video shows a man in the film playing an electronic music clip that was released on his website.
Caption

In recent text-video retrieval, the use of additional captions from vision-language models has shown promising effects on the performance. However, existing models using additional captions often have struggled to capture the
rich semantics, including temporal changes, inherent in the
video. In addition, incorrect information caused by generative models can lead to inaccurate retrieval. To address
these issues, we propose a new framework, Narrating the
Video (NarVid), which strategically leverages the comprehensive information available from frame-level captions,
the narration. The proposed NarVid exploits narration
in multiple ways: 1) feature enhancement through crossmodal interactions between narration and video, 2) queryaware adaptive filtering to suppress irrelevant or incorrect information, 3) dual-modal matching score by adding
query-video similarity and query-narration similarity, and
4) hard-negative loss to learn discriminative features from
multiple perspectives using the two similarities from different views. Experimental results demonstrate that NarVid
achieves state-of-the-art performance on various benchmark datasets.

(a)
(b)

Frame-level
Caption
(Narration)

A man in a white
shirt standing in a
circular room …

Two men sitting in
a cockpit, with a
large, circular
window…

The man appears
to be focused on
his work or
listening …

Aman wearing a
headset, likely
engaged in a video
game or a virtual
meeting…

Two men sitting at
a dining table,
enjoying a meal
together…

Query-relation

Query

Views of two persons working on the supercomputer with the headphones on

Figure 1. (a) Unlike video-level caption information that summarizes the entire video, (b) the proposed framework utilizes framelevel captions to capture time-varying rich information and efficiently leverage selective information based on specific queries.

1. Introduction

backbone to resolve cross-modality gap between text-tovideo domain. Moreover, to capture the time-varying relationships for video data, several studies [9, 23, 25, 43] have
employed temporal modules, such as transformer encoder
[34] or 3D convolution [33], over video frames.
Recently, some research [27, 40] has proposed to utilize
generated captions from the video to bridge the gap between
video and language. Cap4Video [40] derives video-level
captions that summarize the entire video and then utilize the
captions to mitigate the modality gap. However, as shown in
Fig. 1(a), a video-level caption may not reflect the contextual variations across the entire video. Furthermore, the usage of a single caption can lead to performance degradation
when the generated caption is incorrectly obtained. EAVTR [27] have proposed an event-aware method to capture
time-varying events in the video by introducing frame-level
captions, but they focus on training video encoder for event
detection to address event-related video tasks, and does not
consider query-based selective usage of the captions which
is essential in the retrieval task.
To overcome these challenges in caption-based approaches, we propose a novel framework named Narrating the Video (NarVid), which generates frame-level captions across the video and utilizes them comprehensively

With the increasing popularity of various video streaming platforms, text-to-video retrieval is emerging as an important topic in both academia and industry. In order to
achieve accurate retrieval results, text-video retrieval encounters two challenging points: 1) a cross-modality gap
from the heterogeneous data (vision and language) and
2) time-varying information in video. To address crossmodality challenges, many studies [9, 11, 20, 23, 25, 26, 35,
37, 39, 43, 45] have leveraged vision-language pre-trained
models such as CLIP [30] or BLIP [18] as a text and video
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors, equal leading contribution.

24077

