This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QMambaBSR: Burst Image Super-Resolution with Query State Space Model
Xin Di1† , Long Peng1†, ‡ , Peizhe Xia1 , Wenbo Li2 , Renjing Pei2 ,* Yang Cao1 , Yang Wang1,3* , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Chang’an University
{dx9826, longp2001}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, peirenjing@huawei.com, ywang120@chd.edu.cn

Abstract
Burst super-resolution (BurstSR) aims to reconstruct highresolution images by fusing subpixel details from multiple
low-resolution burst frames. The primary challenge lies
in effectively extracting useful information while mitigating the impact of high-frequency noise. Most existing methods rely on frame-by-frame fusion, which often struggles
to distinguish informative subpixels from noise, leading to
suboptimal performance. To address these limitations, we
introduce a novel Query Mamba Burst Super-Resolution
(QMambaBSR) network. Specifically, we observe that subpixels have consistent spatial distribution while noise appears randomly. Considering the entire burst sequence
during fusion allows for more reliable extraction of consistent subpixels and better suppression of noise outliers.
Based on this, a Query State Space Model (QSSM) is proposed for both inter-frame querying and intra-frame scanning, enabling a more efficient fusion of useful subpixels.
Additionally, to overcome the limitations of static upsampling methods that often result in over-smoothing, we propose an Adaptive Upsampling (AdaUp) module that dynamically adjusts the upsampling kernel to suit the characteristics of different burst scenes, achieving superior detail reconstruction. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets—spanning both synthetic and real-world images—demonstrate that QMambaBSR outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. The concat and frame-by-frame operations in existing methods struggle to efficiently extract sub-pixels and suppress
noise, leading to remaining artifacts and over-smoothed details, as
shown in (a). We observe that noise randomly appears on several
frames, while effective sub-pixels have consistent intensity at corresponding positions in all frames, as shown in (c). Based on this,
a novel inter-frame query and intra-frame scanning-based QMambaBSR is proposed to extract more accurate sub-pixels while mitigating noise interference simultaneously, as shown in (b).

1. Introduction

markable progress, but the performance is still limited by
the finite information provided by a single image. Consequently, numerous researchers are dedicating their efforts
to burst super-resolution (BurstSR), which aims to leverage the rich sub-pixel details provided by a sequence of
burst low-resolution images captured by hand-tremor and
camera/object motions to overcome the limitations of SISR,
achieving substantial advancements [7, 23, 24, 36, 43].
In BurstSR, the first image is the super-resolution frame,
denoted as the base frame, while the remaining images, referred to as current frames, supply sub-pixel information
for producing a high-quality HR image. The pipeline of
most existing BurstSR approaches can be mainly categorized: alignment, fusion, and upsampling. Firstly, due to

In recent years, with the continuous development of smartphones, overcoming the limitations of smartphone sensors and lenses to reconstruct high-quality, high-resolution
(HR) images has become a research hotspot. Benefited
from the development of deep learning, single image superresolution (SISR) [9, 19, 33, 34, 50, 53] has achieved re* Yang Wang and Renjing Pei are the corresponding authors. † These
authors contributed equally to this work. ‡Long Peng is the project leader.
This work was finished during Xin Di and Long Peng in the internship of
Huawei Noah.

23080

