This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometric Knowledge-Guided Localized Global Distribution Alignment for
Federated Learning
Yanbiao Ma*
Xidian University

Wei Dai*
Xidian University

Wenke Huang†
Wuhan University

ybmamail@stu.xidian.edu.cn

22012100039@stu.xidian.edu.cn

wenkehuang@whu.edu.cn

Jiayi Chen
Xidian University
22012100031@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Data heterogeneity in federated learning, characterized by
a significant misalignment between local and global distributions, leads to divergent local optimization directions
and hinders global model training. Existing studies mainly
focus on optimizing local updates or global aggregation,
but these indirect approaches demonstrate instability when
handling highly heterogeneous data distributions, especially in scenarios where label skew and domain skew coexist. To address this, we propose a geometry-guided data
generation method that centers on simulating the global
embedding distribution locally. We first introduce the concept of the geometric shape of an embedding distribution
and then address the challenge of obtaining global geometric shapes under privacy constraints. Subsequently, we
propose GGEUR, which leverages global geometric shapes
to guide the generation of new samples, enabling a closer
approximation to the ideal global distribution. In singledomain scenarios, we augment samples based on global geometric shapes to enhance model generalization; in multidomain scenarios, we further employ class prototypes to
simulate the global distribution across domains. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly enhances the performance of existing approaches
in handling highly heterogeneous data, including scenarios with label skew, domain skew, and their coexistence.
Code published at: https://github.com/WeiDaiDavid/2025CVPR_GGEUR

Figure 1. The distribution of local data on clients is imbalanced.
The “bird” category has a large number of samples, allowing its
local distribution to effectively represent the global distribution. In
contrast, the “truck” category has insufficient samples, resulting in
a significant disparity between the local and global distributions.

1. Introduction

fectively addressing key concerns related to data privacy
and security [13, 19, 53]. However, data heterogeneity remains one of the primary challenges in FL, especially in
the presence of label skew and domain skew across clients
[12, 15, 17, 28, 29]. Such distributional differences lead
to variations in the local optimization directions for each
client, which can be particularly pronounced when data is
sourced from multiple domains [5, 33, 42, 59, 66]. This
cross-client distribution shift not only slows down global
model convergence but also undermines the model’s generalization capability across clients [5, 13, 30, 62].
Existing research addressing data heterogeneity in federated learning primarily focuses on two categories of methods [13]. The first is server-side optimization strategies,
which aim to enhance model convergence by adjusting the
global aggregation process [2, 3, 11, 32, 44, 52, 54, 57, 61,
64]. The second category includes client-side regularization [1, 7, 12, 22, 23, 42] and data augmentation methods
[67, 68], which attempt to align local model optimization
through guidance from the global model and loss function
adjustments or directly apply data augmentation techniques

Federated Learning (FL) enables multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model without sharing raw data, ef* Co-first authors
† Corresponding Author: Wenke Huang

20958

