This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SUM Parts: Benchmarking Part-Level Semantic Segmentation of Urban Meshes
Weixiao Gao, Liangliang Nan, Hugo Ledoux
Delft University of Technology
{w.gao-1,liangliang.nan,h.ledoux}@tudelft.nl

Figure 1. SUM Parts provides part-level semantic segmentation of urban textured meshes, covering 2.5 km2 with 21 classes. From left to
right: textured mesh, face-based annotations, and texture-based annotations. See Tab. 1 for class definitions.

Abstract
Semantic segmentation in urban scene analysis has
mainly focused on images or point clouds, while textured
meshes—offering richer spatial representation—remain underexplored. This paper introduces SUM Parts, the first
large-scale dataset for urban textured meshes with partlevel semantic labels, covering about 2.5 km2 with 21
classes. The dataset was created using our own annotation
tool, which supports both face- and texture-based annotations with efficient interactive selection. We also provide a
comprehensive evaluation of 3D semantic segmentation and
interactive annotation methods on this dataset. Our project
page is available at https://tudelft3d.github.io/SUMParts/.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is crucial to understanding urban
scenes by accurately classifying objects and improving data
usability. Recent advances have led to the development
of datasets and methods primarily for images and point
clouds [14, 32, 37]. Research on textured meshes has focused mainly on small-scale indoor settings [5, 11, 15],
with limited work on large outdoor environments [18, 19,
38, 46]. Furthermore, a critical gap in urban scene understanding is part-level semantic segmentation, which decom-

poses urban objects into functional components (e.g., windows, chimneys, road markings) following the international
CityGML standard [41]. To address this, we introduce the
first large-scale benchmark dataset providing part-level semantic labels for urban textured meshes.
Obtaining ground truth labels for urban scene understanding often relies on manual annotation, which is timeconsuming and expensive [18]. Labeling large-scale 3D
scenes poses significant challenges compared to 2D image
annotation, requiring flexible viewpoint management, specialized interaction methods, and advanced rendering techniques. Although considerable research has focused on interactive point cloud annotation [28, 33, 48], efforts to annotate textured meshes [18, 44] remain very sparse. Existing studies often label mesh vertices [15, 30] or faces [18,
44], neglecting the richer details provided by textures.
Details such as building windows and road markings are better represented in texture images
than in unconstrained mesh faces
(see Fig. 2). To address this, we introduce an efficient interactive tool Figure 2. Mesh textures
for textured meshes, enabling both and wireframes (black).
face- and texture-based annotations.

24474

The main contributions are (1) the first large-scale
dataset with part-level semantic labels for urban textured

