This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimVS: Simulating World Inconsistencies for Robust View Synthesis
Alex Trevithick1,2 , Roni Paiss2 , Philipp Henzler3 , Dor Verbin2 , Rundi Wu2,4 , Hadi Alzayer2,5 , Ruiqi Gao2 ,
Ben Poole2 , Jonathan T. Barron2 , Aleksander Holynski2 , Ravi Ramamoorthi1 , Pratul P. Srinivasan2
1

UC San Diego

2

Google DeepMind

3

Google Research

4

Columbia

5

Univ. Maryland

Novel view 1

state 1

Novel view 2

state 2
(a) 8 casually-captured posed
images with scene motion

(c) Our model

frozen to state 2

(b) Our model

frozen to state 1

(d) CAT3D (all images)

Figure 1. We show results of our model applied to a casual in-the-wild capture. (a) Given 8 unordered images of a scene with significant
motion and desired states marked in blue and orange, our model generates a 3D representation for each desired state shown in corresponding
colors in (b) and (c). The CAT3D baseline [15] in (d) cannot disentangle the different states, resulting in catastrophic failure.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Novel-view synthesis techniques achieve impressive results
for static scenes but struggle when faced with the inconsistencies inherent to casual capture settings: varying illumination,
scene motion, and other unintended effects that are difficult
to model explicitly. We present an approach for leveraging
generative video models to simulate the inconsistencies in
the world that can occur during capture. We use this process,
along with existing multi-view datasets, to create synthetic
data for training a multi-view harmonization network that
is able to reconcile inconsistent observations into a consistent 3D scene. We demonstrate that our world-simulation
strategy significantly outperforms traditional augmentation
methods in handling real-world scene variations, thereby
enabling highly accurate static 3D reconstructions in the
presence of a variety of challenging inconsistencies. Project
page: https://alextrevithick.com/simvs

View synthesis, the task of creating images from unobserved
camera viewpoints given a set of posed images, has seen
remarkable progress in recent years. Current algorithms are
able to render detailed photorealistic novel views of complicated 3D scenes. However, these techniques tend to assume
that the provided input images are consistent — that the
geometry and illumination of the scene is static during capture. Typical captures of real-world scenes seldom obey this
constraint; people and objects may move and deform, and
lights may move or change brightness.
Moreover, casual captures outside of tightly-controlled
settings tend not only to be inconsistent but also sparse,
containing only a small number of observed views. Methods
for sparse view synthesis are usually trained on synthetic or
captured multiview datasets that are consistent by design,
and therefore fail to generalize to the inconsistencies seen in
real-world casual captures (see Fig. 6 as an example).

16464

