This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Illusion of Unlearning: The Unstable Nature of Machine Unlearning in
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Naveen George1∗ , Karthik Nandan Dasaraju2 *, Rutheesh Reddy Chittepu1 , Konda Reddy Mopuri1
1
Data-driven Intelligence and Learning Lab, Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
2
Indian Institute of Technology, Ropar
ai23mtech12001@iith.ac.in, 2021csb1081@iitrpr.ac.in, cs21btech11014@iith.ac.in,
krmopuri@ai.iith.ac.in

Abstract
Text-to-image models such as Stable Diffusion, DALL·E,
and Midjourney have gained immense popularity lately.
However, they are trained on vast amounts of data that may
include private, explicit, or copyrighted material used without permission, raising serious legal and ethical concerns.
In light of the recent regulations aimed at protecting individual data privacy, there has been a surge in Machine
Unlearning methods designed to remove specific concepts
from these models. However, we identify a critical flaw in
these unlearning techniques: unlearned concepts will revive when the models are fine-tuned, even with general or
unrelated prompts. In this paper, for the first time, through
an extensive study, we demonstrate the unstable nature of
existing unlearning methods in text-to-image diffusion models. We introduce a framework that includes a couple of
measures for analyzing the stability of existing unlearning
methods. Further, the paper offers preliminary insights into
the plausible explanation for the instability of the mappingbased unlearning methods that can guide future research
toward more robust unlearning techniques. Codes 1 for implementing the proposed framework are provided.

users [22] and the generation of over 2 million images daily
by DALL·E and Stable Diffusion [1, 37]. However, this
widespread use raises critical concerns about data privacy,
security, fairness, and intellectual property, as these models
rely on vast datasets that often include sensitive, personal,
or copyrighted content [35].
In response to these privacy concerns, regulations such
as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [28] and
the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) [5] provide
users the Right to be Forgotten [16], promoting the development of Machine Unlearning (MU) techniques [3, 13].
MU aims to remove specific data or concepts from a
model without the computational expense of retraining from
scratch. While initially explored in classification models [4, 13, 14, 36], MU in generative models, particularly
diffusion-based ones, poses unique challenges due to the
models’ complex, distribution-based learning. Ensuring
these models forget sensitive or harmful information while
retaining general functionality remains an open problem.
Machine Unlearning in text-to-image models focuses on
erasing specific concepts from the model’s generative capacity. The general goal of MU in this context is to ensure
that when a model is conditioned on a prompt related to the
target or “unlearned” concept, it no longer generates images reflecting that concept. These target concepts can be
Not Safe For Work (NSFW) content [11, 15, 17, 21, 34],
objects [10–12, 15, 19–21, 39, 41] or artistic styles [11, 12,
15, 19–21, 39, 41]. In other words, the unlearned concept is
the one we want the model to “forget”. To achieve this, unlearning algorithms typically remap the target concept to a
surrogate concept. This means that when the model is conditioned on the unlearned concept, it produces images associated with the surrogate concept instead. The surrogate
concept can be a general or neutral concept [12, 15, 19], a
random concept [10], or even an empty string [11, 39].
Despite these efforts in Machine Unlearning, we have
identified a critical vulnerability in the current state-of-the-

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a rapid qualitative growth
in text-to-image models [7, 23, 24, 32, 33], leading to
its widespread attention and adoption. Models such as
DALL·E [2, 30, 31], MidJourney [22], and Stable Diffusion [27, 32] enable high-quality image generation from
simple text prompts, opening applications across art, design, advertising, gaming, and even medical imaging. With
millions worldwide adopting these tools for academic and
commercial purposes, their transformative potential is evident, as illustrated by MidJourney’s 16 million active
* Equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/NGK2110/TIU

13393

