This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeking Consistent Flat Minima for Better Domain Generalization
via Refining Loss Landscapes
Aodi Li1 , Liansheng Zhuang1,(B) Xiao Long1 , Minghong Yao1 , Shafei Wang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China
aodili@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lszhuang@ustc.edu.cn

Loss

Loss

Loss

Domain generalization aims to learn a model from multiple training domains and generalize it to unseen test domains. Recent theory has shown that seeking the deep models, whose parameters lie in the flat minima of the loss
landscape, can significantly reduce the out-of-domain generalization error. However, existing methods often neglect
the consistency of loss landscapes in different domains, resulting in models that are not simultaneously in the optimal flat minima in all domains, which limits their generalization ability. To address this issue, this paper proposes an iterative Self-Feedback Training (SFT) framework
to seek consistent flat minima that are shared across different domains by progressively refining loss landscapes during training. It alternatively generates a feedback signal
by measuring the inconsistency of loss landscapes in different domains and refines these loss landscapes for greater
consistency using this feedback signal. Benefiting from the
consistency of the flat minima within these refined loss landscapes, our SFT helps achieve better out-of-domain generalization. Extensive experiments on DomainBed demonstrate superior performances of SFT when compared to
state-of-the-art sharpness-aware methods and other prevalent DG baselines. On average across five DG benchmarks,
SFT surpasses the sharpness-aware minimization by 2.6%
with ResNet-50 and 1.5% with ViT-B/16, respectively.

Domain 1
Domain 1
Domain 2
Domain 2
DomainDomain
3
3

Loss

Domain 1
Domain 1
Domain 2
Domain 2
DomainDomain
3
3

Abstract

(a) Inconsistent loss landscapes (b) Loss landscapes with consistency

Figure 1. Loss Landscapes without and with consistency. The
left subplot (a) illustrates the inconsistency of loss landscapes
across different domains, which arise due to domain shifts. This
paper proposes refining these landscapes to achieve improved consistency, as demonstrated in the right subplot (b).

1. Introduction

lem, abundant domain generalization (DG) algorithms have
been developed from different perspectives, e.g., invariant
or causal representation learning [1, 17, 66], disentangled
representation learning [3, 47], distributionally robust optimization [51], meta-learning [5, 13, 37], data augmentation [57, 64], etc. Nonetheless, it is still an open problem
for the communities of modern machine learning.
Recently, the loss landscape [39], which refers to the
shape of a loss function within the parameter space, provides a unified perspective for understanding various DG
algorithms. Essentially, the training process of deep models is to seek the minimum point within the training loss
landscape. From the view of loss landscapes [39], the ultimate goal of various DG methods is to construct a suitable loss landscape so that the loss minimum point sought
on training domains is exactly the loss minimum point on
unseen test domains. In fact, significant studies have revealed the connection between the geometry of the loss
landscape (particularly the flatness of minima [20]) and
generalization from both theoretical and empirical perspectives [14, 16, 27, 30]. This connection has shown potential
in enabling novel methods to model training that yield better
generalization [16]. For example, by penalizing the sharpness of the loss landscape, numerous methods [11, 16, 45]
have exhibited superior generalization on the DomainBed

The task of Domain Generalization (DG) is to learn a model
from multiple training domains so that it can generalize well
to unseen test domains [59]. Though modern deep learning
has achieved remarkable success in many areas [29, 43, 58,
69], it assumes that training and test data are independent
and identically distributed (IID). This assumption is often
violated in real applications, which significantly degrades
the performance of deep models [59]. To address this prob-

15349

