This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unveiling Differences in Generative Models:
A Scalable Differential Clustering Approach
Jingwei Zhang

Mohammad Jalali Cheuk Ting Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Farzan Farnia

{jwzhang22, mjalali24, farnia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, ctli@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

performance of modern generative model frameworks.
While the scores in the literature provide insightful evaluations of generative models, such score-based assessments
do not provide a nuanced comparison between the models, which may lead to inconsistent rankings compared to
human evaluations. The recent study [43] demonstrated
the imperfections of quantitative evaluation scores, showing that their rankings may not align with human-based
assessments. These findings highlight the need for more
detailed comparisons of generative models’ produced data
and the reference datasets. Specifically, a comprehensive
comparison that identifies the sample types expressed differently by the models could be useful in several applications. Such a comparison can reveal suboptimally generated sample types, which could be used to further improve
the performance of generative models.
To have a fine-grained comparison between two generative models, we propose solving a differential clustering
problem. This approach seeks to identify the novel sample
clusters of a generative model that are generated more frequently compared to a reference distribution. By addressing
the differential clustering task, we can identify the differently expressed sample types between the two models and
perform an interpretable comparison revealing the types of
images captured with a higher frequency by each generative
model.
To solve the differential clustering problem, one can utilize the scores proposed in the literature to quantify the
uncommonness of generated data. As one such novelty
score, [13] proposes the sample-based Rarity score measuring the distance of a generated sample to the manifold of
a reference distribution. In another work, [21] formulates
Feature Likelihood Divergence (FLD) as a sample-based
novelty score based on the sample’s likelihood according
to the reference distribution. Note that the application of
Rarity and FLD scores for differential clustering requires a
post-clustering of the identified novel samples. Also, [48]
suggests the spectral Kernel-based Entropic Novelty (KEN)
framework to detect novel sample clusters by the eigendecomposition of a kernel similarity matrix.

A fine-grained comparison of generative models requires
the identification of sample types generated differently by
each of the involved models. While quantitative scores have
been proposed in the literature to rank different generative models, score-based evaluation and ranking do not reveal the nuanced differences between the generative models in producing different sample types. In this work, we
propose solving a differential clustering problem to detect
sample types generated differently by two generative models. To solve the differential clustering problem, we develop a spectral method called Fourier-based Identification
of Novel Clusters (FINC) to identify modes produced by a
generative model with a higher frequency in comparison
to a reference distribution. FINC provides a scalable algorithm based on random Fourier features to estimate the
eigenspace of kernel covariance matrices of two generative
models and utilize the principal eigendirections to detect
the sample types present more dominantly in each model.
We demonstrate the application of the FINC method to
large-scale computer vision datasets and generative modeling frameworks. Our numerical results suggest the scalability of the developed Fourier-based method in highlighting the sample types produced with different frequencies
by generative models. The project code is available at
https://github.com/buyeah1109/FINC

1. Introduction
Deep generative models trained by variational autoencoders
[24], generative adversarial networks [12], and denoising
diffusion models [17] have led to outstanding results on
various computer vision, audio, and video datasets. To
compare different generative models and rank their performance, several quantitative scores have been proposed in
the computer vision community. Metrics such as Inception
Score (IS) [40] and Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [16]
have been widely used in the community for comparing the

8269

