This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PMA: Towards Parameter-Efficient Point Cloud Understanding via
Point Mamba Adapter
Yaohua Zha1,2 Yanzi Wang1 Hang Guo1 Jinpeng Wang1 Tao Dai3, *
Bin Chen4 Zhihao Ouyang5 Xue Yuerong1 Ke Chen2 Shu-Tao Xia1,2
1

Tsinghua University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory 3 Shenzhen University
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 5 Meta

Abstract
Applying pre-trained models to assist point cloud understanding has recently become a mainstream paradigm in
3D perception. However, existing application strategies
are straightforward, utilizing only the final output of the
pre-trained model for various task heads. It neglects the
rich complementary information in the intermediate layer,
thereby failing to fully unlock the potential of pre-trained
models. To overcome this limitation, we propose an orthogonal solution: Point Mamba Adapter (PMA), which
constructs an ordered feature sequence from all layers
of the pre-trained model and leverages Mamba to fuse
all complementary semantics, thereby promoting comprehensive point cloud understanding. Constructing this ordered sequence is non-trivial due to the inherent isotropy
of 3D space. Therefore, we further propose a geometryconstrained gate prompt generator (G2PG) shared across
different layers, which applies shared geometric constraints
to the output gates of the Mamba and dynamically optimizes the spatial order, thus enabling more effective integration of multi-layer information. Extensive experiments conducted on challenging point cloud datasets across various
tasks demonstrate that our PMA elevates the capability for
point cloud understanding to a new level by fusing diverse
complementary intermediate features. Code is available at
https://github.com/zyh16143998882/PMA.

end-to-end paradigms [29, 30, 34, 51] and self-supervised
pre-training & fine-tuning paradigms [2, 32, 35, 49, 53].
The latter, by fine-tuning general representations from pretrained point cloud models, has significantly advanced the
capability for point cloud understanding and has become the
mainstream paradigm in the field.
To leverage pre-trained models, most existing works [2,
32, 35, 49] adopt a Fully Fine-Tuning (FFT) strategy, where
the parameters of both the pre-trained model and task head
are updated simultaneously during downstream tasks, yielding satisfactory performance and convergence speed. However, this approach is resource-intensive, as it requires learning unique parameters for each task and dataset, resulting in significant memory and storage demands. Some efforts [39, 52, 62] have introduced Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) to point cloud models, mitigating resource
demands by freezing the weights of pre-trained models and
tuning only the task heads and additional learnable parameters.
Although these works achieve a balance between efficiency and performance, they still fail to deliver satisfactory performance across various tasks, especially in finegrained point cloud understanding tasks such as segmentation. This is because segmentation requires fine-grained
understanding at the point level, whereas classification involves a global, coarse-grained understanding of the point
cloud. Existing PEFT methods rely on adapting various
tasks with only a small number of additional learnable parameters. This approach heavily depends on the final output
of the frozen pre-trained model. However, as shown in Figure 1, our experimental observations demonstrate that the
intermediate features of the pre-trained model contain information that is almost comparable to that of the final features. Therefore, the existing PEFT practice of completely
discarding intermediate features and relying solely on the
final features fails to fully exploit the understanding capabilities of the pre-trained model.
To overcome this limitation, we propose an orthogonal
PEFT solution based on the Mamba architecture: Point

1. Introduction
Point clouds, as a fundamental 3D representation, have been
widely applied in fields such as autonomous driving and
robotics, drawing considerable attention. These successful applications have largely benefited from advancements
in deep learning-based point cloud understanding [25, 33,
44, 46, 47, 54]. Existing deep learning-based approaches
for point cloud can be broadly categorized into supervised
* Corresponding author.

daitao.edu@gmail.com

16976

