This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Type-R: Automatically Retouching Typos for Text-to-Image Generation
Wataru Shimoda1 Naoto Inoue1 Daichi Haraguchi1
Hayato Mitani2 Seiichi Uchida2 Kota Yamaguchi1
1
CyberAgent 2 Kyushu University

Create a poster. Display the text
'CVPR' at the top of the image.
'NASHVILLE TENNESSEE' is
below the text. 

The date information '2025
JUNE' is required. This image
contains the picture of Music
City Center at the lower right
and cityscapes at the left.
CVPPR → CVPR


Generated

image

Prompt

. → ∅

Type-R Organized.
∅ → 2025 

∅ → JUNE

Typo-corrected
image

Figure 1. Type-R automatically corrects typographic errors in an image generated from any text-to-image model without sacrificing their
visual quality. We highlight prompt words corresponding to the words in the image with the same color.

Abstract

text-to-image models potentially benefit, with the goal of
helping generate appealing posters, advertisements, book
covers, webpages, or signs, such that these display media
convey the intended message to the viewers. However, one
of the major obstacles is text rendering on the image [25].
Popular state-of-the-art text-to-image models such as Stable
Diffusion [6, 30] or Flux [3] still face notable challenges in
accurately rendering words or characters (Fig. 1 second column). Common issues include missing words, unintended
characters, or word-level errors that insert another similarlooking word. While it might be possible to tune the textto-image models with increasing amounts of training data,
the resulting image is not guaranteed to be typo-free.
In this work, instead of modifying the image generator, we propose automatically retouching the erroneous text
renderings of the already generated image. Our approach,
named Type-R, detects typographic errors in a generated
image and automatically fixes erroneous content. Figure 1
shows an example of the input prompt, the generated image by Flux.1-dev [3], detected errors by Type-R, and the
final retouched image. Type-R successfully corrects the typographic errors without artifacts compared to the initial
generation. Our approach is fully automatic, independent
of the base text-to-image generator, and easily pluggable to
any existing text-to-image model.

While recent text-to-image models can generate photorealistic images from text prompts that reflect detailed instructions, they still face significant challenges in accurately rendering words in the image. In this paper, we propose to
retouch erroneous text renderings in the post-processing
pipeline. Our approach, called Type-R, identifies typographical errors in the generated image, erases the erroneous text, regenerates text boxes for missing words, and
finally corrects typos in the rendered words. Through extensive experiments, we show that Type-R, in combination
with the latest text-to-image models such as Stable Diffusion or Flux, achieves the highest text rendering accuracy
while maintaining image quality and also outperforms textfocused generation baselines in terms of balancing text accuracy and image quality. 1

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of text-to-image generation models
triggers a surge of application interest in various creative
domains. Graphic design is one of the domains from which
1 Code and project page are available.

2745

