This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmoDubber: Towards High Quality and Emotion Controllable Movie Dubbing
Gaoxiang Cong1,2 * Jiadong Pan1,2 * Liang Li1† Yuankai Qi3 Yuxin Peng4
Anton van den Hengel5 Jian Yang3 Qingming Huang1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Macquarie University
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Peking University 5 University of Adelaide

Abstract

: I can't wait to
meet everyone!

…

Given a piece of text, a video clip, and a reference audio,
the movie dubbing task aims to generate speech that aligns
with the video while cloning the desired voice. The existing
methods have two primary deficiencies: (1) They struggle
to simultaneously hold audio-visual sync and achieve clear
pronunciation; (2) They lack the capacity to express userdefined emotions. To address these problems, we propose
EmoDubber, an emotion-controllable dubbing architecture
that allows users to specify emotion type and emotional intensity while satisfying high-quality lip sync and pronunciation. Specifically, we first design Lip-related Prosody
Aligning (LPA), which focuses on learning the inherent consistency between lip motion and prosody variation by duration level contrastive learning to incorporate reasonable
alignment. Then, we design Pronunciation Enhancing (PE)
strategy to fuse the video-level phoneme sequences by efficient conformer to improve speech intelligibility. Next, the
speaker identity adapting module decodes acoustics prior
and inject the speaker style embedding. After that, the
proposed Flow-based User Emotion Controlling (FUEC)
is used to synthesize waveform by flow matching prediction network conditioned on acoustics prior. In this process, the FUEC determines the gradient direction and guidance scale based on the user’s emotion instructions by the
positive and negative guidance mechanism, which focuses
on amplifying the desired emotion while suppressing others. Extensive experimental results demonstrate favorable
performance compared to several state-of-the-art methods.
The code and trained models will be made available at
https://github.com/GalaxyCong/DubFlow.

Silent Video

! Text/Subtitle

Reference Audio

Speech
(a) Visual Voice Cloning (V2C) Task
Audio-Visual Alignment

User Emotion Controlling

…

Weak

Lip-motion sequence
Phoneme-level prosody variation

"

Strong

* ‍ 2. Controllable intensity

#$%&'()
1. Emotion choose

User or Director
(b) Illustration of our proposed method (EmoDubber)

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the V2C tasks. (b) EmoDubber can
help users achieve audio-visual sync and maintain clear pronunciation (left), while controlling the intensity of emotions according
to the user’s intentions (right).

1. Introduction

characteristics specified by the reference audio, while aligning lip-sync with the silent video (see Figure 1 (a)). V2C
is far more challenging than conventional text-to-speech
(TTS), but has a host of applications, not least in repurposing the vast volumes of existing video to be reproduced by
movie creators or enthusiasts.
Existing dubbing methods broadly fall into two groups.
The first focuses primarily on learning and applying effective speaker style representations. For example, V2CNet [4] and VDTTS [18] utilize a pre-trained GE2E [56]
to obtain unique and normalized utterance embedding.
StyleDubber [7] applies multi-scale learning to apply
style cues to the embeddings extracted by GE2E, while
Speak2Dub [63] adopts pre-training strategy on TTS corpus to improve expressiveness. Because these methods rely
on simple MSE-based loss [4, 63] and overall scaling [7],
their capacity to establish accurate correspondence between
lip motion and speech is limited. The second group of methods aim to generate proper prosody by incorporating visual
information from the provided video [7, 19, 27, 66]. For

Movie Dubbing, also known as Visual Voice Cloning
(V2C), aims to convert a script into speech with the voice
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

15863

