This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PolarNeXt: Rethink Instance Segmentation with Polar Representation
Jiacheng Sun1 , Xinghong Zhou1 , Yiqiang Wu1 , Bin Zhu1 , Jiaxuan Lu2 , Yu Qin1 , Xiaomao Li1, *
1
Shanghai University, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{sunjc,jkchou,yiqiangwu,zhubin01,qy21722148,lixiaomao}@shu.edu.cn
lujiaxuan@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
One of the roadblocks for instance segmentation today is
heavy computational overhead and model parameters. Previous methods based on Polar Representation made the initial mark to address this challenge by formulating instance
segmentation as polygon detection, but failed to align with
mainstream methods in performance. In this paper, we
highlight that Representation Errors, arising from the limited capacity of polygons to capture boundary details, have
long been overlooked, which results in severe performance
degradation. Observing that optimal starting point selection effectively alleviates this issue, we propose an Adaptive
Polygonal Sample Decision strategy to dynamically capture the positional variation of representation errors across
samples. Additionally, we design a Union-aligned Rasterization Module to incorporate these errors into polygonal
assessment, further advancing the proposed strategy. With
these components, our framework PolarNeXt achieves a remarkable performance boost of over 4.8% AP compared to
other polar-based methods. PolarNeXt is markedly more
lightweight and efficient than state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods, while achieving comparable segmentation accuracy. We expect this work will open up a new
direction for instance segmentation in high-resolution images and resource-limited scenarios. Codes can be found
at https://github.com/Sun15194/PolarNeXt.

1. Introduction
Object detection and instance segmentation are fundamental tasks in computer vision, aiming at identifying specific
objects within images. Object detection [26, 27, 33], also
known as box detection, localizes objects using rectangular
boxes, which are efficient but coarse-grained. In comparison, instance segmentation offers additional geometric information, such as shape and boundary. Mainstream methods define instance segmentation as pixel-wise classifica* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the composition of prediction errors in
polar-based methods. Classification and Regression (Cls.&Reg.)
Errors are produced during network optimization, which reflects
the deviation from starting point classification (s → ŝ) and dense
distance regression (D → D̂). The ignored Representation (Rep.)
Error arises from the missing boundary details of instance contour
C in Polar Representation, as exemplified by the two cases below.
Obviously, the center point does not necessarily coincide with the
optimal point, from which the assembled polygon with minimal
Rep. Error can be predicted.

tion [7, 14, 34] or iterative deformation [9, 25, 39]. Despite
the finer granularity, these methods introduce heavy computational overhead and model parameters, which restricts
their applicability in high-resolution images or resourcelimited scenarios [11].
To combine the efficiency of detection with the granularity of segmentation, a pioneering attempt is Polar Representation. As shown at the top of Fig. 1, Polar Representation reconstructs the instance contour into a bounding
polygon, assembled by dense rays emitted uniformly from
a starting point. Building on this concept, typical polarbased methods [36–38] formulate instance segmentation as
starting point classification and dense distance regression.
These methods can be instantiated on one-stage object detectors [26, 33], directly inheriting their advantages in inference speed and model complexity. However, Polar Representation has not become a fundamental paradigm for in-

19315

