This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LotusFilter: Fast Diverse Nearest Neighbor Search via a Learned Cutoff Table
Yusuke Matsui
The University of Tokyo
matsui@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) is an essential building block for applications like RAG but can sometimes yield results that are overly similar to each other. In
certain scenarios, search results should be similar to the
query and yet diverse. We propose LotusFilter, a postprocessing module to diversify ANNS results. We precompute a cutoff table summarizing vectors that are close to
each other. During the filtering, LotusFilter greedily looks
up the table to delete redundant vectors from the candidates.
We demonstrated that the LotusFilter operates fast (0.02
[ms/query]) in settings resembling real-world RAG applications, utilizing features such as OpenAI embeddings. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
matsui528/lotf.

1. Introduction
An approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) algorithm, which finds the closest vector to a query from
database vectors [7, 28, 29], is a crucial building block
for various applications, including image retrieval and information recommendation. Recently, ANNS has become
an essential component of Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) approaches, which integrate external information into Large Language Models [4].
The essential problem with ANNS is the lack of diversity. For example, consider the case of image retrieval using ANNS. Suppose the query is an image of a cat, and the
database contains numerous images of the same cat. In that
case, the search results might end up being almost uniform,
closely resembling the query. However, users might prefer
more diverse results that differ from one another.
Diverse nearest neighbor search (DNNS) [14, 40, 47]
is a classical approach to achieving diverse search results
but often suffers from slow performance. Existing DNNS
methods first obtain S candidates (search step) and then select K(< S) results to ensure diversity (filter step). This
approach is slow for three reasons. First, integrating modern ANN methods is often challenging. Second, selecting

𝜀
𝒙13 𝒙25

𝒙28

𝒙25

𝒒

𝒒
𝒙𝑖 − 𝒙𝑗

(a) Usual ANNS

2
2

𝒙61

≥𝜀

𝒙19

(b) DNNS with the LotusFilter

Figure 1. (a) Usual ANNS. The search results are close to the
query q but similar to each other. (b) DNNS with the proposed
√
LotusFilter. The obtained vectors are at least ε apart from each
other. The results are diverse despite being close to the query.

K items from S candidates is a subset selection problem,
which is NP-hard. Lastly, existing methods require access
to the original vectors during filtering, which often involves
slow disk access if the vectors are not stored in memory.
We propose a fast search result diversification approach
called LotusFilter, which involves precomputing a cutoff table and using it to filter search results. Diverse outputs are
ensured by removing vectors too close to each other. The
data structure and algorithm are both simple and highly efficient (Fig. 1), with the following contributions:
• As LotusFilter is designed to operate as a pure postprocessing module, one can employ the latest ANNS
method as a black-box backbone. This design provides
a significant advantage over existing DNNS methods.
• We introduce a strategy to train the hyperparameter, eliminating the need for complex parameter tuning.
• LotusFilter demonstrates exceptional efficiency for largescale datasets, processing queries in only 0.02 [ms/query]
for 9 × 105 1536-dimensional vectors.

30430

2. Related work
2.1. Approximate nearest neighbor search
Approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) has been
extensively studied across various fields [28, 29]. Since

