This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ForestLPR: LiDAR Place Recognition in Forests Attentioning Multiple
BEV Density Images
Yanqing Shen1,2 , Turcan Tuna2 , Marco Hutter2 , Cesar Cadena2 , Nanning Zheng1 *
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zurich
qing1159364090@stu,nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

tutuna,mahutter,cesarc@ethz.ch

Abstract
Place recognition is essential to maintain global consistency in large-scale localization systems. While research
in urban environments has progressed significantly using LiDARs or cameras, applications in natural forestlike environments remain largely under-explored. Furthermore, forests present particular challenges due to high selfsimilarity and substantial variations in vegetation growth
over time. In this work, we propose a robust LiDAR-based
place recognition method for natural forests, ForestLPR. We
hypothesize that a set of cross-sectional images of the forest’s geometry at different heights contains the information
needed to recognize revisiting a place. The cross-sectional
images are represented by bird’s-eye view (BEV) density
images of horizontal slices of the point cloud at different
heights. Our approach utilizes a visual transformer as the
shared backbone to produce sets of local descriptors and introduces a multi-BEV interaction module to attend to information at different heights adaptively. It is followed by an
aggregation layer that produces a rotation-invariant place
descriptor. We evaluated the efficacy of our method extensively on real-world data from public benchmarks as well as
robotic datasets and compared it against the state-of-theart (SOTA) methods. The results indicate that ForestLPR
has consistently good performance on all evaluations and
achieves an average increase of 7.38% and 9.11% on Recall@1 over the closest competitor on intra-sequence loop
closure detection and inter-sequence re-localization, respectively, validating our hypothesis1 .

(a)
6m
5m
4m
3m
2m
1m

0

1

(b)

Figure 1. (a) shows a part of the point cloud submap that is colored
by projected attention maps (the zoomed-in part is shown in (b)).
It can be seen that after removing the ground and tree top, some
canopy and bushes are still included in the cropped point cloud.
Our ForestLPR framework is able to utilize multiple BEV density
images and a multi-BEV interaction module to achieve adaptive
attention to different heights at each patch location.

even for humans, yet it is essential for robotic navigation,
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), and augmented reality applications. Under poor global positioning, place recognition can provide loop-closure constraints
to mitigate the adverse effects of odometry drifts in mapping applications.

1. Introduction

Compared to the traditional registration-based methods [2], feature-based methods have become widely
adopted in LiDAR place recognition, as they directly extract
global features from 3D point clouds [23, 33, 51, 55] or 2D
projections [13, 19, 28]. However, the primary application
area of these methods is currently limited to urban environments. Few works have extended the application to for-

Place recognition in natural forest-like environments is
known to be challenging due to reduced salient features
and high self-similarity. Forest localization is challenging
* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/shenyanqing1105/ForestLPR-CVPR2025

6659

