This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-HGS: 3D Half-Gaussian Splatting *
Haolin Li

Jinyang Liu

Mario Sznaier

Octavia Camps

{li.haoli, liu.jiyan, m.sznaier, o.camps}@northeastern.edu
Northeastern University
Boston, MA

3D Gaussians in Object Space

Abstract
View

Photo-realistic image rendering from 3D scene reconstruction has advanced significantly with neural rendering techniques. Among these, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) outperforms Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) in quality and
speed but struggles with shape and color discontinuities.
We propose 3D Half-Gaussian (3D-HGS) kernels as a plugand-play solution to address these limitations. Our experiments show that 3D-HGS enhances existing 3D-GS methods, achieving state-of-the-art rendering quality without
compromising speed. More demos and code are available at
https://lihaolin88.github.io/CVPR-20253DHGS.

View Direction

Image Plane
(a) 3D Gaussian kernels

3D Half-Gaussians in Object Space
View
View Direction

Image Plane

1. Introduction

(b) 3D Half-Gaussian kernels

The pursuit of photo-realistic and real-time rendering of 3D
scenes is a core research focus in both academic and industrial sectors, with wide-ranging applications including virtual reality [12], media production [18], autonomous driving [28, 32], and extensive scene visualization [14, 16, 22].
Traditionally, meshes and point clouds have been the preferred methods for 3D scene representations due to their
explicit compatibility with fast GPU/CUDA-based rasterization techniques. However, these methods often result in
reconstructions of lower quality and renderings plagued by
various artifacts. In contrast, recent advancements in Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [17] introduced continuous scene
representations leveraging Multi-Layer Perceptron architectures (MLP). This approach optimizes novel-view synthesis
through volumetric ray-marching techniques, providing significantly more realistic renderings. However, NeRF methods are characterized by their slow speed [5].

Figure 1. Illustration of the 3D-GS kernels and the proposed 3D
Half-Gaussian kernels, where each half of the kernel is allowed to
have different opacity parameters.

* This work was supported in part by NSF grant 2038493, ONR grant
N00014-21-1-2431, NIH grant R01CA240771 from NCI, and U.S. Department of Homeland Security grant 22STESE00001-03-02. The views and
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS) [9] has
emerged as a state-of-the-art approach, outperforming existing methods in terms of both rendering quality and speed.
The concept of using 3D Gaussians to parameterize a scene
dates back to the early 2000s [34, 35]. This technique models a 3D scene with a collection of 3D Gaussian reconstruction kernels parameterized by 59 parameters representing
location, scale, orientation, color, and opacity of the kernel. Initially, each Gaussian is derived from a point in a
Structure from Motion (SfM) reconstruction. These parameters are subsequently refined through a dual process
involving the minimization of image rendering loss and
adaptive kernel density adjustment. The efficiency of 3DGS is enhanced by a GPU-optimized, tile-based rasterization method, enabling real-time rendering of complex 3D
scenes. Employing 3D Gaussians as reconstruction kernels
simplifies the volumetric rendering process and facilitates
the integration of a low-pass filter within the kernel. This

10996

