This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Focused Transformer for Single Image Super-Resolution
Wei Long1 , Xingyu Zhou1 , Leheng Zhang1 , Shuhang Gu1*
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
weilong@std.uestc.edu.cn, shuhanggu@gmail.com
https://github.com/LabShuHangGU/PFT-SR

Abstract

Layer 1

Transformer-based methods have achieved remarkable results in image super-resolution tasks because they can capture non-local dependencies in low-quality input images.
However, this feature-intensive modeling approach is computationally expensive because it calculates the similarities between numerous features that are irrelevant to the
query features when obtaining attention weights. These
unnecessary similarity calculations not only degrade the
reconstruction performance but also introduce significant
computational overhead. How to accurately identify the
features that are important to the current query features
and avoid similarity calculations between irrelevant features remains an urgent problem. To address this issue, we
propose a novel and effective Progressive Focused Transformer (PFT) that links all isolated attention maps in the
network through Progressive Focused Attention (PFA) to
focus attention on the most important tokens. PFA not only
enables the network to capture more critical similar features, but also significantly reduces the computational cost
of the overall network by filtering out irrelevant features before calculating similarities. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on various single image superresolution benchmarks.

Layer 2

Layer n

(a) Self-Attention
Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer n

(b) Sparse Attention
Layer 3

Layer 4

Layer n

(c) Progressive Focused Attention (ours)
Query patch

Attention calculation region

Attention weight

Figure 1. Comparison of different attention mechanisms. (a)
Vanilla self-attention calculates attention weights in the whole
window and generates non-zero weights for both highly relevant
and less relevant tokens. (b) Sparse Attention is able to filter out
the impact of less relevant tokens with small weights, but still
requires the calculation of attention weights for all tokens. (c)
Progressive Focused Attention connects isolated attention maps,
leveraging attention weights to skip unnecessary computations and
better aggregate relevant tokens.

1. Introduction

promising reconstruction results. Due to the limitations of
convolution operations, these methods can capture only
local feature information. Many studies have focused on
enabling networks to achieve broader feature interaction to
improve image restoration. Recently, Transformer-based
methods [6, 22, 42, 46] have been increasingly applied to
image reconstruction, owing to their ability to effectively
leverage long-range dependencies, thereby enhancing the
recovery of detailed information in images.

Image Super-Resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct highresolution details and textures from Low-Resolution (LR)
images. Effective SR techniques not only enhance visual
quality but also enable more meaningful information extraction from high-resolution outputs. It has critical applications in fields such as medical imaging, satellite remote
sensing, and video surveillance.
Several classical Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [10, 11, 15, 23] designed for SR have achieved

Transformer-based super-resolution methods utilize cascaded self-attention blocks to recover the missing HighResolution (HR) details. At the core of the self-attention

* Corresponding author

2279

