This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Focus-Attention Transformer for Robust Point Cloud Registration
Kexue Fu14 *, Mingzhi Yuan23∗ , Changwei Wang14 , Weiguang Pang14 , Jing Chi5 ,
Manning Wang23‡ , Longxiang Gao14‡
1
Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of Education,
Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan),
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan, China
2
Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Key Lab of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
4
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computing Power Internet and Service Computing,
Shandong Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan, China
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University of Finance and Economics
{fukx, gaolx}@sdas.org, {mzyuan20, mnwang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, coarse-to-fine methods for point cloud registration have achieved great success, but few works deeply explore the impact of feature interaction at both coarse and
fine scales. By visualizing attention scores and correspondences, we find that existing methods fail to achieve effective feature aggregation at the two scales during the feature
interaction. To tackle this issue, we propose a Dual FocusAttention Transformer framework, which only focuses on
points relevant to the current point for feature interaction,
avoiding interactions with irrelevant points. For the coarse
scale, we design a superpoint focus-attention transformer
guided by sparse keypoints, which are selected from the
neighborhood of superpoints. For the fine scale, we only
perform feature interaction between the point sets that belong to the same superpoint. Experiments show that our
method achieve the state-of-the-art performance on three
standard benchmarks. The code and pre-trained models
are available at https://github.com/fukexue/
DFAT.git.

[6, 39] in terms of accuracy and speed.
How to reduce the negative impact of repetitive structures and low overlap on the accuracy and robustness of
point cloud registration has attracted significant attention
within the community for a long time. To tackle these
problems, Predator [14] first introduces an attention module on downsampled coarse points (superpoints or patches)
to encode contextual features of the point cloud, significantly enhancing the representation capability of features.
However, simple attention mechanisms overlook the influence of positional encoding on point cloud information exchange and the geometric discriminative capability of features. Therefore, GeoTransformer [24] introduces a geometric transformer for superpoints. It encodes relative positional information, including pairwise distances and triplet
angles, into the features of superpoints, enhancing the rotational invariance of features and thereby improving the
matching accuracy between superpoints. Nevertheless, we
found that the above methods [14, 24] and other following
methods [25, 34] all utilize dense feature interactions, inevitably introducing erroneous and redundant information
interactions, which interfere with the discriminative capability of the learned features.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 1 (b,d), we visualize the
superpoint attention scores and the correspondences predicted by GeoTransformer [24] for the final registration.
From the figure, it can be found that superpoints aggregate information from all similar regions, making generated
correspondences lack discrimination and geometric consistency. Under the influence of dense interactions, correct
interactions are diluted, resulting in features that are close
to the mean of repeated region features. Moreover, some

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration aims at estimating the relative transformation between two unaligned point cloud fragments,
which serves as a fundamental task in autonomous driving
[7, 13], graphics [17, 38], and robotics [21–23, 35]. Benefiting from the booming advances in deep learning, a series
of learning-based methods [3, 28, 30] has been proposed
and achieved better performance than traditional methods
* Equal Contribution

‡Corresponding Author

11769

