This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SwiftEdit: Lightning Fast Text-Guided Image Editing via One-Step Diffusion
Trong-Tung Nguyen, Quang Nguyen, Khoi Nguyen, Anh Tran, Cuong Pham†
Qualcomm AI Research+
{tunnguy,quanghon,khoinguy,anhtra,pcuong}@qti.qualcomm.com

⚡SwiftEdit : Make Your Edit in 0.23 seconds ⚡
Source Image

Edited Image

Source Image

basket of apples → basket of puppies

empty street → crowded street

Edited Image

in forest → at sea

couples on beach → couples on beach
hold hands

Source Image

Edited Image

mouth closed → mouth opened

dog holding flower → dog holding flower

Figure 1. SwiftEdit empowers instant, localized image editing using only text prompts, freeing users from the need to define masks. In just
0.23 seconds on a single A100 GPU, it unlocks a world of creative possibilities demonstrated across diverse editing scenarios.

vious multi-step methods (at least 50× times faster) while
maintain a competitive performance in editing results. Our
project is at https://swift-edit.github.io/.

Abstract
Recent advances in text-guided image editing enable users
to perform image edits through simple text inputs, leveraging the extensive priors of multi-step diffusion-based textto-image models. However, these methods often fall short
of the speed demands required for real-world and on-device
applications due to the costly multi-step inversion and sampling process involved. In response to this, we introduce
SwiftEdit, a simple yet highly efficient editing tool that
achieve instant text-guided image editing (in 0.23s). The
advancement of SwiftEdit lies in its two novel contributions:
a one-step inversion framework that enables one-step image reconstruction via inversion and a mask-guided editing
technique with our proposed attention rescaling mechanism
to perform localized image editing. Extensive experiments
are provided to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency
of SwiftEdit. In particular, SwiftEdit enables instant textguided image editing, which is extremely faster than pre-

1. Introduction

+ Qualcomm Vietnam Company Limited

Recent text-to-image diffusion models [5, 24, 26, 27] have
achieved remarkable results in generating high-quality images semantically aligned with given text prompts. To generate realistic images, most of them rely on multi-step sampling techniques, which reverse the diffusion process starting from random noise to realistic image. To overcome this
time-consuming sampling process, some works focus on reducing the number of sampling steps to a few (4-8 steps)
[29] or even one step [5, 20, 39, 40] via distillation techniques while not compromising results. These approaches
not only accelerate image generation but also enable faster
inference for downstream tasks, such as image editing.
For text-guided image editing, recent approaches [11, 13,
19] use an inversion process to determine the initial noise
for a source image, allowing for (1) source image reconstruction and (2) content modification aligned with guided
text while preserving other details. Starting from this inverted noise, additional techniques, such as attention ma-

† also affiliated with Posts & Telecom. Inst. of Tech., Vietnam

Contact email: nguyentrongtung11101999@gmail.com

21492

