This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAM-REF: Introducing Image-Prompt Synergy during Interaction for Detail
Enhancement in the Segment Anything Model
Chongkai Yu1,† , Ting Liu1,†, , Anqi Li2 , Xiaochao Qu1 , Chengjing Wu1 , Luoqi Liu1 , Xiaolin Hu3,
1

MT Lab, Meitu Inc., Beijing 100083, China
2

3

Beijing Institute of Technology

Department of Computer Science and Technology

BNRist, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{yck, lt, qxc, ethan, llq5}@meitu.com
xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
†

Joint first authors.

Joint corresponding author.

Abstract

a

Prev. mask+Prompt

Interactive segmentation is to segment the mask of the target
object according to the user’s interactive prompts. There
are two mainstream strategies: early fusion and late fusion.
Current specialist models utilize the early fusion strategy
that encodes the combination of images and prompts to target the prompted objects, yet repetitive complex computations on the images result in high latency. Late fusion models extract image embeddings once and merge them with
the prompts in later interactions. This strategy avoids redundant image feature extraction and improves efficiency
significantly. A recent milestone is the Segment Anything
Model (SAM). However, this strategy limits the models’
ability to extract detailed information from the prompted
target zone. To address this issue, we propose SAM-REF, a
two-stage refinement framework that fully integrates images
and prompts by using a lightweight refiner into the interaction of late fusion, which combines the accuracy of early fusion and maintains the efficiency of late fusion. Through extensive experiments, we show that our SAM-REF model outperforms the current state-of-the-art method in most metrics
on segmentation quality without compromising efficiency.

Encoder

Interact
Decoder

(a) Early fusion

Prev. mask+Prompt
Encoder

Interact

Decoder

(b) Late fusion

Prev. mask+Prompt
Encoder

Decoder

Interact

Refiner

(c) Our method

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Three pipelines for interactive image segmentation.
(a) Early fusion pipeline. (b) Late fusion pipeline. (c) Our proposed pipeline, which takes advantages of both early fusion and
late fusion pipelines. The orange arrows indicate the interaction
between the user and the systems.

Interactive segmentation [4, 12, 13, 15, 22] is an important
task in computer vision that has garnered significant attention from both academia and industry. It leverages user input through simple interactions, such as scribbles, boxes,
and clicks, to conveniently obtain accurate masks. Based
on the timing of prompt-image fusion, existing methods can
be categorized into early fusion strategies and late fusion
strategies, as shown in Fig. 1.

19356

Early fusion methods such as FocalClick [4], and SimpleClick [21] jointly encode the image and prompts during interaction (Fig. 1a). Since the encoder can generate
features specifically for target objects, these early fusion
pipelines can achieve accurate segmentation results, espe-

