This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Frozen Unimodal Encoders for Flexible Multimodal Alignment
Mayug Maniparambil* †
Raiymbek Akshulakov* ‡
Sanath Narayan§
Ankit Singh§
Abstract
Recent contrastive multimodal vision-language models
like CLIP have demonstrated robust open-world semantic understanding, becoming the standard image backbones
for vision-language applications. However, recent findings
suggest high semantic similarity between well-trained unimodal encoders, which raises a key question: Is there a
plausible way to connect unimodal backbones for visionlanguage tasks? To this end, we propose a novel framework that aligns vision and language using frozen unimodal encoders. It involves selecting semantically similar encoders in the latent space, curating a concept-rich
dataset of image-caption pairs, and training simple MLP
projectors. We evaluated our approach on 12 zero-shot
classification datasets and 2 image-text retrieval datasets.
Our best model, utilizing DINOv2 and All-Roberta-Large
text encoder, achieves 76% accuracy on ImageNet with a
20-fold reduction in data and 65-fold reduction in compute requirements compared multi-modal alignment where
models are trained from scratch. The proposed framework enhances the accessibility of multimodal model development while enabling flexible adaptation across diverse
scenarios. Code and curated datasets are available at
github.com/mayug/freeze-align.

1. Introduction
Contrastive multimodal vision-language models have recently demonstrated impressive zero-shot capabilities [22,
45, 62]. These advancements facilitate the use of language
as an API for vision tasks, treating captions as adaptive
classes to support a wide range of applications. However,
current models face significant challenges: the typical objective function, InfoNCE, is designed to maximize mutual
information between the global summary vector of an image and its text representation. This global approach, which
relies on pooling functions within the CLIP vision encoder,
* joint first authors
† ML Labs, Dublin City University

‡ University of California Berkeley

§ Technological Innovation Institute

Yasser Abdelaziz Dahou Djilali§ †
Noel E. O’Connor†

struggles to deliver the pixel-level granularity required for
tasks like segmentation [5]. In contrast, recent advances
in uni-modal vision encoders, such as the DINOv2 [41],
have demonstrated strong performance in both global and
local vision tasks. The CLIP text encoder is limited by its
English-only tokenizer and a fixed token length of 77, restricting it’s long-context and multilingual retrieval capabilities. Meanwhile unimodal language encoders [48], excel
in multilingual, and long-context abilities, as evidenced by
improved performance on MTEB benchmarks [36]. Despite
these advances in unimodal models, the current strategy for
aligning vision and language models usually involves full
retraining of vision and language encoders, which is both
computationally expensive and inflexible.
This paper proposes a framework for vision-language
alignment that efficiently leverages advanced uni-modal vision and language encoders, creating adaptable multimodal
models by training only projectors between their frozen embedding spaces. Current efforts to create more efficient
CLIP models often compromise on either performance or
still require significant resources. For example, LiT [63]
achieves comparable results to CLIP but relies on massive
compute resources, while smaller-scale models like LiLT
[23] may lack sufficient concepts in their training datasets,
limiting their zero-shot domain transfer accuracy.
To address these challenges, our approach builds on recent findings suggesting semantic similarities between welltrained unimodal vision and language embedding spaces
[21,32]. We hypothesize that these similarities enable effective alignment through simple projection transformations,
and verify through a toy example in Section 3.2 and extensive ablation studies in Section 5.1. Inspired by this,
our framework includes three key steps: identifying semantically similar vision-language encoder pairs, curating
concept-dense datasets, and training lightweight projectors
for efficient alignment.
This approach has three practical benefits compared to
CLIP-like training:
Strong Unimodal Features lead to Strong MultiModal Models Features from uni-modal vision and text encoders are more general than multi-modal trained encoders.
For example, it’s been shown that vision-only trained en-

29847

