This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry Field Splatting with Gaussian Surfels
Kaiwen Jiang1 Venkataram Sivaram1 Cheng Peng2 Ravi Ramamoorthi1
1
University of California, San Diego 2 Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Geometric reconstruction of opaque surfaces from images is a longstanding challenge in computer vision, with
renewed interest from volumetric view synthesis algorithms
using radiance fields. We leverage the geometry field proposed in recent work for stochastic opaque surfaces, which
can then be converted to volume densities. We adapt Gaussian kernels or surfels to splat the geometry field rather
than the volume, enabling precise reconstruction of opaque
solids. Our first contribution is to derive an efficient and
almost exact differentiable rendering algorithm for geometry
fields parameterized by Gaussian surfels, while removing
current approximations involving Taylor series and no selfattenuation. Next, we address the discontinuous loss landscape when surfels cluster near geometry, showing how to
guarantee that the rendered color is a continuous function of
the colors of the kernels, irrespective of ordering. Finally, we
use latent representations with spherical harmonics encoded
reflection vectors rather than spherical harmonics encoded
colors to better address specular surfaces. We demonstrate
significant improvement in the quality of reconstructed 3D
surfaces on widely-used datasets.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of opaque surfaces from a collection
of calibrated RGB images is a classic challenge in computer vision. This problem has received broader attention
in recent years due to the success of Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) [30] and other volumetric novel view synthesis algorithms. Although methods like NeRF [30] are effective
for view synthesis, they fall short in geometric reconstruction applications, since they do not explicitly reconstruct an
accurate surface. Follow up methods, which are specialized
towards surface reconstruction, have proposed instead that
an explicit geometry representation should parameterize the
volume density field.
The typical approach taken by previous methods [25, 27,
29, 31, 45, 48, 54, 55] is to parameterize signed or unsigned
distance fields with a neural network, which can then be
converted to a density field for volume rendering [31, 45].
Eikonal regularization [16] is often used to promote smooth-

Figure 1. We introduce a geometry reconstruction method from a
set of calibrated RGB images by splatting a geometry field with
Gaussian surfels. We enable almost exact and efficient differentiable
rendering. Compared to 2DGS, we reach better geometry quality
and achieve overall smooth and detailed geometry without having
cracks or holes. The reader may wish to zoom into the electronic
version in the figures. (Note: object colors used are for visualization,
not original object color).

ness of the reconstructed surfaces. In particular, Miller et al.
[31] provides a theoretical bridge between surface representations and volume rendering with stochastic geometry, and
generalizes the use of distance fields to introduce a general
stochastic geometry field, which we refer to as simply a geometry field. Chen et al. [5] shows that such geometry fields
can be parameterized with a Poisson field.
Recent advances in Gaussian splatting based methods
[23] have motivated a new class of surface modeling methods (e.g., [7, 18, 20, 49, 59, 60]). These methods utilize
kernels, i.e., 3D Gaussians or 2D Gaussians, to parameterize
a density or opacity field and then perform volume splatting
[23, 64] for rendering. Geometry is then recovered from
the converged density or opacity field through varying definitions of the surface. The benefit compared to the neural
methods comes from the speed and ability to generalize
to complex scenes (e.g., [4, 11, 61]). Despite the success
achieved by these approaches, the surface is not theoretically clearly defined for a general density field, which incurs
approximation that limits the reconstruction quality.
In this paper, we adapt a modern volumetric representation based on Gaussian kernels to splat the geometry field
that provides precise geometry for reconstructing opaque
solids. We show that we can utilize the kernels, i.e., 2D
Gaussians or Gaussian surfels, to parameterize the geometry

5752

