This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GFlowVLM: Enhancing Multi-step Reasoning in Vision-Language Models with
Generative Flow Networks
Haoqiang Kang1,2∗ Enna Sachdeva1 Piyush Gupta1 Sangjae Bae1 Kwonjoon Lee1
1
Honda Research Institute USA; 2 University of California San Diego

Abstract

cially in long horizon planning for tasks such as embodied
AI, where agent must capture long term dependencies.
Recent advancements in LLMs and VLMs demonstrate
emergent reasoning capabilities by leveraging Chain-ofThought (CoT) reasoning, that enhances decision-making
in multi-step interactive environments [7, 25, 35]. Typically, these models are fine-tuned using specialized visual instruction-following datasets through Supervised Fine
Tuning (SFT) methods [18, 20], without active interaction
with the environment, or optimized through Reinforcement
Learning (RL) approaches, such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [29, 41]. However, SFT approaches often limits generalization to unseen scenarios, as training
relies on maximizing the likelihood over a limited, specialized dataset, thereby restricting diversity in the solution
space [17]. Furthermore, RL methods like PPO tend to prioritize short-term rewards, which can hinder the model’s
ability to consider long-term outcomes. Consequently, limited exploration in these models may lead to the oversight of
more optimal long-term strategies, resulting in suboptimal
performance in complex tasks [44].
In contrast to traditional reinforcement learning (RL)
methods, which focus on maximizing cumulative rewards [5, 6], Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) [1]
train stochastic policies to sample diverse, high-reward
sequences (e.g., token sequences) with probabilities proportional to a specified reward function R(x) [2]. This
approach samples sequences based on the reward function’s distribution, enabling it to find a broader range of
high-reward solutions beyond those typically identified by
reward-maximizing techniques. Recent studies have applied GFlowNets to multi-step reasoning within the Large
Language Models (LLMs) framework, demonstrating their
effectiveness over maximum likelihood training and traditional reward-maximization methods [8, 33, 40]. However,
these methods lack the multimodal capabilities which are
crucial for embodied AI tasks requiring the integration of
visual and textual information. Additionally, related works,
such as FoR [40], relies on Markovian structures within this
framework, which may fail to capture the long-range dependencies necessary for complex, real-world reasoning tasks.

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have recently shown
promising advancements in sequential decision-making
tasks through task-specific fine-tuning. However, common
fine-tuning methods, such as Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)
and Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques like Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO), present notable limitations:
SFT assumes Independent and Identically Distributed (IID)
data, while PPO focuses on maximizing cumulative rewards. These limitations often restrict solution diversity
and hinder generalization in multi-step reasoning tasks. To
address these challenges, we introduce a novel framework,
GFlowVLM, a framework that fine-tune VLMs using Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) to promote generation of
diverse solutions for complex reasoning tasks. GFlowVLM
models the environment as a non-Markovian decision process, allowing it to capture long-term dependencies essential for real-world applications. It takes observations
and task descriptions as inputs to prompt chain-of-thought
(CoT) reasoning which subsequently guides action selection. We use task based rewards to fine-tune VLM with
GFlowNets. This approach enables VLMs to outperform
prior fine-tuning methods, including SFT and RL. Empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of GFlowVLM on
complex tasks such as card games (NumberLine, BlackJack)
and embodied planning tasks (ALFWorld), showing enhanced training efficiency, solution diversity, and stronger
generalization capabilities across both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution scenarios. Project page is available at
https://mk322.github.io/gflowvlm/.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable results in generalized tasks such as image captioning
and visual question answering [15, 20, 45]. However, they
struggle with structured reasoning in sequential decision
making tasks that require causal understanding [3], espe∗ Work was done during Haoqiang Kang’s internship at Honda Research
Institute.

3815

