This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MINIMA: Modality Invariant Image Matching
Jiangwei Ren1 , Xingyu Jiang1† , Zizhuo Li2 , Dingkang Liang1 , Xin Zhou1 , Xiang Bai1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Wuhan University
{jwren, jiangxy998, dkliang, xbai}@hust.edu.cn
Abstract

RGB-Event

MINIMARoMa

RGB-Depth

Image matching for both cross-view and cross-modality
plays a critical role in multimodal perception. In practice,
the modality gap caused by different imaging systems/styles
poses great challenges to the matching task. Existing works
try to extract invariant features for specific modalities and
train on limited datasets, showing poor generalization. In
this paper, we present MINIMA, a unified image matching
framework for multiple cross-modal cases. Without pursuing fancy modules, our MINIMA aims to enhance universal performance from the perspective of data scaling
up. For such purpose, we propose a simple yet effective
data engine that can freely produce a large dataset containing multiple modalities, rich scenarios, and accurate
matching labels. Specifically, we scale up the modalities
from cheap but rich RGB-only matching data, by means
of generative models. Under this setting, the matching labels and rich diversity of the RGB dataset are well inherited by the generated multimodal data. Benefiting from
this, we construct MD-syn, a new comprehensive dataset
that fills the data gap for general multimodal image matching. With MD-syn, we can directly train any advanced
matching pipeline on randomly selected modality pairs to
obtain cross-modal ability. Extensive experiments on indomain and zero-shot matching tasks, including 19 crossmodal cases, demonstrate that our MINIMA can significantly outperform the baselines and even surpass modalityspecific methods. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/LSXI7/MINIMA.

1. Introduction
Image matching refers to establishing pixel-wise correspondences from two-view images, which serves as a prerequisite for a wide range of visual applications [30]. Recently, matching two images of different imaging systems/styles plays a vital role in multimodal perceptions [20], including image fusion and enhancement [44,
† Corresponding author.

56.0

RGB-Infrared

51.6

34.6

7.0

37.2

23.9

34.6

56.8

30.2

Retina

60.7

Optical-SAR

45.5

XoFTR CVPR'24

LightGlue (LG) ICCV'23

MINIMALG
XoFTR

AUC ↑ 20.4%

45

RoMa

MINIMALoFTR

GIMDKM

AUC ↑ 97.8%
AUC ↑ 50.0%

25

ReDFeat

LoFTR

DKM
GIMLoFTR

Optical-Map 64.4
ReDFeat TIP'23

Average AUC (%)

12.8
12.6

GIMDKM ICLR'24

MINIMALG (ours)

5

0

4

8

12

LG ELoFTR
GIMLG

16

20

Pairs Per Second (640x480)

24

Figure 1. Overall Image Matching Accuracy and Efficiency
on Six Datasets of Real Cross-modal Image Pairs. AUC of the
pose error (@10◦ ) or reprojection error (@10px) is used for accuracy evaluation, while Pairs Per Second is used for efficiency test.
Left: AUCs on each dataset of representative methods are reported.
Right: average performance is summarized, wherein different colors indicate matching pipelines of sparse, semi-dense, and dense
matching, while our MINIMA is marked as ⋆. Using only synthetic multimodal data created by our data engine, MINIMA can
generalize to real cross-modal scenes with large improvements.

50], visual localization/navigation [1, 54], target detection/recognition/tracking [12, 42, 45, 52, 53, 55], etc. They
benefit from gathering the advantages of different modalities by aligning them, thereby yielding more comprehensive representations. However, the cross-view and crossmodality nature makes the matching task more challenging,
particularly using a single model for different modalities
such as RGB-Infrared (IR), RGB-Depth, and RGB-Event.
Existing studies focus more on RGB-only image matching due to the accessible training sets [4, 24], which have
given birth to many advanced matching architectures [8, 9,
32, 37, 41]. By contrast, cross-modal matching datasets are
weak in scale and scene coverage, as concluded in Tab. 1.
The main reasons are as follows: i) It is laborious to capture a large number of multimodal images of the same
target/scene, and also hard to ensure rich scene coverage.
Therefore, existing datasets are often captured from driving
or fixed camera views [18, 38], and the number of modality types is merely two or three for each dataset. ii) Creating precise dense labels is also expensive. Researchers often manually label matched landmarks [18, 20, 27], or use

23059

