This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SOAP: Vision-Centric 3D Semantic Scene Completion with Scene-Adaptive
Decoder and Occluded Region-Aware View Projection
Hyo-Jun Lee1
Yeong Jun Koh2∗
Hanul Kim3
2
4
Hyunseop Kim
Yonguk Lee
Jinu Lee4
1
2
Kangwon National University
Chungnam National University
3
4
Seoul National University of Science and Technology
42dot Inc.
gywns6298@kangwon.ac.kr

yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr

hukim@seoultech.ac.kr

hyunseop95@gmail.com

yonguk.lee@42dot.ai

jinu.lee@42dot.ai

Abstract

(a) Occluded voxel regions.

Input
3D Scene

Existing view transformations in vision-centric 3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) inevitably experience erroneous feature duplication in the reconstructed voxel space
due to occlusions, leading to a dilution of informative contexts. Furthermore, semantic classes exhibit high variability in their appearance in real-world driving scenarios. To address these issues, we introduce a novel 3D SSC
method, called SOAP, including two key components: an occluded region-aware view projection and a scene-adaptive
decoder. The occluded region-aware view projection effectively converts 2D image features into voxel space, refining the duplicated features of occluded regions using information gathered from previous observations. The sceneadaptive decoder guides query embeddings to learn diverse driving environments based on a comprehensive semantic repository. Extensive experiments validate that the
proposed SOAP significantly outperforms existing methods for the vision-centric 3D SSC on automated driving
datasets, SemanticKITTI and SSCBench. Code is available
at https://github.com/gywns6287/SOAP.

■road ■sidewalk ■vegetation ■terrain
(b) Diversity in the appearance of semantic classes.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Two main motivations of SOAP. (a) The 2D-to-3D view
projection inevitably yields erroneous feature duplication in voxel
generation due to occlusion. (b) The semantic classes exhibit significant variability in their appearance depending on driving regions.

Understanding 3D traffic scenes is crucial for autonomous
driving systems to develop downstream tasks such as motion prediction and planning. LiDAR sensors [8, 33, 43, 54]
provide precise 3D scene information, but their high cost
and the complex setup limit their scalability. In contrast, areas of study about vision-centric 3D perception, including
3D object detection [11, 25, 46, 48, 52], 3D car shape reconstruction [14, 16, 17], and depth estimation [2, 27, 29, 45],
have been receiving attention due to its simplicity and costeffectiveness. However, these methods still struggle to re∗ Corresponding author

construct complete and fine-grained 3D scene representations. To address this limitation, 3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has emerged as a promising alternative. 3D
SSC leverages a voxel-based approach, assigning both an
occupancy probability and a semantic label (e.g. car, pedestrian, road) to each voxel within the 3D space. Thereby,
it can create a comprehensive representation of the driving
scene. While earlier works [5, 19, 39, 41] primarily rely on
LiDAR sensors, recent research [3, 13, 18, 22, 37, 50, 51]
has demonstrated the potential of vision-centric methods.

17145

