This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Three-view Focal Length Recovery From Homographies
Yaqing Ding1

Viktor Kocur2 Zuzana Berger Haladová2 Qianliang Wu3
Shen Cai4 Jian Yang3 Zuzana Kukelova1
1
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
{yaqing.ding, kukelzuz}@fel.cvut.cz
2

Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University in Bratislava
{viktor.kocur, haladova}@fmph.uniba.sk
3

PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{wuqiangliang, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
4

Visual and Geometric Perception Lab, Donghua University
hammer cai@163.com

Abstract

H2

H3

n

In this paper, we propose a novel approach for recovering
focal lengths from three-view homographies. By examining
the consistency of normal vectors between two homographies, we derive new explicit constraints between the focal
lengths and homographies using an elimination technique.
We demonstrate that three-view homographies provide two
additional constraints, enabling the recovery of one or two
focal lengths. We discuss four possible cases, including
three cameras having an unknown equal focal length, three
cameras having two different unknown focal lengths, three
cameras where one focal length is known, and the other two
cameras have equal or different unknown focal lengths. All
the problems can be converted into solving polynomials in
one or two unknowns, which can be efficiently solved using
Sturm sequence or hidden variable technique. Evaluation
using both synthetic and real data shows that the proposed
solvers are both faster and more accurate than methods relying on existing two-view solvers. The code and data are
available on https://github.com/kocurvik/hf.

1. Introduction
Estimating relative camera motion from multiple views using point correspondences is a classical problem in computer vision. Efficient solutions for various camera configurations have been well-studied in the literature [4, 18–
21, 27, 32, 36, 37, 41]. For example, with two fully calibrated cameras, the relative camera pose can be efficiently
determined using 5-point algorithms [19, 27, 36]. In contrast to the two view case, the calibrated three-view rela-

[I 0]

[R2 t2 ]

[R3 t3 ]

Figure 1. Three cameras view the same plane, defining two homographies H2 , H3 . The two homographies have the same reference
image, which should correspond to the same normal vector n.

tive pose problem is much more challenging. This problem can be solved using four triplets of point correspondences [37, 38],1 however it results in a very complex
system of polynomial equations. Thus, the existing solutions [24, 37] to this problem are only approximate and can
often fail, i.e., the returned solution can be arbitrarily far
from the geometrically correct solution.
An important scenario arises when the focal length is the
only unknown in the camera intrinsic parameters, referred
to as the partially calibrated case. This setup is practical
since most modern cameras have zero skew and a centered
principal point. When two cameras share an equal yet unknown focal length, their relative motion and the common
focal length can be estimated using six point correspondences [19, 27, 28, 41]. Similarly, if one camera is fully
calibrated and the other has an unknown focal length, six
point correspondences are also required [5, 27, 28]. For
1 Note, that configuration of four points in three views generates an
over-constrained problem. In this case, we have 12 constraint for 11 degrees of freedom (DOF). A minimal solution would need to drop one constraint, e.g., by considering only a line passing through one of the points in
the third view [24] or by considering a “half” point correspondence.

11505

