This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IMFine: 3D Inpainting via Geometry-guided Multi-view Refinement
Zhihao Shi∗1

Dong Huo∗◦2
Yuhongze Zhou1
Yan Min◦3
Juwei Lu1
Xinxin Zuo4
1
2
Huawei Canada Research Institute
University of Alberta
3
4
McMaster University
Concordia University

zhihaoshi2022@gmail.com, dhuo@ualberta.ca, yuhongze.zhou@mail.mcgill.com
miny13@mcmaster.ca, juwei.lu@huawei.com, xinxin.zuo@concordia.ca

Figure 1. We present a novel 3D inpainting method capable of removing target objects from the 3D scenes and seamlessly inpainting the
occluded regions across various scenarios. The proposed method ensures the generation of plausible geometry and consistent textures. It
is highly recommended to see video results in our project page.

Abstract
Current 3D inpainting and object removal methods are
largely limited to front-facing scenes, facing substantial challenges when applied to diverse, “unconstrained”
scenes where the camera orientation and trajectory are unrestricted. To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel approach that produces inpainted 3D scenes with consistent
visual quality and coherent underlying geometry across
both front-facing and unconstrained scenes. Specifically,
we propose a robust 3D inpainting pipeline that incorporates geometric priors and a multi-view refinement network trained via test-time adaptation, building on a pretrained image inpainting model. Additionally, we develop
a novel inpainting mask detection technique to derive targeted inpainting masks from object masks, boosting the
performance in handling unconstrained scenes. To validate the efficacy of our approach, we create a challenging

and diverse benchmark that spans a wide range of scenes.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
method substantially outperforms existing state-of-the-art
approaches.

1. Introduction

∗ denotes equal contribution.
◦ Work done during an internship at Huawei Canada Research Institute

3D editing is an active research area with significant potential for various applications, including video games, the
Metaverse, virtual reality, and augmented reality. For example, after a 3D scene is created or reconstructed, a user
might want to remove certain objects from the scene. This
paper mainly focuses on the challenging task of inpainting
in 3D scenes to fill the occluded regions to enable seamless
object removal.
Compared to image inpainting [22, 28], 3D inpainting
models lag significantly behind due to the lack of largescale 3D datasets and efficient 3D data structures. Therefore, existing 3D inpainting methods mainly focus on lifting
2D inpainting priors to 3D. Although the current diffusion-

26694

