This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R EWIND: Real-Time Egocentric Whole-Body Motion Diffusion
with Exemplar-Based Identity Conditioning
Jihyun Lee1,2 Weipeng Xu1
Shaojie Bai1 Te-Li Wang1
1

Alexander Richard1 Shih-En Wei1
Minhyuk Sung2 Tae-Kyun Kim2,3

Shunsuke Saito1
Jason Saragih1

2
3
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta (a) Egocentric
KAIST
Imperial College London
whole-body tracking results.

https://jyunlee.github.io/projects/rewind

Input

Estimated Pose

GT Pose

Input

Estimated Pose

(a) Egocentric whole-body motion estimation results.

GT Pose

(b) Avatar driving example.

Figure 1. Real-time and high-fidelity whole-body motion estimation from stereo egocentric images. We propose R EWIND, a novel
egocentric image-conditioned diffusion model for high-quality 3D whole-body motion estimation. R EWIND is real-time, causal, and
generalizable to unseen motion lengths, making it seamlessly applicable for driving photorealistic avatars or meshes. Please refer to the
supplementary video, which demonstrates that R EWIND estimates significantly more plausible motions compared to existing methods.

Abstract

tionally, R EWIND optionally supports identity-conditioned
motion estimation when identity prior is available. To this
end, we propose a novel identity conditioning method based
on a small set of pose exemplars of the target identity, which
further enhances motion estimation quality. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that R EWIND significantly outperforms the existing baselines both with and
without exemplar-based identity conditioning.

We present R EWIND (Real-Time Egocentric WholeBody Motion Diffusion), a one-step diffusion model for realtime, high-fidelity human motion estimation from egocentric image inputs. While an existing method for egocentric
whole-body (i.e., body and hands) motion estimation is nonreal-time and acausal due to diffusion-based iterative motion refinement to capture correlations between body and
hand poses, R EWIND operates in a fully causal and realtime manner. To enable real-time inference, we introduce
(1) cascaded body-hand denoising diffusion, which effectively models the correlation between egocentric body and
hand motions in a fast, feed-forward manner, and (2) diffusion distillation, which enables high-quality motion estimation with a single denoising step. Our denoising diffusion model is based on a modified Transformer architecture, designed to causally model output motions while enhancing generalizability to unseen motion lengths. Addi-

1. Introduction
Egocentric human motion estimation is essential for delivering immersive and realistic experiences in AR/VR applications, such as gaming and telepresence. For instance,
imagine engaging in a conversation with your friend in a
virtual environment. The quality of estimated whole-body
(i.e., body and hands) motion is crucial in creating a realistic experience in interpersonal communication, while subtle
pose changes (e.g., finger poses in Fig. 1b) can significantly
impact the intended message.

7095

