This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AniGrad: Anisotropic Gradient-Adaptive Sampling for 3D Reconstruction From
Monocular Video
Noah Stier

Alex Rich

Pradeep Sen

Tobias Höllerer

{noahstier, anrich, psen, holl}@ucsb.edu

University of California, Santa Barbara

Figure 1. Reconstruction with adaptive & anisotropic resolution. Our 3D reconstruction system allocates computational resources
effectively, using a variable sample pattern that adapts to the local surface complexity and orientation. A) The floor, which is flat and
consistently oriented, is accurately reconstructed with a coarse resolution (4 cm). B) The cabinet is coarsely sampled in the vertical
dimension because it exhibits no variation along that axis. Horizontally, however, it is sampled finely enough to accurately localize the
surface. C) Object boundaries and other high-curvature structures are densely sampled to avoid aliasing, and to maintain high fidelity. The
scene shown here is from ScanNet++ [39].

Abstract
Recent image-based 3D reconstruction methods have
achieved excellent quality for indoor scenes using 3D convolutional neural networks. However, they rely on a highresolution grid in order to achieve detailed output surfaces,
which is quite costly in terms of compute time, and it results
in large mesh sizes that are more expensive to store, transmit, and render. In this paper we propose a new solution to
this problem, using adaptive sampling. By re-formulating
the final layers of the network, we are able to analytically
bound the local surface complexity, and set the local sample rate accordingly. Our method, AniGrad 1 , achieves an
order of magnitude reduction in both surface extraction latency and mesh size, while preserving mesh accuracy and
detail.
1 https://github.com/noahstier/AniGrad

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from images is a key capability for many
important applications such as augmented reality, robotics,
and 3D digital asset creation. In order to achieve highquality reconstructions at interactive speeds, many recent
methods [2, 5, 12, 18, 22, 32–35] focus on using feedforward end-to-end neural networks. These models can
generalize to new scenes at test time, and they do not require
time-consuming direct optimization or volume rendering.
The common approach among these methods is to build
a 3D feature volume by back-projecting deep image features using their camera parameters, and then use a 3D
convolutional neural network (CNN) to estimate a 3D truncated signed distance function (TSDF) over the scene. This
framework has achieved excellent results, but it is limited in
terms of resolution due to the cubic cost of its voxel-based

21814

