This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CustAny: Customizing Anything from A Single Example
Lingjie Kong1,∗ , Kai Wu2,∗ , Chengming Xu2 , Xiaobin Hu2 , Wenhui Han2 , Jinlong Peng2
Donghao Luo2 , Mengtian Li3 , Jiangning Zhang2 , Chengjie Wang2 , Yanwei Fu1,†
1
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
Shanghai Film Academy, Shanghai University
ljkong22@m.fudan.edu.cn
xiaobin.hu@tum.de

wukaiwork@outlook.com
whhan18@gmail.com

michaelluo@tencent.com

mtli@shu.edu.cn

jasoncjwang@tencent.com

chengmingxu@tencent.com
jeromepeng@tencent.com
186368@zju.edu.cn

yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn

Figure 1. Customizing any object from a single example (text prompt and the reference image). Our CustAny can achieve various
customization for general objects with high ID fidelity and flexible text edit-ability, without further fine-tuning.

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion-based text-to-image models
have simplified creating high-fidelity images, but preserving the identity (ID) of specific elements, like a personal
dog, is still challenging. Object customization, using reference images and textual descriptions, is key to addressing
this issue. Current object customization methods are either
object-specific, requiring extensive fine-tuning, or objectagnostic, offering zero-shot customization but limited to
specialized domains. The primary issue of promoting zeroshot object customization from specific domains to the general domain is to establish a large-scale general ID dataset
for model pre-training, which is time-consuming and laborintensive. In this paper, we propose a novel pipeline to

construct a large dataset of general objects and build the
Multi-Category ID-Consistent (MC-IDC) dataset, featuring 315k text-image samples across 10k categories. With
the help of MC-IDC, we introduce Customizing Anything
(CustAny), a zero-shot framework that maintains ID fidelity
and supports flexible text editing for general objects. CustAny features three key components: a general ID extraction module, a dual-level ID injection module, and an IDaware decoupling module, allowing it to customize any object from a single reference image and text prompt. Experiments demonstrate that CustAny outperforms existing methods in both general object customization and specialized
domains like human customization and virtual try-on. Our
contributions include a large-scale dataset, the CustAny
framework and novel ID processing to advance this field.
The official project page is in https://lingjiekongfdu.github.io.

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

20916

