This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Embodied Scene Understanding for Vision Language Models via MetaVQA
Weizhen Wang, Chenda Duan, Zhenghao Peng, Yuxin Liu, Bolei Zhou
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract

goal safely.
Benefiting from large-scale pre-training, off-the-shelf
VLMs obtain embodied scene understanding to some degree. However, their spatial awareness is limited as most
VLMs are pre-trained on offline text and images. Meanwhile, their embodied understanding is also constrained because instruction to interact with the environment occupies
a very small portion of their training data.

Vision Language Models (VLMs) demonstrate significant
potential as embodied AI agents for various mobility applications. However, a standardized, closed-loop benchmark for evaluating their spatial reasoning and sequential decision-making capabilities is lacking. To address
this, we present MetaVQA: a comprehensive benchmark
designed to assess and enhance VLMs’ understanding
of spatial relationships and scene dynamics through Visual Question Answering (VQA) and closed-loop simulations. MetaVQA leverages Set-of-Mark prompting and
top-down view ground-truth annotations from nuScenes
and Waymo datasets to automatically generate extensive
question-answer pairs based on diverse real-world traffic
scenarios, ensuring object-centric and context-rich instructions. Our experiments show that fine-tuning VLMs with
the MetaVQA Dataset significantly improves their embodied scene understanding, which is evident not only in improved VQA accuracy but also in emerging safety-aware
driving maneuvers. In addition, the learning exhibits strong
transferability from simulation to real-world observation.
The project webpage is at https://metadriverse.
github.io/metavqa.

1. Introduction

In the autonomous driving task, many prior works [3–
9] address the training data discrepancy by creating tailored Visual-Question-Answering (VQA) datasets for finetuning, and they all report improvements on their benchmarks. However, these benchmarks are not commensurable
or suitable for zero-shot evaluation on general-purpose
VLMs. This is because they follow different textual and visual expressions to describe the scene and refer to objects.
For example, DriveLM [4] refers to objects by tuples composed of the object identifier, the ID of the corresponding
camera, and the pixel positions of the 2D bounding box’s
vertices in the camera’s coordinate. In contrast, in ELM [5],
objects are grounded by a triple composed of the character “c” and the pixel coordinates of the center of the 2D
bounding box. Adding to their disagreements are their distinctions from intuitive conventions for humans: A person
would ground an object by its features (color, shape, etc.)
expressed in natural language. This mismatch can weaken
the diagnosing power of the VQA datasets: a bad performance of a VLM could be caused by miscommunication
rather than its lack of scene understanding capability.

Recent advances demonstrate the potential of using Vision
Language Models (VLMs) as Embodied AI agents in applications like robot arms control [1, 2] and autonomous
driving [3]. These tasks share the common components
of following instructions, understanding the surroundings,
and taking the optimal action to achieve the goals. For
safety and generalizability in the real world, these AI agents
should have the capability of embodied scene understanding, in terms of spatial awareness and embodied understanding: Spatial awareness refers to the ability to internalize spatial relationships among objects when observing the
3D world through the 2D image captured by a monocular
camera. Embodied understanding is the ability to relate observed objects egocentrically, foresee the implication of action, and choose the optimal action to achieve the instructed

22453

Moreover, existing works evaluate embodied scene understanding of VLMs primarily on the open-loop VQA
task. Nevertheless, embodied agents, as the name suggests,
should be evaluated in interactive environments with robotic
embodiment to achieve certain goals. DriveVLM [3] surrogates closed-loop evaluation with short-term scene descriptions and planning using observations captured from vehicles driven by humans. However, manual effort is costly,
and there is no VLM-environment interaction. Vista [10]
uses a trained world model for simulation, but the observations generated by the model degrade promptly as the
simulation proceeds. Lastly, safety-critical scenarios are
absent in existing works since they utilize only real-world

