This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data Distributional Properties
As Inductive Bias for Systematic Generalization
Felipe del Rio1 , Alain Raymond-Saez1 , Daniel Florea1 , Rodrigo Toro Icarte1,3 , Julio Hurtado2 ,
Cristian B. Calderon3 , Alvaro Soto1,3
1
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 2 University of Warwick, 3 CENIA
{fidelrio,afraymon,dflorea,rntoro}@uc.cl, julio.hurtado@warwick.ac.uk
cristian.buc@cenia.cl, asoto@ing.puc.cl

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) struggle at systematic
generalization (SG). Several studies have evaluated the possibility of promoting SG through the proposal of novel architectures, loss functions, or training methodologies. Few
studies, however, have focused on the role of training data
properties in promoting SG. In this work, we investigate the
impact of certain data distributional properties, as inductive biases for the SG ability of a multi-modal language
model. To this end, we study three different properties.
First, data diversity, instantiated as an increase in the possible values a latent property in the training distribution may
take. Second, burstiness, where we probabilistically restrict
the number of possible values of latent factors on particular inputs during training. Third, latent intervention, where
a particular latent factor is altered randomly during training. We find that all three factors significantly enhance SG,
with diversity contributing an 89% absolute increase in accuracy in the most affected property. Through a series of
experiments, we test various hypotheses to understand why
these properties promote SG. Finally, we find that Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) between latent attributes
in the training distribution is strongly predictive of out-ofdistribution generalization. We find that a mechanism by
which lower NMI induces SG is in the geometry of representations. In particular, we find that NMI induces more parallelism in neural representations (i.e., input features coded in
parallel neural vectors) of the model, a property related to
the capacity of reasoning by analogy. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/fdelrio89/data-systematic

of) knowledge in ways that allow us to behave effectively
under novel task demands and, more generally, help us
make sense of the world [23, 52].
Importantly, SG depends on prior knowledge or inductive biases upon which agents can rely on [46]. Indeed, inductive biases enable the representing of knowledge in the
form of discrete independent concepts, which can be leveraged for flexible and rapid adaptation to new situations. In
humans, for example, visual perception is strongly biased
towards shapes which aids in recognizing previously unknown objects [25, 28]. This bias helps us reason independently about color, texture, or form, aiding in recognizing
unknown objects regardless of their specific combination of
properties. A child who has seen many horses, for instance,
is likely to infer that a zebra moves similarly to a horse despite their differing colors.
In contrast to empirical observations in humans [13], SG
does not emerge naturally in an i.i.d. setting in deep neural networks (DNNs) [38, 39, 43, 71]. Since training data
is always finite in machine learning, models need built-in
assumptions to generalize to novel inputs. These assumptions, often called inductive biases [27], help guide models toward solutions in situations not seen during training,
and promote model weight configurations (i.e., solutions)
that encourage generalization aligned with specific objectives [8, 76]. Inductive biases can take different forms, such
as constraints over loss functions [41], architectures [51],
pre-training [15], learning [45], or the geometry of representations [34, 70, 72]. However, the role of specific training data distributional properties as inductive biases remains
surprisingly understudied.

1. Introduction

A notable exception to this trend is the study of data
complexity. Indeed, both in terms of patterns and scale,
increasing training data complexity can improve SG in language models [1, 22, 36, 44, 62, 80]. Similarly, within the
realm of vision, augmenting training data with translations
has been shown to improve learned invariances [10]. Nev-

Humans excel at adapting quickly to novel tasks. This feature emerges from our systematic generalization (SG) ability, that is, the flexible recombination of previous (blocks

25590

