This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoPressure: A Dataset for Hand Pressure and Pose Estimation
in Egocentric Vision
Yiming Zhao1∗

Taein Kwon1∗
Paul Streli1∗
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
2
ETH Zürich
Microsoft Spatial AI Lab, Zürich
yiming-zhao.github.io/EgoPressure

Christian Holz1

(i) Mesh

(a) Camera 1

(b) Camera 2

(c) Camera 3

(d) Camera 4

(e) Camera 5

(f) Camera 6

(g) Camera 7

(h) Egocentric Cam. (j) Texture (k) Pressure

Figure 1. The EgoPressure dataset. We introduce a novel egocentric pressure dataset with hand poses. We label hand poses using our
proposed optimization method across all static camera views (Cameras 1–7). The annotated hand mesh aligns well with the egocentric
camera’s view, indicating the high ﬁdelity of our annotations. We project the pressure intensity and annotated hand mesh (Fig. i) to all
camera views (Fig. a to h), and further provide the pressure applied over the hand as a UV texture map (Fig. j and k).

Abstract
Touch contact and pressure are essential for understanding
how humans interact with objects and offer insights that beneﬁt applications in mixed reality and robotics. Estimating
these interactions from an egocentric camera perspective
is challenging, largely due to the lack of comprehensive
datasets that provide both hand poses and pressure annotations. In this paper, we present EgoPressure, an egocentric
dataset that is annotated with high-resolution pressure intensities at contact points and precise hand pose meshes,
obtained via our multi-view, sequence-based optimization
method. We introduce baseline models for estimating applied pressure on external surfaces from RGB images, both
with and without hand pose information, as well as a joint
model for predicting hand pose and the pressure distribution
across the hand mesh. Our experiments show that pressure
and hand pose complement each other in understanding
hand-object interactions.

1. Introduction
Understanding touch during hand-object interaction, especially from an egocentric perspective, is key for augmented
reality (AR) [31, 72], virtual reality (VR) [20, 66], and
* Equal contribution.

robotic manipulation [9, 10, 48]. In AR/VR environments,
touch contact and pressure information allow for more precise control and feedback [8]. For example, a virtual piano
could vary its sound with key pressure, a feature lacking in
current AR/VR systems [50]. Pressure sensing is also crucial
for robots to replicate human grasping, where precise force
estimation remains a challenge [9, 10, 39].
Previous approaches have used gloves [46, 47] and robots
with tactile sensors [39, 80] to capture pressure measurements during object manipulation. However, this instrumentation interferes with natural touch by obstructing tactile
feedback. In contrast, vision-based estimation methods require no instrumentation of the hands, and cameras are already integrated into devices like smart glasses and mixed
reality headsets [21, 22]. Despite this potential, advancements in state-of-the-art models have been limited by the
lack of relevant datasets with contact pressure annotations.
A notable exception is the PressureVision dataset [19] that
comprises RGB footage from four static cameras of hands interacting with a pressure-sensitive surface and corresponding
projected pressure images.
In this paper, we introduce a novel dataset, EgoPressure,
that extends these prior efforts [19, 20] and captures handsurface interactions from an egocentric perspective, complete with pressure maps projected onto the articulated hand
mesh in 3-space. Our capture platform combines a Sensel
Morph touchpad with one head-mounted and seven static

27727

