This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Alias-Free Latent Diffusion Models:
Improving Fractional Shift Equivariance of Diffusion Latent Space
Yifan Zhou1
1

Zeqi Xiao1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

2

Shuai Yang 2

Xingang Pan1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University

{yifan006, zeqi001, xingang.pan}@ntu.edu.sg

williamyang@pku.edu.cn

SD VAE

shift AE latent

AF-VAE
(ours)
shift pixels
SD

SD*
shift LDM noisy
latent
AF-SD*
(ours)
* denotes with cross-frame attention

shift pixels

Figure 1. Visualization of AE and LDM latent shift experiments. Top: we shift the input of an 8× upsampling VAE decoder by 1/8 pixel in
each step. The intermediate output images from Stable Diffusion (SD) VAE appear increasingly blurry. Bottom: we shift the noisy latent
of LDM by 1/8 pixel in each step. Without cross-frame attention, SD struggles to generate consistent results; even with it, we can observe
a “bouncing effect”, where textures initially stick but suddenly shift in subsequent steps. In contrast, our alias-free SD (AF-SD) produces
shift-equivariant results in both experiments, maintaining consistency and clarity across steps.

Abstract

LDM (AF-LDM) achieves strong shift-equivariance and is
also robust to irregular warping. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that AF-LDM produces signiﬁcantly more consistent results than vanilla LDM across various applications, including video editing and image-to-image translation. Code is available at: https://github.com/
SingleZombie/AFLDM

Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) are known to have an
unstable generation process, where even small perturbations or shifts in the input noise can lead to signiﬁcantly
different outputs. This hinders their applicability in applications requiring consistent results. In this work, we
redesign LDMs to enhance consistency by making them
shift-equivariant. While introducing anti-aliasing operations can partially improve shift-equivariance, signiﬁcant
aliasing and inconsistency persist due to the unique challenges in LDMs, including 1) aliasing ampliﬁcation during
VAE training and multiple U-Net inferences, and 2) selfattention modules that inherently lack shift-equivariance.
To address these issues, we redesign the attention modules
to be shift-equivariant and propose an equivariance loss
that effectively suppresses the frequency bandwidth of the
features in the continuous domain. The resulting alias-free

1. Introduction
Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [34] achieve highresolution image synthesis by performing the denoising diffusion process in a compressed latent space obtained via a
VAE [23]. Thanks to the rich image prior learned in LDMs,
they have been broadly adopted in a variety of downstream
applications. For example, LDMs are widely used for video
editing by processing each frame [5, 11, 22, 47, 49, 50, 56].
They can also be ﬁnetuned for image-to-image translation
tasks such as super-resolution [45, 46, 57] and normal es-

34

