This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LightLoc: Learning Outdoor LiDAR Localization at Light Speed
Wen Li1,2 * Chen Liu1,2 * Shangshu Yu3† Dunqiang Liu1,2 Yin Zhou4
Siqi Shen1,2 Chenglu Wen1,2 Cheng Wang1,2†
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 GAC R&D Center

Abstract
Mean Position Error (m)

Absolute Pose Regression

Scene coordinate regression achieves impressive results in
outdoor LiDAR localization but requires days of training.
Since training needs to be repeated for each new scene,
long training times make these impractical for applications requiring time-sensitive system upgrades, such as autonomous driving, drones, robotics, etc. We identify large
coverage areas and vast amounts of data in large-scale outdoor scenes as key challenges that limit fast training. In
this paper, we propose LightLoc, the first method capable
of efficiently learning localization in a new scene at light
speed. Beyond freezing the scene-agnostic feature backbone
and training only the scene-specific prediction heads, we
introduce two novel techniques to address these challenges.
First, we introduce sample classification guidance to assist
regression learning, reducing ambiguity from similar samples and improving training efficiency. Second, we propose
redundant sample downsampling to remove well-learned
frames during training, reducing training time without compromising accuracy. In addition, the fast training and confidence estimation characteristics of sample classification
enable its integration into SLAM, effectively eliminating error accumulation. Extensive experiments on large-scale
outdoor datasets demonstrate that LightLoc achieves stateof-the-art performance with just 1 hour of training—50×
faster than existing methods. Our Code is available at
https://github.com/liw95/LightLoc.

Scene Coordinate Regression

Ours
PointLoc

10

PosePN
8 PoseMinkLoc

STCLoc

PoseSOE
4

PosePN++

NIDALoc
HypLiLoc

2

DiffLoc

SGLoc

LiSA

LightLoc
5

10

15

20

50

55

140

Training Time (hrs.)

Figure 1. LiDAR localization performance vs. training time.
The figure shows the mean position error and training time of several regression-based methods on the QEOxford [2, 17] dataset.
The proposed LightLoc achieves state-of-the-art performance with
significantly reduced training time.

tion methods rely on explicit map usage, matching query
points with a pre-built 3D map [37, 40, 41]. However,
these approaches often demand costly 3D map storage and
high communication overhead. Therefore, regression-based
methods [3, 4, 8, 18, 42] have been proposed to address
these limitations by memorizing the specific scene within
a network. During inference, these methods eliminate the
need for pre-built map matching, thus reducing both storage
and communication requirements. Based on their regression objectives, these methods can be further categorized
into Absolute Pose Regression (APR) [4, 8, 18] and Scene
Coordinate Regression (SCR) [3, 17, 42]. Specifically, APR
directly regresses the poses, while SCR predicts correspondences and uses RANASC [12] to solve the poses. Among
them, SCR explicitly leverages geometric information, embedding scene geometry into its parameters [17], resulting
in higher localization accuracy.
Although SCR performs well, due to training needs to
be repeated for each new scene, long training times make
it impractical for applications. For example, LiSA [42], a
state-of-the-art method achieving 0.95m accuracy, requires

1. Introduction
LiDAR localization aims to estimate the 6-DoF pose of sensors, which is a fundamental component of many applications, e.g., autonomous driving [43] and robotics [49].
Contemporary state-of-the-art LiDAR-based localiza* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

6680

