This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Textual Prompts for Open-World Semi-Supervised Learning
Yuxin Fan
940107765@qq.com

Junbiao Cui
cjb@sxu.edu.cn

Jiye Liang *
ljy@sxu.edu.cn

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of
Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University,
Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, China

Abstract
Traditional semi-supervised learning achieves significant
success in closed-world scenarios. To better align with
the openness of the real world, researchers propose openworld semi-supervised learning (OWSSL), which enables
models to effectively recognize known and unknown classes
even without labels for unknown classes. Recently, researchers have attempted to enhance the model performance in recognizing visually similar classes by integrating textual information. However, these attempts do not
effectively align images with text, resulting in limited improvements in model performance. In response to this challenge, we propose a novel OWSSL method. By adopting
a global-and-local textual prompt learning strategy to enhance image-text alignment effectiveness, and implementing a forward-and-backward strategy to reduce noise in
image-text matching for unlabeled samples, we ultimately
enhance the model’s ability to extract and recognize discriminative features across different classes. Experimental
results on multiple fine-grained datasets demonstrate that
our method achieves significant performance improvements
compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. The environment faced by OWSSL. Unlabeled samples
encompass not only known classes but also unknown ones. The
model must be capable of recognizing samples from all classes
after training.

1. Introduction

[1, 23], enabling the recognition of both known and unknown classes even when labeled samples only partially
represent the classes in the unlabeled samples. Figure 1 depicts the OWSSL scenarios.
A series of efficient OWSSL methods have been proposed [26, 28, 29], but their performance in recognizing visually similar classes is limited. Attempts to improve this by
integrating textual information [15, 30] have not effectively
aligned images with text, constraining the model’s ability
to extract discriminative features across classes. To address
these limitations, we propose a novel OWSSL method that
tackles the follwing two key challenges:

Machine learning, particularly supervised learning, has
seen substantial success across various domains [4, 10,
20], yet high annotation costs restrict its broader adoption [11]. To mitigate this, semi-supervised learning (SSL)
has been introduced [21], leveraging limited labeled samples and abundant unlabeled samples to improve model
performance. Traditional SSL methods excel in closedworld scenarios where all classes are represented in the labeled samples, but they fall short in open-world scenarios
with unknown classes in the unlabeled samples [27]. In
response, open-world SSL (OWSSL) has been proposed
* Corresponding author

1. Enhance the image-text alignment effectiveness. Previous OWSSL methods typically align global visual features with pre-collected textual descriptions, but this process often introduces background noise irrelevant to the
classification task, potentially diminishing the model’s
effectiveness in image-text alignment [9, 30]. To tackle
this challenge, we introduce a global-and-local textual

14756

