This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLOC: Contrastive Learning for Ordinal Classification with Multi-Margin
N-pair Loss
Dileepa Pitawela⌥

Gustavo CarneiroN

Hsiang-Ting Chen⌥

dileepa.pitawela@adelaide.edu.au

g.carneiro@surrey.ac.uk

tim.chen@adelaide.edu.au

⌥

University of Adelaide, Australia

N

CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK

Abstract
In ordinal classification, misclassifying neighboring ranks
is common, yet the consequences of these errors are not
the same. For example, misclassifying benign tumor categories is less consequential, compared to an error at the
pre-cancerous to cancerous threshold, which could profoundly influence treatment choices. Despite this, existing
ordinal classification methods do not account for the varying importance of these margins, treating all neighboring
classes as equally significant. To address this limitation, we
propose CLOC, a new margin-based contrastive learning
method for ordinal classification that learns an ordered representation based on the optimization of multiple margins
with a novel multi-margin n-pair loss (MMNP). CLOC enables flexible decision boundaries across key adjacent categories, facilitating smooth transitions between classes and
reducing the risk of overfitting to biases present in the training data. We provide empirical discussion regarding the
properties of MMNP and show experimental results on five
real-world image datasets (Adience, Historical Colour Image Dating, Knee Osteoarthritis, Indian Diabetic Retinopathy Image, and Breast Carcinoma Subtyping) and one synthetic dataset simulating clinical decision bias. Our results
demonstrate that CLOC outperforms existing ordinal classification methods and show the interpretability and controllability of CLOC in learning meaningful, ordered representations that align with clinical and practical needs.

Likert scales), education (grading proficiency levels), and
finance (credit scoring), where maintaining ordinal relationships is key to deriving meaningful insights that inform actionable decisions [24].
Figure 1 illustrates the impact of various types of classification errors in ordinal contexts. Unlike standard classification problems, in ordinal classification or ranking problems,
not all label mistakes are equal [8, 13, 58]; misclassifications with larger rank differences carry more significant
consequences. For example, they often represent greater
discrepancies in disease severity or treatment needs. Moreover, not all adjacent label mistakes are equally significant; for instance, an error between two benign tumor categories may have less impact compared to a misclassification at the boundary between pre-cancerous and cancerous
stages, where the shift in diagnosis could significantly alter
treatment and management [2, 52]. Similarly, a misclassification between minors and adults would have a larger impact than other adjacent ordinal categories [19], as it could
lead to more substantial legal or social implications.
Existing methods have not been designed to address
both of these challenges. Regression attempts to model
ordered categories, but its single continuous output often
loses the ordinal structure and lacks clear boundaries between ranks [14, 35, 62]. Additionally, its error penalties
are less flexible, as typical regression or models, such as
those minimizing mean squared error, do not inherently account for the ordinal relationships between classes nor allow modification. Ordinal classification methods [8, 40]
are well-suited for tasks involving ordered categories, as
they preserve the ranking structure and focus on maintaining the correct order, rather than merely predicting label
distributions. However, most existing approaches focus on
preserving order and minimizing label overlap in adjacent
ranks, without considering the varying significance of adjacent label errors or examining the impact of margins between ranked labels.
We propose the new Contrastive Learning for Ordinal
Classification (CLOC) method that is based on an optimization that minimizes the novel Multi-Margin N-Pair
(MMNP) loss. The new MMNP loss is a central contribu-

1. Introduction
Ordinal classification, the assignment of data to discrete,
ordered categories, is essential across fields where ranking
impacts key decisions. In healthcare, assessments such as
TNM for cancer staging [22], APACHE for intensive care
[28], and the Glasgow Coma Scale for brain injury [54]
are essential for guiding treatment and predicting outcomes.
This approach is also widely employed in psychology (e.g.,
Code is available at https://github.com/dpitawela/CLOC

15538

