This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViKIENet: Towards Efficient 3D Object Detection with Virtual Key Instance
Enhanced Network
Zhuochen Yu1*
Bijie Qiu1*†
Andy W. H. Khong1,2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 2 Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine
e230005@e.ntu.edu.sg, bijie.qiu@ntu.edu.sg, andykhong@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The sparsity of point clouds and inadequacy of semantic information pose challenges to current LiDAR-only 3D object
detection methods. Recent methods alleviate these challenges by converting RGB images into virtual points via
depth completion to be fused with LiDAR points. Although
these methods have shown outstanding results, they often
introduce significant computation overhead due to the high
density of virtual points and noise due to inaccurate depth
completion. Besides, they do not thoroughly leverage semantic information from images. In this work, we propose the virtual key instance enhanced network (ViKIENet),
a highly efficient and effective multi-modal feature fusion
framework that fuses the features of virtual key instances
(VKIs) and LiDAR points through multiple stages. Our contributions include three main components: semantic key
instance selection (SKIS), virtual-instance-focused fusion
(VIFF), and virtual-instance-to-real attention (VIRA). We
also propose the extended version ViKIENet-R with VIFF-R
which includes rotationally equivariant features. Experiment results show that ViKIENet and ViKIENet-R achieve
significant improvements in detection performance on the
KITTI, JRDB, and nuScenes datasets compared to existing
works. On the KITTI dataset, ViKIENet and ViKIENet-R
operate at 22.7 and 15.0 FPS, respectively. As of CVPR
submission (Nov. 15th , 2024), ViKIENet ranks first on the
car detection and orientation estimation leaderboard, while
ViKIENet-R ranks second (compared with officially published papers) on the 3D car detection leaderboard.

Figure 1. The proposed ViKIENet and ViKIENet-R significantly
accelerate the virtual-point-based methods (VP Methods) while
enhancing performance to be close to or surpassing the state-ofthe-art in 3D, BEV and 2D object detection, and orientation estimation. (More details are presented in Tables 2 and 4).

1. Introduction

LiDAR-based 3D object detection can obtain accurate depth
measurements of point clouds [8, 24, 30, 38, 43, 44], it suffers from sparse sampling density in the scans. RGB images, on the other hand, possess structured and dense data
and can provide richer semantic information to distinguish
objects from backgrounds.
Sensor fusion methods have been proposed to fuse complementary information arising from RGB images and LiDAR point clouds for 3D object detection [13, 14, 18, 22,
32]. In particular, early methods combined semantic information derived from cameras with LiDAR point clouds
without addressing the sparsity issue [27]. To this end,
virtual/pseudo-point-based methods [31, 40] such as the
multi-modal sparse fuse dense framework (SFD) [33] gen-

The prevalence of deep learning and autonomous systems
over the past decade has led to the rapid development of 3D
object detection methods [6, 7, 17, 21, 25, 33, 39]. Although
* Equal technical contribution
† Corresponding author

11844

