This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Graph Neural Network Combining Event Stream and Periodic Aggregation for
Low-Latency Event-based Vision
Manon Dampfhoffer1 , Thomas Mesquida1 , Damien Joubert2 , Thomas Dalgaty1 ,
Pascal Vivet1 , Christoph Posch2
1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, List, F-38000 Grenoble, France. 2 Prophesee, Paris, France.
{manon.dampfhoffer, thomas.mesquida}@cea.fr cposch@prophesee.ai

Abstract

Event camera
~10s of 𝝁s

Event-based cameras asynchronously detect changes in
light intensity with high temporal resolution, making them
a promising alternative to RGB camera for low-latency and
low-power optical flow estimation. However, state-of-theart convolutional neural network methods create frames
from the event stream, therefore losing the opportunity to
exploit events for both sparse computations and low-latency
prediction. On the other hand, asynchronous event graph
methods could leverage both, but at the cost of avoiding
any form of time accumulation, which limits the prediction
accuracy. In this paper, we propose to break this accuracylatency trade-off with a novel architecture combining an
asynchronous accumulation-free event branch and a periodic aggregation branch. The periodic branch performs
feature aggregations on the event graphs of past data to
extract global context information, which improves accuracy without introducing any latency. The solution could
predict optical flow per event with a latency of tens of microseconds on asynchronous hardware, which represents a
gain of three orders of magnitude with respect to state-ofthe-art frame-based methods, with 48x less operations per
second. We show that the solution can detect rapid motion
changes faster than a periodic output. This work proposes,
for the first time, an effective solution for ultra low-latency
and low-power optical flow prediction from event cameras.

Event graph
~10s of 𝝁s

RGB camera (frame duration)
~ 10s of ms

Periodic
Aggregator

Frame-based method compute
~ 10s of ms
time

Motion Event Optical Flow
change prediction (ours)

Frame-based Optical
Flow prediction

Figure 1. Ultra-low latency optical flow prediction with asynchronous event graph neural networks and periodic aggregator.

frames. However, the latency of the optical flow prediction is limited, both by the frame rate of the sensor and the
computational time of the prediction algorithm. Therefore,
rapid motion changes cannot be detected during this blind
time, which can be critical in some real-time applications
such as navigation [12]. The latency of the sensor can be decreased by increasing the frame rate, which comes at a high
computational cost and can cause bandwidth problems.
Event cameras are a promising alternative to RGB cameras in this context [11]. The pixels of event cameras
function asynchronously and produce an event whenever
a change in the light intensity is detected, at a temporal
resolution of microseconds [17]. Therefore, they are particularly adapted for detecting fast motion changes with
low latency. However, state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks (CNN) cannot handle the asynchronous flow
of events and construct frames from events [7, 9, 13, 20,
21, 24, 30, 33, 38], loosing the opportunity to exploit the
event information at low latency. Moreover, state-of-the-art
methods are computationally-expensive [13, 20], limiting
real-time implementation on embedded hardware with constrained resources.
Therefore, the concept of event graphs (based on Graph

1. Introduction
Optical flow is the apparent relative motion of objects and
surfaces in a scene (which could come from the motion of
an object or from the observer itself) and is used in many
downstream computer vision tasks, such as video stabilization [35], virtual reality [25], navigation [36] and obstacle
avoidance [32]. Using an RGB camera, it can be measured as the pixel’s displacement between two consecutive

6909

