This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Molmo and PixMo:
Open Weights and Open Data
for State-of-the-Art Vision-Language Models
Matt Deitke→†ω Christopher Clark→† Sangho Lee† Rohun Tripathi† Yue Yang†ε
Jae Sung Parkω Mohammadreza Salehiω Niklas Muennighoff† Kyle Lo† Luca Soldaini†
Jiasen Lu† Taira Anderson† Erin Bransom† Kiana Ehsani† Huong Ngo†
YenSung Chen† Ajay Patelε Mark Yatskarε Chris Callison-Burchε Andrew Headε
Rose Hendrix† Favyen Bastani† Eli VanderBilt† Nathan Lambert† Yvonne Chou†
Arnavi Chheda† Jenna Sparks† Sam Skjonsberg† Michael Schmitz† Aaron Sarnat†
Byron Bischoff† Pete Walsh† Chris Newell† Piper Wolters† Tanmay Gupta† Kuo-Hao Zeng†
Jon Borchardt† Dirk Groeneveld† Crystal Nam† Sophie Lebrecht† Caitlin Wittlif†
Carissa Schoenick† Oscar Michel† Ranjay Krishna†ω Luca Weihs†
Noah A. Smith†ω Hannaneh Hajishirzi†ω Ross Girshick†ω Ali Farhadi†ω Aniruddha Kembhavi†ω
†

Allen Institute for AI

ω

University of Washington

Abstract

ε

University of Pennsylvania

Sonnet—produce comprehensive image descriptions and
accurately answer complex visual questions. Unfortunately, the most performant of these vision-language models (VLMs) remain proprietary with neither model weights,
data, nor code being publicly released.
To foster scientific exploration, numerous research efforts have attempted to reproduce similar capabilities in
open models. Early works, exemplified by LLaVA [69],
produced fully open weights and training data but now
lag significantly behind the state-of-the-art. More recent,
stronger open-weight models have trended towards less
open data: the training data may either be proprietary
(e.g., [10]) or, in cases where it is released, there is a heavy
reliance on synthetic data generated by proprietary systems,
e.g., models are trained on datasets like ShareGPT4V [15]
which uses GPT-4V [88] to generate a large set of detailed
image captions. The resulting VLMs, therefore, are effectively distillations of proprietary VLMs. As it stands, the
scientific community is missing foundational knowledge
about how to build performant VLMs from scratch (more
discussion about this and related work are in the Appendix).
In this work, we present the Molmo (Multimodal Open
Language Model) family of state-of-the-art open VLMs
with released model weights and released vision-language
training data without any reliance on synthetic data from
other VLMs, including proprietary ones. The success of
our approach relies on careful model design choices, a welltuned training pipeline, and most critically, the quality of
our new datasets, collectively named PixMo (Pixels for
Molmo), which are fully open.
High-quality multimodal data, both for pre-training and

Today’s most advanced vision-language models (VLMs) remain proprietary. The strongest open-weight models rely
heavily on synthetic data from proprietary VLMs to achieve
good performance, effectively distilling these closed VLMs
into open ones. As a result, the community has been missing foundational knowledge about how to build performant
VLMs from scratch. We present Molmo, a new family of
VLMs that are state-of-the-art in their class of openness.
Our key contribution is a collection of new datasets called
PixMo, including a dataset of highly detailed image captions for pre-training, a free-form image Q&A dataset for
fine-tuning, and an innovative 2D pointing dataset, all collected without the use of external VLMs. The success of
our approach relies on careful modeling choices, a welltuned training pipeline, and, most critically, the quality of
our newly collected datasets. Our best-in-class 72B model
not only outperforms others in the class of open weight
and data models, but also outperforms larger proprietary
models including Claude 3.5 Sonnet, and Gemini 1.5 Pro
and Flash, second only to GPT-4o based on both academic
benchmarks and on a large human evaluation. Our model
weights, new datasets, and source code are available at
https://molmo.allenai.org/blog.

1. Introduction
Large multimodal models are used ubiquitously today. Proprietary models—GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5 Pro, Claude 3.5
→ Equal contribution

91

