This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual SFT Matches Multimodal RLHF with Negative Supervision
Ke Zhu1,2∗

Yu Wang2 * Yanpeng Sun2,3 Qiang Chen2 Jiangjiang Liu2
Gang Zhang2 Jingdong Wang2†
1
Nanjing University 2 Baidu
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

zhuk@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {wangyu106,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
Multimodal RLHF usually happens after supervised finetuning (SFT) stage to continually improve vision-language
models’ (VLMs) comprehension. Conventional wisdom
holds its superiority over continual SFT during this preference alignment stage. In this paper, we observe that the inherent value of multimodal RLHF lies in its negative supervision, the logit of the rejected responses. We thus propose a
novel negative supervised finetuning (nSFT) approach that
fully excavates these information resided. Our nSFT disentangles this negative supervision in RLHF paradigm, and
continually aligns VLMs with a simple SFT loss. This is
more memory efficient than multimodal RLHF where 2 (e.g.,
DPO) or 4 (e.g., PPO) large VLMs are strictly required. The
effectiveness of nSFT is rigorously proved by comparing it
with various multimodal RLHF approaches, across different dataset sources, base VLMs and evaluation metrics. Besides, fruitful of ablations are provided to support our hypothesis. Code will be found in https://github.com/Kevinzcode/nSFT/.

1. Introduction
Large vision-language models (VLMs) emerged [15, 42]
thanks to the intelligence of large language models (LLMs).
Typically, such models [4, 8, 13] usually experience a pretraning stage with diverse image-text pairs before supervised finetuned (SFT) in a multitask fashion [13, 25, 40].
The successful application of reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF, also called preference alignment) in LLM [23, 26, 37] has shed light on vision-language
areas [9, 21, 29, 44], which aims to further leverage VLMs’
multimodal comprehension ability after the standard SFT
stage and to reduce potential image hallucinations.
A widespread belief in multimodal RLHF is they all as* Equal Contributions
† Corresponding Author

Win

≻

DPO Train

Reference model
Training Data

SFT Train

s

Compare

Win

Policy model

Lose

Lose

Negative
Demonstration

SFT model

Figure 1. Standard DPO training pipeline (in the first row) and our
proposed nSFT (in the second row).

sume the inferiority of SFT during this preference alignment process [3, 21, 44]. They evidently shows that continual SFT falls short in addressing image-level hallucination [44] and are becoming less effective in data utilization [3, 21]. These opinions holds true, as also demonstrated in our quantitative experiments in Fig. 2c (e.g.,
‘Cont. SFT’ vs ‘DPO’). However, we found practically that
multimodal RLHF is not as perfect as it does, since it will
face GPU memory shortage [44] and usually confronts unstable training issue [29].
In this paper, we aim to address the following question:
is multimodal RLHF indeed superior than continual SFT
during preference alignment? Through theoretical analysis
in gradient and optimization aspects, we find key success
of multimodal RLHF (e.g., DPO [23]) mostly attributes to
the negative supervision in the rejected responses, whereas
naive continual SFT fails to capture.
Based on this discovery, this paper proposes a novel negative supervied finetuning (nSFT) pipeline that continually
aligns VLMs with a simple SFT loss. Specifically, an LLM
(e.g., GPT-4) is adopted to identify the misaligned details in
the negative supervision, by referring to a large vision error codebook that contains both instance- and image-level
error. The LLM then constructs a new conversation talk-

14615

