This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Discovery of Facial Landmarks and Head Pose
Satyajit Tourani∗1
1

Arif Mahmood4

Siddharth Tourani∗2,3

Muhammad Haris Khan2

IIIT Hyderabad, 2 MBZUAI, 3 University of Heidelberg, 4 Information Technology University of the Punjab, * equal contribution
{tourani.satyajit,tourani.siddharth}@gmail.com, arif.mahmood@itu.edu.pk,muhammad.haris@mbzuai.ac.ae

Figure 1. (a) Qualitative comparison of detected landmarks. (b) Normalized Mean Error (NME) v/s Training time comparison. Our
method achieves lower NME with 3.9× training time speedup. (c) Comparison of correctly detected landmarks (within 10% of interocular
distance). (d) Our method generalizes well to different domains including anime, Pixar and Arcane style images.

Abstract

Moreover, our method provides a significant training speedup over the existing best unsupervised landmark detection
method. 1

Unsupervised landmark and head pose estimation is fundamental in fields like biometrics, augmented reality, and
emotion recognition, offering accurate spatial data without
relying on labeled datasets. It enhances scalability, adaptability, and generalization across diverse settings, where
manual labeling is costly. In this work we exploit Stable Diffusion to approach the challenging problem of unsupervised
landmarks and head pose estimation and make following
contributions. (a) We propose a semantic-aware landmark
localization algorithm including a consistent landmarks selection technique. (b) To encode landmarks and their holistic configuration, we propose learning image-aware textual
embedding. (c) A novel algorithm for landmarks-guided
3D head pose estimation is also proposed. (d) We refine
the landmarks using head pose by innovating a 3D rendering based augmentation and pose-based batching technique while the refined landmarks, consequently improving the head pose. (e) We report a new state-of-the-art in
unsupervised facial landmark estimation across five challenging datasets including AFLW2000, MAFL, Cat-Heads,
LS3D and a facial landmark tracking benchmark 300VW.
In unsupervised head pose estimation, we outperform existing methods on BIWI and AFLW2000 by visible margins.

1. Introduction
Landmarks carry essential information about an object’s
shape and spatial arrangement in 3D, particularly for flexible objects like the human face or body [38]. For example,
facial landmarks are useful for downstream tasks, such as
3D face reconstruction [30, 62], face recognition [18, 43]
and face-related applications [24, 32]. Traditionally, research in landmark detection has focused on developing
supervised methods [2, 6, 21, 27, 39], leveraging datasets
with human-labeled annotations. Acquiring such annotations for various object types are often quite costly and
labour-intensive [2]. Akin to other computer vision areas,
this has led to devising unsupervised learning methods for
object landmarks detection [1, 17, 37, 47].
Learning landmarks without human supervision presents
notable challenges for several reasons. Landmarks are indexed by spatial locations, however, they encode complex
semantic information about the underlying objects [47].

21192

1 Code available at: https://github.com/touranisatyajit/cvpr2025-uldheadpose

