This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniStereo: Real-time Omnidireactional Depth Estimation with Multiview
Fisheye Cameras

1

Jiaxi Deng1 * Yushen Wang1 * Haitao Meng2 Zuoxun Hou3 Yi Chang4 Gang Chen1†
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
3
Beijing Institute of Space Mechanics and Electricity, Beijing, China
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{dengjx25, wangysh35}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, haitao.meng@tum.de
hzx 007xjtu@163.com, yichang@hust.edu.cn, cheng83@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Error

Fast and reliable omnidirectional 3D sensing is essential
to many applications such as autonomous driving, robotics
and drone navigation. While many well-recognized methods have been developed to produce high-quality omnidirectional 3D information, they are too slow for real-time
computation, limiting their feasibility in practical applications. Motivated by these shortcomings, we propose an efficient omnidirectional depth sensing framework, called OmniStereo, which generates high-quality 3D information in
real-time. Unlike prior works, OmniStereo employs Cassini
projection to simplify the photometric matching and introduces a lightweight stereo matching network to minimize
computational overhead. Additionally, OmniStereo proposes a novel fusion method to handle depth discontinuities and invalid pixels complemented by a refinement module to reduce mapping-introduced errors and recover fine
details. As a result, OmniStereo achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) accuracy, surpassing the second-best method over
32% in MAE, while maintaining real-time efficiency. It operates more than 16.5× faster than the second-best method
in accuracy on TITAN RTX, achieving 12.3 FPS on embedded device Jetson AGX Orin, underscoring its suitability for real-world deployment. The code is available at
https://github.com/DengJiaxi1/OmniStereo.

70
40
30
20
10
0

●

OmniMVS+

●

MODE

●

FastOmniMVS

●

CrownConv

●

Sphere-Stereo

●

OmniMVS+Tiny

★

Ours OmniStereo

10 20 30 40
FPS

80

Figure 1. The MAE versus runtime for various methods on the
Urban dataset using TITAN RTX GPU.

nidirectional 3D information to detect and avoid surrounding obstacles for operational safety. To achieve omnidirectional 3D information, solutions such as using LiDARs [18]
and multiple sets of stereo cameras [13, 37] are widely
adopted. However, the former are generally either expensive and bulky or can only produce sparse 3D scans without vision appearance information. The latter suffers from
practical issues of the size and cost of the multiple cameras
or blind spots between different lenses. Compared to these
solutions, using a small number of fisheye cameras can significantly reduce system weight and cost. Therefore, omnidirectional depth sensing from multiple fisheye cameras has
received considerable research attention in the community.
The complex geometric constraints and image distortions of fisheye cameras pose challenges for omnidirectional depth estimation. To address this issue, many wellrecognized approaches [11, 15, 26, 28] that adopt deep convolutional neural networks to improve accuracy and robustness have been proposed in the literature. Despite significant progress in this domain, there is still a large gap between performance and accuracy when computing full om-

1. Introduction
Omnidirectional depth sensing enables full environmental 3D geometry awareness with a 360° panoramic view
in many applications such as autonomous driving [29],
robotics [36], and drone navigation [5]. In navigation systems for autonomous vehicles, it is essential to obtain om* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1003

