This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial-Temporal Graph Diffusion Policy with Kinematic Modeling for
Bimanual Robotic Manipulation
Qi Lv1,2,3

Hao Li1,3 Xiang Deng1† Rui Shao1 Yinchuan Li3 Jianye Hao3
Longxiang Gao4 Michael Yu Wang2 Liqiang Nie1†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
School of Engineering, Greate Bay University 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
lvqi@stu.hit.edu.cn, dengxiang@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the signiﬁcant success of imitation learning in
robotic manipulation, its application to bimanual tasks
remains highly challenging. Existing approaches mainly
learn a policy to predict a distant next-best end-effector
pose (NBP) and then compute the corresponding joint rotation angles for motion using inverse kinematics. However,
they suffer from two important issues: (1) rarely considering the physical robotic structure, which may cause selfcollisions or interferences, and (2) overlooking the kinematics constraint, which may result in the predicted poses
not conforming to the actual limitations of the robot joints.
In this paper, we propose Kinematics enhanced SpatialTemporAl gRaph Diffuser (KStar Diffuser). Speciﬁcally,
(1) to incorporate the physical robot structure information
into action prediction, KStar Diffuser maintains a dynamic
spatial-temporal graph according to the physical bimanual
joint motions at continuous timesteps. This dynamic graph
serves as the robot-structure condition for denoising the actions; (2) to make the NBP learning objective consistent
with kinematics, we introduce the differentiable kinematics
to provide the reference for optimizing KStar Diffuser. This
module regularizes the policy to predict more reliable and
kinematics-aware next end-effector poses. Experimental results show that our method effectively leverages the physical structural information and generates kinematics-aware
actions in both simulation and real-world.

1. Introduction
Bimanual manipulation [34, 36, 42, 45] represents a fundamental capability for robotic systems to perform com∗ This work was done when Qi Lv and Hao Li were intern at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab. † Corresponding author

   

Figure 1. The self-collision problem in bimanual manipulation
tasks due to overlooking the robotic structure.

plex tasks requiring two-arm coordination. While imitation
learning has demonstrated remarkable success in single-arm
manipulation [6, 7, 33], its extension to bimanual scenarios
faces unique challenges as robots need to coordinate dualarm movements while conforming to physical constraints.
These challenges signiﬁcantly impact the reliability and
feasibility of predicted actions in real-world applications.
A straightforward approach [9, 10, 13, 55, 56, 58] would
be to learn the entire motion trajectory by predicting joint
positions at consecutive timesteps. However, this poses signiﬁcant challenges as trajectories are typically long and difﬁcult to learn. Therefore, mainstream approaches [15, 17,
31, 44] typically adopt a two-stage pipeline: ﬁrst predicting the next-best end-effector pose (NBP), then computing
joint rotations through inverse kinematics [21, 26]. However, the dominant NBP-based approaches, though simplify
the learning process, often lead to unreliable motion generation. Concretely, the predicted poses may violate physical
structure constraints [27, 43], causing potential arm collisions, or exceeding joint limits due to inadequate consideration of kinematic feasibility, as Figure 1 illustrated.
In real-world bimanual manipulation tasks, existing ap-

17394

