This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

No Pains, More Gains:
Recycling Sub-Salient Patches for Efﬁcient High-Resolution Image Recognition
Rong Qin1 , Xin Liu1 , Xingyu Liu1 , Jiaxuan Liu1 , Jinglei Shi1,5 , Liang Lin2,4 , Jufeng Yang1,2,3 *
1

VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.
2

3

Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.

Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN·FUTIAN), Shenzhen, China.
4

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
5

Key Lab of SCCI, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China.

qinrong nk@mail.nankai.edu.cn, xinliu 0209@163.com
xingyu liu2002@163.com, jxliu1999@163.com
jinglei.shi@nankai.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction

Over the last decade, many notable methods have emerged
to tackle the computational resource challenge of the high
resolution image recognition (HRIR). They typically focus
on identifying and aggregating a few salient regions for
classiﬁcation, discarding sub-salient areas for low training consumption. Nevertheless, many HRIR tasks necessitate the exploration of wider regions to model objects
and contexts, which limits their performance in such scenarios. To address this issue, we present a DBPS strategy to enable training with more patches at low consumption. Speciﬁcally, in addition to a fundamental buffer that
stores the embeddings of most salient patches, DBPS further employs an auxiliary buffer to recycle those sub-salient
ones. To reduce the computational cost associated with
gradients of sub-salient patches, these patches are primarily used in the forward pass to provide sufﬁcient information for classiﬁcation. Meanwhile, only the gradients of
the salient patches are back-propagated to update the entire
network. Moreover, we design a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) architecture that leverages aggregated information from salient patches to ﬁlter out uninformative background within sub-salient patches for better accuracy. Besides, we introduce the random patch drop to accelerate
training process and uncover informative regions. Experiment results demonstrate the superiority of our method in
terms of both accuracy and training consumption against
other advanced methods. The code is available in the
https://github.com/Qinrong-NKU/DBPS.

* Corresponding author.

14965

(a) Original Pavement Image

(b) Salient Patches

(c) Salient and Sub-Salient Patches

(d) Pavement Distress Recognition

Figure 1. In the pavement image (a) of CQU-BPDD dataset [47],
a small number of salient patches (b) are insufﬁcient for modeling the distress object and corresponding context. The introduction of sub-salient patches (c) supplements the context for better prediction. As shown in (d), our method utilizes both salient
and sub-salient patches for signiﬁcant accuracy gains while maintaining low training consumption. The ‘IPS-M‘ indicates the IPSTransformer trained with M patches and ‘Ours-M-S‘ indicates our
model optimized with M salient patches and S sub-salient ones.

High resolution images exceeding megapixel have found
extensive real-world applications, with HRIR offering signiﬁcant beneﬁts across various domains [4]. For instance,
it aids autopilot systems in accurately identifying distant
small trafﬁc signs [44] and assists doctors in making diagnoses based on gigapixel medical images. Despite re-

