This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Semantic Guidance for Open Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Zhengyang Wang1

Tingliang Feng1
Fan Lyu2
Wei Feng1
Liang Wan1 *

Fanhua Shang1

1 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2 New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

{zywang 01, fengtl, fhshang, wfeng, lwan}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

fan.lyu@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation aims to enable models to segment arbitrary categories. Currently,
though pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like
CLIP have established a robust foundation for this task
by learning to match text and image representations from
large-scale data, their lack of pixel-level recognition necessitates further ﬁne-tuning. Most existing methods leverage
text as a guide to achieve pixel-level recognition. However, the inherent biases in text semantic descriptions and
the lack of pixel-level supervisory information make it challenging to ﬁne-tune CLIP-based models effectively. This paper considers leveraging image-text data to simultaneously
capture the semantic information contained in both image
and text, thereby constructing Dual Semantic Guidance and
corresponding pixel-level pseudo annotations. Particularly,
the visual semantic guidance is enhanced via explicitly exploring foreground regions and minimizing the inﬂuence of
background. The dual semantic guidance is then jointly utilized to ﬁne-tune CLIP-based segmentation models, achieving decent ﬁne-grained recognition capabilities. As the
comprehensive evaluation shows, our method outperforms
state-of-art results with large margins, on eight commonly
used datasets with/without background.

task. Currently, several approaches [6–10] train segmentation models based on VLMs using image-text data which
is rich in semantic information. This enables the models
to acquire ﬁne-grained segmentation capabilities while retaining their generalization ability across open-vocabulary
categories, which provides a promising strategy for tackling
semantic segmentation tasks in open-vocabulary scenarios.
Let’s look deeper in open-vocabulary semantic segmentation tasks utilizing VLMs: the core principle involves
aligning pixel-level features with text embeddings, and assigning each pixel a category based on these alignments.
Currently, some methods [6, 8] trained on image-text data
rely on the VLM model’s ability to align part of images
with the complete texts, establishing weak constraints for
segmentation training. In contrast to employing complete
texts, some methods [7, 9] attempt to extract nouns from
texts to obtain category semantic information that matches
local regions in images. However, nouns lacking detailed
descriptions can suffer from “Inherent biases”, which arise
from the semantic disparity between coarse-grained text and
corresponding images. In image-text data, the nouns in text
often offers coarse-grained information, where ”cat” and
”dog” are both labeled as ”animal” (Fig 1.a), yet there are
substantial differences in image level. Moreover, some existing methods [6, 9] lack the pixel-level semantic supervisory information to ﬁne-tune VLMs. As a result, poorly
segmented images can still align with the corresponding text
well, as shown in Fig 1.b.
In this paper, we denote the semantic information used
for matching images pixels as semantic guidance. We
identify that the crucial factor in improving the model’s
ﬁne-grained segmentation performance is the establishment
of granular semantic guidance (at both text and image level)
and accurate segmentation annotations. To acquire more
precise semantic guidance and segmentation labels, we explore the feasibility of extracting semantic guidance from
images which are abundant in semantic content. The most
direct form is the various instances within an image, as these
instances provide an unbiased semantic representation of
the corresponding regions. By utilizing foundation models
such as SAM [11], we can efﬁciently extract a large amount

1. Introduction
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation (OVSS) aims to
segment arbitrary categories in open environments, distinguishing itself from traditional semantic segmentation [1–
3], which operates within a predeﬁned set of categories. Recently, Visual-Language Models (VLMs) such as CLIP [4]
and Align [5] demonstrate exceptional capabilities in aligning textual descriptions with corresponding images, making them highly suitable for open-vocabulary tasks. However, these VLMs with image-level visual-text alignment
lack ﬁne-grained expressive power, resulting in poor segmentation precision when directly applied to the OVSS
* Liang Wan is the corresponding author of this paper.

20212

