This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GASP: Gaussian Avatars with Synthetic Priors
Jack Saunders*
University of Bath

Charlie Hewitt
Microsoft

Yiye Chen*
Georgia Institute of Technology
Nicholas Gydé
Microsoft
Input Data

Yanan Jian
Microsoft

Darren Cosker
Microsoft and University of Bath
Vinay P. Namboodiri
University of Bath

Tadas Baltrušaitis
Microsoft
Virginia Estellers
Microsoft

Benjamin E. Lundell
Microsoft

Real-time 360˚ free-viewpoint rendering

Avatar
Enrollment

Single image or monocular video

Marek Kowalski
Microsoft

Synthetic Prior

…

𝒟𝒟

.
.
.

Figure 1. We propose GASP, a novel model for creating photorealistic, real-time, animatable, 360◦ avatars from easily-captured data. We
train a generative prior model of Gaussian Avatars on Synthetic data. The prior allows our model to be fit using a single image or a short
video with the prior accounting for the unseen views. This lets users create their avatar with only a webcam or smartphone.

Abstract
Gaussian Splatting has changed the game for real-time
photo-realistic rendering. One of the most popular applications of Gaussian Splatting is to create animatable avatars,
known as Gaussian Avatars. Recent works have pushed
the boundaries of quality and rendering efficiency but suffer from two main limitations. Either they require expensive
multi-camera rigs to produce avatars with free-viewpoint
rendering, or they can be trained with a single camera but
only rendered at high quality from this fixed viewpoint. An
ideal model would be trained using a short monocular video
or image from available hardware, such as a webcam, and
rendered from any view. To this end, we propose GASP:
Gaussian Avatars with Synthetic Priors. To overcome the
limitations of existing datasets, we exploit the pixel-perfect
nature of synthetic data to train a Gaussian Avatar prior. By
* Work conducted while at Microsoft.

fitting this prior model to a single photo or video and finetuning it, we get a high-quality Gaussian Avatar, which supports 360◦ rendering. Our prior is only required for fitting,
not inference, enabling real-time applications. Through our
method, we obtain high-quality, animatable Avatars from
limited data which can be animated and rendered at 70fps
on commercial hardware.

1. Introduction
Creating high-quality digital humans unlocks significant
potential for many applications, including Virtual Reality,
gaming, video conferencing, and entertainment. Digital humans must be photorealistic, easy to capture and capable of
real-time rendering. The vision and graphics communities
have long worked towards this goal, and we are rapidly approaching the point where such digital humans are possible.
A series of works based first on NeRFs [30] raised the

271

