This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CTRL-O: Language-Controllable Object-Centric Visual Representation
Learning
Aniket Didolkar1,2∗ Andrii Zadaianchuk3∗† Rabiul Awal1,2 *
Maximilian Seitzer4 Efstratios Gavves3,5
Aishwarya Agrawal1,2†
1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 2 Université de Montréal
3
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 4 University of Tübingen
5
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
https://ctrl-o-paper.github.io

Standard OCL

Abstract

Slot 2

Object-centric representation learning aims to decompose
visual scenes into fixed-size vectors called “slots” or “object
files”, where each slot captures a distinct object. Current
state-of-the-art object-centric models have shown remarkable success in object discovery in diverse domains, including complex real-world scenes. However, these models suffer
from a key limitation: they lack controllability. Specifically,
current object-centric models learn representations based
on their preconceived understanding of objects, without allowing user input to guide which objects are represented.
Introducing controllability into object-centric models could
unlock a range of useful capabilities, such as the ability to
extract instance-specific representations from a scene. In
this work, we propose a novel approach for user-directed
control over slot representations by conditioning slots on
language descriptions. The proposed C ON TR O L LABLE
O BJECT- CENTRIC REPRESENTATION LEARNING approach,
which we term CTRL-O, achieves targeted object-language
binding in complex real-world scenes without requiring mask
supervision. Next, we apply these controllable slot representations on two downstream vision language tasks: textto-image generation and visual question answering. The
proposed approach enables instance-specific text-to-image
generation and also achieves strong performance on visual
question answering.

1. Introduction
Object-centric representation learning aims to decompose
a visual scene into its constituent entities or objects and
represent each entity as a distinct vector called a slot.
Slot-based representations are inherently compositional
* denotes equal contribution, order is determined by flipping a coin
† denotes equal advising contributions

CTRL-O

Slot 1

Slot 3

❌ No semantic label
❌ No control

Object
Discovery

Mountain

Visual Question Answering

Sky

Image Generation

Sun

Object Discovery

✅ Semantic Control

Multimodal
Applications

Labels

Figure 1. Left: Standard object-centric learning (OCL) assigns
arbitrary slots with no control. Right: CTRL-O introduces
language-based control, enabling specific object targeting and
multimodal applications.

and support many complex downstream tasks such as
dynamics modeling [13, 32, 47], control [6, 7, 17, 53],
and reasoning [1, 30]. Moreover, studies in cognitive
neuroscience [37, 44] have shown that human perception
uses mechanisms akin to slot-based representations.
Existing unsupervised object-centric models [6, 10, 11,
29, 32, 42] can successfully decompose complex real-world
visual scenes. However, they face a fundamental limitation:
they lack control over the object representations. While these
models expose control over the number of scene parts, they
do not allow users to extract specific object representations
within a scene (e.g., specified by user queries in the form
of language or position markers). For instance, a user can
specify that a scene should be decomposed into K slots, but
they cannot direct a given slot to bind to a particular object
of interest such as “a cat” or “a black purse”.
This lack of control over the semantic content of the representation can be limiting, as this restricts the model always to
extract a fixed decomposition of a scene based on its own preconceived understanding of objects and parts. Such rigidity
can be problematic for applications that require representations at varying granularity, such as extracting the representation of a car wheel instead of the entire car, or vice versa.
Moreover, many downstream tasks may require or benefit
from the knowledge of the semantic content in the slots. Due
to the unsupervised nature of existing models, there is no way

29523

