This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Theory of Learning Unified Model via Knowledge Integration from Label Space
Varying Domains
Dexuan Zhang1
Thomas Westfechtel1
1
The University of Tokyo,

2

Tatsuya Harada1,2
RIKEN

{dexuan.zhang, thomas, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Existing domain adaptation systems can hardly be applied
to real-world problems with new classes presenting at deployment time, especially regarding source-free scenarios
where multiple source domains do not share the label space
despite being given a few labeled target data. To address
this, we consider a challenging problem: multi-source semisupervised open-set domain adaptation and propose a learning theory via joint error, effectively tackling strong domain
shift. To generalize the algorithm into source-free cases,
we introdcue a computationally efficient and architectureflexible attention-based feature generation module. Extensive experiments on various data sets demonstrate the significant improvement of our proposed algorithm over baselines.

1. Introduction
Generally, a supervised learning algorithm trained on a particular distribution of labeled samples (source domain) often
fails to generalize when deployed on a new environment (target domain) in the presence of domain shift. In this regard,
Domain adaptation (DA) [1] algorithms address the domainshift problem by aligning the data distributions of the source
and target domains through learning a domain-invariant feature space using statistical or adversarial learning approaches,
which have made remarkable success. However, the problem
setting still needs to be relaxed for real-world applications
when we aim to integrate the knowledge learned from multiple source domains. Current DA methods can hardly cover
the case for varying label space across domains, and the corresponding learning theory has yet to be proposed. Moreover,
the solution is limited if this heterogeneous domain setting is
extended to source-free situations where each source model
may be trained on different network architectures and the
label space. This work tackles a challenging multi-source
semi-supervised open-set domain adaptation paradigm with
varying label space, illustrated in Fig. 1.

In general, multi-source DA (MSDA) [45] and semisupervised DA (SSDA) [41] are regarded as more practical
than the single-source DA setup, considering that labeled
data may come from various domains. More precisely, in
these cases, the labeled samples can be differently distributed
among themselves in addition to the usual domain shit between the source and the target domains. One naive approach
to MSDA and SSDA is to group all labeled data into a single
domain and deploy any unsupervised DA (UDA) method.
However, such a trivial solution may lead to sub-optimal
classification due to the gaps among labeled data [41].
Most DA techniques assume the same label space in
source and target domains, usually called the closed-set setting. The paradigm of closed-set DA has been substantially
explored in the literature for UDA [11, 32, 33, 39, 47, 62, 64],
SSDA [23, 37, 41, 43, 59, 61], and MSDA [19, 36, 51, 53,
57, 65, 67]. In contrast, the open-set DA (OSDA) [4] setting
allows the presence of target-specific classes in addition to
the shared classes. Such an open-set arrangement is more
challenging due to a huge label shift across domains. The
closed-set DA techniques cannot be directly applied in this
case since these target-specific open-set samples, in turn,
may jeopardize the domain alignment process. This work
formalizes a more generalized problem where source domains may not share the label space, and the unlabeled target
domain additionally contains novel classes.
Motivated by these, we consider a learning scenario in
this work as the multi-source semi-supervised open-set DA
(MSODA) where each source domain has a diverse label
space, the labeled target domain consists of a few-shot of
target data whose label space, i.e., the known class, is a
superset of any source label space, and the unlabeled target
domain contains data either from the known or a combined
unknown class. Under this setup, the task is to classify the
unlabeled data either into one of the known categories or a
common unknown class. Such a setup invariably holds huge
applications in fields relating to real-world visual perception
like medical imaging and remote sensing, where acquisition
of multi-domain data is feasible, and novel categories may
show up abruptly [4]. Nonetheless, this MSODA problem

10142

