This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GauCho: Gaussian Distributions with Cholesky Decomposition for Oriented
Object Detection
José Henrique Lima Marques2 *
Jeffri Murrugarra-Llerena1 *
Claudio R. Jung2 ∗ Equal contribution
1
2
Stony Brook University, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
jmurrugarral@cs.stonybrook.edu, {jhlmarques,crjung}@inf.ufrgs.br

Abstract
Oriented Object Detection (OOD) has received increased attention in the past years, being a suitable solution for detecting elongated objects in remote sensing analysis. In particular, using regression loss functions based
on Gaussian distributions has become attractive since they
yield simple and differentiable terms. However, existing
solutions are still based on regression heads that produce
Oriented Bounding Boxes (OBBs), and the known problem
of angular boundary discontinuity persists. In this work,
we propose a regression head for OOD that directly produces Gaussian distributions based on the Cholesky matrix
decomposition. The proposed head, named GauCho, theoretically mitigates the boundary discontinuity problem and
is fully compatible with recent Gaussian-based regression
loss functions. Furthermore, we advocate using Oriented
Ellipses (OEs) to represent oriented objects, which relates
to GauCho through a bijective function and alleviates the
encoding ambiguity problem for circular objects. Our experimental results show that GauCho can be a viable alternative to the traditional OBB head, achieving results comparable to or better than state-of-the-art detectors for the
challenging dataset DOTA. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/jhlmarques/GauCho.

1. Introduction
Oriented object detection (OOD) is an essential application
of computer vision that extends traditional object detection
by considering the orientation of objects in images, being
particularly useful in remote sensing [12]. Standard object
detection methods use horizontal bounding boxes (HBBs),
and the de facto representations for OOD are rotated HBBs
called oriented bounding boxes (OBBs).
Regarding the network architecture, we can modify the
regression head of a traditional object detector that produces the center (x, y) and dimensions (w, h) of an HBB
by adding an angular parameter θ related to the orientation

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Examples of different parameterizations for OOD. (a)
Long-Edge (LE) for OBBs. (b) Gaussian (covariance matrix).

of the OBB. For HBB detection, each box is characterized
by a unique pair of values (w, h), with w, h > 0. However,
there are several issues when defining the parameters of an
OBB [25, 35, 38] regarding the shape parameters (w, h, θ).
Common representations are the OpenCV (OC) and the
long-edge (LE) representation [35]: OC defines the angle
based on the OBB side that lies in [−90◦ , 0); LE defines the
angle based on the largest side, so that θ ∈ [−90◦ , 90◦ ).
These parametrizations present a boundary discontinuity
problem, where different sets of parameters generate very
similar OBBs. Hence, regression loss functions that use independent parameter-wise comparisons for center, dimensions, and angle (e.g., using the L1 loss) might present large
values for similar OBBs. As an example, consider an OBB
with dimensions w = 1, h = 3 rotated by 30◦ . Its representation in the LE parameterization is (3, 1, 30◦ ), where
the first component is the dimension related to the angular
information. Figure 1a shows the LE parameters after rotating this OBB in the range [−90◦ , 90◦ ), which covers all
possible rotations – we show the angle and the corresponding OBB dimension, and can observe a discontinuity at 60◦ .
One popular strategy for mitigating the discontinuity
problem is using a holistic regression loss function that optimizes the OBB parameters jointly. In particular, a promising approach consists of mapping OBBs to Gaussian distributions and defining regression terms based on distances
between Gaussians [20, 32, 33, 35, 36]. Such terms are
inherited from distance functions between generic proba-

3593

