This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SGCR: Spherical Gaussians for Efficient 3D Curve Reconstruction
Xinran Yang1 , Donghao Ji1 , Yuanqi Li1 , Jie Guo1 , Yanwen Guo1∗ , Junyuan Xie1
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{xryang,donghaoji}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{yuanqili,guojie,ywguo,jyxie}@nju.edu.cn

Figure 1. We present a novel method using 2D images to generate Spherical Gaussians, enabling the accurate representation of 3D edges.
Spherical Gaussians combine the advantages from 3D Gaussian Splatting and the ability to preserve excellent 3D structures. With a
corresponding curve extraction algorithm, Spherical Gaussians efficiently reconstruct 3D edge curves by only 2D supervision.

Abstract

pervision. Given Spherical Gaussians serve as intermedia for the robust edge representation, we further introduce a novel optimization-based algorithm called SGCR
to directly extract accurate parametric curves from aligned
Spherical Gaussians. We demonstrate that SGCR outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in 3D edge reconstruction while enjoying great efficiency. Code is available
at https://github.com/Martinyxr/SGCR.

Neural rendering techniques have made substantial
progress in generating photo-realistic 3D scenes. The latest
3D Gaussian Splatting technique has achieved high quality novel view synthesis as well as fast rendering speed.
However, 3D Gaussians lack proficiency in defining accurate 3D geometric structures despite their explicit primitive
representations. This is due to the fact that Gaussian’s attributes are primarily tailored and fine-tuned for rendering
diverse 2D images by their anisotropic nature. To pave the
way for efficient 3D reconstruction, we present Spherical
Gaussians, a simple and effective representation for 3D geometric boundaries, from which we can directly reconstruct
3D feature curves from a set of calibrated multi-view images. Spherical Gaussians is optimized from grid initialization with a view-based rendering loss, where a 2D edge
map is rendered at a specific view and then compared to
the ground-truth edge map extracted from the corresponding image, without the need for any 3D guidance or su-

1. Introduction
In computer graphics and vision, photorealistic novel view
synthesis (NVS) and accurate geometry reconstruction are
two significant objectives. 3D Gaussian Splatting [19] offers an appealing explicit representation—3D Gaussians,
resulting in high-quality synthesis of novel views and realtime rendering speed. However, it falls short in capturing
accurate 3D geometric structures since the anisotropic 3D
Gaussians, which are intended for efficient rasterization and
sufficient expression ability, do not align with the geometric
features (surfaces, edges and corners) in a faithful manner.
A question naturally arises: Can we utilize 3D Gaussians

∗ Corresponding author.

5793

