This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V IDEOT REE: Adaptive Tree-based Video Representation
for LLM Reasoning on Long Videos
Ziyang Wang* Shoubin Yu⇤ Elias Stengel-Eskin⇤
Jaehong Yoon Feng Cheng Gedas Bertasius Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
https://videotree2024.github.io/

Abstract

Input Long Video

Answer

……

(c) LLM Reasoning

Long-form video understanding is complicated by the high
redundancy of video data and the abundance of queryirrelevant information. To tackle these challenges, we propose V IDEOT REE, a training-free framework which builds
a query-adaptive and hierarchical video representation for
LLM reasoning over long-form videos. First, V IDEOT REE
extracts query-relevant information from the input video
through an iterative process, progressively refining the selection of keyframes based on their relevance to the query.
Furthermore, V IDEOT REE leverages the inherent hierarchical structure of long video data, which is often overlooked by
existing LLM-based methods. Specifically, we incorporate
multi-granularity information into a tree-based representation, allowing V IDEOT REE to extract query-relevant details
from long videos in a coarse-to-fine manner. This enables
the model to effectively handle a wide range of video queries
with varying levels of detail. Finally, V IDEOT REE aggregates the hierarchical query-relevant information within the
tree structure and feeds it into an LLM reasoning model to
answer the query. Our experiments show that our method
improves both reasoning accuracy and efficiency. Specifically, V IDEOT REE outperforms existing training-free approaches on EgoSchema and NExT-QA with less inference
time, achieving 61.1% and 75.6% accuracy on the test set
without additional video-specific training. Moreover, on the
long split of Video-MME (average 44 minutes), V IDEOT REE
achieves better performance than GPT-4V and many other
MLLMs that were extensively trained on video data.

Visual Clustering

…
(a) Adaptive Breadth
Expansion

VideoTree

…

… Coarse

Language
Query

Fine

First-level VideoTree

(b) Relevance-Guided
Depth Expansion

Figure 1. Overview of V IDEOT REE for LLM reasoning on long
videos. Given the long video input, we first apply adaptive breadth
expansion to identify the first-level keyframes for V IDEOT REE.
Next, we use relevance-guided depth expansion to explore the
inherent hierarchical structure of the video, forming a tree-based
representation. Finally, the coarse-to-fine information extracted by
V IDEOT REE is fed into the LLM reasoner to answer the query.

capable of reasoning over and answering questions about
long-form videos has become increasingly crucial. Recently,
several approaches [19, 72, 89] have emerged that leverage
the long-sequence reasoning capabilities of Large Language
Models (LLMs) to tackle the challenge in long-form video
understanding in a training-free manner. Typically, these
approaches leverage vision-language models (VLM) to caption densely sampled frames, thus representing the video in
text format. This text representation is then subsequently fed
into an LLM, which reasons over the video and responds
to the provided query. Although this strategy has demonstrated great potentials on long-form video understanding
benchmarks, it still faces two major limitations:

1. Introduction
With the surge in accessible long video content and the growing importance of applications such as long-form human
behavior analysis and movie analysis, developing models

1) Informational Overload: Long videos inherently contain high levels of information redundancy, and current approaches [7, 89] lack a principled method to effectively address this challenge. A deluge of redundant and irrelevant

* Equal contribution.

3272

