This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FATE: Full-head Gaussian Avatar with Textural Editing
from Monocular Video
Jiawei Zhang1 Zijian Wu1 Zhiyang Liang1 Yicheng Gong1
Dongfang Hu2 Yao Yao1 Xun Cao1 Hao Zhu1,B
1

Nanjing University

2

OPPO

Figure 1. From a monocular portrait video input, we propose FATE to reconstruct an animatable 3D head avatar, which enables Gaussian
texture editing and allows for 360◦ full-head synthesis.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reconstructing photo-realistic and animatable 3D head
avatars is a consistent objective in computer vision, given
its extensive applications in film production, AR/VR, metaverse, and computer games. To produce high-fidelity head
avatars with precision, classic solutions commonly rely on
light field acquisition systems [15, 25, 59] alongside the
design of an artist team. These approaches require huge
costs and unvoidable manual design, which can hardly be
applied to consumer-level scenarios. In recent years, significant research efforts have been devoted to a more practical
approach: reconstructing 3D head avatars from an easily
captured monocular video.

Reconstructing high-fidelity, animatable 3D head avatars
from effortlessly captured monocular videos is a pivotal
yet formidable challenge. Although significant progress
has been made in rendering performance and manipulation capabilities, notable challenges remain, including incomplete reconstruction and inefficient Gaussian representation. To address these challenges, we introduce FATE
— a novel method for reconstructing an editable full-head
avatar from a single monocular video. FATE integrates
a sampling-based densification strategy to ensure optimal
positional distribution of points, improving rendering efficiency. A neural baking technique is introduced to convert discrete Gaussian representations into continuous attribute maps, facilitating intuitive appearance editing. Furthermore, we propose a universal completion framework
to recover non-frontal appearance, culminating in a 360◦ renderable 3D head avatar. FATE outperforms previous approaches in both qualitative and quantitative evaluations,
achieving state-of-the-art performance. To the best of our
knowledge, FATE is the first animatable and 360◦ full-head
monocular reconstruction method for a 3D head avatar.
Project page and code are available at this link.

Early research on the monocular reconstruction of 3D
head avatars converges to a widely adopted framework.
Firstly, parametric head estimation algorithms [14, 18, 71]
are leveraged to estimate a head’s pose and rough shape
for each frame. Subsequently, multiple video frames
are harnessed to refine the head’s appearance across various poses and expressions, culminating in an expressiondrivable 3D head avatar. The advent of the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [30] model, renowned for its rendering efficiency and ease of manipulation, has been widely
adopted as the preferred head representation in recent meth-

5535

