This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArticulatedGS: Self-supervised Digital Twin Modeling of Articulated Objects
using 3D Gaussian Splatting
Junfu Guo 1

Yu Xin1
1

Gaoyi Liu1

Kai Xu2

Ligang Liu 1

Ruizhen Hu 3 *

University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Defense Technology
3
Shenzhen University

Abstract
We tackle the challenge of concurrent reconstruction at the
part level with the RGB appearance and estimation of motion parameters for building digital twins of articulated objects using the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) method.
With two distinct sets of multi-view imagery, each depicting an object in separate static articulation configurations,
we reconstruct the articulated object in 3D Gaussian representations with both appearance and geometry information at the same time. Our approach decoupled multiple
highly interdependent parameters through a multi-step optimization process, thereby achieving a stable optimization
procedure and high-quality outcomes. We introduce ArticulatedGS, a self-supervised, comprehensive framework that
autonomously learns to model shapes and appearances at
the part level and synchronizes the optimization of motion
parameters, all without reliance on 3D supervision, motion cues, or semantic labels. Our experimental results
demonstrate that, among comparable methodologies, our
approach has achieved optimal outcomes in terms of part
segmentation accuracy, motion estimation accuracy, and
visual quality. The code will be made publicly available
at our website https://guojunfu-tech.github.
io/articulatedGS-io/

1. Introduction
Articulated objects, such as laptops, ovens, and drawers,
are a part of our daily life. Building the digital twin
of an articulated object with accurate reconstruction of
and fine-grained analysis often plays an important role in
robotics [24, 27, 31, 47], animation [19, 44], and simulation [41, 45]. Moreover, it is also desirable to equip the digital twins with color appearance to facilitate downstream applications such as training sim-to-real transferable embod* Corresponding author

Real-World Object

Motion Estimation
& Part Segmentation

Any-State Synthesis

3D Gaussians

Figure 1. ArticulatedGS is a self-supervised modeling and reasoning pipeline to reconstruct the articulated objects using 3D
Gaussian Splatting.

ied AI [1, 34, 35]. Consequently, the capturing and reconstruction of shape geometry, visual appearance, and articulation parameters is indispensable in building accurate and
functional digital twins of articulated objects.
The problem of modeling high-fidelity digital twins of
articulated objects is receiving increasing attention in recent years [10, 21, 22, 33]. Most of the previous works [10,
16, 21] are concentrated on the regeneration or construction of 3D geometrical representation of articulated objects,
which may involve the estimation of articulation parameters or functionalities to animate the objects into different
articulation states. The result is usually a mesh-based representation of articulated objects with relatively low geometric fidelity and visual realism. Moreover, the reliance
on supervised learning, which typically consumes a large
3D dataset with articulation annotation, also limits the generalizability to unseen object categories. To our knowledge,
the only self-supervised work that takes RGB observations
as input is PARIS [21]. PARIS adopts the neural radiance
field (NeRF) as an intermediate representation and outputs a

27144

