This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Occlusion-aware Text-Image-Point Cloud Pretraining
for Open-World 3D Object Recognition
Khanh Nguyen, Ghulam Mubashar Hassan & Ajmal Mian
The University of Western Australia
duykhanh.nguyen@research.uwa.edu.au
{ghulam.hassan,ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au
Abstract
Recent open-world representation learning approaches
have leveraged CLIP to enable zero-shot 3D object recognition. However, performance on real point clouds with
occlusions still falls short due to unrealistic pretraining
settings. Additionally, these methods incur high inference costs because they rely on Transformer’s attention
modules. In this paper, we make two contributions to
address these limitations. First, we propose occlusionaware text-image-point cloud pretraining to reduce the
training-testing domain gap. From 52K synthetic 3D objects, our framework generates nearly 630K partial point
clouds for pretraining, consistently improving real-world
recognition performances of existing popular 3D networks.
Second, to reduce computational requirements, we introduce DuoMamba, a two-stream linear state space model
tailored for point clouds. By integrating two spacefilling curves with 1D convolutions, DuoMamba effectively
models spatial dependencies between point tokens, offering a powerful alternative to Transformer. When pretrained with our framework, DuoMamba surpasses current state-of-the-art methods while reducing latency and
FLOPs, highlighting the potential of our approach for realworld applications. Our code and data are available at
ndkhanh360.github.io/project-occtip.

1. Introduction
3D understanding plays a vital role in robotics [7], virtual
reality [1], and autonomous driving [51], enabled by deeplearning models that perform recognition tasks such as 3D
object classification [32], object detection [28, 34], and semantic segmentation [17, 20]. However, existing 3D networks [28, 32, 33, 44, 46] are trained using closed-set annotation, constraining them to recognize only pre-defined categories and struggle with ‘unseen’ ones. Inspired by CLIP
[36], recent open-world studies [16, 23, 48, 53, 57, 59]
have extended the aligned image-text latent space to include

3D object representations, allowing generalization beyond
‘seen’ categories and enabling zero-shot 3D recognition.
Existing works in this line of research take 3D-imagetext triplets as input and align the three embedding spaces
using cross-modal contrastive learning. These methods represent 3D shapes either as depth maps [16, 26, 53, 59] or
raw point clouds [10, 23, 48, 49, 54, 57]. Depth-based approaches must first convert point clouds into 2D depth maps
and use pretrained image encoders, such as Vision Transformer (ViT) [9], for 3D feature extractions. However, their
performance typically suffers from information loss during
the projection and the domain gap caused by differences
between RGB and depth images. On the other hand, pointbased methods [10, 23, 48, 49, 54, 57] can directly exploit
all intrinsic geometry in the point clouds. An example is
the recent work CLIP2 [52], which pretrains a 3D encoder
using real-scanned objects extracted from scene-level point
clouds. For contrastive learning, it pairs these with cropped
images and simple category-based prompts as text descriptions. However, limited caption diversity and poor cropped
image quality (due to occlusion, lighting, etc.) hinder CLIP
knowledge transfer, leading to suboptimal performance.
Other works [10, 23, 48, 49, 54, 57] instead leverage synthetic 3D models1 to construct pretraining triplets. These
methods uniformly sample points from the mesh surface to
create full point clouds2 . They also render RGB images
from preset camera positions and generate diverse captions
from multiple sources, allowing for control over the quality
of images and texts. As a result, these methods demonstrate promising zero-shot performance on complete point
cloud benchmarks such as ModelNet40 [47]. However,
their performance degrades significantly on real-scanned
data, leading to unsatisfactory results in practical scenarios. As shown in Figure 1a, there is a 20% accuracy drop
from the synthetic ModelNet40 [47] to the real ScanOb1 In this paper, we use 3D models to refer to 3D CAD models or 3D
meshes instead of 3D deep learning models.
2 A full (complete) point cloud provides 360-degree coverage of an object, while a partial (occluded) one is captured from a single viewpoint.

16965

