This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TokenHSI: Unified Synthesis of Physical Human-Scene Interactions
through Task Tokenization
Liang Pan1,2
1

Zeshi Yang3
Bo Dai2,5

Zhiyang Dou2
Taku Komura2

Wenjia Wang2
Jingbo Wang1†

Buzhen Huang4

The University of Hong Kong 3 Independent Researcher
4
Southeast University 5 Feeling AI
https://liangpan99.github.io/TokenHSI

Shanghai AI Laboratory

Foundational HSI Skill

2

Long-horizon Task Completion

Skill Composition

Terrain Shape Variation

Object Shape Variation

Figure 1. Introducing TokenHSI, a unified model that enables physics-based characters to perform diverse human-scene interaction tasks.
It excels at seamlessly unifying multiple foundational HSI skills within a single transformer network and flexibly adapting learned skills
to challenging new tasks, including skill composition, object/terrain shape variation, and long-horizon task completion.

Abstract

and flexible adaptation. The key insight is to model the humanoid proprioception as a separate shared token and combine it with distinct task tokens via a masking mechanism.
Such a unified policy enables effective knowledge sharing
across skills, thereby facilitating the multi-task training.
Moreover, our policy architecture supports variable length
inputs, enabling flexible adaptation of learned skills to new
scenarios. By training additional task tokenizers, we can
not only modify the geometries of interaction targets but
also coordinate multiple skills to address complex tasks.
The experiments demonstrate that our approach can significantly improve versatility, adaptability, and extensibility in
various HSI tasks.

Synthesizing diverse and physically plausible Human-Scene
Interactions (HSI) is pivotal for both computer animation
and embodied AI. Despite encouraging progress, current
methods mainly focus on developing separate controllers,
each specialized for a specific interaction task. This significantly hinders the ability to tackle a wide variety of challenging HSI tasks that require the integration of multiple
skills, e.g. sitting down while carrying an object (see Fig. 1).
To address this issue, we present TokenHSI, a single, unified
transformer-based policy capable of multi-skill unification
† Corresponding author.

5379

