This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do Visual Imaginations Improve Vision-and-Language Navigation Agents?
Akhil Perincherry1 , Jacob Krantz, Stefan Lee1
1
Oregon State University
perincha@oregonstate.edu, jkrantz989@gmail.com, leestef@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) agents are
tasked with navigating an unseen environment using natural language instructions. In this work, we study if visual
representations of sub-goals implied by the instructions can
serve as navigational cues and lead to increased navigation
performance. To synthesize these visual representations
or “imaginations”, we leverage a text-to-image diffusion
model on landmark references contained in segmented instructions. These imaginations are provided to VLN agents
as an added modality to act as landmark cues and an auxiliary loss is added to explicitly encourage relating these with
their corresponding referring expressions. Our findings reveal an increase in success rate (SR) of ∼1 point and up to
∼0.5 points in success scaled by inverse path length (SPL)
across agents. These results suggest that the proposed approach reinforces visual understanding compared to relying
on language instructions alone. Code and data for our work
can be found at https://www.akhilperincherry.
com/VLN-Imagine-website/.

Figure 1. Illustration of visual imaginations. (Top) A natural
language instruction specifying sub-goals pool table, kitchen, and
bedroom. (Bottom) Visual imaginations of landmarks pool table,
kitchen and bedroom referenced by the sub-goals in the instruction. In our work, we study if these visual imaginations generated
using text-to-image models can improve performance in VLN.

generations for our running example in Figure 1. Drawing an analogy to the substantial work in cognitive science
on the impact of mental imagery on task performance, we
refer to these generated images as visual imaginations and
study whether providing them in addition to corresponding
language-based instructions can improve the performance
of vision-and-language navigation agents.
But why might we believe visual imaginations could be
beneficial? In short – text-to-image models have broad
knowledge, and learning to perform semantic matching in
the image domain may be an easier task than language
grounding. Associating noun phrases and their visual referents is a sub-task in vision-and-language navigation (VLN)
that most works address through extensive pretraining of
model components on web-scale image caption datasets –
e.g., by initializing image and language encoders with CLIP
[34] models. While this provides a useful warm-start, it is
unclear how well the remaining cross-modal components
that drive navigation retain these capabilities after downstream VLN training. Downstream datasets may cover only
a small portion of relevant objects and visual grounding remains a weakness in many existing VLN models [43, 47].

1. Introduction
In this work, we examine whether providing visual imagery
corresponding to described landmarks improves the performance of agents following natural language navigation
instructions. Consider the natural language navigation instruction presented in Figure 1 which asks an agent to “Go
straight, take a left at the pool table to enter the kitchen.
Walk to the bedroom and stop”. This instruction provides
unconditional action directives like “go straight” but also
frequently conditions the given directions on visual landmarks in the scene such as the pool table, kitchen, and bedroom. Standard approaches to vision-and-language navigation tasks rely on learned cross-modal alignment mechanisms to implicitly associate these noun phrases with their
visual referents during navigation. However, text-to-image
generation models have improved to the point that producing imagery matching the semantics of these visual references prior to navigation is plausible. We show three such

3846

