This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReCon: Enhancing True Correspondence Discrimination through Relation
Consistency for Robust Noisy Correspondence Learning
Quanxing Zha1,2 , Xin Liu1,3 *, Shu-Juan Peng1,2 , Yiu-ming Cheung3 , Xing Xu4 , Nannan Wang5
1
Department of Computer Science & Xiamen CVPR Key Laboratory, Huaqiao University
2
Fujian Key Lab. of Big Data Intell. and Security, Huaqiao University, 3 Hong Kong Baptist University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 5 Xidian University
quanxing.zha@gmail.com, xliu@hqu.edu.cn, ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, xing.xu@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

Relation-agnostic alignment

Can we accurately identify the true correspondences from
multimodal datasets containing mismatched data pairs?
Existing methods primarily emphasize the similarity matching between the representations of objects across modalities, potentially neglecting the crucial relation consistency
within modalities that are particularly important for distinguishing the true and false correspondences. Such an
omission often runs the risk of misidentifying negatives as
positives, thus leading to unanticipated performance degradation. To address this problem, we propose a general
Relation Consistency learning framework, namely ReCon,
to accurately discriminate the true correspondences among
the multimodal data and thus effectively mitigate the adverse impact caused by mismatches. Specifically, ReCon
leverages a novel relation consistency learning to ensure
the dual-alignment, respectively of, the cross-modal relation consistency between different modalities and the intramodal relation consistency within modalities. Thanks to
such dual constrains on relations, ReCon significantly enhances its effectiveness for true correspondence discrimination and therefore reliably filters out the mismatched pairs
to mitigate the risks of wrong supervisions. Extensive experiments on three widely-used benchmark datasets, including
Flickr30K, MS-COCO, and Conceptual Captions, are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of
ReCon compared with other SOTAs. The code is available
at: https://github.com/qxzha/ReCon.

Visual object sequence

1. Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval is dedicated to understanding the semantic correspondences between multimedia data, aiming
to recall the most relevant candidates for a given query
[2, 3, 17, 37]. While existing approaches have achieved
* Corresponding author

Cross-modal

True Correspondence
A man wearing
sunglasses playing
a silver guitar.

Relation-aware alignment
Visual Modality

Intra-modal

Linguistic object sequence
A
man

wearing
playing a
sunglasses silver guitar

Linguistic Modality

(a) Difference between relation-agnostic and relation-aware alignments.

relationagnostic

positive pair

Intra-modal relation inconsistency
Noisy Correspondence

A man with
sunglasses is
playing the guitar.

relationaware

negative pair

(b) Difference of discrimination for noise between different alignments.

Figure 1. Illustration of relation discrepancy. The relation-aware
alignment correctly identifies mismatched pair as negatives, while
relation-agnostic alignment fails to detect such inconsistency.

remarkable success by associating the heterogeneous data
in a common latent space, they often neglect to provide an
explicit consideration of semantically irrelevant data. Such
mismatches, a.k.a., noisy correspondence (NC) [15], would
be inadvertently introduced due to the notoriously laborintensive data collection and the unreliable non-expert annotations [16, 30], which inevitably impedes the semantic
correspondences between modalities and consequently results in a decline of retrieval performance [11, 27, 31].
To tackle the NC problem, a core consensus is to enhance
the discriminability for positives/matches and to mine local
correspondences from negatives/mismatches. Several priors [11, 15, 31] leverage the memory effect [10], wherein
DNNs learn simple dominant patterns first, to identify
matches in the early training stage. Subsequently, they estimate soft correspondence labels to describe the matching

29680

