This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SkillMimic: Learning Basketball Interaction Skills from Demonstrations
Yinhuai Wang1,2∗ Qihan Zhao1∗ Runyi Yu1,2∗ Hok Wai Tsui1 Ailing Zeng6†
Zhengyi Luo7 Jiwen Yu3 Xiu Li4 Qifeng Chen1 Jian Zhang3† Lei Zhang5
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Unitree Robotics
4
Tsinghua University 5 International Digital Economy Academy
yinhuai.wang@connect.ust.hk

3
6

Jing Lin5
Ping Tan1

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
Tencent 7 Carnegie Mellon University

pingtan@ust.hk

Figure 1. We propose a novel approach that for the first time enables physically simulated humanoids to learn a variety of basketball
interaction skills from Human-Object Interaction (HOI) data, including but not limited to shooting (blue), retrieving (red), and turnaround
layup (yellow). Once acquired, these interaction skills can be composed to accomplish complex tasks, such as consecutive scoring (green).

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) represents one of the most
fundamental yet challenging capabilities in robotics and
character animation [10, 12, 16, 23, 28, 46, 47]. Among
various HOI scenarios, basketball serves as an exemplary
testbed that demands mastery of complex, dynamic, and
precise interactions. Despite significant progress, existing
physics-based character animation methods predominantly
focus on imitation learning of locomotion skills [8, 32–
34, 42] through Reinforcement Learning (RL), leaving a
significant gap for HOI imitation. While some methods can
learn interaction skills, such as striking pillars [34], playing tennis [50], climbing ropes [2], and carrying boxes [15],
they typically involve handcrafted reward functions for each
different interaction skill. However, designing skill-specific
rewards is labor-intensive and fundamentally limits generalization. This limitation becomes particularly acute in basketball, where the complexity and diversity of skills would
demand extraordinary engineering effort for reward design.
Consequently, existing methods [2, 8, 15, 32–34, 42, 50] fail
to provide a unified learning framework for a single policy
to learn diverse interaction skills, let alone achieving complex long-term tasks such as consecutive basketball scoring.
How can a simulated humanoid learn a wide variety of
interaction skills in a simple and scalable manner? Consider how humans naturally acquire complex skills: amateur
basketball players often develop their expertise by watching

Traditional reinforcement learning methods for humanobject interaction (HOI) rely on labor-intensive, manually
designed skill rewards that do not generalize well across
different interactions. We introduce SkillMimic, a unified
data-driven framework that fundamentally changes how
agents learn interaction skills by eliminating the need for
skill-specific rewards. Our key insight is that a unified HOI
imitation reward can effectively capture the essence of diverse interaction patterns from HOI datasets. This enables
SkillMimic to learn a single policy that not only masters
multiple interaction skills but also facilitates skill transitions, with both diversity and generalization improving as
the HOI dataset grows. For evaluation, we collect and introduce two basketball datasets containing approximately
35 minutes of diverse basketball skills. Extensive experiments show that SkillMimic successfully masters a wide
range of basketball skills including stylistic variations in
dribbling, layup, and shooting. Moreover, these learned
skills can be effectively composed by a high-level controller to accomplish complex and long-horizon tasks such
as consecutive scoring, opening new possibilities for scalable and generalizable interaction skill learning. Project
page: https://ingrid789.github.io/SkillMimic/
∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.

17540

