This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Paint by Inpaint: Learning to Add Image Objects by Removing Them First
Navve Wasserman1* , Noam Rotstein2* , Roy Ganz2 , Ron Kimmel2
1

Weizmann Institute of Science

2

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

*Indicates equal contribution.

Add a
white
buttoned
shirt

Add
steamed
milk

Add
goggles

Add a
flowing
river

Add a
big flat
TV

Add pink
flowers

Figure 1. Visual Results of the Proposed Models.

Abstract
Image editing has advanced significantly with the introduction of text-conditioned diffusion models. Despite this
progress, seamlessly adding objects to images based on
textual instructions without requiring user-provided input
masks remains a challenge. We address this by leveraging the insight that removing objects (Inpaint) is significantly simpler than its inverse process of adding them
(Paint), attributed to inpainting models that benefit from
segmentation mask guidance. Capitalizing on this realization, by implementing an automated and extensive pipeline,
we curate a filtered large-scale image dataset containing
pairs of images and their corresponding object-removed
versions. Using these pairs, we train a diffusion model to inverse the inpainting process, effectively adding objects into
images. Unlike other editing datasets, ours features natural target images instead of synthetic ones while ensuring
source-target consistency by construction. Additionally, we
utilize a large Vision-Language Model to provide detailed
descriptions of the removed objects and a Large Language
Model to convert these descriptions into diverse, naturallanguage instructions. Our quantitative and qualitative results show that the trained model surpasses existing models
in both object addition and general editing tasks. Visit our
project page for the released dataset and trained models.

as each image offers infinite editing possibilities, each with
countless potential outcomes. A particularly intricate editing task is seamlessly adding objects to images, which requires not only realistic visuals but also a nuanced understanding of the global image context, including parameters such as location, scale, and style. While many solutions require the user to provide a mask for the target object
[32, 52, 64, 67], recent advancements have capitalized on
the success of text-conditioned diffusion models to enable a
mask-free approach [4, 73]. Such solutions offer a more
convenient and realistic setting; yet, they still encounter
challenges, as demonstrated in Figure 3.
The leading method for such editing, InstructPix2Pix
(IP2P) [4], synthesizes a dataset containing triplets of
source and target images alongside an editing instruction as
guidance. Under this guidance, a model is trained to transform source images into target ones. While showing some
success, the model’s effectiveness is bounded by the quality
of the synthesized training data. We address this limitation
by introducing an alternative automatic method for creating
a large-scale, high-quality dataset for image object addition.
Our approach is grounded in the observation that adding objects (paint) is essentially the inverse of removing them
(inpaint). Namely, by using pairs of images—ones containing objects and others with objects removed—an object
addition dataset can be established. In practice, we create
the dataset by leveraging abundant images and object masks
available in segmentation datasets [17, 29, 33] alongside a
high-end inpainting model [52]. The outputs are then used
in a reverse manner, with the original images as editing targets and the inpainted ones as sources. This reversed ap-

1. Introduction
Image editing plays a central role in the computer vision
and graphics communities, with diverse applications spanning various domains. The task is inherently challenging

18313

