This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAtCha Gaussians: Atlas of Charts for High-Quality Geometry and
Photorealism From Sparse Views
Antoine Guédon†
Tomoki Ichikawa‡
Kohei Yamashita‡
Ko Nishino‡
†
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
‡
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Japan
antoine.guedon@enpc.fr

{tichikawa,kyamashita}@vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
kon@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

https://anttwo.github.io/matcha/

MAtCha Gaussians from 3 views

MAtCha Gaussians from 10 views

MAtCha Gaussians from 10 views

Figure 1. We propose MAtCha Gaussians, a novel surface representation for reconstructing high-quality 3D meshes with photorealistic rendering from sparse-view images. Our key idea is to model the underlying scene geometry as an Atlas of Charts in 2D image
planes, which we render with 2D Gaussian surfels. We initialize the charts with a monocular depth estimation model and refine them
using differentiable Gaussian rendering and a lightweight neural chart deformation model. Combined with a sparse-view SfM model like
MASt3R-SfM [14], MAtCha can recover sharp and accurate surface meshes of both foreground and background objects in unbounded
scenes within minutes, from a few unposed RGB images. We used 3 views for training for the left most, and 10 views for the rest.

Abstract

seemingly contradicting goals in a single model. At the
core of MAtCha lies a novel neural deformation model and
a structure loss that preserve the fine surface details distilled from learned monocular depths while addressing their
fundamental scale ambiguities. Results of extensive experimental validation demonstrate MAtCha’s state-of-theart quality of surface reconstruction and photorealism onpar with top contenders but with dramatic reduction in the
number of input views and computational time. We believe
MAtCha will serve as a foundational tool for any visual application in vision, graphics, and robotics that require explicit geometry in addition to photorealism.

We present a novel appearance model that simultaneously
realizes explicit high-quality 3D surface mesh recovery and
photorealistic novel view synthesis from sparse view samples. Our key idea is to model the underlying scene geometry Mesh as an Atlas of Charts which we render with
2D Gaussian surfels (MAtCha Gaussians). MAtCha distills
high-frequency scene surface details from an off-the-shelf
monocular depth estimator and refines it through Gaussian
surfel rendering. The Gaussian surfels are attached to the
charts on the fly, satisfying photorealism of neural volumetric rendering and crisp geometry of a mesh model, i.e., two

6001

