This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

K-Sort Arena: Efficient and Reliable Benchmarking for Generative Models via
K-wise Human Preferences
Zhikai Li1, *, Xuewen Liu1,∗ , Dongrong Joe Fu2 , Jianquan Li1 , Qingyi Gu1,†, Kurt Keutzer2 , Zhen Dong2,†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of California, Berkeley
lizhikai2020@ia.ac.cn, zhendong@berkeley.edu
Project: https://huggingface.co/spaces/ksort/K-Sort-Arena

Abstract
The rapid advancement of visual generative models necessitates efficient and reliable evaluation methods. Arena
platform, which gathers user votes on model comparisons,
can rank models with human preferences. However, traditional Arena methods, while established, require an excessive number of comparisons for ranking to converge and
are vulnerable to preference noise in voting, suggesting the
need for better approaches tailored to contemporary evaluation challenges. In this paper, we introduce K-Sort Arena,
an efficient and reliable platform based on a key insight:
images and videos possess higher perceptual intuitiveness
than texts, enabling rapid evaluation of multiple samples
simultaneously. Consequently, K-Sort Arena employs Kwise comparisons, allowing K models to engage in free-forall competitions, which yield much richer information than
pairwise comparisons. To enhance the robustness of the system, we leverage probabilistic modeling and Bayesian updating techniques. We propose an exploration-exploitationbased matchmaking strategy to facilitate more informative
comparisons. In our experiments, K-Sort Arena exhibits
16.3× faster convergence compared to the widely used Elo
algorithm. To further validate the superiority and obtain a
comprehensive leaderboard, we collect human feedback via
crowdsourced evaluations of numerous cutting-edge textto-image and text-to-video models. Thanks to its high efficiency, K-Sort Arena can continuously incorporate emerging models and update the leaderboard with minimal votes.
Our project has undergone several months of internal testing and is now available online.

1. Introduction
Visual generation models have made significant advancements, excelling in tasks such as text-to-image [5, 41, 44,
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Chatbot Arena

K‐Sort Arena

(Texts)

(Images or Videos)

One-on-One

Free-for-All

A

A

B

C

D

B

A>B

A>C>B>D

Figure 1. Comparison between K-Sort Arena and Chatbot Arena
[10]. K-Sort Arena employs K-wise comparisons (K>2) to get
richer information from user votes. Notably, it introduces probabilistic modeling and an effective matchmaking strategy, significantly improving efficiency and reliability.

54, 56] and text-to-video [11, 13, 16, 55] generation. Such
great progress has attracted more and more researchers,
leading to a continuous proliferation of new models. Therefore, an efficient and reliable evaluation of the models’ capabilities is urgently desired. However, traditional evaluation metrics, such as IS [45], FID [19], FVD [49], etc., fall
short in providing a fair and comprehensive evaluation, especially not reflecting human preferences in the real world.
To this end, Chatbot Arena [10] is proposed as a platform
developed for evaluating large language models (LLMs). It
constructs randomized, anonymous pairwise comparisons
of models and collects user judgments of their outputs,
thereby forming an overall ranking of models’ capabilities.
Despite the great progress, Chatbot Arena still faces challenges regarding efficiency and accuracy: (i) The inefficiency of Chatbot Arena stems primarily from two inherent
mechanisms: pairwise comparisons and randomized matching. By allowing only two models to be compared at a time
and potentially matching models of vastly different ranks,
the system often yields minimal information per comparison. This inefficiency necessitates an excessive number
of comparisons to achieve a stable ranking, resulting in a
significant waste of valuable human effort in voting. More
importantly, as a massive number of new models contin-

9131

