This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ID-Patch: Robust ID Association for Group Photo Personalization
Yimeng Zhang1,2,∗ , Tiancheng Zhi1 , Jing Liu1 , Shen Sang1 ,
Liming Jiang1 , Qing Yan1 , Sijia Liu2 , Linjie Luo1
1

ByteDance Inc., 2 Michigan State University

Pose Condition & ID Location

OMG + InstantID

InstantFamily

ID-Patch (Ours)

"An indoor celebration scene
featuring three women..."

Generation Time: 71.1s

Generation Time: 9.6s

Generation Time: 9.4s

Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art multi-identity generation methods. From left to right: the condition inputs followed by results
generated using OMG [19] (with InstantID [43]), InstantFamily [17], and our proposed ID-Patch approach. Red dashed boxes highlight
failures. OMG fails to preserve the hairstyles of the middle person, and creates artifacts for the right woman’s hand, possibly because of
the inconsistency between its generation stages (explained in Fig. 2). InstantFamily suffers from ID leakage, resulting the incorrect ID of
the middle person. Our approach preserves the detailed identity of each person. In addition, our approach is 7 times faster than OMG and
has less computational overhead than InstantFamily.

Abstract

strate that ID-Patch surpasses baseline methods across metrics, such as face ID resemblance, ID-position association accuracy, and generation efficiency. Project Page is:
https://byteaigc.github.io/ID-Patch/

The ability to synthesize personalized group photos and
specify the positions of each identity offers immense creative potential. While such imagery can be visually appealing, it presents significant challenges for existing technologies. A persistent issue is identity (ID) leakage, where injected facial features interfere with one another, resulting
in low face resemblance, incorrect positioning, and visual
artifacts. Existing methods suffer from limitations such as
the reliance on segmentation models, increased runtime, or
a high probability of ID leakage. To address these challenges, we propose ID-Patch, a novel method that provides robust association between identities and 2D positions. Our approach generates an ID patch and ID embeddings from the same facial features: the ID patch is positioned on the conditional image for precise spatial control,
while the ID embeddings integrate with text embeddings
to ensure high resemblance. Experimental results demon-

1. Introduction
Personalized group photo generation has wide-ranging applications in entertainment, advertising, social media, and
virtual reality. For example, users might want to create a
group photo of friends at a virtual party, even if some could
not attend in person. This technology enables the creation
of engaging and memorable content that reflects real-life social interactions and relationships. However, this task poses
significant challenges, particularly the risk of identity (ID)
leakage, where the identity information of one individual
inadvertently affects the representation of another at a different position. Such blending compromises the distinctiveness and accuracy of each person’s features. Besides, being
able to specify the position of each identity in the image is

∗ Work done during internship at ByteDance.

2986

