This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Reconstruction from Readout-Multiplexed Single-Photon Detector Arrays
Shashwath Bharadwaj, Ruangrawee Kitichotkul, Akshay Agarwal and Vivek K Goyal
Boston University
shash@bu.edu

Abstract
Readout multiplexing is a promising solution to overcome
hardware limitations and data bottlenecks in imaging with
single-photon detectors. Conventional multiplexed readout processing creates an upper bound on photon counts
at a very fine time scale, where frames with multiple detected photons must either be discarded or allowed to introduce significant bias. We formulate multiphoton coincidence resolution as an inverse imaging problem and introduce a solution framework to probabilistically resolve the
spatial locations of photon incidences. Specifically, we develop a theoretical abstraction of row–column multiplexing
and a model of photon events that make readouts ambiguous. Using this, we propose a novel estimator that spatially
resolves up to four coincident photons. Monte Carlo simulations show that our proposed method increases the peak
signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) of reconstruction by 3 to 4 dB
compared to conventional methods under optimal incident
flux conditions. Additionally, this method reduces the required number of readout frames to achieve the same meansquared error as other methods by a factor of ∼ 4. Finally,
our method matches the Cramér–Rao bound for detection
probability estimation for a wider range of incident flux
values compared to conventional methods. While demonstrated for a specific detector type and readout architecture,
this method can be extended to more general multiplexing
with different detector models.

tons. Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors
(SNSPDs) are emerging devices that offer near-unity quantum efficiency across a range of wavelengths, low dark
counts, and low jitter, making them compelling alternatives
to SPADs [38]. However, the requirement of cryogenic
cooling to maintain superconductivity has largely restricted
their use to laboratory experiments.
Single-photon imaging in typical commercial applications requires arrays of single-photon detectors [28]. While
megapixel SPAD arrays have already been deployed in mass
consumer products [3, 25], high data transfer rates from
these arrays for further processing remain a bottleneck.
For instance, typical room-scale ranging experiments with
SPAD array-based single-photon lidar can have data generation rates of the order of gigabits per second when the
array resolution approaches the megapixel scale. It is attractive to compress the readout to less than a stream of all
digitized detection times. Methods like in-pixel histogramming [18], histogram compression through sketching [14],
equidepth histogramming [19, 32], and differential readouts
[36] have been proposed to address high data transfer rates.
These approaches to avoid the cost of high temporal resolution are complementary to our emphasis on transverse
spatial dimensions in this work.

1. Introduction

Implementing high spatial resolution SNSPD arrays is a
significant challenge. As the number of pixels in the array
grows, the heat load introduced by reading out each pixel
individually becomes incompatible with the cryogenics of
the system [12]. To mitigate this, recent efforts have focused on addressing groups of pixels in the readout, starting
with Allman et al. [1] who introduced row–column readout
multiplexing. In this mechanism, readouts indicate photon
detection at each row and each column of the array instead
of every pixel, which reduces the required number of readout lines for an n × n array from n2 to 2n. Wollman et
al. [37] extended this scheme to demonstrate the first kilopixel SNSPD array. McCaughan et al. [24] introduced the
thermally coupled imager with time-of-flight multiplexing,
where separate readout lines for each row and column are
replaced with a single bus for all rows and all columns.
This makes the required number of readouts independent of

Single-photon detectors have been widely studied for use in
applications like biological imaging [7, 34], lidar [15, 29],
and quantum optics [9] due to properties such as singlephoton sensitivity and high-precision time-tagging of photon arrivals. Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) have
been of particular interest due to compatability with CMOS
manufacturing techniques and room temperature operation [11]. However, they have low detection efficiencies
(especially at mid infrared wavelengths), which means that
only a small fraction of incident light is detected as pho-

11406

