This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Patch Matters: Training-free Fine-grained Image Caption Enhancement via
Local Perception
Ruotian Peng1,4 *, Haiying He2 *, Yake Wei3 , Yandong Wen4 , Di Hu3†
School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology
2
College of Science, China Agricultural University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
School of Engineering, Westlake University
{pengruotian, wenyandong}@westlake.edu.cn, 2963057784@cau.edu.cn, {yakewei, dihu}@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract

GLM-4V-Plus: The image depicts a group of people
gathered around a fruit stand. The stand is filled with a
variety of fruits, including bananas, apples, and oranges.
There are several individuals in the scene, some of whom
are wearing backpacks and there are a few cars parked on
the side. The people seem to be engaged in various
activities, such as examining the fruits or conversing
with each other. The setting appears to be an outdoor
market or a similar public space.

High-quality image captions play a crucial role in
improving the performance of cross-modal applications
such as text-to-image generation, text-to-video generation,
and text-image retrieval. To generate long-form, highquality captions, many recent studies have employed multimodal large language models (MLLMs). However, current
MLLMs often produce captions that lack fine-grained details or suffer from hallucinations, a challenge that persists
in both open-source and closed-source models. Inspired
by Feature-Integration theory, which suggests that attention must focus on specific regions to integrate visual information effectively, we propose a divide-then-aggregate
strategy. Our method first divides the image into semantic and spatial patches to extract fine-grained details, enhancing the model’s local perception of the image. These
local details are then hierarchically aggregated to generate a comprehensive global description. To address hallucinations and inconsistencies in the generated captions,
we apply a semantic-level filtering process during hierarchical aggregation. This training-free pipeline can be
applied to both open-source models (LLaVA-1.5, LLaVA1.6, Mini-Gemini) and closed-source models (Claude-3.5Sonnet, GPT-4o, GLM-4V-Plus). Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method generates more detailed, reliable captions, advancing multimodal description generation without requiring model retraining. The source code
are available at https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/
Patch-Matters

Training-Free Enhancement: Divide-then-Aggregate
Ours: The image depicts a bustling outdoor fruit market scene. People are gathered around a
fruit stand, which is filled with a variety of fruits, including bananas, apples, and oranges. The
stand is set up on the sidewalk, and the fruits are arranged in an inviting and accessible manner.
The market is covered by a blue awning, providing shade for the fruits and customers. A man is
reaching out to grab a banana hanging from the ceiling, while others are examining the fruits or
conversing with each other. A man in a blue jacket and blue backpack is looking around the
streets, while a person in a black jacket with a gray backpack is looking at the fruits. The
surrounding buildings and signs add to the lively atmosphere of the market.

Figure 1. An illustration of current challenges faced by MLLMs in
generating accurate image descriptions. Our approach provides a
description with enhanced visual details and significantly reduced
hallucinated content. Shared information, newly added details and
hallucinations are highlighted in different colors for clarity.

1. Introduction
High-quality image descriptions can significantly enhance
the performance of models across various domains, such as
text-image retrieval [1, 2], text-to-image [3–5], and text-tovideo generation [6, 7]. Research has shown that short and
noisy descriptions often lead to erroneous outputs in models [8] and hinder their ability to handle complex tasks [9].
In contrast, descriptions that includes rich visual elements
and is free from hallucinations can effectively improve the
model’s ability to process complex scenarios [1, 2] and increase the reliability of its responses [10], ultimately boosting model performance.
Therefore, researchers have consistently sought ways to
improve image captioning. Early methods [11, 12] combined convolutional neural networks with recurrent neural

* Equal Contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

3963

