This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deterministic Certification of Graph Neural Networks against
Graph Poisoning Attacks with Arbitrary Perturbations
Jiate Li§, Meng Pang†, Yun Dong‡, and Binghui Wang§*
§

Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, USA

†

School of Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Nanchang University, Nanchang, China

‡

Department of Humanities, Social Science, and Communication, MSOE, Milwaukee, USA

Abstract

However, various works [6–8, 20, 40, 45, 51, 55, 60, 63]
have shown that GNNs are vulnerable to training-time graph
poisoning attacks — an attacker perturbs the graph structure
during training such that the learnt poisoned GNN model
will have low accuracy on predicting new test nodes/graphs.
As a graph consists of three components: nodes, their features, and edges connecting the nodes, an attacker is allowed
to perturb an individual component or their combinations.
For instance, an attacker could inject a few nodes [20, 40],
slightly modify the edges [8, 45, 55, 63] on the training
graphs, and/or perturb features of certain nodes [63].
Various empirical defenses [12, 42, 43, 59, 61, 62] have
been proposed to mitigate the graph poisoning attack, but
were soon broken by adaptive attacks [33]. Most existing certified defenses [16, 19, 22, 24, 47, 54] are against test-time
evasion attacks, with a few exceptions [18, 22], leaving certified defenses against poisoning attacks largely unexplored1 .
However, existing provable defenses face several limitations
when applied in practice: 1) all restrict the attacker’s capability to only one type of perturbation (e.g., node injection
or edge perturbation); 2) they are designed for a particular
GNN architecture or GNN task [19]; and 3) their robustness
guarantee is probabilistic (i.e., not 100% accurate) [18, 22].
We propose PGNNCert to address the above limitations.
PGNNCert is the first certified defense for GNNs on the two
most common node and graph classification tasks against
arbitrary poisoning perturbations (i.e., arbitrarily manipulate the nodes, node features, and edges of training graph(s))
with deterministic robustness guarantees. Our defense is
inspired by ensemble learning, and consists of three main
steps: 1) Divide each training graph into multiple subgraphs
and allocate subgraphs of training graph(s) into multiple
groups via a hash function; 2) Train a set of node/graph classifiers for each group and build a majority-voting node/graph
classifier on the subgraphs; 3) Derive the deterministic robustness guarantee against arbitrary poisoning perturbations.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are becoming the de facto
method to learn on the graph data and have achieved the
state-of-the-art on node and graph classification tasks. However, recent works show GNNs are vulnerable to trainingtime poisoning attacks – marginally perturbing edges, nodes,
or/and node features of training graph(s) can largely degrade GNNs’ testing performance. Most previous defenses
against graph poisoning attacks are empirical and are soon
broken by adaptive / stronger ones. A few provable defenses
provide robustness guarantees, but have large gaps when applied in practice: 1) restrict the attacker on only one type of
perturbation; 2) design for a particular GNN architecture or
task; and 3) robustness guarantees are not 100% accurate.
In this work, we bridge all these gaps by developing
PGNNCert, the first certified defense of GNNs against poisoning attacks under arbitrary (edge, node, and node feature) perturbations with deterministic robustness guarantees.
Extensive evaluations on multiple node and graph classification datasets and GNNs demonstrate the effectiveness of
PGNNCert to provably defend against arbitrary poisoning
perturbations. PGNNCert is also shown to significantly outperform the state-of-the-art certified defenses against edge
perturbation or node perturbation during GNN training.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Network (GNN) [15, 21, 37, 44, 48, 56]
is the leading approach for representation learning on
graphs, showing state-of-the-art performance in various
graph-related tasks like node classification and graph classification. In node classification, the goal is to predict labels for
individual nodes, while in graph classification, the objective
is to predict labels for entire graphs. GNNs have significantly
advanced applications across fields such as chemistry [14],
physics [36, 39], neuroscience [3], and social science [13].

1We note there exist some certified defense [17, 23, 35, 46] against
poisoning attacks but not for the graph data. In addition [18, 22] show they
achieve unsatisfactory performance when adapted to graph data.

* Corresponding author (bwang70@iit.edu)

5020

