This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Scheduling of Causal Prompts and Tasks for Multi-Task Learning
Chaoyang Li1,2 , Jianyang Qin1 , Jinhao Cui1 , Zeyu Liu1 , Ning Hu2 , Qing Liao1,2 *
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{lichy, hun}@pcl.ac.cn, {22b351005, cuijinhao, liuzeyu}@stu.hit.edu.cn, liaoqing@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-task prompt learning has emerged as a promising technique for fine-tuning pre-trained Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) to various downstream tasks. However, existing methods ignore challenges caused by spurious correlations and dynamic task relationships, which may reduce the model performance. To tackle these challenges,
we propose JSCPT, a novel approach for Joint Scheduling of Causal Prompts and Tasks to enhance multi-task
prompt learning. Specifically, we first design a Multi-Task
Vison-Language Prompt (MTVLP) model, which learns
task-shared and task-specific vison-language prompts and
selects useful prompt features via causal intervention, alleviating spurious correlations. Then, we propose the taskprompt scheduler that models inter-task affinities and assesses the causal effect of prompt features to optimize the
multi-task prompt learning process. Finally, we formulate
the scheduler and the multi-task prompt learning process
as a bi-level optimization problem to optimize prompts and
tasks adaptively. In the lower optimization, MTVLP is updated with the scheduled gradient, while in the upper optimization, the scheduler is updated with the implicit gradient. Extensive experiments show the superiority of our
proposed JSCPT approach over several baselines in terms
of multi-task prompt learning for pre-trained VLMs.

learning soft prompts, encouraging the pre-trained VLMs
better fitting to downstream tasks.
Early prompt learning methods for VLMs [16, 19, 61–
63] can enhance individual visual task performance with
limited training data. Recognizing that multi-task learning
(MTL) can boost performance and efficiency over singletask models, researchers have explored prompt learning
from VLMs to multi-task settings [24, 42, 47]. For example,
HiPro [24] builds a hierarchical task prompt tree to group
tasks and extract multi-grained task information. MVLPT
[42] uses task-shared multi-modal prompts for multi-task
transfer, while MmAP [47] trains group-shared and taskspecific cross-modal aligned prompts for MTL. However,
existing multi-task vision-language prompt-tuning methods
may be suboptimal, as they overlook the challenges posed
by spurious correlations and dynamic task relationships.
(1) Spurious correlations: Fine-tuning pre-trained
VLMs on downstream tasks within specific domains can
be challenging due to spurious correlations arising from
domain-specific biases, which may cause the model to
learn useless features and ultimately degrade performance.
[33, 34, 50]. For instance, Fig. 1(a) shows a failed MVLPT
[42] test case caused by such spurious correlations. In the
training set, plates and forks frequently appear with apple
pie, creating spurious correlations between these features
(i.e., the plate and the fork) and the label. Consequently, the
model misclassifies real apple pie images (without the plate
or the fork) as baklava. To identify the causes of spurious
correlations and suggest solutions, we construct a causal
graph (Fig. 1(b)), where I, U , Y , and C represent input images, useful features, labels, and confounders, respectively.
Here, I → Y denotes the desired causal effect, enabling the
model to predict label Y directly from image I. However,
not all features in I are useful (e.g., plates and forks). Confounders C, stemming from data bias, can interfere between
I and Y , creating spurious correlations with useless features
[20]. To address this, we aim to mitigate confounder interference via causal intervention, extracting useful features U
to learn beneficial causal effects (i.e., I → U → Y ).
(2) Dynamic task relationships: Although pre-grouping

1. Introduction
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) [22, 52, 55],
such as CLIP [34] and ALIGN [15], significantly enhance
image-text matching by aligning their embeddings from
vast web data [6, 14], which provide new insights for solving various downstream visual tasks. However, fine-tuning
the full VLMs may forget useful knowledge acquired in the
pre-training and can pose the risk of overfitting downstream
tasks [19]. To address this, prompt tuning [16, 19, 61–63]
is proposed to modify embeddings of pre-trained VLMs by
* Corresponding author

25124

