This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Dental Model Segmentation with Geometrical Boundary Preserving
Shufan Xi1 , Zexian Liu1 , Junlin Chang1,3 , Hongyu Wu1 ,* Xiaogang Wang2 , Aimin Hao1
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{xsfvrlab, liuzexian, changjunlin, whyvrlab, ham}@buaa.edu.cn, wangxiaogang@swu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D intraoral scan mesh is widely used in digital dentistry diagnosis, segmenting 3D intraoral scan mesh is a
critical preliminary task. Numerous approaches have been
devised for precise tooth segmentation. Currently, the deep
learning-based methods are capable of the high accuracy
segmentation of crown. However, the segmentation accuracy at the junction between the crown and the gum is still
below average. Existing down-sampling methods are unable to effectively preserve the geometric details at the junction. To address these problems, we propose CrossTooth,
a boundary-preserving segmentation method that combines
3D mesh selective downsampling to retain more vertices
at the tooth-gingiva area, along with cross-modal discriminative boundary features extracted from multi-view rendered images, enhancing the geometric representation of
the segmentation network. Using a point network as a backbone and incorporating image complementary features,
CrossTooth significantly improves segmentation accuracy,
as demonstrated by experiments on a public intraoral scan
dataset. The source code is available at https : / /
github.com/XiShuFan/CrossTooth_CVPR2025

sample
points

visualize
curvature

camera
render

1. Introduction

Figure 1. An illustration of 3D intraoral scan model. The original
intraoral scan consists of points and triangles, it can be visualized
with a mean curvature histogram. The more red the color is, the
lower the curvature is. Deep learning methods usually take sampled points as input, with blurry boundaries. But we can observe
more clear tooth edges in images rendered from intraoral scan than
in sampled points, indicated by red and blue boxes in the zoomed
views respectively.

Intraoral scanning is widely used in the field of digital dentistry and the crown segmentation is the key step.
The main challenges [1] in crown segmentation arise from
the intrinsic similarity between crown shapes, the close arrangement of adjacent teeth, as well as abnormal teeth with
irregular shapes. Additionally, external devices such as
braces can influence the crown structure, making it difficult
to crown segmentation.
To address these challenges, various methods have been
proposed. Traditional methods rely on manually defined
features for segmentation, including curvature-based meth-

ods [34, 40], contour-based methods [25], and harmonic
field-based [18, 49] methods. Frequently used curvaturebased methods depend heavily on the intraoral scanner accuracy and the teeth condition of patients. In areas where
curvatures are not apparent or in regions with steep curvatures like tooth crowns, these methods perform poorly and
require manual correction, which lacks robustness.
Deep learning methods, driven by data, have surpassed
traditional ones. Several works have applied deep learning methods directly on 3D intraoral scan models for segmentation. Some methods [17, 28, 29, 46, 47] build networks in local-global feature fusion paradigm, where the
network learns both local details and global context information from the point clouds. Some [39, 41] follow the

* Corresponding author.

10476

