This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency Dynamic Convolution for Dense Image Prediction
Linwei Chen1
Lin Gu2,3
Liang Li4
Chenggang Yan5,6
Ying Fu1∗
1
2
3
Beijing Institute of Technology
RIKEN
The University of Tokyo
4
5
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Hangzhou Dianzi University 6 Tsinghua University
chenlinwei@bit.edu.cn; lin.gu@riken.jp; liang.li@ict.ac.cn; cgyan@hdu.edu.cn; fuying@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
While Dynamic Convolution (DY-Conv) has shown
promising performance by enabling adaptive weight selection through multiple parallel weights combined with an attention mechanism, the frequency response of these weights
tends to exhibit high similarity, resulting in high parameter costs but limited adaptability. In this work, we introduce Frequency Dynamic Convolution (FDConv), a novel
approach that mitigates these limitations by learning a
fixed parameter budget in the Fourier domain. FDConv divides this budget into frequency-based groups with disjoint
Fourier indices, enabling the construction of frequencydiverse weights without increasing the parameter cost.
To further enhance adaptability, we propose Kernel Spatial Modulation (KSM) and Frequency Band Modulation
(FBM). KSM dynamically adjusts the frequency response
of each filter at the spatial level, while FBM decomposes
weights into distinct frequency bands in the frequency domain and modulates them dynamically based on local content. Extensive experiments on object detection, segmentation, and classification validate the effectiveness of FDConv. We demonstrate that when applied to ResNet-50,
FDConv achieves superior performance with a modest increase of +3.6M parameters, outperforming previous methods that require substantial increases in parameter budgets (e.g., CondConv +90M, KW +76.5M). Moreover, FDConv seamlessly integrates into a variety of architectures,
including ConvNeXt, Swin-Transformer, offering a flexible
and efficient solution for modern vision tasks. The code
is made publicly available at https://github.com/LinweiChen/FDConv.

1. Introduction
Convolution, the core operation in ConvNets, has driven
decades of advancement in computer vision [1, 3–6, 14, 18,
23, 29, 35, 38, 44, 47, 61, 77, 80]. Essential for capturing lo*Corresponding Author

(a) Frequency response of ODConv

(b) Frequency response of FDConv

(c) t-SNE result of ODConv

(d) t-SNE result of FDConv

Figure 1. Weight frequency responses and t-SNE analyses. We
set the number of weights to 4 to align with ODConv [32]. (a)
The frequency responses of the four parallel weights in ODConv
are highly similar, indicating limited diversity. (b) In contrast, FDConv shows distinct frequency responses for each weight, spanning different parts of the frequency spectrum. (c) The t-SNE plot
for ODConv reveals that the filters in the four weights are closely
clustered, suggesting a lack of diversity. (d) The t-SNE plot for
FDConv shows that the filters in the four weights have different
distributions, indicating greater diversity.

cal patterns and building hierarchical representations, it remains fundamental in modern architectures [11, 47, 62, 71].
Building upon the success of standard convolution, Dynamic Convolution (DY-Conv) [63, 73] offers a more adaptive and efficient approach. Unlike standard convolution
with fixed weights, DY-Conv uses multiple parallel weights
combined by an attention module, allowing sample-specific
weight adaptation with minimal extra computation.
However, our analysis in Figure 1 reveals that traditional dynamic convolution [31, 32, 63, 73] lack of frequency responses diversity in their parallel weights. As
shown in Figure 1(a), these weights exhibit highly similar
frequency responses, while the t-SNE visualization in Figure 1(c) indicates that filters within ODConv [32] are clus-

30178

