This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind the Gap: Detecting Black-box Adversarial Attacks in the Making through
Query Update Analysis
Jeonghwan Park, Niall McLaughlin, Ihsen Alouani
Queen’s University Belfast, United Kingdom
jeonghwan.park@uk.thalesgroup.com, {n.mclaughlin, i.alouani}@qub.ac.uk

Abstract

Attack Queries

Legend

Adversarial attacks remain a significant threat that can
jeopardize the integrity of Machine Learning (ML) models. In particular, query-based black-box attacks can generate malicious noise without having access to the victim
model’s architecture, making them practical in real-world
contexts. The community has proposed several defenses
against adversarial attacks, only to be broken by more advanced and adaptive attack strategies. In this paper, we
propose a framework that detects if an adversarial noise instance is being generated. Unlike existing stateful defenses
that detect adversarial noise generation by monitoring the
input space, our approach learns adversarial patterns in
the input update similarity space. In fact, we propose to observe a new metric called Delta Similarity (DS), which we
show it captures more efficiently the adversarial behavior.
We evaluate our approach against 8 state-of-the-art attacks,
including adaptive attacks, where the adversary is aware of
the defense and tries to evade detection. We find that our
approach is significantly more robust than existing defenses
both in terms of specificity and sensitivity.1

Random update vector for
0th order optimisation
(gradient estimation)

Benign Queries

New neighbourhood to
explore the gradient (after
gradient estimation)
New benign query

Figure 1. A high-level illustration of our intuition. The sequence
of malicious queries to generate an adversarial example has a different pattern than benign queries; Attack steps require random
vector updates for gradient estimation.

1. Introduction

malicious actor generates adversarial perturbations by iteratively querying the model and analyzing the corresponding
outputs. Despite the restricted access scenario, many querybased black-box attacks have been proposed [6, 8, 9, 19],
showing a high efficiency in fooling ML models.
Most existing defenses against adversarial attacks frame
the problem in a ”post-mortem” manner, i.e., assuming adversarial examples have already been generated [5, 16, 24,
27]. However, a recent line of work specifically focused
on query-based black-box settings suggests to detect adversarial attacks in the making [7, 10, 23]. These approaches
leverage the adversary’s need to query the victim model,
proposing to monitor input queries for anomalies in the input space that could indicate attempts to generate adversarial examples. For instance, Stateful Detection [7] identifies adversarial attack attempts by tracking the similarity (statefulness) between input queries, flagging anomalous queries that deviate significantly from typical behavior patterns. Similar methods, such as Blacklight [23] and
PIHA [10], also rely on statefulness analysis. Blacklight focuses on detecting clusters of highly similar queries, which
are often indicative of the iterative optimization techniques
used by attackers. In contrast, PIHA uses statistical methods to analyze the input history, identifying anomalies in the
distribution of queries. All these approaches focus on the
analysis of input samples, which can be evaded by adaptive
attackers. In fact, many of these defenses have been shown

Adversarial attacks have been investigated as a critical
threat to the trustworthiness of ML systems. Two main
threat models have been considered in the literature: whitebox and black-box. The white-box setting assumes the adversary has access to the model parameters, architecture
and gradient. This setting has been investigated thoroughly
to provide a worst-case vulnerability analysis [14, 15, 24].
The second scenario, i.e., black-box, is more practical in
real-world contexts and corresponds to an adversary with
limited access to the victim model, restricted to inputs and
outputs. This threat model is particularly relevant in Machine Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS) settings, where models can be queried remotely by clients through APIs. A
1 Code is available at https://github.com/jpark04-qub/GWAD

10235

