This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BWFormer: Building Wireframe Reconstruction from Airborne
LiDAR Point Cloud with Transformer
Yuzhou Liu1,2 , Lingjie Zhu3 , Hanqiao Ye1,2 , Shangfeng Huang4 ,
Xiang Gao1 ,* Xianwei Zheng5 , Shuhan Shen1,2 *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Cenozoic Robotics 4 University of Calgary 5 The State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
{liuyuzhou2021,xiang.gao}@ia.ac.cn; shshen@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present BWFormer, a novel Transformerbased model for building wireframe reconstruction from
airborne LiDAR point cloud. The problem is solved in a
ground-up manner here by detecting the building corners
in 2D, lifting and connecting them in 3D space afterwards
with additional data augmentation. Due to the 2.5D characteristic of the airborne LiDAR point cloud, we simplify
the problem by projecting the points on the ground plane
to produce a 2D height map. With the height map, a heat
map is first generated with pixel-wise corner likelihood to
predict the possible 2D corners. Then, 3D corners are predicted by a Transformer-based network with extra height
embedding initialization. This 2D-to-3D corner detection
strategy reduces the search space significantly. To recover
the topological connections among the corners, edges are finally predicted from the height map with the proposed edge
attention mechanism, which extracts holistic features and
preserves local details simultaneously. In addition, due to
the limited datasets in the field and the irregularity of the
point clouds, a conditional latent diffusion model for LiDAR
scanning simulation is utilized for data augmentation. BWFormer surpasses other state-of-the-art methods, especially
in reconstruction completeness. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/3dv- casia/BWformer/.

Lack of dataset

Sparsity

Incompleteness

Noise

Minor structure

(a) Difficulties in wireframe reconstruction from LiDAR point clouds

Synthetic height maps

Edge Attention

…

Corner Trans.

Real height map

2D-to-3D Corner detection

Edge classification

(b) Overview of BWFormer

Figure 1. (a) There are numerous challenges in reconstructing
building wireframe from airborne LiDAR point cloud, such as lack
of labeled point cloud dataset with wireframes, sparsity with few
points, incomplete areas, noise from trees or other buildings, and
minor structures like chimneys. (b) To solve the difficulties above,
with synthetic height maps, 2D-to-3D corner detection with reduced search space, and holistic edge attention, BWFormer predicts the final complete wireframe. Trans. is short for Transformer.

1. Introduction

seen a breakthrough with the development of deep learning community. Various types of input data, including LiDAR point clouds, multi-view images, and remote sensing images are utilized for building reconstruction, with the
results being represented in different forms such as point
clouds, meshes, and wireframes [2, 9, 38]. Among various input types and output representations, airborne LiDAR
point clouds are preferred due to their large coverage and
high accuracy, and wireframes are favored for their concise
representation and low-memory consumption.

Building reconstruction has become more and more important nowadays for wide applications such as smart cities [4,
15, 17], VR/AR [23, 33], autonomous driving [13], and
robotics [16]. In recent years, building reconstruction has
* Corresponding authors

22215

