This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training Data Provenance Verification: Did Your Model Use Synthetic Data
from My Generative Model for Training?
Yuechen Xie1 , Jie Song1 *, Huiqiong Wang2 , Mingli Song1,3,4
1

Zhejiang University
Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Security, Zhejiang University
4
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
2

{xyuechen,sjie,huiqiong wang,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
High-quality open-source text-to-image models have lowered the threshold for obtaining photorealistic images significantly, but also face potential risks of misuse. Specifically, suspects may use synthetic data generated by these
generative models to train models for specific tasks without permission, when lacking real data resources especially.
Protecting these generative models is crucial for the wellbeing of their owners. In this work, we propose the first
method to this important yet unresolved issue, called Training data Provenance Verification (TrainProVe). The rationale behind TrainProVe is grounded in the principle of
generalization error bound, which suggests that, for two
models with the same task, if the distance between their
training data distributions is smaller, their generalization
ability will be closer. We validate the efficacy of TrainProVe across four text-to-image models (Stable Diffusion
v1.4, latent consistency model, PixArt-α, and Stable Cascade). The results show that TrainProVe achieves a verification accuracy of over 99% in determining the provenance
of suspicious model training data, surpassing all previous
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/
xieyc99/TrainProVe.

1. Introduction
High-quality open-source text-to-image models based on
diffusion models [15] can generate photorealistic images
with simple text prompts [4, 28, 34, 38], making them
highly significant in terms of lowering creative barriers,
enabling personalized customization, etc. Currently, most
open-source text-to-image models are only permitted for
* Corresponding author

academic or educational purposes, and commercial use is
prohibited without explicit permission [3, 4, 21, 28, 33, 34,
36, 38]. Therefore, protecting the intellectual property of
these generative models is crucial for safeguarding the interests of their owners.
Currently, one of the major security challenges faced by
defenders, i.e., the generative model owners, is the unauthorized use of the synthetic data from their models by suspects [24, 47, 48, 55]. As shown in Fig. 1, based on the suspect’s intention, this issue can be divided into three cases:
Case 1: the suspect steals the synthetic data illegally and
claims it as his own personal work [24, 44, 48], implying the
intellectual property of the generative model is infringed.
Case 2: the suspect steals the synthetic data from the
defender’s generative model, and trains another generative
model for the same task using knowledge distillation techniques [6, 14, 29, 39, 50]. In this case, the defender cannot
access the synthetic data used by the suspect, making it a
more challenging defense task compared to Case 1.
Case 3: the suspect steals the synthetic data from the
generative model to train another model for a specific
task [1, 8, 13, 40, 42, 53, 57]. In this case, the defender is
not only unaware of the training data used by the suspicious
model, but also cannot compare the similarity between the
generative model and the suspicious model directly due to
the different tasks, representing an even more arduous defense task compared to Case 2.
For Case 1 and Case 2, there are already some mature methods to address these issues, such as adding watermarks [24, 31, 52, 54, 56] and training data attribution [55],
which identify illegal activities by checking the distributions of the suspicious images or the synthetic images from
suspicious model. However, for Case 3, although the potential of using synthetic data to train models for other tasks has
been recognized gradually in recent years [13, 40, 42, 53]

23817

