This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Aware Clustering for Prompting Vision-Language Models
Fusheng Hao1,2 Fengxiang He3 Fuxiang Wu1,2 Tichao Wang1,2 Chengqun Song1,2 Jun Cheng1,2 *
1
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Prompt learning has attracted widespread attention in
adapting vision-language models to downstream tasks. Existing methods largely rely on optimization strategies to ensure the task-awareness of learnable prompts. Due to the
scarcity of task-specific data, overfitting is prone to occur. The resulting prompts often do not generalize well or
exhibit limited task-awareness. To address this issue, we
propose a novel Task-Aware Clustering (TAC) framework
for prompting vision-language models, which increases the
task-awareness of learnable prompts by introducing taskaware pre-context. The key ingredients are as follows:
(a) generating task-aware pre-context based on task-aware
clustering that can preserve the backbone structure of a
downstream task with only a few clustering centers, (b) enhancing the task-awareness of learnable prompts by enabling them to interact with task-aware pre-context via
the well-pretrained encoders, and (c) preventing the visual task-aware pre-context from interfering the interaction between patch embeddings by masked attention mechanism. Extensive experiments are conducted on benchmark
datasets, covering the base-to-novel, domain generalization, and cross-dataset transfer settings. Ablation studies validate the effectiveness of key ingredients. Comparative results show the superiority of our TAC over competitive counterparts. The code is available at https:
//github.com/FushengHao/TAC.

Figure 1. Motivation of our TAC. We improve the task-awareness
of learnable prompts from a new perspective, i.e., introducing taskaware pre-context.

1. Introduction

lower than that of the customized models [61]. Considering
the data-hungry nature of VLMs and the scarcity of taskspecific data, it is difficult to improve performance through
finetuning such models. As an alternative to finetuning,
prompting has become as a powerful paradigm for adapting VLMs to downstream tasks [4, 7, 21, 22, 29, 51].
Prompting is a technique that adapts VLMs by increasing their understanding of downstream tasks. The current
methodology is to provide VLMs with task-relevant context while keeping the model weights frozen. The context
is also known as prompts. Many effective prompt templates
have been engineered. For example, textual templates like
“a photo of a [class]” [37] have been hand-crafted to provide task-relevant context for the textual encoder, and visual templates like “a red circle around an [object]” [2] have
been discovered to direct the visual encoder’s attention to
the [object]. To avoid the need for large-scale trial and error
in prompt engineering, context optimization [61] has been
proposed, which treats learnable vectors as prompts and ensure their task-awareness by optimization. This strategy has
attracted much attention in recent years. For example, maximizing the ground-truth class scores [61] is proposed to
ensure the task-awareness of learnable prompts, and selfregulating constraints [23] are further introduced to guide

Large-scale visual and textual data pairs have been collected
and employed to pretrain high-capacity Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) [1, 20, 37]. Due to the alignment of the
visual and textual modalities, the resulting models have
emerged with remarkable generalization ability on various downstream tasks such as zero-shot image classification [37] and open-vocabulary object detection [11]. Despite achieving decent performance, the performance is still
* Corresponding author: jun.cheng@siat.ac.cn

14745

