This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EdgeTAM: On-Device Track Anything Model
Chong Zhou1,2 ,* Chenchen Zhu1 , Yunyang Xiong1 , Saksham Suri1 , Fanyi Xiao1 , Lemeng Wu1
Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi1 , Bo Dai3,4 , Chen Change Loy2 , Vikas Chandra1 , Bilge Soran1
1
Meta AI, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 The University of Hong Kong, 4 Feeling AI

Abstract
On top of Segment Anything Model (SAM), SAM 2 further
extends its capability from image to video inputs through
a memory bank mechanism and obtains a remarkable performance compared with previous methods, making it a
foundation model for video segmentation task. In this paper, we aim at making SAM 2 much more efficient so that
it even runs on mobile devices while maintaining a comparable performance. Despite several works optimizing
SAM for better efficiency, we find they are not sufficient
for SAM 2 because they all focus on compressing the image encoder, while our benchmark shows that the newly
introduced memory attention blocks are also the latency
bottleneck. Given this observation, we propose EdgeTAM,
which leverages a novel 2D Spatial Perceiver to reduce the
computational cost. In particular, the proposed 2D Spatial Perceiver encodes the densely stored frame-level memories with a lightweight Transformer that contains a fixed
set of learnable queries. Given that video segmentation is a
dense prediction task, we find preserving the spatial structure of the memories is essential so that the queries are split
into global-level and patch-level groups. We also propose a
distillation pipeline that further improves the performance
without inference overhead. As a result, EdgeTAM achieves
87.7, 70.0, 72.3, and 71.7 J &F on DAVIS 2017, MOSE,
SA-V val, and SA-V test, while running at 16 FPS on iPhone
15 Pro Max. The code and models are available here.

Figure 1. Speed-performance trade-offs on iPhone 15 Pro Max
and NVIDIA A100. EdgeTAM is significantly faster than SAM
2 on edge devices and compare to other VOS methods, it is also
more accurate on the challenging SA-V val dataset. Note that,
EdgeTAM can run at 16 FPS on iPhone 15 Pro Max.

1. Introduction

Despite achieving an astonishing performance compared
to previous video object segmentation (VOS) models and
allowing more diverse user prompts, SAM 2, as a serverside foundation model, is not efficient for on-device inference. For instance, the smallest SAM 2 variant runs at only
around 1 FPS on an iPhone 15 Pro Max 1 . Furthermore,
existing methods [54, 65, 68] that optimize SAM for better
efficiency only consider squeezing its image encoder since
the mask decoder is extremely lightweight. But as shown in
Fig. 2, this is not sufficient for SAM 2 because even when
the image encoder is replaced with much more compact visual backbones, such as ViT-Tiny [43] and RepViT [49],
the latency does not improve by much due to the computationally demanding memory attention blocks that are newly

Segment Anything Model (SAM) [20] is the first foundation
model for promptable image segmentation. Various studies
show its magnificent capabilities on zero-shot generalization and transfer learning [5, 27, 42, 53]. On top of SAM,
recently, SAM 2 [35] extends the original SAM to handle
both image and video inputs, with a memory bank mechanism, and is trained with a new large-scale multi-grained
video tracking dataset (SA-V).
* Work done during the internship at Meta Reality Labs.

13832

1 We convert to CoreML model with coremltools [1] and benchmark
with CPU and NPU. Throughout the paper, we interchangeably use iPhone
and iPhone 15 Pro Max for simplicity.

