This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Supervising Sound Localization by In-the-wild Egomotion
Anna Min2
1

Ziyang Chen1

University of Michigan

2

Hang Zhao2,3

Tsinghua University

3

Andrew Owens1
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
We present a method for learning binaural sound localization
using egomotion as a supervisory signal. Over the course of
a video, the camera’s direction to a sound source will change
as the camera moves. We train an audio model to predict
sound directions that are consistent with visual estimates of
camera motion, which we obtain using traditional methods
from multi-view geometry. This provides a weak but plentiful
form of supervision that we combine with traditional binaural cues. To evaluate this method, we propose a dataset of
real-world audio-visual videos with egomotion. We show
that our model can successfully learn from real-world data
and that it performs well on sound localization tasks.

1. Introduction
Our sense of hearing allows us to perceive events that are
out of sight, such as objects that are distant, occluded, or
outside of our narrow field of view. Despite the importance
of spatial audio perception, existing methods for stereo sound
localization often struggle in real-world settings, such as by
being limited to synthetic training data [13], specific binaural
cues [12], or specific visual object categories [19].
Recent work has addressed this problem using time-delay
estimation [12] and jointly learning camera rotation with
sound sources [13]. These approaches either rely on training
with simulated data or specific hand-chosen binaural cues
and thus can only be applied to limited domains. Natural
sound recordings vary widely in ways that are difficult to
capture through simulation. For example, properties of the
equipment itself, such as the geometry of the stereo microphone pair and their frequency responses, are highly varied,
and the sounds that they record are often complex mixtures
of different sources that make it difficult to extract a learning
signal from.
We address the problem of learning stereo sound localization entirely from unlabeled “in the wild” videos. We
exploit the fact that real-world audio-visual signals contain
moments in which the camera moves while the sound source
remains approximately stationary, thereby providing a form

Figure 1. Supervising sound localization using egomotion from
natural video. We use camera motion as a supervisory signal for
stereo sound localization. Our model learns to predict changes in
sound direction that correlate with changes in visually indicated
camera motion. In contrast to prior self-supervised sound localization methods, our model is trained solely on in-the-wild natural
videos, which often contain complex camera motions and noisy
mixtures of different component sounds.

of cross-modal supervision. We use well-established multiview geometry methods to estimate the relative pose of the
camera, and then train a sound localization method to make
predictions that are consistent with this motion.
Our technical approach exploits the fact that, while obtaining ground truth information from vision is difficult,
approximate visual information (such as the direction of the
camera rotation) are straightforward to estimate and provide
constraints that can be used as part of a weakly supervised
learning framework. We show that this weak supervision
from vision can be combined together with traditional interaural intensity difference cues.
Our method has a number of advantages over prior approaches. In contrast to other work that uses egomotion [13],

23936

