This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Impact Label Noise and Choice of Threshold has
on Cross-Entropy and Soft-Dice in Image Segmentation

1

Marcus Nordström1,2 Atsuto Maki1 Henrik Hult1
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 2 RaySearch Laboratories
{marcno,atsuto,hult}@kth.se

Abstract
In image segmentation and specifically in medical image segmentation, the soft-Dice loss is often chosen instead of the
more traditional cross-entropy loss to improve performance
with respect to the Dice metric. Experimental work supporting this claim exists, but how and why the two loss functions
lead to different predictions is not well understood. This
paper explains the observed discrepancy as a consequence
of how those loss functions are effected by label noise and
what threshold is used to convert the predicted soft segmentation to predicted labels. In particular, it is shown (i) how
the optimal solutions to the two loss functions diverge as
the noise is increased, and (ii) how the optimal solutions to
soft-Dice can be recovered by thresholding the solutions to
cross-entropy with an a priori unknown but efficiently computable threshold. The theoretical results are supported by
numerical experiments and it is concluded that cross-entropy
with the alternative threshold yields the stability and informative label probability maps associated with cross-entropy
without sacrificing the performance of soft-Dice.

A large amount of research has been devoted to medical
image segmentation with imperfect data. One important
question that has been addressed is how experimentally robust various segmentation methods are to label noise. In
such work, experiments are conducted by first obtaining
some data set and then corrupting the portion of data used
for training with various types of noise. Different models
are then trained on the resulting data sets and evaluated on
uncorrupted data. If both noisy labels and noise-free labels
can be obtained from clinical practitioners, it is possible to
corrupt a clean label simply by swapping it with the corresponding noisy label. Such a study of label noise was
presented in [38]. An alternative is to start with a data set
that is assumed to be noise-free and generate noisy data
with a noise model. Simple noise models that have been
studied include randomly flipping labels in an independent
manner or randomly translating the target structure [10].
Models that yield more realistic looking segmentation noise
include randomly perturbing some points of the boundary on
a noise-free segmentation with Gaussian variables [10] and
randomly deforming a segmentation with an interpolated
low-dimensional Gaussian array [35].

1. Introduction

How label noise affects the performance of segmentation
models is highly dependent on the loss function that is used
during training. Arguably, the most classical loss function
considered in the field is the cross-entropy loss. This loss is
known to have a lot of nice theoretical properties and to be
stable in practice. However, because of the class imbalance
associated with the foreground typically being significantly
smaller than the background, other loss functions putting
more emphasis on foreground are often considered. The
most popular such loss is a smoothed version of the Dice
metric. This loss is referred to as soft-Dice or the Dice
loss, and has been shown to yield better performance than
cross-entropy in several experimental settings at the cost of
sometimes introducing some stability issues [2, 24]. To get
some of the improved performance while limiting potential
stability issues, it is common to use linear combinations of
the losses. This is for instance the type of loss used in the
popular nnU-net [13].

In medical image analysis it is often of interest to partition an
image into foreground and background with respect to some
region of interest. This problem is referred to as the medical
image segmentation problem. Since the introduction of the
U-net [29], state of the art methods for addressing the problem have been dominated by neural network methods trained
according to the supervised learning paradigm [7, 32]. These
methods are remarkably effective in scenarios with abundant
and clean data. However, manually delineating a region
of interest accurately and reliably can be a complex and
time-consuming process that often requires medical expertise. This result in high costs associated with obtaining highquality data sets for training, and consequently, that data used
in practice often is imperfect in the sense that the manually
provided labels are contaminated by noise [1, 5, 23, 27].

20820

