This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Positive2Negative: Breaking the Information-Lossy Barrier
in Self-Supervised Single Image Denoising
Zhiyuan Xu1
Lin Zhu1
Wanxuan Lu4
Hua Huang2,3
Lizhi Wang2,3 *
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
3
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology and Educational Application, Ministry of Education
4
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Tong Li1

1

Abstract

Add noise

Image denoising enhances image quality, serving as a foundational technique across various computational photography applications. The obstacle to clean image acquisition in real scenarios necessitates the development of selfsupervised image denoising methods only depending on
noisy images, especially a single noisy image. Existing selfsupervised image denoising paradigms (Noise2Noise and
Noise2Void) rely heavily on information-lossy operations,
such as downsampling and masking, culminating in lowquality denoising performance. In this paper, we propose
a novel self-supervised single image denoising paradigm,
Positive2Negative, to break the information-lossy barrier.
Our paradigm involves two key steps: Renoised Data Construction (RDC) and Denoised Consistency Supervision
(DCS). RDC renoises the predicted denoised image by the
predicted noise to construct multiple noisy images, preserving all the information of the original image. DCS ensures consistency across the multiple denoised images, supervising the network to learn robust denoising. Our Positive2Negative paradigm achieves state-of-the-art performance in self-supervised single image denoising with significant speed improvements. The code is released to the public at https://github.com/Li-Tong-621/P2N .

Add noise

Down sample

Down sample

(b) Down sample

(a) Add noise

Noise2Noise-Based Paradigms
Mask

Identity

(c) Masking input

Identity

Identity

(d) Masking network

Noise2Void-Based Paradigms
Renoised Data Construction

Renoised Data Construction

Positive2Negative Paradigm

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Information-lossy operations in current paradigms.
The noise addition operation reduces the signal-to-noise ratio, the
downsampling operation diminishes the sampling density, and the
masking operation disregards crucial central pixels. Each of these
operations introduces an information-lossy barrier [8, 31, 37], culminating in imprecise denoising.

Image denoising plays a vital role in image processing
to enhance visual quality [13], serving as a foundational
technique across various computational photography applications [3, 39]. The widespread popularity of paired
clean-noisy image datasets [1, 35] has catalyzed advancements in supervised methods, yielding remarkable performance [7, 51]. However, supervised methods fall short in
* Corresponding Author: Lizhi Wang (wanglizhi@bnu.edu.cn)

dynamic scenes [18, 22], where long exposure results in
misalignment and blur [22, 42], hindering the acquisition of
clean images. Therefore, advancing self-supervised image
denoising methods using only noisy images [25, 43], especially a single noisy image [9, 11, 24, 27], holds significant
importance.
The crux of self-supervised image denoising methods

17924

