This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InteractionMap: Improving Online Vectorized HDMap Construction with
Interaction
Kuang Wu

Chuan Yang *
Zhanbin Li
Langge Technology

Abstract
Vectorized high-definition (HD) maps are essential for
an autonomous driving system. Recently, state-of-the-art
map vectorization methods are mainly based on DETR-like
framework to generate HD maps in an end-to-end manner. In this paper, we propose InteractionMap, which improves previous map vectorization methods by fully leveraging local-to-global information interaction in both time
and space. Firstly, we explore enhancing DETR-like detectors by explicit position relation prior from point-level
to instance-level, since map elements contain strong shape
priors. Secondly, we propose a key-frame-based hierarchical temporal fusion module, which interacts temporal information from local to global. Lastly, the separate classification branch and regression branch lead to the problem of misalignment in the output distribution. We interact
semantic information with geometric information by introducing a novel geometric-aware classification loss in optimization and a geometric-aware matching cost in label
assignment. InteractionMap achieves state-of-the-art performance on both nuScenes and Argoverse2 benchmarks.

Figure 1. Visual comparison between MapTRv2 [25] and our improved results. Our method effectively eliminates error map elements, leading to better precision and stability.

1. Introduction

board sensors [19, 20, 24]. With the development of bird’s
eye view (BEV) representation, recent approaches [4, 13,
19, 22, 38, 41, 55] treat the semantic map learning task
as a semantic segmentation problem. However, rasterized
maps generated by these methods lack vectorized instancelevel information, which is essential to downstream tasks,
such as motion forecasting and motion planning [8, 23].
To overcome the limitations of segmentation-based methods, approaches VectorMapNet [29], MapTR [24], MapTRv2 [25] predict point sets to construct end-to-end vectorized local HD maps using transformer [45] decoders inspired by DETR [2].
As shown in Figure 1, the representation of point sets
has a limited model capability of instance-level information. Moreover, predicting directly from a single frame
input is challenging in complex scenarios, due to temporal inconsistency between frames. To address these issues,
we propose InteractionMap, which consists of Relation Embedding Module (REM), Temporal Fusion Module (TFM),

High-Definition (HD) maps are designed for high-precision
autonomous driving, which contain instance-level vectorized representation such as lane divider, road boundaries,
pedestrian crossing, etc. The rich semantic information of
road topology and traffic rules is important for the navigation of autonomous driving (AD). HD maps are traditionally constructed offline using LiDAR SLAM-based
methods [43, 52] with high maintenance costs, complex
pipelines, and notable localization errors. In addition, manual annotation and map updating rely heavily on human labor and time demands.
In recent years, more research endeavors have shifted towards deep-learning-based methods that construct vectorized HD maps around the ego-vehicle at runtime with on* Corresponding at: ycscience86@gmail.com

17176

