This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ComfyBench: Benchmarking LLM-based Agents in ComfyUI for Autonomously
Designing Collaborative AI Systems
Xiangyuan Xue1,2* Zeyu Lu1,2 Di Huang3 Zidong Wang1,4 Wanli Ouyang1,4 Lei Bai1B
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
The University of Sydney 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Much previous AI research has focused on developing
monolithic models to maximize their intelligence, with the
primary goal of enhancing performance on specific tasks.
In contrast, this work attempts to study using LLM-based
agents to design collaborative AI systems autonomously.
To explore this problem, we first introduce ComfyBench to
evaluate agents’s ability to design collaborative AI systems
in ComfyUI. ComfyBench is a comprehensive benchmark
comprising 200 diverse tasks covering various instructionfollowing generation challenges, along with detailed annotations for 3,205 nodes and 20 workflows. Based on ComfyBench, we further develop ComfyAgent, a novel framework
that empowers LLM-based agents to autonomously design
collaborative AI systems by generating workflows. ComfyAgent is based on two core concepts. First, it represents
workflows with code, which can be reversibly converted into
workflows and executed as collaborative systems by the interpreter. Second, it constructs a multi-agent system that
cooperates to learn from existing workflows and generate
new workflows for a given task. While experimental results demonstrate that ComfyAgent achieves a comparable
resolve rate to o1-preview and significantly surpasses other
agents on ComfyBench, ComfyAgent has resolved only 15%
of creative tasks. LLM-based agents still have a long way
to go in autonomously designing collaborative AI systems.
Progress with ComfyBench is paving the way for more intelligent and autonomous collaborative AI systems. Our code
is available at: https://github.com/xxyQwQ/ComfyBench.

1. Introduction
The recent evolution of AI is defined by the growing importance of collaborative AI systems, which integrate multiple models and tools to work as a whole collaborative system [74]. The success of ChatGPT [37] presents the pos* This work was done during his internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. B Corresponding author, baisanshi@gmail.com.

sibility of integrating a wide range of tasks, such as web
browsing [35], image generation [43], and code execution,
into a single conversational agent. Unlike traditional AI
models that function as single entities, collaborative AI systems integrate multiple AI components, each contributing
unique capabilities to solve complex problems. This shift
towards integration has become crucial for achieving stateof-the-art results, as it leverages the combined strengths of
diverse AI functionalities within a unified framework.
Unfortunately, the design space and optimization of collaborative systems often require significant human expertise [31]. For instance, AlphaCode 2 [2] utilizes an intricate AI system to achieve expert-level performance in competitive programming, which involves fine-tuned LLMs for
coding and scoring, expert models for clustering, and modules for code execution and filtering. These components
collaborate in a precise manner carefully designed by human experts to achieve state-of-the-art performance, which
is not achievable by any single component or their casual
combination. This brings us to a pivotal question: Can we
develop an agent, akin to a human expert, capable of autonomously designing collaborative AI systems?
In this work, we explore this question in ComfyUI [13],
a trending and open-source platform that supports various
generative tools and models in terms of nodes. Within ComfyUI, users can flexibly construct and connect nodes to build
the workflow of the collaborative AI system, which is capable of producing highly customized artwork.
To evaluate agents’s ability to design collaborative AI
systems in ComfyUI, we introduce ComfyBench, a comprehensive benchmark shown in Figure 1, which comprises
200 diverse tasks covering various instruction-following
generation challenges, along with detailed annotations for
3,205 nodes and 20 workflows. We categorize tasks into
three levels of difficulty: vanilla, complex, and creative.
In each task, agents are required to create workflows that
describe collaborative AI systems within ComfyUI, which
can then be executed to produce the desired outcomes specified in the task instructions. We assess the performance of
agents using two evaluation metrics: pass rate, showing the

24614

