This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniGen: Unified Image Generation
Shitao Xiao* , Yueze Wang∗ , Junjie Zhou∗ , Huaying Yuan∗ ,
Xingrun Xing, Ruiran Yan, Chaofan Li, Shuting Wang, Tiejun Huang, Zheng Liu†
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{stxiao, yzwang}@baai.ac.cn, {junjiebupt,zhengliu1026}@gmail.com, hyyuan@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) has unified language generation tasks and revolutionized humanmachine interaction. However, in the realm of image generation, a unified model capable of handling various tasks
within a single framework remains largely unexplored. In
this work, we introduce OmniGen, a new diffusion model
for unified image generation. OmniGen is characterized
by the following features: 1) Unification: OmniGen not
only demonstrates text-to-image generation capabilities but
also inherently supports various downstream tasks, such
as image editing, subject-driven generation, and visualconditional generation. 2) Simplicity: The architecture of
OmniGen is highly simplified, eliminating the need for additional plugins. Moreover, compared to existing diffusion
models, it is more user-friendly and can complete complex
tasks end-to-end through instructions without the need for
extra intermediate steps, greatly simplifying the image generation workflow. 3) Knowledge Transfer: Benefit from
learning in a unified format, OmniGen effectively transfers
knowledge across different tasks, manages unseen tasks and
domains, and exhibits novel capabilities. We also explore
the model’s reasoning capabilities and potential applications of the chain-of-thought mechanism. This work represents the first attempt at a general-purpose image generation model, and we will release our resources at https:
//github.com/VectorSpaceLab/OmniGen to foster future advancements.

Figure 1. OmniGen can flexibly follow instructions to complete
various tasks, without the need for any additional plugins. For
complex tasks (e.g., examples in the second line), it can also be
completed end-to-end without cumbersome intermediate steps.

1. Introduction

has yet to reveal a counterpart that matches the universality
of LLMs. Current image generation models have demonstrated proficiency in specialized tasks. For instance, in
the text-to-image generation filed, models such as the SD
series [12, 51, 55], DALL-E [54], and Imagen [25] have
made significant strides. Meanwhile, lots of efforts have
been made to extend the capabilities of diffusion models for
specific tasks, such as ControlNet [75], InstandID [64], and
InstructPix2Pix [3]. Currently, for each new task, designing
a specific module and fine-tuning it is necessary, which hinders the development of image generation. What’s worse,
these task-specific models lead to a significant issue: we
cannot accomplish tasks simply through input instructions
but require a complex and cumbersome workflow involving
multiple models and numerous steps. For example, ControlNet needs to use a detector to extract conditions (such
as pose estimation maps) and then loads the corresponding
condition module. InstantID can only process single-person
images and requires a face detection model to detect faces
beforehand, followed by using a face encoder to encode the
face. If users want to edit the generated images, additional
models like InstructPix2Pix need to be loaded.

The pursuit of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) has intensified the demand for generative foundation models capable
of handling various tasks within a single framework. In the
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), Large Language Models (LLMs) have become exemplary in achieving
this goal, demonstrating remarkable versatility across numerous language tasks. However, the realm of visual generation
* Co-first authors
† Corresponding authors

Can a single model complete various tasks end-to-end
through user instructions, similar to how ChatGPT handles language tasks? We envision a future where image
generation is made simple and flexible: that any tasks can be

13294

