This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Janus: Decoupling Visual Encoding for Unified Multimodal
Understanding and Generation
Chengyue Wu1,2 Xiaokang Chen1,†,∗ Zhiyu Wu1,3 Yiyang Ma1,3 Xingchao Liu1
Zizheng Pan1 Wen Liu1 Zhenda Xie1 Xingkai Yu1 Chong Ruan1 Ping Luo2,4,∗
1

3

DeepSeek-AI 2 The University of Hong Kong
Peking University 4 HKU Shanghai Intelligent Computing Research Center
https://github.com/deepseek-ai/Janus

Abstract
We introduce Janus, an autoregressive framework that unifies multimodal understanding and generation. Prior research often relies on a single visual encoder for both tasks,
such as Chameleon. However, due to the differing levels
of information granularity required by multimodal understanding and generation, this approach can lead to suboptimal performance, particularly in multimodal understanding. To address this issue, we decouple visual encoding into
separate pathways, while still leveraging a single, unified
transformer architecture for processing. The decoupling
not only alleviates the conflict between the visual encoder’s
roles in understanding and generation, but also enhances
the framework’s flexibility. For instance, both the multimodal understanding and generation components can independently select their most suitable encoding methods. Experiments show that Janus surpasses previous unified model
and matches or exceeds the performance of task-specific
models. The simplicity, high flexibility, and effectiveness of
Janus make it a strong candidate for next-generation unified
multimodal models. The code will be made available.

tion [70, 76], achieving performance comparable to diffusion models. To build more powerful and generalist multimodal models, researchers have sought to combine multimodal understanding and generation tasks [72, 74, 91].
For instance, some studies have attempted to connect multimodal understanding models with pretrained diffusion
models [26, 27, 72]. For example, Emu [72] uses the output
of the LLM as a condition for a pretrained diffusion model,
and then relies on the diffusion model to generate images.
However, strictly speaking, this approach cannot be considered a truly unified model, because the visual generation
functionality is handled by the external diffusion model,
while the multimodal LLM itself lacks the capability to directly generate images.

1. Introduction

Other approaches [74, 82, 83, 91] employ a single transformer to unify both multimodal understanding and generation tasks, which improves instruction-following for visual generation, unlocks potential emergent abilities, and
reduces model redundancy. Such methods typically use a
single vision encoder to process inputs for both two tasks.
However, the representations required by multimodal understanding and generation tasks differ significantly. In
multimodal understanding tasks, the purpose of the vision
encoder is to extract high-level semantic information (e.g.,
object categories or visual attributes within an image). The
output of understanding task not only involves extracting
information from images but also involves complex semantic reasoning. Therefore, the granularity of the vision
encoder’s representation tends to mainly focus on highdimensional semantic representation. By contrast, in visual generation tasks, the main focus is on generating local details and maintaining global consistency in the image. The representation in this context necessitates a lowdimensional encoding that is capable of fine-grained spatial
structure and textural detail expression. Unifying the representations of these two tasks within the same space will lead
to conflicts and trade-offs. Consequently, existing unified

In recent years, multimodal large models have made significant advancements in both understanding and generation
domains [20, 49]. In the field of multimodal understanding, researchers follow the design of LLaVA [49] by using a vision encoder as a bridge to enable large language
models (LLMs) to understand images. In the field of visual generation, diffusion-based approaches [9, 20, 20, 64]
have seen notable success. More recently, some works
have explored autoregressive methods for vision genera† Project lead
* Corresponding authors: pkucxk@pku.edu.cn, pluo@cs.hku.hk

12966

