This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape Abstraction via Marching Differentiable Support Functions
Sunkyung Park, Jeongmin Lee, Dongjun Lee*
Seoul National University
{sunk1136, ljmlgh, djlee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Shape abstraction, simplifying shape representation into
a set of primitives, is a fundamental topic in computer vision. The choice of primitives shapes the structure of world
understanding, yet achieving both high abstraction accuracy and versatility remains challenging. In this paper, we
introduce a novel framework for shape abstraction utilizing a differentiable support function (DSF), which offers
unique advantages in representing a wide range of convex shapes with fewer parameters, providing smooth surface approximation and enabling differentiable contact features (gap, point, normal) essential for downstream applications involving contact-related problems. To tackle the
associated optimization and combinatorial challenges, we
introduce two techniques: differentiable shape parameterization and hyperplane-based marching to enhance accuracy and reduce DSF requirements. We validate our method
through experiments demonstrating superior accuracy and
efficiency, and showcase its applicability in tasks requiring
differentiable contact information.

Figure 1. Our method abstracts an object represented by SDF into
DSFs. The abstracted results can be utilized in differentiable formulations of shape editing, contact localization, and differentiable
simulation. For shape editing, the abstracted DSFs are modified
by contact information.

1. Introduction

through various research efforts in recent years, utilizing different levels of primitives including planar sections
[26, 27], cuboids [38, 40, 48], polytopes [5, 8], and, more
commonly, superquadrics [22, 23, 29, 35]. In this paper, we
aim to establish a novel framework for shape abstraction
based on a new type of primitive—differentiable support
function (DSF [19]), a recently proposed technique for representing convex geometry. We suggest that DSF offers the
following notable advantages in shape abstraction: 1) unlike
conventional primitives, it can accommodate a wide range
of convex shapes and, compared to more complex polytopes or meshes, requires fewer parameters to accurately
represent smooth surfaces; and 2) the abstraction introduces
a novel utility—differentiable contact, where contact features (gap, point, normal) between shapes are guaranteed
to be differentiable with respect to both shape parameters
and object pose. This allows the abstraction to be utilized
in contact-related problems, including contact localization,
differentiable simulation, and shape post-optimization by
leveraging additional geometric and physical information.

Shape representation is pivotal in computer vision and
serves as a fundamental building block for explaining and
understanding the world in a computable form. Representation techniques range from classical models like meshes
and grids to more recently emerging methods such as implicit fields and encoders [37, 46], each selected for their
suitability to specific applications. Meanwhile, shape abstraction simplifies these representations into more manageable primitives, facilitating a more structured understanding
of the world. This is also known to align with how humans perceive and understand scenes by separating them
into components [2], and often enables more efficient processing across a variety of applications, including semantic
labeling [49], editing [29], and physics simulation [8].
In this regard, shape abstraction has been explored
* Corresponding author

16902

