This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging the Gap between Gaussian Diffusion Models and Universal
Quantization for Image Compression
Lucas Relic1,2

Roberto Azevedo2 Yang Zhang2 Markus Gross1,2
1
ETH Zürich 2 DisneyResearch|Studios

Christopher Schroers2

Figure 1. Visualization of the 3 gaps we address in this work. Failure to match the noise level (middle columns) results in either too noisy
or too smooth images. Inconsistent noise types (middle-right) introduces generative artifacts and color shift. Applying diffusion to discrete
data (far right) causes flat textures as well as color shift. Addressing all three gaps (middle-left) results in the most realistic reconstruction
that best matches the source image (far left).

Abstract

1. Introduction
In today’s data-driven world, the field of neural image
compression (NIC) [7, 8, 35] has experienced significant
growth, with increasing demand for more effective codecs.
As NIC performance continues to improve, recent efforts
have focused on achieving compression at even lower bitrates [24, 31]. Here, generative models excel, leveraging
their ability to synthesize textures effectively under stringent information constraints.
Recently proposed methods [19, 31, 36] use diffusion
models [18, 33] as an expressive decoder to produce highly
detailed, realistic reconstructions, especially at extremely
low bitrates. This is achieved by conditioning the diffusion model on information extracted from the source image and generating a new image that attempts to match
the source as closely as possible. We refer to this as the
Conditioning-based Diffusion Image Compression (CDIC)
strategy. However, latent diffusion models [32] also support
a different paradigm for lossy image compression. Quantization error can be modeled as noise [7, 15], and given that
diffusion models are denoising models, one can directly apply them to the data to remove quantization artifacts [31].
We coin this strategy “Dequantization”-based Diffusion Image Compression (DDIC). Following this paradigm provides several benefits, such as reduced decoding time (due
to the small number of diffusion steps compared to the full

Generative neural image compression supports data representation at extremely low bitrate, synthesizing details at the
client and consistently producing highly realistic images.
By leveraging the similarities between quantization error
and additive noise, diffusion-based generative image compression codecs can be built using a latent diffusion model
to “denoise” the artifacts introduced by quantization. However, we identify three critical gaps in previous approaches
following this paradigm (namely, the noise level, noise type,
and discretization gaps) that result in the quantized data
falling out of the data distribution known by the diffusion
model. In this work, we propose a novel quantizationbased forward diffusion process with theoretical foundations that tackles all three aforementioned gaps. We achieve
this through universal quantization with a carefully tailored
quantization schedule and a diffusion model trained with
uniform noise. Compared to previous work, our proposal
produces consistently realistic and detailed reconstructions,
even at very low bitrates. In such a regime, we achieve
the best rate-distortion-realism performance, outperforming previous related works.

2449

