This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PatchVSR: Breaking Video Diffusion Resolution Limits with
Patch-wise Video Super-Resolution
∗‡

†‡

Shian Du1 , Menghan Xia2 , Chang Liu1 , Xintao Wang2 , Jing Wang3 , Pengfei Wan2 ,
†
Di Zhang2 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Kuaishou Technology, 3 Beijing Institute of Technology

coverage, these models typically achieve sharp object structures or coarse textures but struggle to synthesize faithful
details. Recently, the emergence of diffusion generative
models has enabled open-domain video generation of remarkable quality. The generative capabilities of these foundation models present new opportunities for video superresolution techniques [16, 55]. Nevertheless, existing base
models are generally constrained to generating videos of
fixed sizes due to their inherent architecture. This limitation is inherited in their downstream super-resolution models, making it challenging for them to support arbitrary resolution outputs.

Abstract
Pre-trained video generation models hold great potential for generative video super-resolution (VSR). However,
adapting them for full-size VSR, as most existing methods
do, suffers from unnecessary intensive full-attention computation and fixed output resolution. To overcome these limitations, we make the first exploration into utilizing video
diffusion priors for patch-wise VSR. This is non-trivial because pre-trained video diffusion models are not native for
patch-level detail generation. To mitigate this challenge, we
propose an innovative approach, called PatchVSR, which
integrates a dual-stream adapter for conditional guidance.
The patch branch extracts features from input patches to
maintain content fidelity while the global branch extracts
context features from the resized full video to bridge the
generation gap caused by incomplete semantics of patches.
Particularly, we also inject the patch’s location information
into the model to better contextualize patch synthesis within
the global video frame. Experiments demonstrate that our
method can synthesize high-fidelity, high-resolution details
at the patch level. A tailor-made multi-patch joint modulation is proposed to ensure visual consistency across individually enhanced patches. Due to the flexibility of our
patch-based paradigm, we can achieve highly competitive
4K VSR based on a 512×512 resolution base model, with
extremely high efficiency.

This study is motivated by the insight that feature attention in super-resolution models is more locally focused
compared to generation models. This localization is reasonable, as super-resolution tasks have a low-resolution
video as a reference, allowing details to be generated based
on neighborhood semantics rather than requiring intensive global coherence considerations. To leverage this insight, we propose a patch-based strategy for video superresolution. The concept is straightforward and intuitive:
we split the input video into patches sized to be compatible with the pre-trained base model, enhance each patch
individually, and then combine them to produce the final
result. This approach enables the achievement of superresolution results at arbitrary resolutions, independent of the
base model’s inherent resolution constraints.

1. Introduction

The key challenge lies in that video generation-based
models are trained on complete video frames and face noticeable performance degradation for patch-level generation. To adapt a pre-trained video generation model for generating patch-level details in super-resolution, we propose
an innovative approach, called PatchVSR, which integrates
a dual-stream adapter for conditional guidance. The local
branch extracts features from the input patches to guide the
base model for detail synthesis adhering to the input, while
the global branch captures contextual information from the
entire input frame to bridge the generation gap caused by
incomplete semantics of patches. To make the context guid-

Video super-resolution (VSR) has long been a challenging research problem in the field of computer vision. With
the advent of deep learning, significant advancements have
been made in end-to-end VSR models trained on curated
datasets. However, due to limited model capacity and data
∗ Work done during an internship at KwaiVGI, Kuaishou Technology.
‡ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

17799

