This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Global Stereo Consistency for Category-Level Shape and 6D Pose
Estimation from Stereo Images
Junning Qiu1,2,3 * Minglei Lu4 * Fei Wang1,2,3 Yu Guo1,2,3† Yonggen Ling4†
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
2
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University 4 Tencent Robotics X

Abstract
Stereo-based category-level shape and 6D pose estimation methods have the potential to generalize to a wider
range of materials than RGBD methods, which often suffer from depth measurement errors. However, without explicit depth from two views, parameters to be estimated can
become inherently entangled, negatively impacting performance. To address this, we propose a method that leverages
global stereo consistency to constrain optimization directions and mitigate parameter entanglement. We first estimate an intra-category occupancy field to represent a unified shape across views, ensuring consistency and preventing shape ambiguity. Through a divide-and-conquer approach within global shape fitting, we fit this shape to stereo
images to obtain the pose, iteratively rendering normalized
depth maps and exchanging information across views. This
approach improves convergence toward the correct pose
and scale. We validated our method on both depth-friendly
and depth-challenging materials using our S-RGBD dataset
and the TOD benchmark. Our method surpasses RGBD
methods on challenging objects and performs comparably
on depth-friendly ones. Ablation studies confirm the effectiveness of each component.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of how our method optimizes pose
and size after the shape has been estimated. (a) Coarse estimate
results. (b) The optimization allows fitting shapes to the image in
both left and right eye views. Note that λ = zs is related to the 2D
image projection. (c) Introduce baseline relationship to remove
ambiguity and make global fitting.

1. Introduction

3D CAD model for each object. To address the aforementioned challenges, Wang et al. [45] pioneered the use of
Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS) to describe
intra-category shape, predicting NOCS and utilizing depth
information with the Umeyama algorithm [40] to estimate
scale and 6D pose. Subsequently, a wave of RGBD methods
emerged. Some of these continued to use NOCS or its variants [2, 9, 25, 27, 39, 42], while some directly regressed 6D
pose and scale to improve efficiency [4, 6, 26, 28, 58, 59].
Others explored alternative approaches such as [5, 22].

Category-level shape and 6D pose estimation involves estimating 6D pose, scale and shape for unseen objects within
a known set of categories. This research area has attracted
extensive attention due to its crucial importance in multiple
fields such as AR/VR [30, 46], robotics [55], and 3D scene
understanding [7]. Different from traditional instance-level
6D pose estimation [12, 15, 18, 24, 35, 50], categorylevel 6D pose estimation [20, 27, 45, 56] is more challenging as it breaks away from the reliance on a specific
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Although RGBD methods have shown promising results,
most of them heavily rely on depth sensors [3, 56, 60],
which hinders their applicability to a wide range of objects.
Consequently, methods that do not require depth input have
garnered attention. Challengingly, the lack of depth information not only complicates shape estimation, but also introduces scale ambiguity [60]. To address these issues, most
monocular RGB methods [8, 20, 47] use NOCS to describe

16839

