This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V I S TREAM: Improving Computation Efﬁciency of Visual Streaming Perception
via Law-of-Charge-Conservation Inspired Spiking Neural Network
Kang You♣† , Ziling Wei♣† , Jing Yan , Boning Zhang♣ , Qinghai Guo♥ , Yaoyu Zhang♠ , Zhezhi He♣
♣
Intelligent Computing Research Group, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, CN
♠
Institute of Natural Sciences and MOE-LSC, SJTU, CN  School of Mathematical Sciences, SJTU, CN
♥
Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, CN † Equal contribution  Corresponding author
Abstract

ception (i.e., low inference latency). In many VSP scenarios, each newly captured frame must be processed in real
time to meet latency requirements, making it challenging
to incorporate extensive temporal information from prior
frames. Although leveraging historical frame information
can improve perception performance, it also imposes extra
computational overhead and is therefore rarely adopted in
resource-contrained edge platforms.
Meanwhile, spiking neural network (SNN) is an emerging paradigm of intelligent processing, which leverages the
biologically plausible neuron model (e.g., integrate-andﬁre) and event-driven processing mechanism [20, 21, 29]
(Sec. 2.1). In recent work [38], by utilizing a unique spiking neuron called bipolar integrate&ﬁre with spike tracer
(aka., ST-BIF) and conversion-based synaptic weight learning method, SNN is demonstrated to be equivalent with
its ANN counterpart that using quantized rectiﬁed linear
unit (Q-ReLU) as activation. For example, given a classic
ResNet-50 [12] using Q-ReLU as its activation function, its
converted SNN version owns the identical output of ANN
counterpart w.r.t. the same input (i.e., no accuracy drop).
Furthermore, since SNNs mimic the human brain via
taking inputs encoded by spatial-temporal spike-train, the
capability of SNNs to process time-series data is under
extensive investigation. Prior work [6, 18] use SNNs to
accomplish time series classiﬁcation and prediction tasks,
while [4, 39, 42] explore SNN application in video processing tasks, leveraging event-driven architecture to improve
computational efﬁciency and capture temporal dynamics.
These studies demonstrate the potential of SNNs for handling time series data, highlighting SNNs adaptability in the
temporal domain. Nevertheless, there still lacks strong evidence that reveals the advantage of SNN over ANN for VSP
tasks in terms of accuracy and efﬁciency.
By statistically analyzing the pixel difference (L1-norm)
of the neighboring frames across various VSP datasets
(Sec. 2.2), we ﬁnd that the pixel difference of neighboring frames is smaller than the pixel magnitude of independent frames, where the difference will further reduce when

Visual streaming perception (VSP) involves online intelligent processing of sequential frames captured by vision sensors, enabling real-time decision-making in applications
such as autonomous driving, UAVs, and AR/VR. However,
the computational efﬁciency of VSP on edge devices remains a challenge due to power constraints and the underutilization of temporal dependencies between frames. While
spiking neural networks (SNNs) offer biologically inspired
event-driven processing with potential energy beneﬁts, their
practical advantage over artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs)
for VSP tasks remains unproven. In this work, we introduce
a novel framework, V I S TREAM, which leverages the Law
of Charge Conservation (LoCC) property in ST-BIF neurons and a differential encoding (DiffEncode) scheme to optimize SNN inference for VSP. By encoding temporal differences between neighboring frames and eliminating frequent
membrane resets, V I S TREAM achieves signiﬁcant computational reduction while maintaining accuracy equivalent
to its ANN counterpart. We provide theoretical proofs of
equivalence and validate V I S TREAM across diverse VSP
tasks, including object detection, tracking, and segmentation, demonstrating substantial energy savings without
compromising performance. V I S TREAM is publicly available at: https:// github.com/ IntelligentComputing-Research-Group/ViStream

1. Introduction
Visual streaming perception (VSP) refers to the scenarios
where the vision sensor takes a snapshot of the surrounding environment (i.e., frame), then conducts online intelligent processing, e.g., artiﬁcial neural network (ANN), for
further decision-making [17]. Practical VSP applications,
e.g., autonomous driving [36], AR/VR [3] and etc., are
prone to conduct computation locally on edge devices that
are normally power-constrained and demand real-time per-

8796

