This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure from Collision
Takuhiro Kaneko
NTT Corporation
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

1.005

1.005

0.143

0.094

(3) Ground truth

(2) SfC (proposed)

Recent advancements in neural 3D representations, such as
neural radiance fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian splatting
(3DGS), have made accurate estimation of the 3D structure
from multiview images possible. However, this capability is
limited to estimating the visible external structure, and it is
still difficult to identify the invisible internal structure hidden behind the surface. To overcome this limitation, we address a new task called structure from collision (SfC), which
aims to estimate the structure (including the invisible internal one) of an object from the appearance changes at collision. To solve this task, we propose a novel model called
SfC-NeRF, which optimizes the invisible internal structure
of the object through a video sequence under physical, appearance (i.e., visible external structure)-preserving, and
keyframe constraints. In particular, to avoid falling into
undesirable local optima owing to its ill-posed nature, we
propose volume annealing, i.e., searching for the global optima by repeatedly reducing and expanding the volume. Extensive experiments on 115 objects involving diverse structures (i.e., various cavity shapes, locations, and sizes) and
various material properties reveal the properties of SfC and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed SfC-NeRF.1

(1) Static

Abstract

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Concept of structure from collision (SfC). (a) and (c)
Examples of training images taken from a certain viewpoint. (b)
and (d) Cross-sectional views of the internal structures cut perpendicular to the viewpoint. The score indicates the chamfer distance (×103 ↓) between the ground truth and estimated particles
(the smaller, the better). Here, two objects appear to be identical
in static images (1) but actually have different internal structures
(3). (1) A static 3D representation learning model cannot distinguish the difference in internal structures (b)(d) because there is no
difference in appearance in static images (a)(c). (2) To overcome
this limitation, we address SfC. As shown in (a) and (c), changes
in shape and appearance during collision are influenced by the internal structure. We utilize this property to identify the internal
structure of the object. Although it is still difficult to identify perfectly owing to its ill-posed nature, our method has succeeded in
capturing the bias in the location of the holes (b)(d).

Learning 3D representations from multiview images is a
fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics, with
applications across various domains, including augmented
and virtual reality, gaming, robotics, and autonomous driving. Recent advancements in neural 3D representations,
such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) [46] and 3D Gaussian
splatting (3DGS) [32], have enabled accurate estimation of
3D structures from multiview images and yielded impressive results in novel view synthesis.
However, this benefit is limited to the estimation of the
visible external structure, and it is still difficult to estimate the invisible internal structure hidden behind the surface.2 For example, in Figure 1, the two objects have dif1 The project page is available at https://www.kecl.ntt.co.
jp/people/kaneko.takuhiro/projects/sfc/.
2 More strictly, when an object is transparent or translucent, it is possible to estimate the internal structure hidden behind the surface using a vol-

ferent internal structures, as shown in Figure 1(3)(b)(d).
However, they are identical in static images, as shown in
Figure 1(1)(a)(c). Consequently, a standard static neural
3D representation learning model (e.g., the voxel-based
NeRF [62] used in this example) learns the same internal
ume rendering-based 3D representation learning model (e.g., NeRF [46])
because it represents appearance on the basis of cumulative volume densities. However, this effect is limited when an object is nontransparent. This
study aims to identify the internal structure even in the latter case.

16314

