This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tartan IMU: A Light Foundation Model for Inertial Positioning in Robotics
Shibo Zhao1 †∗ , Sifan Zhou1 † , Raphael Blanchard1 , Yuheng Qiu1 , Wenshan Wang1 , Sebastian Scherer1
1

Carnegie Mellon University

Car turning left
Car moving forward

Car turning right

Car is stationary
Human walking
on 昀氀at ground

Dog walking on
昀氀at ground

Drone hovering

Dog walking up
stairs

Drone turning

Human walking
up stairs
Adaptive
Fig. 1. t-SNE Visualization of our Tartan IMU Foundation Model. Our foundation model is trained
onTraining
overBuffer
100Selection
hours of diverse IMU
data collected from various platforms, including ground vehicles, drones, legged robots, and human motion. This model maps IMU data
update
into a unified high-dimensional shared space, capturing broad, generalizable IMU
knowledge.deploy
data

Abstract
Despite recent advances in deep learning, most existing learning IMU odometry methods are trained on specific datasets, lack generalization, and are prone to overfitting, which limits their real-world application. To address
these challenges, we present Tartan IMU, a foundation
IMU Model
model designed for generalizable, Pre-trained
IMU-based
state estimation across diverse robotic platforms. Our approach consists of three-stage: First, a pre-trained foundation model
leverages over 100 hours of multi-platform data to establish
general motion knowledge, achieving 36% improvement in
ATE over specialized models. Second, to adapt to previously unseen tasks, we use Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA),
allowing positive transfer with only 1.1 M trainable parameters. Finally, to support robotics deployment, we introduce
online test-time adaptation, which eliminates the boundary
between training and testing, allowing the model to continuously ”learn as it operates” at 200 FPS in real-time.
* Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

Project page: https://superodometry.com/tartanimu.

1. Introduction
The Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) is a critical compoTime
T0
T1
T2
T3
nent in robotic systems, widely used across platforms such
as autonomous drones, vehicles, legged robots, and VR/AR
Fine-tuned
Adapter
OnlineBy
Adaptation
devices
for human interaction.
measuring linear acceleration and angular velocity, the IMU enables accurate
motion tracking and reliable control across diverse environments. Compared to other positioning solutions such
as visual odometry[47] and LiDAR odometry[48], Inertial
odometry (IO) offers greater robustness in challenging conditions as it is unaffected by visual degradation such as low
lighting and LiDAR degradation such as smoke [49].
However, current IO solutions rely on double integration to integrate the pose from acceleration and angular
velocity, which is susceptible to drift due to factors such
as sensor bias, temperature fluctuations, and sensor white
noise [19]. Even minor errors can rapidly accumulate during integration, causing significant drift and unbounded er-

22520

