This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compositional Caching for Training-free Open-vocabulary Attribute Detection
Marco Garosi1

Alessandro Conti1
1

University of Trento

Gaowen Liu2
2

Cisco Research

Elisa Ricci1,3
3

Massimiliano Mancini1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

https://comca-attributes.github.io

Abstract
Attribute detection is crucial for many computer vision tasks,
as it enables systems to describe properties such as color, texture, and material. Current approaches often rely on laborintensive annotation processes which are inherently limited:
objects can be described at an arbitrary level of detail (e.g.,
color vs. color shades), leading to ambiguities when the
annotators are not instructed carefully. Furthermore, they
operate within a predefined set of attributes, reducing scalability and adaptability to unforeseen downstream applications. We present C OMPOSITIONAL C ACHING (C OM C A),
a training-free method for open-vocabulary attribute detection that overcomes these constraints. C OM C A requires
only the list of target attributes and objects as input, using
them to populate an auxiliary cache of images by leveraging web-scale databases and Large Language Models to
determine attribute-object compatibility. To account for
the compositional nature of attributes, cache images receive soft attribute labels. Those are aggregated at inference time based on the similarity between the input and
cache images, refining the predictions of underlying VisionLanguage Models (VLMs). Importantly, our approach is
model-agnostic, compatible with various VLMs. Experiments on public datasets demonstrate that C OM C A significantly outperforms zero-shot and cache-based baselines,
competing with recent training-based methods, proving that
a carefully designed training-free approach can successfully
address open-vocabulary attribute detection.

1. Introduction
Attributes shape our perception and interactions with the
environment. Let us consider the example of Fig. 1. If our
aim is to identify the animal, we may focus on its fur color,
size, the presence of horns and the tail. Similarly, if we
want to analyze its health status, we may focus on its age,
fur patterns and shades, and its skin. This level of analysis
requires models with fine-grained understanding of the visual input, which is usually obtained by training a model on
datasets that annotate both objects and their corresponding

Figure 1. Example of attribute annotations. Attribute annotations are often: sparse , as they are not consistent across samples;
incomplete , as not all attributes are annotated; ambiguous , as
they can be subjective or miss a frame of reference. This makes
open-vocabulary attribute detection challenging. Differently from
previous works [5, 7], we do not rely on such annotations and propose C OM C A, a training-free approach requiring no supervision.

attributes [38, 40]. However, collecting attribute annotations
is both time-consuming and prone to ambiguities, especially
when annotators lack clear instructions. Additionally, attribute annotations are often tailored to specific datasets and
are ambiguous. For instance, in Fig. 1, one may list “brown”
as a color for the left goat, but others may argue that it is a
red-ish shade of brown. A simple solution is to provide annotators with a predefined list of attributes; however, (i) the list
may not cover all possible annotations for a property (e.g.,
all colors) and (ii) it limits models trained on it to the given
list itself, making them unable to recognize new attributes.
Recent approaches overcome some of the challenges by
developing open-vocabulary attribute detection models [5,
7, 16] that detect attributes specified in natural language at
inference time. While these approaches generalize beyond
the set of seen attributes and objects, their performance is still
biased toward the specific dataset they are trained on. Indeed,
training-based approaches may show significant degradation
in performance in cross-dataset experiments (see Fig. 4).
In this work, we overcome potentially ambiguous and/or limited attribute annotations by introducing
C OMPOSITIONAL C ACHING (C OM C A), a training-free
open-vocabulary attribute detection model. C OM C A employs a Vision-Language Model (VLM) [41] and refines its

15098

