This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LookCloser: Frequency-aware Radiance Field for Tiny-Detail Scene
Chong Bao2
Xiyu Zhang2
Xiaojun Xiang1
Weihong Pan2 *
Hanqing Jiang1†
Hujun Bao2†
1
2
SenseTime Research
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Xiaoyu Zhang1 *

Instant-NGP

Mip-NeRF360

3DGS

Ours

Ground truth

Instant-NGP Mip-NeRF360

3DGS

Ours

Ground truth

Figure 1. FA-NeRF is a frequency-aware framework to capture both the overall scene structure and the high-definition tiny details within
a single model, e.g., the clear petal of flowers and sharp texture of wings of the butterfly. Instead, other methods give an over-smooth
rendering and lose excessive details. Please see the Supplementary Video for an immersive roaming experience.

Abstract

in modeling entire scenes while preserving fine details.

Humans perceive and comprehend their surroundings
through information spanning multiple frequencies. In immersive scenes, people naturally scan their environment
to grasp its overall structure while examining fine details
of objects that capture their attention. However, current
NeRF frameworks primarily focus on modeling either highfrequency local views or the broad structure of scenes
with low-frequency information, which is limited to balancing both. We introduce FA-NeRF, a novel frequencyaware framework for view synthesis that simultaneously
captures the overall scene structure and high-definition details within a single NeRF model. To achieve this, we propose a 3D frequency quantification method that analyzes the
scene’s frequency distribution, enabling frequency-aware
rendering. Our framework incorporates a frequency grid
for fast convergence and querying, a frequency-aware feature re-weighting strategy to balance features across different frequency contents. Extensive experiments show that
our method significantly outperforms existing approaches

1. Introduction

* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.

The Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has achieved significant
success in photo-realistic novel view synthesis and shows
great potential for immersive roaming experiences, game
and film production, etc. Significant efforts have been invested to enhance the performance of NeRF [1, 15, 33], including improving the high-frequency details [20, 42, 51,
56]of localized scenes or adapting to the expanded scale of
scenes [16, 39, 41].
However, in real-world scenarios, both scene structure
and intricate details are crucial. Artifacts from incomplete structures or excessive blurring of details can significantly undermine the sense of immersion. To address this, we constructed a dataset—termed the Multifrequency Dataset—that captures panoramic images for
low-frequency structural information and high-resolution
images for high-frequency details.
In this work, we aim to provide a high-quality rendering of both scene structures and intricate details across
a wide frequency range. However, due to varying viewpoints and resolutions in the dataset, frequency variations

16122

