This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Neural Surfaces for Elastic 4D Shape Representation and Analysis
Awais Nizamani1∗ Hamid Laga1 Guanjin Wang1 Farid Boussaid2
Mohammed Bennamoun2 Anuj Srivastava3
1
Murdoch University (Australia) 2 The University of Western Australia 3 Florida State University

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for the statistical analysis
of genus-zero 4D surfaces, i.e., 3D surfaces that deform
and evolve over time. This problem is particularly challenging due to the arbitrary parameterizations of these surfaces and their varying deformation speeds, necessitating
effective spatiotemporal registration. Traditionally, 4D surfaces are discretized, in space and time, before computing
their spatiotemporal registrations, geodesics, and statistics.
However, this approach may result in suboptimal solutions
and, as we demonstrate in this paper, is not necessary. In
contrast, we treat 4D surfaces as continuous functions in
both space and time. We introduce Dynamic Spherical Neural Surfaces (D-SNS), an efficient smooth and continuous
spatiotemporal representation for genus-0 4D surfaces. We
then demonstrate how to perform core 4D shape analysis
tasks such as spatiotemporal registration, geodesics computation, and mean 4D shape estimation, directly on these
continuous representations without upfront discretization
and meshing. By integrating neural representations with
classical Riemannian geometry and statistical shape analysis techniques, we provide the building blocks for enabling
full functional shape analysis. We demonstrate the efficiency of the framework on 4D human and face datasets.
The source code and additional results are available at
https://4d-dsns.github.io/DSNS/.

jects deform and grow at different rates. Thus, they need
to be temporally aligned onto each other. Traditionally, 3D
and 4D shapes are represented as discrete point clouds or
triangular meshes. The spatiotemporal registration problem
is then reduced to that of matching landmarks across shapes.
Shape statistics such as means and modes of variation are
then computed directly on these registered landmarks. This,
however, leads to solutions that depend on the quality and
resolution of the discretization.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we treat 4D shapes as continuous functions in both space and time and develop a novel statistical
analysis framework that operates directly on these continuous representations, without upfront discretization. This
includes performing spatiotemporal registration, computing
geodesics, and estimating the mean 4D shape of a set of 4D
surfaces. We focus on genus-0 surfaces, which are abundant
in nature, e.g., human bodies and body parts. We propose
a novel surface-based neural representation, hereinafter referred to as Dynamic Spherical Neural Surface (D-SNS),
that treats a 4D surface as a continuous mapping from a
spherical domain and time to 3D. This mapping is then parameterized using Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs). This
will allow us to formulate the spatial registration problem
as that of finding the optimal spatial reparameterizations of
the neural functions. Similarly, temporal registration can be
formulated as the problem of optimal temporal reparameterization of these neural functions. This can be efficiently
implemented using an MLP and optimized using an elastic
Riemannian metric that quantifies physical deformations of
surfaces, i.e., bending and stretching. Additionally, we propose a framework that co-registers a set of 4D surfaces, represented with their D-SNSs, and simultaneously computes
their 4D mean as a D-SNS. The main contributions of this
paper can be summarized as follows;

Statistical 3D shape analysis focuses on quantifying shape
similarities and differences between 3D objects. It also aims
at modelling, using probability distributions, the shape variability within and across object classes. 4D shape statistics,
on the other hand, adds the temporal dimension. It aims
to discover typical shape deformation patterns in a class of
objects, and statistically model the variability of these deformations within and across classes. This is a very challenging problem since 3D shapes come with arbitrary discretization and thus need to be spatially registered onto each
other. 4D shapes add another level of complexity since ob-

21783

• We introduce a new continuous representation for genus0 4D surfaces, parameterized using Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs). This framework treats both 3D and 4D
shapes as functions, enabling functional shape analysis. We also demonstrate how this representation can
be efficiently learned from discrete input 4D surfaces,
with performance validated on datasets such as 4D facial

