This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CustomKD: Customizing Large Vision Foundation for Edge Model
Improvement via Knowledge Distillation
Jungsoo Lee Debasmit Das Munawar Hayat
Sungha Choi† Kyuwoong Hwang Fatih Porikli
Qualcomm AI Research‡
{jungsool, debadas, hayat, sunghac, kyuwoong, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

pretaining datasets. Owing to their well-generalized representation, LVFMs are widely known to achieve state-of-theart performances on diverse downstream tasks [20, 23, 31,
37, 42]. However, while LVFMs have demonstrated impressive performance, their utilization in resource-constrained
real-world applications is challenging due to their high
computational costs and extensive parameters, which often
impede their deployment [12, 52, 55]. Consequently, edge
models, known for their computational efficiency, may remain the preferred choice for real-world applications, especially when considering deployment on mobile devices.
However, these edge models typically offer limited performance, so finding a solution to improve their capabilities
while maintaining their low computation costs is necessary.

Abstract
We propose a novel knowledge distillation approach, CustomKD, that effectively leverages large vision foundation
models (LVFMs) to enhance the performance of edge models (e.g., MobileNetV3). Despite recent advancements in
LVFMs, such as DINOv2 and CLIP, their potential in
knowledge distillation for enhancing edge models remains
underexplored. While knowledge distillation is a promising
approach for improving the performance of edge models,
the discrepancy in model capacities and heterogeneous architectures between LVFMs and edge models poses a significant challenge. Our observation indicates that although
utilizing larger backbones (e.g., ViT-S to ViT-L) in teacher
models improves their downstream task performances, the
knowledge distillation from the large teacher models fails
to bring as much performance gain for student models as
for teacher models due to the large model discrepancy.
Our simple yet effective CustomKD customizes the wellgeneralized features inherent in LVFMs to a given student
model in order to reduce model discrepancies. Specifically,
beyond providing well-generalized original knowledge from
teachers, CustomKD aligns the features of teachers to those
of students, making it easy for students to understand and
overcome the large model discrepancy overall. CustomKD
significantly improves the performances of edge models in
scenarios with unlabeled data such as unsupervised domain adaptation (e.g., OfficeHome and DomainNet) and
semi-supervised learning (e.g., CIFAR-100 and ImageNet),
achieving the new state-of-the-art performances.

While training edge models with more labeled data samples to improve their performance on a certain downstream
task would be one viable solution, collecting more labeled
samples is labor-intensive and expensive. Without further
data collection, one feasible solution to tackle such a challenge is performing knowledge distillation (KD) [1, 21, 40,
41, 61] with LVFMs serving as teachers for the edge models. This approach can enhance the performance of edge
models to be comparable to that of LVFMs while maintaining their low computational costs. Specifically, by leveraging unlabeled data samples, we can extract meaningful information from LVFMs and transfer it to edge models without incurring expensive data annotation costs.

1. Introduction

However, one major challenge of using LVFMs as teachers is the model discrepancy between LVFMs and edge
models, leading to differences in representation spaces. In
this KD setting, the model discrepancy arises from two primary factors. First, LVFMs are built with a vast number
of parameters in order to understand the massive amount of
knowledge from large-scale pretraining datasets while edge
models are built on only a limited number of parameters.
Second, the heterogeneous architectures (i.e., architectural
difference) between students (e.g., CNN based) and teachers (e.g., ViT based) may also cause the model discrepancy.

Recent efforts in computer vision have focused on building
large vision foundation models (LVFMs), with a substantial
number of parameters, generally trained using large-scale
† Corresponding author. ‡ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of
Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

25176

