This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Local Sharpness: Communication-Efficient Global Sharpness-aware
Minimization for Federated Learning
Debora Caldarola1, *, Pietro Cagnasso1 , Barbara Caputo1 , Marco Ciccone2,†
1
Politecnico di Torino, 2 Vector Institute

Abstract
Loss

Loss

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

2

Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative model training with privacy preservation. Data heterogeneity across
edge devices (clients) can cause models to converge to
sharp minima, negatively impacting generalization and robustness. Recent approaches use client-side sharpnessaware minimization (SAM) to encourage flatter minima,
but the discrepancy between local and global loss landscapes often undermines their effectiveness, as optimizing
for local sharpness does not ensure global flatness. This
work introduces F ED G LO SS (Federated Global Serverside Sharpness), a novel FL approach that prioritizes the
optimization of global sharpness on the server, using SAM.
To reduce communication overhead, F ED G LO SS cleverly
approximates sharpness using the previous global gradient, eliminating the need for additional client communication. Our extensive evaluations demonstrate that F ED G LO SS consistently achieves flatter minima and better
performance compared to state-of-the-art FL methods in
various federated vision benchmarks. Code available at
github.com/pietrocagnasso/fedgloss.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [39] provides a powerful framework to collaboratively train machine learning models on
private data distributed across multiple endpoints. Unlike
traditional methods, FL enables edge devices (clients), like
smartphones or IoT (Internet of Things) hardware, to train
a shared model without compromising their sensitive information. This is achieved through communication rounds,
where clients independently train on their local data and
then exchange updated model parameters with a central
server, preserving data privacy. The optimization on the
server side relies on pseudo-gradients [47], i.e., the average
of the difference between the global model and the client’s
update, which serve as an estimate of the true global gradi* Corresponding author: debora.caldarola@polito.it
† Work mainly carried out while at Politecnico di Torino

(a) C IFAR 10
α=0

2

(b) C IFAR 10
α = 0.05

Loss

Loss

3.5

3.5

3

3

2.5

2.5

4

4

2

(c) C IFAR 100
α=0

2

(d) C IFAR 100
α = 0.5

Figure 1. Comparison of F EDAVG (solid) and F ED S AM (net) loss landscapes with
varying degrees of data heterogeneity (α) on the C IFAR datasets. F ED S AM’s effectiveness in converging to global flat minima is highly influenced by the data
heterogeneity, where higher heterogeneity (α → 0) leads to sharper minima, and
the complexity of the task, e.g., higher sharpness for the more complex C IFAR 100.
This highlights the importance of optimizing global sharpness. Model: CNN.

ent on the overall dataset. This approach holds immense potential for privacy-sensitive applications, proving its value
in areas like healthcare [2, 37, 41, 46], finance [41], autonomous driving [11, 40, 51], IoT [62], and more [32, 57].
However, the real-world deployment of FL presents unique
challenges stemming from data heterogeneity and communication costs [34]. Clients gather their data influenced
by various factors such as personal habits or geographical locations, leading to inherent differences across devices [20, 24, 51]. This results in the global model suffering from degraded performance and slower convergence
[4, 25, 26, 36], with instability emerging as client-specific
optimization paths diverge from the global one. This phenomenon, known as client drift [26], limits the model’s ability to generalize to the overall underlying distribution.
While many FL approaches focus on mitigating client
drift through client-side regularization [1, 35, 56], a recent
trend leverages the geometry of the loss landscape to improve generalization [4, 7, 45, 53, 54]. These methods build
upon the notion that convergence to sharp minima correlates with poor generalization [17, 23, 27]. F ED S AM [4, 45]
employs Sharpness-aware Minimization (S AM) [12] in local training to guide clients toward flatter loss regions, enhancing global performance. This comes at the cost of increased client-side computation, since S AM requires two
forward/backward passes for each local optimization step:
a gradient ascent step to compute the maximum sharpness
and a descent step for sharpness and loss value minimization. Although F ED S AM and its variants [7, 54] demonstrated their effectiveness in various settings, they rely
solely on local flatness, assuming that minimizing sharpness

25187

