This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot 4D Lidar Panoptic Segmentation
Yushan Zhang1,2 * Aljoša Ošep1 Laura Leal-Taixé1 Tim Meinhardt1
1
2
NVIDIA
Linköping University

3D Instances

4D Instances

Semantics

Semantics

Prior work: Zero-Shot (3D)
Lidar Panoptic Segmentation

This work: Zero-Shot 4D
Lidar Panoptic Segmentation

Text prompts:
{advertising stand}

Text prompts:
{car}

Figure 1. Learning to Segment Anything in Lidar–4D: Prior methods (left) for zero-shot Lidar panoptic segmentation process individual
(3D) point clouds in isolation. In contrast, our data-driven approach (right) operates directly on sequences of point clouds, jointly performing object segmentation, tracking, and zero-shot recognition based on text prompts specified at test time. Our method localizes and tracks
any object and provides a temporally coherent semantic interpretation of dynamic scenes. We can correctly segment canonical objects,
such as car, and objects beyond the vocabularies of standard Lidar datasets, such as advertising stand. Best seen in color, zoomed.

Abstract
Zero-shot 4D segmentation and recognition of arbitrary objects in Lidar is crucial for embodied navigation, with applications ranging from streaming perception to semantic
mapping and localization. However, the primary challenge
in advancing research and developing generalized, versatile
methods for spatio-temporal scene understanding in Lidar
lies in the scarcity of datasets that provide the necessary
diversity and scale of annotations. To overcome these challenges, we propose SAL-4D (Segment Anything in Lidar–
4D), a method that utilizes multi-modal robotic sensor setups as a bridge to distill recent developments in Video Object Segmentation (VOS) in conjunction with off-the-shelf
Vision-Language foundation models to Lidar. We utilize
VOS models to pseudo-label tracklets in short video sequences, annotate these tracklets with sequence-level CLIP
tokens, and lift them to the 4D Lidar space using calibrated
multi-modal sensory setups to distill them to our SAL-4D
model. Due to temporal consistent predictions, we outperform prior art in 3D Zero-Shot Lidar Panoptic Segmentation (LPS) over 5 PQ, and unlock Zero-Shot 4D-LPS.

spatio-temporal scene understanding is directly relevant for
embodied navigation [91], semantic mapping [6, 7, 92], localization [33, 39] and neural rendering [63].
Status quo. In applications that demand precise spatial and dynamic situational scene understanding, e.g., autonomous driving [91], perception stacks rely on Lidarbased object detection [53, 104, 113] and multi-object
tracking [20, 35, 93, 106] methods to localize objects, with
recent trends moving towards holistic scene understanding
via 4D Lidar Panoptic Segmentation (4D-LPS) [4]. The
progress in these areas has largely been fueled by datadriven methods [16, 73, 74, 90] that rely on manually labeled datasets [7, 24, 86], limiting these methods to localizing instances of predefined object classes. On the
other hand, recent developments in single-scan Lidar-based
perception are moving towards utilizing vision foundation
models for pre-training [71, 72, 82] and zero-shot segmentation [62, 67, 99]. However, state-of-the-art methods can
only detect [61] and segment [62, 99] objects in individual
scans. In contrast, embodied agents must continuously interpret sensory data and localize objects in a 4D continuum
to understand the present and predict the future.
Towards 4D pseudo-labeling. Can we perform 4D Lidar
Panoptic Segmentation by distilling video-foundation models to Lidar? Recent advances [78] suggest that Video Object Segmentation (VOS) [70] generalize well to arbitrary
objects. However, empirically, long-term segmentation stability remains a challenge [21, 110], while data recorded

1. Introduction
We tackle segmentation, tracking, and zero-shot recognition of any object in Lidar sequences. Such open-ended 4D
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

24506

