This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mimir: Improving Video Diffusion Models for Precise Text Understanding
Shuai Tan1 * † , Biao Gong1 * ‡ , Yutong Feng2 , Kecheng Zheng1 , Dandan Zheng1 , Shuwei Shi1 ,
Yujun Shen1 , Jingdong Chen1 , Ming Yang1
1

Ant Group 2 Tsinghua University

A majestic eagle soars above a vast, snow-covered forest, its powerful wings cutting through the crisp winter air. Below, a dense canopy of evergreen trees is blanketed in
pristine snow, creating a serene landscape.

A woman with short, curly silverhair in a red dress stands in a dimly lit, futuristic setting, looking to her left. Neon lights and digital screens fill the scene. By the end, she
gazes away from the viewer against a neon cityscape, conveying mystery and anticipation.

The transformation from a flower bud to a fully blooming flower.

A vast, golden desert stretches endlessly under a brilliant blue sky in the early morning light. As the sun sets, the sky transforms into a canvas of vibrant oranges. Finally,
the night falls, revealing a breathtaking canopy of stars, with the Milky Way arching gracefully over the tranquil.

Figure 1. Samples generated by Mimir. Our model demonstrates a powerful spatiotemporal imagination for input text prompts, e.g.,
(row-3) physically accurate petals, (row-4) the desert with illumination harmonization, which closely match human cognition.

Abstract
Text serves as the key control signal in video generation
due to its narrative nature. To render text descriptions into
video clips, current video diffusion models borrow features
from text encoders yet struggle with limited text comprehension. The recent success of large language models
(LLMs) showcases the power of decoder-only transformers,
which offers three clear benefits for text-to-video (T2V)
generation, namely, precise text understanding resulting
from the superior scalability, imagination beyond the input
text enabled by next token prediction, and flexibility to

prioritize user interests through instruction tuning. Nevertheless, the feature distribution gap emerging from the two
different text modeling paradigms hinders the direct use of
LLMs in established T2V models. This work addresses this
challenge with Mimir, an end-to-end training framework
featuring a carefully tailored token fuser to harmonize
the outputs from text encoders and LLMs. Such a design
allows the T2V model to fully leverage learned video priors
while capitalizing on the text-related capability of LLMs.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate
the effectiveness of Mimir in generating high-quality
videos with excellent text comprehension, especially when
processing short captions and managing shifting motions.
Project page: https://lucaria-academy.github.io/Mimir/

* Equal contribution. † Work done during internship at Ant Group.
‡ Project lead and corresponding author.

23978

