This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adv-CPG: A Customized Portrait Generation Framework with Facial
Adversarial Attacks
Junying Wang1
1
2

Hongyuan Zhang2,3

Yuan Yuan1,∗

School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom, Shanghai, China
junyingwang959@163.com, hyzhang98@gmail.com, y.yuan.ieee@gmail.com

Figure 1. The proposed Adv-CPG generates safe portraits that can deceive malicious face recognition systems. First row: original image.
Second row: customized portrait based on the text prompt, without protection via Adv-CPG. Third row: customized portrait based on the
scene text prompt, with protection via Adv-CPG. Fourth row: comparison with existing methods. The yellow number over each image:
confidence score returned by Face++ when using the adversarial example for identity matching with the target (higher is better).

Abstract
Recent Customized Portrait Generation (CPG) methods,
taking a facial image and a textual prompt as inputs, have
attracted substantial attention. Although these methods
generate high-fidelity portraits, they fail to prevent the generated portraits from being tracked and misused by malicious face recognition systems. To address this, this paper proposes a Customized Portrait Generation framework
with facial Adversarial attacks (Adv-CPG). Specifically, to
achieve facial privacy protection, we devise a lightweight
local ID encryptor and an encryption enhancer. They implement progressive double-layer encryption protection by
directly injecting the target identity and adding additional
identity guidance, respectively. Furthermore, to accomplish

fine-grained and personalized portrait generation, we develop a multi-modal image customizer capable of generating controlled fine-grained facial features. To the best of
our knowledge, Adv-CPG is the first study that introduces
facial adversarial attacks into CPG. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of Adv-CPG, e.g., the average
attack success rate of the proposed Adv-CPG is 28.1% and
2.86% higher compared to the SOTA noise-based attack
methods and unconstrained attack methods, respectively.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Diffusion models [35, 38] have exhibited impressive superiority in the field of text-to-image (T2I) synthesis, especially
for image customization tasks [10, 26]. Among these, Customized Portrait Generation (CPG) creates a portrait image
that is visually consistent with the reference facial image,

21001

