This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniNet: A Contrastive Learning-guided Unified Framework with Feature
Selection for Anomaly Detection

1

Xiaolong Xu1,2,3
Shun Wei1
Jielin Jiang1,2,3 *
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China 2 Nanjing University, China
3
Jiangsu Province Engineering Research Center of
Advanced Computing and Intelligent Services, China
{pangdatangtt,jiangjielin2008,xlxu}@nuist.edu.cn1
Code:

https://github.com/pangdatangtt/UniNet

Abstract

lance [1, 37, 42]. Prior AD paradigms typically develop
separate models tailored to each domain (see Fig. 1(a)).
Despite considerable advancements in domain-specific applications, these approaches often suffer from limited crossdomain applicability. This limitation primarily arises from
domain differences and inherent discrepancies in features.
For instance, in industrial AD, some self-supervised methods [28, 41, 53] employ external data [10] or data augmentation technologies to synthesize anomalies and learn anomalous feature distribution. However, the anomalies generated
in this manner can differ substantially from those encountered in other domains, e.g., medical imaging [11, 25, 43] or
video surveillance [29], potentially resulting in insufficient
learning of the anomalous distribution. In fact, beyond the
stark differences in visual appearance of anomalies–such as
defects on industrial products vs. polyps on the intestine or
anomalous behavior like cyclist in video surveillance–there
are also notable differences in the normal features across
different domains. This variability further complicates their
cross-domain applications. Moreover, another main challenge hindering the effective application of most methods across other domains is their reliance on pre-trained
networks–trained on source domains such as ImageNet
[13]–for feature extraction. Recent studies [17, 22, 54] have
demonstrated that pre-trained features often bear little resemblance to those needed to the target domain owing to
inherent biases in these pre-trained networks, adversely affecting performance (see Fig. 1(c)). In light of these challenges, this paper explores the problem of how to develop a
unified framework capable of adapting to diverse domains
while achieving accurate AD (see Fig. 1(b)).

Anomaly detection (AD) is a crucial visual task aimed at
recognizing abnormal pattern within samples. However,
most existing AD methods suffer from limited generalizability, as they are primarily designed for domain-specific
applications, such as industrial scenarios, and often perform poorly when applied to other domains. This challenge largely stems from the inherent discrepancies in features across domains. To bridge this domain gap, we introduce UniNet, a generic unified framework that incorporates
effective feature selection and contrastive learning-guided
anomaly discrimination. UniNet comprises student-teacher
models and a bottleneck, featuring several vital innovations: First, we propose domain-related feature selection,
where the student is guided to select and focus on representative features from the teacher with domain-relevant priors, while restoring them effectively. Second, a similarity
contrastive loss function is developed to strengthen the correlations among homogeneous features. Meanwhile, a margin loss function is proposed to enforce the separation between the similarities of abnormality and normality, effectively improving the model’s ability to discriminate anomalies. Third, we propose a weighted decision mechanism for
dynamically evaluating the anomaly score to achieve robust
AD. Large-scale experiments on 12 datasets from various
domains show that UniNet surpasses existing methods.

1. Introduction
Visual anomaly detection (AD) has gained significant traction in recent years, with applications spanning across various fields, such as medical image diagnosis [7, 35, 46], industrial defect inspection [9, 24, 31, 48], and video surveil-

Recently, ReContrast [17] introduces contrastive learning (CL) elements to optimize its framework for adaptation to different target domains, showing good transfer ability. Nevertheless, two limitations restrict its further development. First, it struggles to capture representative fea-

* Corresponding author.

9994

