This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShiftwiseConv: Small Convolutional Kernel with Large Kernel Effect
Dachong Li1 Li Li2 Zhuangzhuang Chen1 Jianqiang Li3 *
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology.
{lidachong2023, 2250201001, chenzhuangzhuang2016}@email.szu.edu.cn, lijq@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Large kernels make standard convolutional neural networks (CNNs) great again over transformer architectures
in various vision tasks. Nonetheless, recent studies meticulously designed around increasing kernel size have shown
diminishing returns or stagnation in performance. Thus,
the hidden factors of large kernel convolution that affect
model performance remain unexplored. In this paper, we
reveal that the key hidden factors of large kernels can be
summarized as two separate components: extracting features at a certain granularity and fusing features by multiple pathways. To this end, we leverage the multi-path longdistance sparse dependency relationship to enhance feature
utilization via the proposed Shiftwise (SW) convolution operator with a pure CNN architecture. In a wide range of
vision tasks such as classification, segmentation, and detection, SW surpasses state-of-the-art transformers and CNN
architectures, including SLaK and UniRepLKNet. More
importantly, our experiments demonstrate that 3 × 3 convolutions can replace large convolutions in existing large
kernel CNNs to achieve comparable effects, which may inspire follow-up works. Code and all the models at https:
//github.com/lidc54/shift-wiseConv.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) [18, 31, 32, 36] outperforms traditionally dominant CNNs, largely due to its superior capacity for long-range modeling. Meanwhile, CNNs are widely
recognized for their resource efficiency and translation invariance. Thus, an intuitive idea is to integrate the strengths
* Corresponding author. This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar under Grant
62325307, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62203134, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grants 2023B1515120038, in part by Shenzhen
Science and Technology Innovation Commission (20220809141216003,
KJZD20230923113801004), in part by the Scientific Instrument Developing Project of Shenzhen University under Grant 2023YQ019.

pruned
feature
operator
SW

SW

BN(sum(*))

group
Conv
group
Conv
Rep

SW

BN(sum(*))

SW

BN(sum(*))

+

Figure 1. The left panel depicts the retina’s cellular structure,
which is composed of photoreceptor cells and ganglia, with photoreceptors sending visual signals to ganglia via multiple pathways. The right panel presents our Shiftwise (SW) Convolution,
consisting of standard convolution and a connection-centric module. The approach utilizes group convolution and reparameterization (Rep) to extract basic information, which is then processed by
a shift algorithm to mimic large kernel convolution.

of ViT to facilitate the evolution of CNNs. To this end,
ConvNeXt [38] draws inspiration from ViT and incorporates effective long-distance modeling into its architecture,
thereby outperforming ViT-based models in various vision
tasks. The most critical insight is to enhance long-distance
dependencies through the enlargement of kernel sizes.
Motivate by the above insight, recent studies like RepLKNet [16], SLaK [35], and UniRepLKNet [17] have significantly advanced kernel size, and made CNNs great again
over ViTs. More specifically, RepLKNet [16] expanded
convolutional kernels from 7×7 in ConvNeXt [38] to 31×31,
which led to performance improvements. SLaK [35] introduced decomposable convolutions, utilizing two distinct
strip convolutions of 51×5 and 5×51, further advancing the
capabilities of pure CNNs. ParCNetV2 [58] expanded kernel sizes to twice the feature map size, achieving accuracy
levels nearly on par with SLaK [35]. In contrast, UniRe-

25281

