This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Inverse Rendering from Propagating Light
Anagh Malik∗1,2 Benjamin Attal∗3 Andrew Xie1,2 Matthew O’Toole+3 David B. Lindell+1,2
1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 Carnegie Mellon University
∗

joint first authors + equal contribution

https:/anaghmalik.com/InvProp
2.37 ns

conventional image

estimated normals
2.62 ns

2.86 ns

lidar frames (novel views)
2.96 ns

time-resolved relighting (novel views)

direct component

indirect component

Figure 1. We introduce a method to model and invert multi-view, time-resolved measurements of propagating light from a flash lidar
system. (row 1) Our method accurately recovers the geometry of this scene and enables rendering of time-resolved lidar measurements
that reveal light propagation from novel views. (row 2) Physically-based modeling enables novel applications, such as time-resolved
relighting and automatic decomposition of light transport into direct and indirect components.

Abstract
We present the first system for physically based, neural
inverse rendering from multi-viewpoint videos of propagating light. Our approach relies on a time-resolved extension
of neural radiance caching — a technique that accelerates
inverse rendering by storing infinite-bounce radiance arriving at any point from any direction. The resulting model
accurately accounts for direct and indirect light transport
effects and, when applied to captured measurements from a
flash lidar system, enables state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction in the presence of strong indirect light. Further, we
demonstrate view synthesis of propagating light, automatic
decomposition of captured measurements into direct and
indirect components, as well as novel capabilities such as
multi-view time-resolved relighting of captured scenes.

1. Introduction
Ultrafast imaging systems such as lidar illuminate a scene
with a pulse of light and capture the backscattered “echoes”
from the propagating wavefront [73]. Precisely measuring the speed-of-light time delay of backscattered light enables 3D reconstruction, and so lidar systems based on this
principle are popular in applications from autonomous driving [36] to augmented reality [2] and remote sensing [13].
Lidar relies on time-resolved measurements of direct
light transport, or light that reflects directly from a surface
back to the sensor. Measurements of indirect light transport
(i.e., light that scatters multiple times before reaching the
sensor) are typically ignored or discarded because modeling indirect light requires computationally expensive (and
often intractable) inverse rendering using procedures such
as recursive path tracing [25, 64]. Still, measurements of

10534

