This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FIRE: Robust Detection of Diffusion-Generated Images via Frequency-Guided
Reconstruction Error
Beilin Chu, Xuan Xu, Xin Wang, Yufei Zhang, Weike You* , Linna Zhou*
School of CyberSpace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
beilin.chu@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Existing Method

The rapid advancement of diffusion models has significantly
improved high-quality image generation, making generated
content increasingly challenging to distinguish from real
images and raising concerns about potential misuse. In
this paper, we observe that diffusion models struggle to
accurately reconstruct mid-band frequency information in
real images, suggesting the limitation could serve as a
cue for detecting diffusion model generated images. Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel method called
Frequency-guIded Reconstruction Error (FIRE), which, to
the best of our knowledge, is the first to investigate the influence of frequency decomposition on reconstruction error.
FIRE assesses the variation in reconstruction error before
and after the frequency decomposition, offering a robust
method for identifying diffusion model generated images.
Extensive experiments show that FIRE generalizes effectively to unseen diffusion models and maintains robustness
against diverse perturbations.

⊖ absolute operation

Ⓒ concat operation
!

!

Diffusion Model

!"#$

!′

!!

w/o interaction

First Stage

Real/
Generated

⊖

Our Method

Classifier

Second Stage

better alignment

!

⊖
!"#$

!!

FMRE

Real/
Generated

Ⓒ

⊖
!%&#

Diffusion Model
!
!%&#

!%&#_"#$

Classifier

End-to-end Training

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison between existing reconstruction-based
methods and FIRE. Existing approaches [32, 43] proceed in two
steps: first, compute the reconstruction error of the image using
a pre-trained diffusion model, and then train a backend classifier
on the reconstruction error. FIRE integrates the classifier with the
diffusion model, allowing end-to-end learning and better alignment of the latent space for artifact generation and detection. Additionally, FMRE can leverage frequency-guided reconstruction
to identify the information that the diffusion model struggles to reconstruct.

The advent of diffusion models (DMs) [18] has made highquality, controllable image generation significantly more
accessible. Subsequent works leverage large-scale multimodal learning [33, 34, 38], particularly involving text and
image pairs, to further diversify the scenarios in which DMs
can generate images. The realism of these generated images
has reached a level where they can deceive the human visual
system, raising concerns about the potential misuse of DMs
to create misleading content [21]. Therefore, the development of effective methods to detect such generated images
is critical to mitigate the potential societal risks posed by
this technology.
Several works [5, 17, 48, 49] have been proposed specifically for detecting images generated by DMs. Among them,
a novel class of detection methods based on diffusion re* Equal corresponding authors.

construction are proposed [7, 26, 27, 32, 43], highlighting a
promising research direction. These methods are founded
on the assumption that generated images, having undergone the diffusion process, are closer to the latent space in
DM. Consequently, they are less affected by reconstruction
through a second denoising process compared to real images. By utilizing the reconstruction error, these methods
can achieve satisfactory performance in detecting images
generated by various models, often with lightweight models
or even in a training-free manner. However, these methods
still face challenges in generalizing to unseen datasets [7].
When rethinking the significance of reconstruction error
representation in the diffusion process, we argue it indeed

12830

