This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SaMam: Style-aware State Space Model for Arbitrary Image Style Transfer

1

Hongda Liu1 , Longguang Wang2 , Ye Zhang1 , Ziru Yu1 , Yulan Guo1 *
The Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, Sun Yat-Sen University
2
Aviation University of Air Force
{liuhd36@mail2.sysu, guoyulan@sysu}.edu.cn

Abstract
Global effective receptive ﬁeld plays a crucial role
for image style transfer (ST) to obtain high-quality stylized results. However, existing ST backbones (e.g., CNNs
and Transformers) suffer huge computational complexity
to achieve global receptive ﬁelds. Recently, State Space
Model (SSM), especially the improved variant Mamba, has
shown great potential for long-range dependency modeling with linear complexity, which offers an approach to
resolve the above dilemma. In this paper, we develop a
Mamba-based style transfer framework, termed SaMam.
Speciﬁcally, a mamba encoder is designed to efﬁciently extract content and style information. In addition, a styleaware mamba decoder is developed to ﬂexibly adapt to various styles. Moreover, to address the problems of local
pixel forgetting, channel redundancy and spatial discontinuity of existing SSMs, we introduce local enhancement
and zigzag scan mechanisms. Qualitative and quantitative
results demonstrate that our SaMam outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency.

1. Introduction
Style transfer (ST) aims at capturing image style to generate artistic images, which has attracted increasing interests
since the seminal works [14, 15]. With the developments of
modern deep learning techniques such as CNNs [3, 22, 24],
transformers [8, 55, 62], and diffusion models [6, 9, 29],
style transformation performance has continued to be improved in the past few years. We attribute this improvement
partly to the increase of receptive ﬁelds. First, a relatively
large receptive ﬁeld allows the model to extract sufﬁcient
image patterns from a wider region, enabling it to better
capture style patterns [8]. Second, with a larger receptive
ﬁeld, the model is able to leverage more pixels in the content image to facilitate the style transformation of the anchor
* Corresponding author: Yulan Guo

Figure 1. Trade-off between inference time t (ms) and ArtFID [54]
achieved by different methods. The size of a circle represents
MACs (G).

pixel [19].
Despite superior performance, previous methods achieve
larger receptive ﬁelds at the cost of higher computational
cost. CNN-based methods stack more convolutional layers
to enlarge receptive ﬁelds [24, 43], at the cost of high computational overhead. In addition, Transformer-based methods obtains global receptive ﬁeld at cost of quadratic computational complexity [8, 19]. For diffusion-based models,
as numerous iterations are required, these methods also suffer high computational cost [6, 9].
Recently, a novel State Space Model (SSM) called
Mamba [17] is proposed in the NLP ﬁeld for long sequence
modeling with linear complexity [13, 17, 18, 36, 44].
Mamba introduces an effective solution to balance global
receptive ﬁeld and computational efﬁciency [19, 32, 35, 63].
Speciﬁcally, the discretized space equations in Mamba are
formalized into a recursive form and can model long-range
dependency when equipped with specially designed structured reparameterization [17, 19].
In this paper, we propose Style-aware Mamba (SaMam)

28468

