This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Let’s Verify and Reinforce Image Generation Step by Step
Renrui Zhang∗†1 , Chengzhuo Tong∗4 , Zhizheng Zhao∗3 , Ziyu Guo∗2 , Haoquan Zhang4
Manyuan Zhang1 , Jiaming Liu3 , Peng Gao4,5 , Hongsheng Li‡1,6
CUHK 1 MMLab & 2 MiuLar Lab 3 Peking University
4
Shanghai AI Lab 5 SIAT 6 CPII under InnoHK

Abstract
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning has been extensively
explored in large models to tackle complex understanding tasks. However, it remains an open question whether
such strategies can be applied to verifying and reinforcing image generation scenarios. In this paper, we provide the first comprehensive investigation in the potential of
CoT reasoning to enhance autoregressive image generation.
We focus on three techniques: scaling test-time computation for verification, aligning model preferences with Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), and integrating these
techniques for complementary effects. Our results demonstrate that these approaches can be effectively adapted and
combined to significantly improve image generation performance. Furthermore, given the pivotal role of reward models in our findings, we propose the Potential Assessment
Reward Model (PARM) specialized for autoregressive image generation. PARM adaptively assesses each generation step through a potential assessment mechanism, merging the strengths of existing reward models. Using our
investigated reasoning strategies, we enhance a baseline
model, Show-o, to achieve superior results, with a significant +24% improvement on the GenEval benchmark, surpassing Stable Diffusion 3 by +15%. We hope our study
provides unique insights and paves a new path for integrating CoT reasoning with autoregressive image generation. Code is released at https://github.com/
ZiyuGuo99/Image-Generation-CoT.

made toward enhancing LLMs and LMMs with Chain-ofThought (CoT) reasoning capabilities [19, 50, 52, 60], e.g.,
OpenAI o1 [34], contributing to superior performance in
mathematics [28, 58], science [15, 42], and coding [13, 62].
Despite the success in multimodal understanding, it remains under-explored whether multi-step reasoning strategies can be effectively applied to image generation. Considering the discrepancy between two tasks, we observe that,
autoregressive image generation [3, 45, 51, 53] shares a
similar output manner to the nature of LLMs and LMMs.
Specifically, they both quantize the target data (language
and image) into discrete tokens, and iteratively predict partial content conditioned on previously generated tokens.
As illustrated in Figure 1, LMMs leverage CoT to break
down complex mathematical problems into manageable
steps, which enables scaling test-time computation with reward models [24, 30, 44, 49] and reinforcement learning
for preference alignment [18, 20, 29, 59]. Likewise, autoregressive image generation through step-by-step decoding can produce intermediate images, potentially allowing
for similar verification and reinforcement techniques. This
raises the question: Can we verify and reinforce image generation step-by-step with strategies revealed by OpenAI o1?

1. Introduction

To this end, we conduct a systematic investigation into
the potential of CoT reasoning for autoregressive image
generation. We adopt Show-o [53], a latest discrete generative model, as our baseline, and evaluate on a challenging text-to-image generation benchmark: GenEval [12].
Specifically, we focus on examining two key perspectives:
1) Scaling test-time computation with Outcome/Process Reward Model (ORM/PRM) as verifiers; and 2) Reinforced
preference alignment with Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO). The specifics are as follows:

Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 47, 48] and Large
Multimodal Models (LMMs) [10, 33, 57] have gained remarkable achievements across language [5, 31], 2D image [8, 27], video [9, 17], and 3D [14, 16]. Building
upon general understanding skills, recent efforts have been
∗ Equal Contribution

† Project Lead

‡ Corresponding Author

• ORM vs PRM as Test-time Verifiers. As the top-1 result
may not always be reliable, reward models are employed
to score sampled candidates and perform outcome selection, where ORM is instance-level and PRM is processlevel. In our settings, the score assesses whether each

28662

