This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeshGen: Generating PBR Textured Mesh with Render-Enhanced
Auto-Encoder and Generative Data Augmentation
Zilong Chen1 , Yikai Wang2† , Wenqiang Sun3 , Feng Wang1 , Yiwen Chen4 , Huaping Liu1†
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University 3 HKUST
4
S-Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
chenzl22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yikaiw@outlook.com, hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Project page: https://heheyas.github.io/MeshGen

Abstract

progress in automatic 3D generation. In particular, methods
utilizing score distillation sampling [50] have demonstrated
breakthroughs by leveraging priors from text-to-image diffusion models. However, these optimization-based methods are relatively slow and face challenges such as mode
collapse [73, 75] and the Janus problem [1, 59] due to
the lack of inherent 3D information. Subsequent strategies tackle these challenges by focusing on multi-view
generation [13, 42, 44, 71] and large reconstruction models [24, 30, 39, 68, 78, 83, 101]. The former generates
multi-views for 3D reconstruction, while the latter maps
sparse-view images to compact neural 3D representations
like triplane NeRF [6] or 3D Gaussians [68, 101]. Although these methods enhance 3D generation quality and
speed, they often use volumetric representations like NeRF
or Gaussian instead of meshes, leading to quality loss during conversion [12, 24, 67]. Additionally, relying solely on
multi-views for supervision makes them prone to inconsistencies and challenges in reconstructing objects with complex geometry [65].

In this paper, we introduce MeshGen, an advanced
image-to-3D pipeline that generates high-quality 3D
meshes with detailed geometry and physically based rendering (PBR) textures. Addressing the challenges faced by existing 3D native diffusion models, such as suboptimal autoencoder performance, limited controllability, poor generalization, and inconsistent image-based PBR texturing, MeshGen employs several key innovations to overcome these
limitations. We pioneer a render-enhanced point-to-shape
auto-encoder that compresses meshes into a compact latent
space by designing perceptual optimization with ray-based
regularization. This ensures that the 3D shapes are accurately represented and reconstructed to preserve geometric
details within the latent space. To address data scarcity and
image-shape misalignment, we further propose geometric
augmentation and generative rendering augmentation techniques, which enhance the model’s controllability and generalization ability, allowing it to perform well even with
limited public datasets. For the texture generation, MeshGen employs a reference attention-based multi-view ControlNet for consistent appearance synthesis. This is further
complemented by our multi-view PBR decomposer that estimates PBR components and a UV inpainter that fills invisible areas, ensuring a seamless and consistent texture
across the 3D mesh. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that MeshGen largely outperforms previous methods
in both shape and texture generation, setting a new standard
for the quality of 3D meshes generated with PBR textures.

Recently, 3D native diffusion models have garnered significant attention as a promising paradigm toward meshoriented generation [11, 22, 23, 34, 74, 80, 95]. By mapping
meshes into a compact latent space using 3D auto-encoders,
these methods directly learn the distribution of 3D shapes
instead of reconstructing from generated multi-views. Despite considerable progress that has been made, several
challenges remain unresolved. Firstly, due to the lack of
perceptual loss, existing 3D auto-encoders have limited capacity, making it difficult to capture rich surface details and
high-frequency information. Moreover, existing 3D native
diffusion models typically generate simple and symmetric
shapes that differ significantly from the reference image,
and the scarcity and poor quality of public datasets further
limit the generalization ability of current open-source models. In addition, existing image-conditioned texture generation methods struggle to produce appearances consistent

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement of diffusion-based image generation models [56, 97–99], there has been significant
† Corresponding authors.

5835

