This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Efficient Foundation Model for Zero-shot Amodal Segmentation
Zhaochen Liu1,2 , Limeng Qiao3 , Xiangxiang Chu3 , Lin Ma3 , Tingting Jiang1,4 *
1
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, National Key Laboratory
for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Meituan Inc. 4 National Biomedical Imaging Center, Peking University
{dreamerliu, qiaolm, ttjiang}@pku.edu.cn, {cxxgtxy, forest.linma}@gmail.com

Abstract
Aiming to predict the complete shape of partially occluded
objects, amodal segmentation is an important capacity towards visual intelligence. In order to promote the practicability, zero-shot foundation model competent for the open
world gains growing attention in this field. Nevertheless,
prior models exhibit deficiencies in efficiency and stability.
To address this problem, utilizing the implicit prior knowledge, we propose the first SAM-based amodal segmentation foundation model, SAMBA. Methodologically, a novel
framework with multilevel facilitation is designed to better
adapt the task characteristics and unleash the potential capabilities of SAM. In the modality level, a separation-tofusion structure is employed that jointly learns modal and
amodal segmentation to enhance mutual coordination. In
the instance level, to ease the complexity of amodal feature
extraction, we introduce a principal focusing mechanism to
indicate objects of interest. In the pixel level, mixture-ofexperts is incorporated with a specialized distribution loss,
by which distinct occlusion rates correspond to different experts to improve the accuracy. Experiments are conducted
on several eminent datasets, and the results show that the
performance of SAMBA is superior to existing zero-shot and
even supervised approaches. Furthermore, our proposed
model has notable advantages in terms of speed and size.

Figure 1. The predicted amodal masks by SAMBA. SAMBA is
an efficient foundation model for zero-shot amodal segmentation.

1. Introduction

as self-driving [4, 40], image augmentation [12, 28, 38] and
robotic gripping systems [17, 48, 49].
Despite the significant advance, these previous related
work is limited to the closed-world setting, only effectively
supporting certain specific datasets, which obviously cannot
meet the practical requirements [2]. To tackle this problem, pix2gestalt [35], a framework for zero-shot amodal
segmentation is proposed. However, utilizing the denoising diffusion model to reconstruct the complete appearance,
pix2gestalt is deficient in efficiency and stability for the
segmentation-only tasks, thus being restricted as a foundational model. In light of this situation, a natural question
arises: How to build a compact but efficacious foundation
model for zero-shot amodal segmentation?
Recently, many foundation models for general modal
segmentation have been developed [21, 24, 50, 61], among
which SAM [21] is prime to be widely adopted. Pre-trained

Due to the commonness of occlusion phenomenon in the
real world, comprehending occlusion is one of the vital capabilities of visual intelligence [36]. For this goal, amodal
segmentation was proposed to predict the complete shape
of an object containing both the visible portion and the occluded portion [27]. Since then, diverse approaches [2] have
been widely explored to empower various applications such
* Corresponding author.

20254

