This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Using Diffusion Priors for Video Amodal Segmentation
Kaihua Chen
Deva Ramanan
Tarasha Khurana
Carnegie Mellon University

Figure 1. In this work, we tackle the problem of video amodal segmentation and content completion: given a modal (visible) object
sequence in a video, we develop a two-stage method that generates its amodal (visible + invisible) masks and RGB content. We capitalize
on the shape and temporal consistency priors baked into video foundation models because of their large-scale pretraining. Finetuning these
models enables us to infer complete shapes and RGB details of objects that undergo occlusion. Our method is effectively able to handle
severe occlusions and generalizes across diverse object categories, achieving state-of-the-art results on synthetic and real-world datasets.
We show one such example of an unseen deformable object category ‘laptop’ that undergoes a complete occlusion in the highlighted frame.

Abstract
Object permanence in humans is a fundamental cue that
helps in understanding persistence of objects, even when
they are fully occluded in the scene. Present day methods
in object segmentation do not account for this amodal nature of the world, and only work for segmentation of visible
or modal objects. Few amodal methods exist; single-image
segmentation methods cannot handle high-levels of occlusions which are better inferred using temporal information,
and multi-frame methods have focused solely on segmenting rigid objects. To this end, we propose to tackle video
amodal segmentation by formulating it as a conditional
generation task, capitalizing on the foundational knowledge
in video generative models. Our method is simple; we repurpose these models to condition on a sequence of modal
mask frames of an object along with contextual pseudodepth maps, to learn which object boundary may be occluded and therefore, extended to hallucinate the complete

extent of an object. This is followed by a content completion
stage which is able to inpaint the occluded regions of an object. We benchmark our approach alongside a wide array
of state-of-the-art methods on four datasets and show a dramatic improvement of upto 13% for amodal segmentation in
an object’s occluded region.

1. Introduction
Gestalt psychology [25] suggests that human perception inherently organizes visual elements into cohesive wholes.
When an object is occluded, humans can often infer the
complete outline of the object – an ability that is developed in humans in their early years [20, 33]. Additionally, object permanence [2] suggests that with some temporal context, humans can perceive objects to persist even
when they undergo complete occlusions. Replicating these
phenomena of gestalt psychology and object permanence in

22890

