This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-GSW: 3D Gaussian Splatting for Robust Watermarking
Youngdong Jang1
1

Hyunje Park 1

Korea University

Feng Yang 2
2

Heeju Ko 1

Google DeepMind

3

Euijin Choo3

Sangpil Kim1 *

University of Alberta

Abstract
As 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) gains significant attention and its commercial usage increases, the need for watermarking technologies to prevent unauthorized use of the
3D-GS models and rendered images has become increasingly important. In this paper, we introduce a robust watermarking method for 3D-GS that secures copyright of
both the model and its rendered images. Our proposed
method remains robust against distortions in rendered images and model attacks while maintaining high rendering
quality. To achieve these objectives, we present FrequencyGuided Densification (FGD), which removes 3D Gaussians
based on their contribution to rendering quality, enhancing real-time rendering and the robustness of the message.
FGD utilizes Discrete Fourier Transform to split 3D Gaussians in high-frequency areas, improving rendering quality. Furthermore, we employ a gradient mask for 3D Gaussians and design a wavelet-subband loss to enhance rendering quality. Our experiments show that our method
embeds the message in the rendered images invisibly and
robustly against various attacks, including model distortion. Our method achieves superior performance in both
rendering quality and watermark robustness while improving real-time rendering efficiency. Project page: https:
//kuai-lab.github.io/cvpr20253dgsw/

Figure 1. The unauthorized use of the 3D Gaussian Splatting
model. Our method ensures that the watermark remains detectable
even in distorted images and under model attacks.

that uses trainable 3D Gaussians. This explicit property enhances the capability of 3D-GS to generate 3D assets. Due
to these properties, 3D-GS has been a transformative 3D
representation.
While 3D-GS has advanced and practical usage has increased, it raises concerns about the unauthorized use of
its 3D assets. Therefore, attempts have been made to develop digital watermarking for radiance fields to address
this problem, such as WateRF [11] , which integrates watermark embedding into the rendering process. However,
this method presents several challenges when applied directly to 3D-GS. First, achieving high-fidelity rendering requires redundant 3D Gaussians, which leads to substantial
memory and storage overheads, especially for large-scale
scenes. This also makes embedding a large amount of watermark computationally expensive, significantly increasing
processing time. Secondly, there are many 3D Gaussians
that have minimal impact on the rendered image. Their
minimal impact on the rendered image makes it difficult to
embed the watermark robustly.
To address these issues, we propose Frequency-Guided
Densification (FGD) to reduce the number of 3D Gaussians
to ensure both real-time rendering and robust message embedding. FGD consists of two phases. In the first phase, we

1. Introduction
3D representation has been at the center of computer
vision and graphics. Such technology plays a pivotal
role in various applications and industries, e.g., movies,
games, and the Metaverse industry. Since Neural Radiance
Field [31] (NeRF) has shown great success in 3D representation due to photo-realistic rendering quality, it has been at
the forefront of 3D content creation.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting [15] (3D-GS) has
gained attention for its real-time rendering performance and
high rendering quality, compared to other radiance field
methods [6, 9, 31, 34]. 3D-GS is an explicit representation
* Corresponding Author

5938

