This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoTUS: Large-Scale Machine Unlearning with a Taste of Uncertainty
Christoforos N. Spartalis1,2 Theodoros Semertzidis2 Efstratios Gavves1,3 Petros Daras2
1
University of Amsterdam, 2 Centre for Research & Technology Hellas, 3 Archimedes/Athena RC
{c.spartalis,e.gavves}@uva.nl

{c.spartalis,theosem,daras}@iti.gr

Abstract
We present LoTUS, a novel Machine Unlearning (MU)
method that eliminates the influence of training samples
from pre-trained models, avoiding retraining from scratch.
LoTUS smooths the prediction probabilities of the model
up to an information-theoretic bound, mitigating its overconfidence stemming from data memorization. We evaluate
LoTUS on Transformer and ResNet18 models against eight
baselines across five public datasets. Beyond established
MU benchmarks, we evaluate unlearning on ImageNet1k,
a large-scale dataset, where retraining is impractical, simulating real-world conditions. Moreover, we introduce the
novel Retrain-Free Jensen-Shannon Divergence (RF-JSD)
metric to enable evaluation under real-world conditions.
The experimental results show that LoTUS outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in terms of both efficiency and effectiveness. Code: https://github.com/cspartalis/LoTUS.

the samples designated for unlearning (also known as forget samples). To this end, two main taxonomy classes have
been developed: exact unlearning, which aims to produce
a model that is statistically indistinguishable from the gold
standard, which is often infeasible for complex algorithms
[4] or inefficient [3], and approximate unlearning, which relaxes the constraints of exact unlearning and adopts a suite
of evaluation metrics that typically measure how well the
unlearned model approximates the gold standard in terms of
accuracy and resilience to privacy attacks [12]. The scope
of this study concerns the following questions:
Q1: Can an unlearning method efficiently
eliminate the influence of training samples from
a pre-trained model while approximating the
effectiveness of the gold standard?
Q2: Can this unlearning method effectively handle large-scale datasets and models under realworld constraints, including limited data access?
To answer these questions we propose the Logits
Tempering Unlearning Strategy (LoTUS for short, such
as the fruit that made Ulysses’ comrades forget). LoTUS
leverages the known tendency of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) to memorize sample-specific features from training
data and output over-confident predictions [38], a vulnerability exploited by Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
to assess whether a sample is a member of the training
set [33]. To this end, LoTUS smooths the model’s output
probabilities, as shown in Fig. 1, increasing the entropy to
resemble that of unseen (during training) samples. This unseen set, which may include synthetic data, enables LoTUS
to calibrate the retained information for forget samples postunlearning and replicate the decision-making process of the
gold standard model. Since the gold standard model was
not trained on the forget samples, it naturally avoids overconfident predictions and typically exhibits lower accuracy
on them. To better approximate the gold standard’s performance, LoTUS also introduces Gumbel noise into the pretrained model’s output distribution. This encourages diverse
predictions and helps reduce the pre-trained model’s accuracy on forget samples to resemble that of the gold standard.

1. Introduction
Machine Unlearning focuses on removing the influence
of training samples from pre-trained models without
retraining the model entirely [26]. Its applications include
privacy protection in Machine Learning [3, 14, 15]. As
an alternative to retraining a model from scratch, Machine Unlearning addresses three principal challenges: 1
minimizing the time window during which the model is
vulnerable, 2 minimizing the cost in terms of time and
computational resources, and 3 minimizing the dependency on access to all training data to retain the utility of
the pre-trained model, as full data access is often limited
due to privacy policies and storage limitations. Therefore,
an effective and efficient unlearning algorithm should meet
the following requirements [13]: 1 Effectively eliminate
the impact of specific training samples from the model. 2
Retain the model’s performance on the remaining training
samples, even if access to the training set is limited. 3 Be
efficient in terms of both time and computational resources.
Considering only the effectiveness of unlearning, the
gold standard is to retrain the model from scratch without

10046

