This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FeedEdit: Text-Based Image Editing with Dynamic Feedback Regulation
Fengyi Fu1 , Lei Zhang1 , Mengqi Huang1 , Zhendong Mao1B
1
University of Science and Technology of China
{ff142536f, huangmq}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {leizh23,zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Text-based image editing which aims at generating rigid or
non-rigid changes to images conditioned on the given text,
has recently attracted considerable interest. Previous works
mainly follow the multi-step denoising diffusion paradigm,
which adopts a fixed text guidance intensity (i.e., editing intensity) to inject textual features, while ignoring the stepspecific editing requirements. This work argues that the
editing intensity at each denoising step should be adaptively
adjusted conditioned on the historical editing degree, to
provide accurate text guidance for the whole denoising process. We thereby propose a novel feedback editing framework (FeedEdit), a training-free method which, explicitly
exploits the feedback regulation on editing intensity to ensure precise and harmonious editing at all steps. Specifically, we design (1) Dynamic Editing Degree Perceiving
module, which is based on specific frequency-domain filtering, to enhance and exploit the correlation between feature differences and editing degree for perceiving. (2)
Proportional-Integral feedback controller, to automatically
map the perceived editing errors into appropriate feedback
control signals. (3) Phrase-level Regulating Strategy, to
achieve fine-grained function-specific regulation of textual
features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of FeedEdit over existing methods in both editability and
quality, especially for multi-function editing scenarios.

Figure 1. Illustration of motivation. (a) Existing fixed-intensity
paradigm ignores step-specific editing requirements, resulting in
over-editing on “golden” background (red box) and under-editing
in “jumping” (green box). (b) Our paradigm feedback regulates
the editing intensity, by adaptively strengthening or weakening different text effects, to achieve accurate denoising performance.

Recent works take their effort on two aspects. The first
focuses on effective training strategies, based on supervised
training [4, 44, 47] with paired edited datasets, or text embedding optimizing [17, 35, 46], to learn the specific denoising between source and edited images. The other focuses on
promoting inversion [20, 42] or inference [10, 24, 36, 40]
processes, e.g., through strengthening editing region localization [8, 22] or attention manipulation [5, 36], to improve editing accuracy in denoising process. The learned
or improved denoising processes are mostly driven by the
Classifier-Free Guidance technology [12] or its variants
[4, 13], with a fixed guidance scale to weight the injected
textual features. In general, the commonality of most existing methods is to use a fixed text guidance intensity, to
guide the image denoising process for each denoising step.
However, we argue that existing frameworks with fixed
text guidance intensity (i.e., editing intensity) are inherently

1. Introduction
Recent text-to-image diffusion models [27, 29, 30, 32]
have revolutionized the fields of image generation. Many
methods try to extend text-to-image diffusion into textbased image editing (TBIE) task [4, 5, 10, 17, 23, 44], due
to its powerful ability at manipulating images for photography, advertising, social media, and so on. Specifically,
TBIE aims to generate rigid (appearance editing) or nonrigid (layout editing) changes to images with the given text,
while maintaining invariance to text-irrelevant regions.
B Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

2661

