This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SplineGS: Robust Motion-Adaptive Spline
for Real-Time Dynamic 3D Gaussians from Monocular Video
Jongmin Park1 * Minh-Quan Viet Bui1 * Juan Luis Gonzalez Bello1
Jihyong Oh2† Munchurl Kim1†
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

2

Jaeho Moon1

Chung-Ang University

{jm.park, bvmquan, juanluisgb, jaeho.moon, mkimee}@kaist.ac.kr

jihyongoh@cau.ac.kr

https://kaist-viclab.github.io/splinegs-site/

Figure 1. Our SplineGS achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality with fast rendering speed for novel spatio-temporal view synthesis from monocular videos without relying on pre-computed camera parameters. (a) We use our predicted camera parameters for
[24, 55] since COLMAP [42] is unable to provide reasonable camera parameters for most scenes in the DAVIS dataset [39]. (b) SplineGS
achieves the best rendering quality while maintaining a rendering speed of 400 FPS on the NVIDIA dataset [56].

Abstract
Synthesizing novel views from in-the-wild monocular videos
is challenging due to scene dynamics and the lack of
multi-view cues. To address this, we propose SplineGS,
a COLMAP-free dynamic 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
framework for high-quality reconstruction and fast rendering from monocular videos. At its core is a novel MotionAdaptive Spline (MAS) method, which represents continuous dynamic 3D Gaussian trajectories using cubic Hermite splines with a small number of control points. For
MAS, we introduce a Motion-Adaptive Control points Pruning (MACP) method to model the deformation of each dynamic 3D Gaussian across varying motions, progressively
pruning control points while maintaining dynamic modeling
integrity. Additionally, we present a joint optimization strat-

egy for camera parameter estimation and 3D Gaussian attributes, leveraging photometric and geometric consistency.
This eliminates the need for Structure-from-Motion preprocessing and enhances SplineGS’s robustness in real-world
conditions. Experiments show that SplineGS significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in novel view synthesis quality for dynamic scenes from monocular videos,
achieving thousands times faster rendering speed.

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) is fundamental to 3D vision,
supporting applications like virtual reality (VR), augmented
reality (AR), and film production. NVS aims to generate

26866

* Co-first authors (equal contribution).
† Co-corresponding authors.

