This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VTON-HandFit: Virtual Try-on for Arbitrary Hand Pose Guided by Hand
Priors Embedding
Yujie Liang1,2 *, Xiaobin Hu3 *, Boyuan Jiang3 , Donghao Luo3†, Xu Peng3 , Kai Wu3 ,
Chengming Xu3 , Wenhui Han3 , Taisong Jin1,2†, Chengjie Wang3 , Rongrong Ji1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China.
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China. 3 Tencent Youtu Lab.
liangyujie@stu.xmu.edu.cn,{xiaobinhu,byronjiang,michaelluo,ppxupeng,
chengmingxu,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com,wukaiwork@outlook.com,
whhan18@gmail.com, {jintaisong,rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Although diffusion-based image virtual try-on has made
considerable progress, emerging approaches still struggle
to effectively address the issue of hand occlusion (i.e., clothing regions occluded by the hand part), leading to a notable degradation of the try-on performance. To tackle this
issue widely existing in real-world scenarios, we propose
VTON-HandFit, leveraging the power of hand priors to reconstruct the appearance and structure for hand occlusion
cases. Firstly, we tailor a Hand-Pose Aggregation Net using the ControlNet-based structure explicitly and adaptively
encoding the global hand and pose priors. Besides, to fully
exploit the hand-related structure and appearance information, we propose Hand-feature Disentanglement Embedding module to disentangle the hand priors into the hand
structure-parametric and visual-appearance features, and
customize a masked cross attention for further decoupled
feature embedding. Lastly, we customize a hand-canny constraint loss to better learn the structure edge knowledge
from the hand template of model image. VTON-HandFit
outperforms the baselines in qualitative and quantitative
evaluations on the public dataset and our self-collected
hand-occlusion Handfit-3K dataset particularly for the arbitrary hand pose occlusion cases in real-world scenarios.
Our project page is at: https://vton-handfit.github.io.

the shopping experience for consumers and minimize advertising expenses for clothing merchants. The VTON task
involves generating an image of a human model wearing
a specific garment. Over the past few years, countless researchers [9–11, 50] have dedicated significant efforts to
achieve more realistic and precise virtual try-on results.
Most recent studies on virtual try-on predominantly utilize generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13] or latent
diffusion models (LDMs) [39] for image synthesis. Traditional GAN-based approaches [15–17] often struggle with
accurately generating garment folds, realistic lighting and
shadows, and lifelike human body representations. Consequently, more recent research has shifted towards LDMbased methods [61], which effectively improve the authenticity of clothed images. However, these researches focus
on generating more realistic and natural try-on images while
keeping the detailed features of garments. The hands of tryon models are usually strictly on the sides and garments are
not occluded by the hands. Such a strict constraint hinders
the virtual try-on paving the way toward real-world applications. For instance, as a highly flexible editing task with
a wide range of degrees of freedom, digital humans usually meet the occasions that the garments are occluded by
the hands, which severely deteriorates the performance of
virtual try-on.
Motivated by the above challenge, basically, there
mainly exist two solutions to tackle this arbitrary hand
problem: 1). perfect hand parsing model to accurately
segment the tiny area among fingers. 2). involving the
hand-reconstruction into the try-on processing. As shown
in Fig. 1, CatVTON[8] use the parsing model to keep
the hand part, leading to unavoidably the remaining artifacts and backgrounds from the model image. The existing parsing models fail to accurately segment the small

1. Introduction
Image-based virtual try-on (VTON) [26] is a widely
adopted and highly promising image synthesis technology
in the e-commerce industry. Its primary goal is to enhance
∗ equal contribution, † corresponding author

22616

