This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Knowledge Prompt Tuning for Multi-task Test-Time Adaptation
Qiang Zhang∗ , Mengsheng Zhao∗ , Jiawei Liu† , Fanrui Zhang, Yongchao Xu, Zheng-Jun Zha
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{zq 126, zmsxxd, zfr888, yongchaoxu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jwliu6, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Test- time adaptation using vision- language models (such
as CLIP) to quickly adjust to distributional shifts of downstream tasks has shown great potential. Despite significant
progress, existing methods are still limited to single- task
test- time adaptation scenarios and have not effectively explored the issue of multi- task adaptation. To address this
practical problem, we propose a novel Hierarchical Knowledge Prompt Tuning (HKPT) method, which achieves joint
adaptation to multiple target domains by mining more comprehensive source domain discriminative knowledge and hierarchically modeling task- specific and task- shared knowledge. Specifically, HKPT constructs a CLIP prompt distillation framework that utilizes the broader source domain
knowledge of large teacher CLIP to guide prompt tuning for
lightweight student CLIP from multiple views during testing. Meanwhile, HKPT establishes task- specific dual dynamic knowledge graph to capture fine- grained contextual
knowledge from continuous test data. To fully exploit the
complementarity among multiple target tasks, HKPT employs an adaptive task grouping strategy for achieving intertask knowledge sharing. Furthermore, HKPT can seamlessly transfer to basic single- task test- time adaptation scenarios while maintaining robust performance. Extensive experimental results in both multi- task and single- task testtime adaptation settings demonstrate that our HKPT significantly outperforms state- of- the- art methods.

Figure 1. Performance comparison of different methods on
two large-scale multi-task datasets, Office-home (left panel) and
MiniDomainNet (right panel). Our HKPT achieves state-of-theart performance on both datasets.

1. Introduction

image features with their corresponding text features in a
shared latent space by jointly training on millions of imagetext pairs. This allows the CLIP model to learn a wide range
of visual concepts and to be applied effectively to various
downstream tasks in the zero-shot or few-shot setting [23].
However, when the test data of the target task exhibits significant distributional shifts compared to the original training data for CLIP, its generalization performance often faces
great challenges [20, 45].
To enable pre-trained VLMs to quickly adapt to the distributional shifts of target task, recent studies [7, 24, 32]
have introduced a new paradigm for achieving test-time
adaptation, called test-time prompt tuning. Unlike previous
supervised prompt learning methods [19, 48], this paradigm
does not require access to expensive labeled training data.
It optimizes learnable prompts from the unlabeled test data

In recent years, the continuous development of pre-trained
vision-language models (VLMs) has demonstrated their
powerful performance and generalization capabilities [22].
For instance, the representative model CLIP [29] aligns
∗ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

30524

