This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EdgeMovingNet: Edge-preserving Point Cloud Reconstruction via Joint
Geometry Features

1

Xinran Yang1 , Donghao Ji1 , Yuanqi Li1∗ , Junyuan Xie1 , Jie Guo1 , Yanwen Guo1,2∗
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, 2 School of Software, North University of China
{xryang,donghaoji}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{yuanqili,jyxie,guojie,ywguo}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud reconstruction is a critical process in 3D representation and reverse engineering. When it comes to CAD
models, edges are significant features that play a crucial
role in characterizing the geometry of 3D shapes. However, few points are exactly sampled on edges during acquisition, resulting in apparent artifacts for the reconstruction
task. Upsampling point cloud is a direct technical route,
but there is a main challenge that the upsampled points
may not align with the model edge accurately. To overcome this, we develop an integrated framework to estimate
edges by joint regression of three geometry features—pointto-edge direction, point-to-edge distance and point normal.
Benefiting these features, we implement a novel refinement
process to move and produce more points which lie accurately on edges of the model, allowing for high-quality
edge-preserving reconstruction. Experiments and comparisons against previous methods demonstrate our method’s
effectiveness and superiority.

Figure 1. Point cloud reconstruction for edges. The zoomed-in
views show three edges intersected at a corner, compared among
Poisson [15], Voronoi-based [5] method and our method.

1. Introduction

or upsampling methods [10, 22, 37, 38, 48, 51] attempt to
increase point density in edge region, inaccuracies in positioning or insufficient density prevent these added points
from defining surface edges faithfully. Additionally, some
approaches [21, 24, 31, 41] involve partitioning the given
points into patches and fitting a smooth surface to each
patch. However, identifying the optimal decomposition that
reveals the structure of the underlying model remains challenging. On the other hand, CAD models exhibit a wide variety of geometric shapes. Algorithms [4, 19, 33, 47] relying
on analytic models of geometric features (such as curvature
and its derivatives) often necessitate manual parameter tuning per object, rendering them less suitable for large collections of data. In contrast, data-driven, learning based methods [6, 14, 36, 43] offer a natural alternative. They leverage
global information from training datasets and autonomously
adapt to specific input shapes without user intervention. Our
paper introduces EdgeMovingNet and a refinement process
to address the aforementioned challenges.
In the first stage, our focus is on developing a robust feature extraction algorithm for the sampled point cloud. Some
characteristics of the point cloud include: (1) sparse distribution, with points rarely aligning directly with (edge) features; (2) noisy distribution; (3) absence of normals. We introduce EdgeMovingNet—a deep-learning-based approach
that estimates edges by joint prediction of sharp geometric features (point-to-edge direction and point-to-edge distance) as well as normal information, in order to handle
this type of data. Our approach defines features implicitly

Reconstructing mesh from raw point clouds is a fundamental task in reverse engineering and computer-aided design.
Over the years, a wide range of techniques have been developed to tackle this problem. As for high quality reconstruction, edge features serve as critical geometric cues in
characterizing the structure of objects, especially for CAD
models. Traditional reconstruction methods such as Poisson
[15] and Voronoi-based [5] method fail to preserve sharp
edges well (See Fig. 1). In this paper, we take point clouds
without normal as input and adopt a two-stage method to
achieve edge-preserving surface reconstruction results.
The challenges come from two aspects. On the one hand,
the general input point cloud may be sparse and contain
very few points accurately located on the edges of the base
geometry. While certain point consolidation [12, 13, 25, 26]
∗ Corresponding author.

22150

