This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DecoupledGaussian: Object-Scene Decoupling for Physics-Based Interaction
Miaowei Wang1 ✠ Yibo Zhang3 Weiwei Xu4
Rui Ma3 Changqing Zou2,4
Daniel Morris5
1
2
University of Edinburgh
Zhejiang Lab 3 Jilin University
4
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 5 Michigan State University

Decoupling

Figure 1. DecoupledGaussian decomposes static objects and contacted scenes from videos or multi-view images, enabling simulations
like scene collisions (Top) and object melting with material adjustments (Bottom). See the supplementary video for the full sequences.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present DecoupledGaussian, a novel system that decouples static objects from their contacted surfaces captured in-the-wild videos, a key prerequisite for realistic
Newtonian-based physical simulations. Unlike prior methods focused on synthetic data or elastic jittering along the
contact surface, which prevent objects from fully detaching or moving independently, DecoupledGaussian allows
for significant positional changes without being constrained
by the initial contacted surface. Recognizing the limitations of current 2D inpainting tools for restoring 3D locations, our approach proposes joint Poisson fields to repair and expand the Gaussians of both objects and contacted scenes after separation. This is complemented by
a multi-carve strategy to refine the object’s geometry. Our
system enables realistic simulations of decoupling motions,
collisions, and fractures driven by user-specified impulses,
supporting complex interactions within and across multiple scenes. We validate DecoupledGaussian through a
comprehensive user study and quantitative benchmarks.
This system enhances digital interaction with objects and
scenes in real-world environments, benefiting industries
such as VR, robotics, and autonomous driving. Our project
page is at: https://wangmiaowei.github.io/
DecoupledGaussian.github.io/.
✠: Partially conducted at Zhejiang Lab.

: Corresponding author.

Interactive reconstruction and simulation of target objects
and their surrounding scenes have become increasingly sophisticated recently. These can provide 4D assets for autonomous driving [74] and robotics [64], and also enable
immersive applications in Virtual Reality (VR) [66] and the
entertainment industry [95].
Advances in realism have been made by moving beyond traditional representations, such as point clouds [47],
meshes [69], grids [12], and signed distance fields [77].
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [62] use neural rendering techniques for novel view synthesis from videos, enabling interactive games [60], animation [96], and simulations [50], where what is simulated directly stems from what
is captured. And Gaussian Splatting (GS) [43], known for
its rapid rendering and reconstruction speeds, leverages discrete Gaussian kernels, making it easier to directly manipulate and process [11, 21] objects reconstructed from videos.
However, current physics-based simulation methods that
use NeRF [17, 50] or Gaussian splatting [6, 38, 89] either
focus on synthetic objects, allowing for full-view observations during reconstruction, or simulate elastic deformations and jittering, in which objects remain constrained to
the contacted surface. This prevents objects from truly detaching under user-specified impulses.
To allow objects to move without being constrained by

11361

