This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DL2G: Degradation-guided Local-to-Global Restoration for
Eyeglass Reflection Removal
Zhilv Yi1∗ , Xiao Lu2 *, Hong Ding3 , Jingbo Hu1 , Zhi Jiang1 , Chunxia Xiao1†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
College of Engeering and Design, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan, China
3
Guangxi University of Finance and Economics, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
{yizhilv, 2023282110107, zzz1203685136, cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn,
luxiao@hunnu.edu.cn, dhong20123@126.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Examples of our DL2G for eyeglass reflection removal. The top row shows some cases with different reflection intensities,
colors, and shapes. The bottom row presents our results. (a), (b) are captured in the lab with controlled lighting conditions. (c) and (d) are
captured in the outdoor environment with uncontrolled lighting conditions. (c), (d), (e) and (f) are collected from the Internet.

Abstract
Eyeglass reflection removal can restore the texture information in the reflection destructed eye area, which is meaningful for various tasks on the facial images. It is still challenging to correctly eliminate reflections, reasonably restore the
lost contents, and guarantee that the final result has a consistent color and illumination with the input image. In this
paper, we introduce a Degradation-guided Local-to-Global
(DL2G) restoration framework to address this problem. We
first propose a multiplicative reflection degradation model,
which is used to alleviate reflection degradation to obtain
a preliminary result. Then, in the local details restoration
stage, we propose a local structure-aware diffusion model
to learn the true distribution of texture details in the eye

area. This helps in recovering lost contents in the regions of
heavy degradation where the background is invisible. Finally, in the global consistency refinement stage, we utilize the input image as a reference image to generate the
final result that is consistent with the input image in color
and illumination. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method can improve the effect of reflection removal and
generate results with more reasonable semantics, exquisite
details, and harmonious illumination.

1. Introduction

* Zhilv Yi and Xiao Lu contribute equally.
† Chunxia Xiao is the corresponding author.

Reflection is a common optical phenomenon observed in
natural scenes. For portrait images with eyeglasses, reflections on the eyeglasses often obscure the texture detail of
the eyes, even resulting in the loss of content information.
Therefore, removing reflections can improve the quality and

16061

