This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Document Haystacks: Vision-Language Reasoning Over Piles of
1000+ Documents
Jun Chen1 *, Dannong Xu2 *, Junjie Fei1 *, Chun-Mei Feng3 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
The University of Sydney, 3 IHPC, A*STAR
{jun.chen,junjie.fei,mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa
daxu8019@uni.sydney.edu.au, fengcm.ai@gmail.com
(a) Prior Benchmarks:
Each Question Paired with a Limited Image Set
RetVQA & WebVQA:
Q1: Does grass and sky
share the same color?

(b) Our Benchmark:
All Questions Mapped to an Extensive Document Collection

Document Haystack

RetVQA & WebVQA
Q2: Are the satellites on the Soviet space
control/monitoring ship Kosmonavt Yuriy Gagarin
always oriented in the same direction?

Q1: Who is the R&D
customer for the project
"Water on Tobacco" ?

A1: METH DEV

Q2: What percent of
analytics jobs in India
requires more than 5
years of experience
according to the 2017
study?
Q3: In which subject, Dr
Alexander R. Inglis did
his masters degree?

(a) Previous Benchmarks:
Each question paired with a limited image set

A2: 39%

A3: Chemistry

(b) Our Benchmarks:
All questions mapped to an extensive document collection

Figure 1. Comparison between previous and proposed benchmarks. Given a question as input, all benchmarks aim to retrieve relevant
images from an image pool to correctly answer the question. Unlike prior benchmarks like RetVQA [32] and WebVQA [7], which structure
their datasets by pairing each question with a limited set of images (typically ≤ 30), our benchmarks, DocHaystack and InfoHaystack, map
each question to a substantially larger document collection, scaling up to 1,000 visual documents. This expanded scope more accurately
represents large-scale document retrieval scenarios and offers a greater challenge in retrieval accuracy and visual question answering.

Abstract
Large multimodal models (LMMs) have achieved impressive progress in vision-language understanding, yet they
face limitations in real-world applications requiring complex reasoning over a large number of images. Existing
benchmarks for multi-image question-answering are limited in scope, each question is paired with only up to 30
images, which does not fully capture the demands of largescale retrieval tasks encountered in the real-world usages.
To reduce these gaps, we introduce two document haystack
benchmarks, dubbed DocHaystack and InfoHaystack, designed to evaluate LMM performance on large-scale visual document retrieval and understanding. Addition-

ally, we propose V-RAG, a novel, vision-centric retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) framework that leverages a
suite of multimodal vision encoders, each optimized for
specific strengths, and a dedicated question-document relevance module. V-RAG sets a new standard, with a 9%
and 11% improvement in Recall@1 on the challenging
DocHaystack-1000 and InfoHaystack-1000 benchmarks,
respectively, compared to the previous best baseline models. Additionally, integrating V-RAG with LMMs enables
them to efficiently operate across thousands of images,
yielding significant improvements on our DocHaystack and
InfoHaystack benchmarks. Our code and datasets are
available at https://github.com/Vision-CAIR/
dochaystacks

∗ Equal contribution

24817

