This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenFusion: Closing the Loop between Reconstruction and Generation via Videos
Sibo Wu1,2 Congrong Xu1,3 Binbin Huang4 Andreas Geiger5 Anpei Chen1,5,†
1

Westlake University
4
The University of Hong Kong

2DGS

2

Technical University of Munich 3 ShanghaiTech University
5
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center † Corresponding author

Ours
View Extrapolation

View Interpolation

PSNR:
13.26,
LPIPS:
PSNR:
18.07,
LPIPS:
0.4820.505

2DGS

Video Gen

3D Gen

3D Gen

PSNR: 18.24, LPIPS: 0.415

Figure 1. GenFusion introduces a reconstruction-driven generative model to enable artifact-free 3D asset generation and view synthesis
for both view interpolation and extrapolation.

Abstract
Recently, 3D reconstruction and generation have demonstrated impressive novel view synthesis results, achieving
high fidelity and efficiency. However, a notable conditioning
gap can be observed between these two fields, e.g., scalable
3D scene reconstruction often requires densely captured
views, whereas 3D generation typically relies on a single or
no input view, which significantly limits their applications.
We found that the source of this phenomenon lies in the misalignment between 3D constraints and generative priors. To
address this problem, we propose a reconstruction-driven
video diffusion model that learns to condition video frames
on artifact-prone RGB-D renderings. Moreover, we propose a cyclical fusion pipeline that iteratively adds restoration frames from the generative model to the training set,
enabling progressive expansion and addressing the viewpoint saturation limitations seen in previous reconstruction
and generation pipelines. Our evaluation, including view
synthesis from sparse view and masked input, validates the
effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D assets is a fundamental task in computer
vision and computer graphics, with broad applications in
AR/VR, autonomous driving and robotics. Recent advances
in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF [36], Mildenhall et al.

in 2020) and Gaussian Splatting (GS [27], Kerbl et al. in
2023) have enabled high-fidelity 3D scene reconstruction
and novel view synthesis. They employ MLP or Gaussian
primitives to represent scenes and optimize 3D representation through photometric loss. However, this line of work
inherits a key limitation: faithful reconstruction relies on
abundant viewpoint coverage; under-observed regions or
viewpoints may lead to significant artifacts or missing content.
This is primarily because reconstructing NeRFs or GSs
from multi-view images is inherently underconstrained, as
an infinite number of photo-consistent explanations may
exist for the input images [40, 63]. Consequently, reconstruction models tend to generate “floaters” or “background collapse” artifacts to fake view-dependent effects,
even when supplied with dense and well-captured highquality images [46]. This observation has motivated a series of regularization techniques to constrain neural field
training, including sparsity regularizers [22, 56], smoothness losses [37, 55, 62] and monocular geometric cues [61].
For example, ReconFusion [48] regularizes a NeRF-based
3D reconstruction pipeline by introducing a sample loss between novel random camera poses and images predicted by
a PixelNeRF-style image diffusion model, yielding significant performance improvements over previous NeRF reconstruction methods in sparse setting. In contrast, feedforward reconstruction methods [5, 6, 10, 14, 57, 60] learn

6078

