This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Map Priors for Collaborative BEV Semantic Segmentation
Jiahui Fu1 , Yue Gong1 , Luting Wang1 , Shifeng Zhang2 , Xu Zhou2 , Si Liu1 †
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 Sangfor Technologies Inc.

(a)

Abstract

BEV feature

Sender Receiver
Information conflict
during fusion

Collaborative perception aims to address the constraint of
single-agent perception by exchanging information among
multiple agents. Previous works primarily focus on collaborative object detection, exploring compressed transmission and fusion prediction tailored to sparse object features.
However, these strategies are not well-suited for dense features in collaborative BEV semantic segmentation. Therefore, we propose CoGMP, a novel Collaborative framework
that leverages Generative Map Priors to achieve efficient
compression and robust fusion. CoGMP introduces two key
innovations: Element Format Feature Compression (EFFC)
and Structure Guided Feature Fusion (SGFF). Specifically,
EFFC leverages map element priors from codebook to encode BEV features as discrete element indices for transmitted information compression. Meanwhile, SGFF utilizes
a diffusion model with structural priors to coherently integrate multi-agent features, thereby achieving consistent fusion predictions. Evaluations on the OPV2V dataset show
that CoGMP achieves a 6.89/7.64 Road/Lane IoU improvement and a 32-fold reduction in communication volume.

Ground

Information degradation
during compression

Compressed BEV feature

sender
receiver Truth

BEV Feature

Fusion
prediction

(b)
0
1
2

Fusion
prediction
Sender
Receiver

Figure 1. (a) Sender’s compression suffers from information
degradation, deteriorating the compressed prediction. The receiver’s fusion struggles to handle information conflicts, leading
to the suboptimal fusion prediction. (b) Our method leverages the
generative map priors for compression in element format and fusion under structure guidance, facilitating better fusion prediction.

1. Introduction

Existing methods [6, 17, 26, 32, 43, 49–52] primarily address the 3D object detection task in Bird’s Eye
View (BEV). However, accurate environment understanding requires perceiving not only surrounding objects but
also scene layouts [4, 19, 23]. Therefore, we explore the
compression and fusion strategies for collaborative BEV semantic segmentation, which has not been explored. Designing appropriate strategies for dense features presents
significant challenges as shown in Fig. 1 (a). During the
sender compresses BEV features with spatial mask and dimensionality reduction, information degradation inevitably
occurs, resulting in inferior perception quality. On the receiver side, when features from multi-agents are fused, conflicting semantic estimations in overlapping regions present
a substantial obstacle and lead to erroneous fusion predictions. Existing strategies tailored to collaborative detection
fail to address the above challenges due to their dependency
on object-level sparsity, which is absent in the dense BEV
segmentation task because of non-negligible feature representation differences.
Therefore, we propose CoGMP, a novel Collaborative
framework with Generative Map Priors for BEV semantic

Collaborative perception aims to achieve global optimal
perception with minimal message exchange between multiagents. It has notable applications in fields such as vehicleto-everything [54, 63] and autonomous drone swarms [45,
53]. In scenarios with multi-agents, they exchange complementary information to overcome individual constraints
like restricted viewpoints [7] and occlusions [10], thereby
enhancing perceptual ability. Specifically, senders need to
adopt compression strategies to retain local information as
much as possible under limited transmission bandwidth.
Meanwhile, receivers are committed to aggregating information from senders to achieve global perception despite
conflicts caused by pose errors and prediction discrepancies. To this end, collaborative perception methods focus
on achieving efficient information compression on sender
side and robust information fusion on receiver side.
† Corresponding author

11919

