This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing more with less: human-like representations in vision models
Andrey Gizdov1,2

Shimon Ullman1,3

Daniel Harari1,3

1

Weizmann Institute of Science
2
Harvard University
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{andrey.gizdov, shimon.ullman, hararid}@weizmann.ac.il
https://seeingmorewithless.github.io/

Abstract

tails where needed while maintaining an awareness of the
broader context. This efficient representation enables perception with a limited number of photoreceptors, and a limited diameter of the optic nerve (carrying information from
the retina to the brain), balancing detail and field of view
(FOV).
In contrast, current large multimodal models (LMMs) in
artificial intelligence typically process visual inputs at a uniform resolution across the entire FOV. This approach can
lead to inefficiencies, as models may allocate equal computational resources to regions of the image that are less
critical for the task at hand. Recent methods, like dynamic
tokenization and token merging, aim to alleviate such issues [5, 33]. These techniques embed the full image at the
first network layer, and then progressively prune/combine
tokens to reduce the computational load in areas of the
image that require less precision. However, such methods still embed a full-resolution image input to begin with,
which becomes a major constraint in portable systems that
cannot do computations on-board and instead send images
over a narrow communication channel. For small edge devices and UAVs that utilize LPWANs (Low-Power WideArea Networks) the bandwidth is small enough, e.g. 70
kbit/s [10, 36], that transmitting full-resolution images of
a wide FOV (typically in size much larger than 70kbit) becomes impractical for real-time visual capabilities. To the
best of our knowledge, there is no solution addressing the
challenge of computationally efficient vision over a narrow
communication channel.
Given the efficiency of the human visual system, a natural question arises: Can we improve the performance and
efficiency of LMMs by adopting a foveated sampling scheme
similar to that of human vision?
In this paper, we present the first study that examines the internal representations and performance of existing LMMs when provided with human-like variable
resolution images. By applying a biologically inspired

Large multimodal models (LMMs) typically process visual
inputs with uniform resolution across the entire field of
view, leading to inefficiencies when non-critical image regions are processed as precisely as key areas. Inspired by
the human visual system’s foveated approach, we apply a
sampling method to leading architectures such as MDETR,
BLIP2, InstructBLIP, LLaVA, and ViLT, and evaluate their
performance with variable (foveated) resolution inputs. Results show that foveated sampling boosts accuracy in visual
tasks like question answering and object detection under
tight pixel budgets, improving performance by up to 2.7%
on the GQA dataset, 2.1% on SEED-Bench, and 2.0% on
VQAv2 compared to uniform sampling. Furthermore, we
show that indiscriminate resolution increases yield diminishing returns, with models achieving up to 80% of their
full capability using just 3% of the pixels, even on complex tasks. Foveated sampling prompts more human-like
processing within models, such as neuronal selectivity and
globally acting self-attention in vision transformers. This
paper provides a foundational analysis of foveated sampling’s impact on existing models, suggesting that more efficient architectural adaptations, mimicking human visual
processing, are a promising research venue for the community. Potential applications of our findings center low
power minimal bandwidth devices (such as UAVs and edge
devices), where compact and efficient vision is critical.

1. Introduction
The human visual system excels at processing complex
visual scenes by efficiently allocating computational resources—a high-resolution focus at the center of gaze (the
fovea) and progressively lower resolution toward the periphery [26, 34, 40]. This variable resolution sampling,
known as foveation, allows humans to perceive fine de-

4408

