This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeCap: Self-Calibrating and Adaptive Prompts for
Cross-view Person Re-Identification in Aerial-Ground Networks
Shining Wang1,2,4 *, Yunlong Wang1,2,4 *, Ruiqi Wu1,2,4 , Bingliang Jiao1,2,4 , Wenxuan Wang1,3,4†, Peng Wang1,2,4
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
2
Ningbo Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
3
Shenzhen Research Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
4
National Engineering Laboratory for integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China.
{wangshining, wangyunlong2019, wurq, bingliang.jiao}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn {wxwang, peng.wang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
When discussing the Aerial-Ground Person Reidentification (AGPReID) task, we face the main challenge of the significant appearance variations caused by
different viewpoints, making identity matching difficult.
To address this issue, previous methods attempt to reduce
the differences between viewpoints by critical attributes
and decoupling the viewpoints. While these methods can
mitigate viewpoint differences to some extent, they still
face two main issues: (1) difficulty in handling viewpoint
diversity and (2) neglect of the contribution of local
features. To effectively address these challenges, we design
and implement the Self-Calibrating and Adaptive Prompt
(SeCap) method for the AGPReID task. The core of this
framework relies on the Prompt Re-calibration Module
(PRM), which adaptively re-calibrates prompts based
on the input. Combined with the Local Feature Refinement Module (LFRM), SeCap can extract view-invariant
features from local features for AGPReID. Meanwhile,
given the current scarcity of datasets in the AGPReID
field, we further contribute two real-world Large-scale
Aerial-Ground Person Re-Identification datasets, LAGPeR
and G2APS-ReID. The former is collected and annotated
by us independently, covering 4, 231 unique identities and
containing 63, 841 high-quality images; the latter is reconstructed from the person search dataset G2APS. Through
extensive experiments on AGPReID datasets, we demonstrate that SeCap is a feasible and effective solution for the
AGPReID task. The datasets and source code available on
https://github.com/wangshining681/SeCap-AGPReID.

Figure 1. Aerial View and Ground View exhibit significant appearance variation due to notable differences in views. This variation
poses substantial challenges for cross-view image matching.

1. Introduction

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

Person re-identification (ReID), as the cornerstone of intelligent surveillance systems, fundamentally relies on accurately identifying individuals across different camera viewpoints and complex environmental changes [11, 12, 23, 25,
29, 37]. However, traditional ReID methods are often limited to the same view, such as ground view [24, 27, 34–
36, 41] or aerial view [4, 10, 14, 28, 39], and fail to adequately address the challenges posed by extreme visual
transformations and the integration of complementary information in cross-view scenarios (e.g., combining ground
and aerial cameras). These challenges are more prevalent in
real-world applications, thereby introducing the problem of
the Aerial-Ground Person Re-Identification (AGPReID).
As shown in Fig. 1, unlike traditional ReID tasks, the
query and gallery sets in AGPReID are captured separately
by aerial-view or ground-view cameras [20, 21, 38], respectively. This results in significant variations in the compared

22119

