This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPA-VL: A Comprehensive Safety Preference Alignment Dataset for Vision
Language Models
Yongting Zhang1,3 * Lu Chen2,3 * Guodong Zheng2,3 Yifeng Gao2
Rui Zheng2 Jinlan Fu3 Zhenfei Yin3 Senjie Jin2
Yu Qiao3 Xuanjing Huang2 Feng Zhao1† Tao Gui2,3‡ Jing Shao3†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Fudan University
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
zytabcd@mail.ustc.edu.cn,

luchen23@m.fudan.edu.cn

https://sqrtizhang.github.io/SPA-VL/

Abstract
The emergence of Vision Language Models (VLMs) has
brought unprecedented advances in understanding multimodal information. The combination of textual and visual semantics in VLMs is highly complex and diverse,
making the safety alignment of these models challenging.
Furthermore, due to the limited study on the safety alignment of VLMs, there is a lack of large-scale, high-quality
datasets. To address these limitations, we propose a Safety
Preference Alignment dataset for Vision Language Models named SPA-VL. In terms of breadth, SPA-VL covers
6 harmfulness domains, 13 categories, and 53 subcategories, and contains 100,788 samples of the quadruple
(question, image, chosen response, rejected response). In
terms of depth, the responses are collected from 12 opensource (e.g., QwenVL) and closed-source (e.g., Gemini)
VLMs to ensure diversity. The construction of preference
data is fully automated, and the experimental results indicate that models trained with alignment techniques on the
SPA-VL dataset exhibit substantial improvements in harmlessness and helpfulness while maintaining core capabilities. SPA-VL, as a large-scale, high-quality, and diverse
dataset, represents a significant milestone in ensuring that
VLMs achieve both harmlessness and helpfulness.

1. Introduction
Vision Language Models (VLMs), such as GPT-4V [36],
Claude 3 [1], LLaVA [27], and MiniGPT-4 [62] can understand visual signals and respond to user instructions.
* Equal contribution. Authorship order determined by coin flip.
† Corresponding authors.
‡ Corresponding authors.

Equipped with a visual encoder module, VLMs extract multimodal knowledge from both visual and textual queries,
leveraging pre-trained LLMs’ powerful comprehension and
generative capabilities to achieve remarkable results across
diverse vision-language tasks.
Due to the complexity of multimodal harms, previous
study [16] has demonstrated that harmless inputs may also
result in outputs that do not align with human preferences.
Although LLMs have undergone harmless alignment, the
alignment of visual encoders is relatively weak, making
VLMs susceptible to successful attacks through the visual
modality [6, 14, 25]. Therefore, it is necessary to simultaneously improve the alignment of the visual and language
modules of the VLM to achieve the harmless and helpful
responses. Ensuring the alignment of VLMs with ethical
and safety standards is crucial for their safe and effective
deployment. However, most existing works on the safety of
VLMs focused on the evaluation benchmarks [10, 24, 26] or
jailbreak detection [6, 14, 14, 23–25]. Seldom studies considered constructing large-scale, high-quality open-source
training datasets to achieve the safety alignment of VLMs.
The lack of such datasets hampers further development in
this field.
To address these limitations, we propose a large-scale
safety alignment dataset for VLMs named SPA-VL. Since
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
is widely regarded as performing well in alignment studies [20, 41], our SPA-VL dataset is designed for the RLHF,
with each sample containing four elements (question, image, chosen response, rejected response). The main perspectives of our SPA-VL dataset are summarized as follows:
(1) Comprehensive Domains: SPA-VL contains
100,788 samples and comprehensively covers a wide range
of harm types, encompassing 6 domains, 13 categories, and
53 subcategories. (2) Diverse Questions and Responses:

19867

