This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AniMo: Species-Aware Model for Text-Driven Animal Motion Generation
Xuan Wang1*
1

Kai Ruan2*
2

Zhejiang University

Xing Zhang3

Renmin University of China

Gaoang Wang1B
3

New Hope Liuhe Co., Ltd.

xuanw@zju.edu.cn, kairuan@ruc.edu.cn, zhangxing@newhope.cn, gaoangwang@intl.zju.edu.cn
*

Equal contribution

B

Corresponding author

https://github.com/WandererXX/AniMo

Abstract
Text-driven motion generation has made significant
strides in recent years. However, most existing works focus
on human motion, largely overlooking the rich and diverse
behaviors of animals. Understanding and synthesizing animal motion have important applications in wildlife conservation, animal ecology, and biomechanics. Animal motion
modeling presents unique challenges due to species diversity, varied morphological structures, and different behavioral patterns in response to similar textual descriptions. To
address these challenges, we propose AniMo for text-driven
animal motion generation. AniMo consists of two stages:
motion tokenization and text-to-motion generation. In the
motion tokenization stage, we encode motions using a jointaware spatiotemporal encoder with species-aware feature
modulation, enabling the model to adapt to diverse skeletal structures across species. In the text-to-motion generation stage, we employ masked modeling to jointly learn the
mapping from textual descriptions to motion tokens. Additionally, we introduce AniMo4D, a large-scale dataset
containing 78,149 motion sequences and 185,435 textual
descriptions across 114 animal species. Experimental results show that AniMo achieves superior performance on
both the AniMo4D and AnimalML3D datasets, effectively
capturing diverse morphological structures and behavioral
patterns across animal species.

Figure 1. Examples of animal motions. Animals exhibit more
diverse morphological structures and behavior patterns, making it
challenging to generate motions from text-only prompts. (Yellow
represents animal attributes, Green represents animal species, and
Blue represents motions.)

dominantly focus on human behavior, largely ignoring the
rich and diverse motion patterns exhibited by animals. Expanding motion generation beyond human holds significant potential for animal management, wildlife conservation, ecological research, and biomechanics [9, 30, 39, 41].
In this work, we focus on animal motion, an area that
remains relatively under-explored compared to human motion. As shown in Figure 1, modeling animal motion
presents unique challenges due to the vast diversity in

1. Introduction
Text-to-motion generation, which transforms textual descriptions into semantically consistent and realistic 3D motions, has attracted significant attention recently. This technology has diverse applications in domains such as robotics,
virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR), video games, and content creation [65]. While existing methods succeed in generating realistic motion [12, 27, 34, 47, 56, 61], they pre-

1929

