This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transfer Your Perspective:
Controllable 3D Generation from Any Viewpoint in a Driving Scene
Tai-Yu Pan1 , Sooyoung Jeon1 , Mengdi Fan1 , Jinsu Yoo1 , Zhenyang Feng1 ,
Mark Campbell2 , Kilian Q. Weinberger2 , Bharath Hariharan2 , Wei-Lun Chao1
1

The Ohio State University, 2 Cornell University

static agent

dynamic agent
(a) Ego-centric driving

(b) TYP for dynamic agent

(c) TYP for static agent

(d) Collaborative driving

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed problem and solution, Transfer Your Perspective (TYP). (a) A given sensory data captured by
the ego-car (red triangle). (b) A generated sensory data by TYP, seeing from the viewpoint of another vehicle (green triangle) in the same
scene. (c) A generated sensory data, seeing from an imaginary static agent like roadside units (blue icon). (d) Putting all the sensory data
together, given or generated, TYP enables the development of collaborative perception with little or no real collaborative driving data.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Self-driving cars relying solely on ego-centric perception
face limitations in sensing, often failing to detect occluded,
faraway objects. Collaborative autonomous driving (CAV)
seems like a promising direction, but collecting data for development is non-trivial. It requires placing multiple sensorequipped agents in a real-world driving scene, simultaneously! As such, existing datasets are limited in locations and
agents. We introduce a novel surrogate to the rescue, which
is to generate realistic perception from different viewpoints
in a driving scene, conditioned on a real-world sample—the
ego-car’s sensory data. This surrogate has huge potential:
it could potentially turn any ego-car dataset into a collaborative driving one to scale up the development of CAV. We
present the very first solution, using a combination of simulated collaborative data and real ego-car data. Our method
Transfer Your Perspective (TYP) learns a conditioned diffusion model whose output samples are not only realistic but
also consistent in both semantics and layouts with the given
ego-car data. Empirical results demonstrate TYP’s effectiveness in aiding in a CAV setting. In particular, TYP enables
us to (pre-)train collaborative perception algorithms like
early and late fusion with little or no real-world collaborative data, greatly facilitating downstream CAV applications.

Seeing the world from an ego-centric perspective, a selfdriving car risks being “narrow-sighted,” limiting its ability
to respond appropriately in dynamic driving environments.
For instance, it should slow down or honk if a pedestrian is
about to cross the road or if another vehicle is merging into
its lane. However, these actions depend on the car’s ability
to detect traffic participants, which may be occluded by a
large bus or a building at a sharp intersection. This occlusion
problem can hardly be addressed by mounting a few more
sensors on the car. We argue that a self-driving car must
move beyond its ego-centric perspective.
One intuitive way is to collaborate with nearby “agents”
that observe the scene from different angles, such as other
sensor-equipped cars or static devices like roadside units
(RSUs). When trained together to address GPS errors and
synchronization delays [55], collaborative perception has
been shown to significantly improve the accuracy of each
agent’s perception, particularly in detecting occluded or distant objects [3, 4, 14, 19, 23, 33, 42, 45, 50–52]. However,
collecting training data for collaborative perception is never
easy. Unlike single-agent data, which can be collected by
simply driving a car on the road, collaborative data requires
the simultaneous presence of multiple agents in the same
driving scene. For dynamic agents like vehicles, precise coordination is needed to ensure they are within communication

12027

