This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangling Safe and Unsafe Image Corruptions via Anisotropy and Locality
Ramchandran Muthukumar* 1 Ambar Pal2† Jeremias Sulam1 René Vidal3
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Amazon Web Services 3 University of Pennsylvania

Abstract

prehensive understanding of their security vulnerabilities is
necessary [46]. One such vulnerability concerns the ability of a malicious adversary to tamper with predictions by
adding small imperceptible corruptions referred to as adversarial perturbations [22, 42]. There is by now overwhelming
evidence that carefully crafted adversarial perturbations can
foil the prediction of state-of-the-art machine learning classifiers, i.e. they are not adversarially robust [6, 8]. Such
vulnerabilities have been observed in a wide variety of applications like computer vision [1, 49], speech recognition
[37, 55], autonomous driving [5, 45], and more. The goal of
designing safe and reliable ML systems remains incomplete
[4, 11] despite significant investment [23, 24, 33]. Often,
strategies that intend to foil performance, i.e. adversarial
attacks [6, 7, 22, 31, 44], have proven more successful than
strategies aimed at mitigating vulnerabilities, i.e. adversarial
defenses [3, 9, 34, 48, 52].
Meaningfully evaluating the adversarial robustness of
a machine learning system requires a formal specification
of a threat function, and an associated threat model that
limits the scope of malicious adversaries [20]. Informally,
a threat function d : Rd × Rd → R≥0 measures the
threat1 represented by a corruption δ ∈ Rd towards altering the true label at input x ∈ Rd as d(x, δ). We let
S(x, d, ε) := {δ ∈ Rd | d(x, δ) ≤ ε} denote the ε-sublevel
set of perturbations where the threat d is measured w.r.t. input x. A threat model (d, ε) is a pair of a threat function
d and a permissible threshold ε that together define the set
of permissible perturbations S(x, d, ε). Under the threat
model (d, ε), the robust accuracy of a classifier h ∈ H is
the probability that the label prediction at x is locally invariant to corruptions within the permissible set S(x, d, ε), see
Definition 2 for an explicit definition.
One of the most commonly used threat models is
the ℓp -threat model (dp , ϵ), corresponding to the choice2
dp (x, δ) := ∥δ∥p . The threat function dp is task-agnostic,
easy to evaluate, and induces a compact sub-level set
S(x, dp , ε) that allows efficient projection. Hence, the ℓp threat model (dp , ε) presents a natural starting point for in-

State-of-the-art machine learning systems are vulnerable to
small perturbations to their input, where “small” is defined
according to a threat model that assigns a positive threat to
each perturbation. Most prior works define a task-agnostic,
isotropic, and global threat, like the ℓp norm, where the
magnitude of the perturbation fully determines the degree
of the threat and neither the direction of the attack nor its
position in space matter. However, common corruptions
in computer vision, such as blur, compression, or occlusions, are not well captured by such threat models. This
paper proposes a novel threat model called Projected
Displacement (PD) to study robustness beyond existing
isotropic and global threat models. The proposed threat
model measures the threat of a perturbation via its alignment with unsafe directions, defined as directions in the input
space along which a perturbation of sufficient magnitude
changes the ground truth class label. Unsafe directions are
identified locally for each input based on observed training
data. In this way, the PD-threat model exhibits anisotropy
and locality. Experiments on Imagenet-1k data indicate that,
for any input, the set of perturbations with small PD threat
includes safe perturbations of large ℓp norm that preserve
the true label, such as noise, blur and compression, while
simultaneously excluding unsafe perturbations that alter
the true label. Unlike perceptual threat models based on
embeddings of large-vision models, the PD-threat model
can be readily computed for arbitrary classification tasks
without pre-training or finetuning. Further additional task
information such as sensitivity to image regions or concept
hierarchies can be easily integrated into the assessment of
threat and thus the PD threat model presents practitioners
with a flexible, task-driven threat specification that alleviates
the limitations of ℓp -threat models.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning (ML) systems are nearing
widespread deployment in civilian life, and hence a com-

1 The flexibility to define threat w.r.t. input x is critical to our work.
2 For any vector δ ∈ Rd , the ℓ norm ∥·∥ for p ≥ 1 is defined as
p
p

* Corresponding author: rmuthuk1@jhu.edu
† This work is not related to AP’s position at Amazon

∥δ∥p :=

9954

P

i |δi |

1

p p.

