This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gazing at Rewards: Eye Movements as a Lens into
Human and AI Decision-Making in Hybrid Visual Foraging
Bo Wang1,2,3

Dingwei Tan1,2,4
Yen-Ling Kuo5
Zhaowei Sun3
1
Tat-Jen Cham
Mengmi Zhang1,2

Jeremy M. Wolfe6,7

Address correspondence to mengmi.zhang@ntu.edu.sg
1
2

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Deep NeuroCognition Lab, I2R and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3

5

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 4 Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China

University of Virginia, USA 6 Brigham and Women’s Hospital, USA 7 Harvard Medical School, USA

Abstract

1. Introduction

Imagine searching a collection of coins for quarters
(0.25), dimes (0.10), nickels (0.05), and pennies (0.01)—a
hybrid foraging task where observers look for multiple
instances of multiple target types. In such tasks, how do
target values and their prevalence influence foraging and
eye movement behaviors (e.g., should you prioritize rare
quarters or common nickels)? To explore this, we conducted
human psychophysics experiments, revealing that humans
are proficient reward foragers. Their eye fixations are
drawn to regions with higher average rewards, fixation
durations are longer on more valuable targets, and their
cumulative rewards exceed chance, approaching the upper
bound of optimal foragers. To probe these decision-making
processes of humans, we developed a transformer-based
Visual Forager (VF) model trained via reinforcement
learning. Our VF model takes a series of targets, their
corresponding values, and the search image as inputs,
processes the images using foveated vision, and produces a
sequence of eye movements along with decisions on whether
to collect each fixated item. Our model outperforms
all baselines, achieves cumulative rewards comparable
to those of humans, and approximates human foraging
behavior in eye movements and foraging biases within
time-limited environments. Furthermore, stress tests on
out-of-distribution tasks with novel targets, unseen values,
and varying set sizes demonstrate the VF model’s effective
generalization. Our work offers valuable insights into the
relationship between eye movements and decision-making,
with our model serving as a powerful tool for further
exploration of this connection. All data, code, and models
are available at https://github.com/ZhangLabDeepNeuroCogLab/visual-forager.

Figure 1.
Illustrative example of eye movements and
decision-making in a hybrid visual foraging task. The image
depicts a real-world scenario where the goal is to search piles of
coins for multiple instances of target coins with varying monetary
values in order to maximize the accumulative monetary reward,
within a time-limited environment. Yellow dots and arrows
represent the locations and order of eye movements during the
search. Red bounding boxes show the target coins that are
collected. Note that humans do not always collect every item they
fixate on, highlighting the selective nature of the foraging process.

14810

Hybrid visual foraging is a ubiquitous challenge in
our daily life, such as grocery shopping for a list of
items, simultaneously scanning for traffic lights, parking
spaces, and restaurants while driving, or looking for a
specific amount of change among piles of coins (Fig. 1).
These tasks involve searching for multiple instances of
various target types stored in memory, where target
values and prevalence can vary, and the exact number of
target instances is often unknown. This raises a critical
question about how to prioritize target selections during the
search process. Understanding these dynamics is essential
for optimizing search efficiency and decision-making in
complex environments.
To tackle this question, eye movements could offer a

