This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AlphaPre: Amplitude-Phase Disentanglement Model for Precipitation
Nowcasting
Kenghong Lin, Baoquan Zhang* , Demin Yu, Wenzhi Feng, Shidong Chen, Feifan Gao, Xutao Li, Yunming Ye*
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{linkenghong, deminy, 23b951053, chenshidong, 22S151126}@stu.hit.edu.cn,
{baoquanzhang, lixutao, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

Precipitation nowcasting involves using current radar observation sequences to predict future radar sequences and
determine future precipitation distribution, which is crucial for disaster warning, traffic planning, and agricultural
production. Despite numerous advancements, challenges
persist in accurately predicting both the location and intensity of precipitation, as these factors are often interdependent, with complex atmospheric dynamics and moisture
distribution causing position and intensity changes to be
intricately coupled. Inspired by the fact that in the frequency domain, phase variations are shown to correspond
to changes in the position of precipitation, while amplitude
variations are linked to intensity changes, we propose an
amplitude-phase disentanglement model called AlphaPre,
which separately learn the position and intensity changes
of precipitation. AlphaPre comprises three key components: a phase network, an amplitude network, and an AlphaMixer. The phase network captures positional changes
by learning phase variations, and the amplitude network
models intensity changes by alternating between the frequency and spatial domains. The AlphaMixer then integrates these components to produce a refined precipitation
forecast. Extensive experiments on four datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method over
state-of-the-art approaches. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/linkenghong/AlphaPre.

Phase

Phase
(deformation)

Deformation

Amplitude
(constant)

Phase
(displacement)

Displacement

Amplitude

Amplitude
(reduced)

Weakening

Phase
(constant)

Amplitude
(amplified)

Intensification

FFT

(b)

FFT

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of the relationship between the amplitudephase of radar images and precipitation processes. (a) By maintaining a constant amplitude and varying the phase, the effects
of cloud deformation and displacement are observed. (b) The
phase is held constant while the amplitude is varied, resulting in
corresponding changes in precipitation intensity. These observations demonstrate that phase changes correspond to changes in
the precipitation position, while amplitude variations are linked
to changes in precipitation intensity.

Given the importance of this task, many methods have been
proposed, among which deep learning-based approaches
have received growing attention and shown significant development in recent years [8].
In spite of great progress with deep learning techniques,
accurately predicting both the location and intensity of precipitation remains challenging [39]. This difficulty arises
from the complex coupling between spatial and intensity

Precipitation nowcasting, aiming to predict short-term rainfall within a time frame of a few minutes to a few hours, is
a critical task in meteorology with significant implications
for society. It holds diverse implications for human society, spanning critical areas including meteorological disaster preparedness, smart cities and agricultural strategizing.
* Corresponding authors

17841

