This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model Diagnosis and Correction via Linguistic and Implicit Attribute Editing
Xuanbai Chen, Xiang Xu, Zhihua Li, Tianchen Zhao, Pietro Perona,
Qin Zhang, Yifan Xing
AWS AI Labs
{xuanbaic, xiangx, zhihuaa, tianchz, peronapp, qzaamz, yifax}@amazon.com

Abstract
How can we troubleshoot a deep visual model, i.e. understand why it makes certain mistakes and further take action
to correct its behavior? We design a Model Diagnosis and
Correction system (MDC), an automated framework that
analyzes the pattern of errors, proposes candidate causes of
attributes, conducts hypothesis testing via attribute editing,
and ultimately generates counterfactual training samples
to improve the performance of the model. Unlike previous methods, in addition to the linguistic attributes, our
method also incorporates the analysis for implicit causal
attributes, those cannot to be accurately described by natural language. To achieve this, we propose an image editing
module capable of leveraging both implicit and linguistic
attributes to generate counterfactual images depicting error
patterns and further experimentally validate causality relationships. Lastly, we enrich the training set with synthetic
samples depicting verified causal attributes and retrain the
model, further boosting accuracy and robustness. Extensive
experiments on both generalized and specialized domains
demonstrate the superiority of MDC in model diagnosis and
correction. Specifically, we achieve an average relative improvement of 62.01% in HTER for face security application
over state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. Overview the main differences (highlighted in yellow)
between (a) common diagnosis pipeline and (b) MDC consists of
three main modules: (1) candidate attribute discovery to identify
the linguistic and implicit causal attribute candidates automatically
from errors; (2) editing model to generate samples (e.g. the sample
with neutral background similar to error sample in the left, and
sample with darker skin tone) and validate the causality; (3) model
correction to improve performance using verified causal attributes.

1. Introduction

on analyzing attributes described by language and manually
provided by user through prior knowledge.
In this paper, we propose a novel model diagnosis and correction framework (MDC) to autonomously discover both
linguistic and implicit attributes without human intervention, perform counterfactual hypothesis testing, and leverage
them to enhance model robustness. Our candidate attribute
discovery module is inspired by the observation that some
useful implicit attributes (e.g., image style) are challenging
to articulate in natural language. For instance, Figure 1(b) illustrates how appearance variations related to environmental
lighting and background, difficult and unlikely to be described by user in previous model diagnosis approaches, are
indeed causal attributes for model errors and can be successfully captured by MDC. Without relying on the prompted
linguistic attributes by human expert, our approach can automatically identify implicit attributes from provided error
examples, in addition to discovering linguistic attributes. An
editing model is designed to enable counterfactual hypothe-

As deep visual recognition models are finding widespread applications in security and other sensitive fields where errors
can be very expensive [57], AI researchers are targeting to efficiently diagnose model and fix it. Recent literature propose
to test on counterfactual examples [5, 22, 25, 49, 71], and the
core principle of such hypothesis testing [54] answers this
question: How does the visual recognition model’s prediction F(x) change when only a single attribute a in the input
image x is altered, with all other attributes remaining fixed?
And thereby, it elucidates causal relationships between the
manipulated attribute and the model output [54]. Current
advances [5, 32, 33, 37, 41, 42, 44, 48, 55, 65, 73, 80] focus

14281

