This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attraction Diminishing and Distributing for Few-Shot Class-Incremental
Learning
Li-Jun Zhao1 , Zhen-Duo Chen1, *, Yongxin Wang2 , Xin Luo1 , Xin-Shun Xu1
1
School of Software, Shandong University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong Jianzhu University, China
lj zhao1028@163.com, chenzd.sdu@gmail.com, yxinwang@hotmail.com
luoxin.lxin@gmail.com, xuxinshun@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) aims to continuously learn novel classes with limited samples after pretraining on a set of base classes. To avoid catastrophic forgetting and overfitting, most FSCIL methods first train the
model on the base classes and then freeze the feature extractor in the incremental sessions. However, the reliance
on nearest neighbor classification makes FSCIL prone to
the hubness phenomenon, which negatively impacts performance in this dynamic and open scenario. While recent
methods attempt to adapt to the dynamic and open nature
of FSCIL, they are often limited to biased optimizations to
the feature space. In this paper, we pioneer the theoretical analysis of the inherent hubness in FSCIL. To mitigate
the negative effects of hubness, we propose a novel Attraction Diminishing and Distributing (D2A) method from the
essential perspectives of distance metric and feature space.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method
can broadly and significantly improve the performance of
existing methods.

that FSCIL focuses on. During the incremental sessions,
prototype classifiers are generated based on training samples, and the classification of test samples relies on searching the nearest prototype, i.e., 1-nearest neighbor (NN).

1. Introduction

However, the use of NN classification—especially in
high-dimensional spaces—is prone to hubness. Specifically, (1) due to neural collapse [21], features from the same
class tend to converge towards their within-class mean,
while features from different classes are maximally separated. Despite FSCIL aiming to provide a distinct component for each previously seen class in the output distribution, the limited transferability of feature learning often
constrains the actual output distribution. Consequently, instead of achieving distinct clusters for all classes, the output
feature space is primarily composed of base class clusters.
This leads to the output feature distribution dominated by
a mixture centered on base class prototypes. (2) Hubness
[24] refers to the phenomenon in high-dimensional space
where few points are included as the K-NN of other points
far more frequently than the remaining data points, and
these few points are called hubs. Through analysis, we find
that for the output mixture distribution in FSCIL, base class
prototypes are generally closer to the mean of the component distributions, and therefore tend to become hubs. This
makes the base class prototypes more “attractive” in NN retrieval during inference.

Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) [1, 5, 6, 9]
has been gaining increasing attention in recent years. As
a special form of Class Incremental Learning (CIL) [4, 38,
43], FSCIL is proposed to continuously learn novel classes
with limited samples after pre-training on base classes with
sufficient samples.
In the past few years, FSCIL methods widely adopt the
incremental-frozen baseline [17, 32, 37, 45], where the feature extractor is trained only during the base session with
base classes. By not adjusting the feature extractor based on
the few-shot incremental classes, this baseline fundamentally prevents catastrophic forgetting and overfitting issues
* Corresponding author

In traditional static and close-set classification, hubness
might benefit NN classification by providing more stability in classifications within established class clusters. However, in the dynamic and open-set FSCIL scenario, this skew
creates a disadvantage because novel classes are constantly
introduced and the hubs from previous classes could dominate the classification of novel data. Some FSCIL methods
[28, 33, 40] attempt to adapt to the dynamic and open nature
by techniques such as augmentation and fine-tuning. Essentially, they can be viewed as introducing hubs into the feature space and trying to associate them with novel classes.

25657

