This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DualTalk: Dual-Speaker Interaction for 3D Talking Head Conversations
Ziqiao Peng1

Yanbo Fan2∗† Haoyu Wu1 Xuan Wang2 Hongyan Liu3 Jun He1† Zhaoxin Fan4†
1
Renmin University of China 2 Ant Group 3 Tsinghua University
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing
Dual-Speaker Interaction Model

Speaker-Only
Speaker-Only
Model

...

Speaker Audio

❌ Face-to-Face Interaction Speaker Motion
❌ Non-Verbal Feedback
Listener-Only

...

Speaker-A Motion
...

Speaker-A Audio

DualTalk
Speaker Motion

Speaker Audio

Listener-Only
Model

Speaker-B Audio

❌ Multi-Round Interaction
❌ Speaking Generation

Listener Motion

✅ Speaking and Listening Role Transition
✅ Multi-Round Conversations
✅ 😁 Natural Interaction

...

Speaker-B Generated Motion

Figure 1. Comparison of single-role models (Speaker-Only and Listener-Only) with DualTalk. Unlike single-role models, which lack key
interaction elements, DualTalk supports speaking and listening role transition, multi-round conversations, and natural interaction.

Abstract
In face-to-face conversations, individuals need to switch
between speaking and listening roles seamlessly. Existing
3D talking head generation models focus solely on speaking or listening, neglecting the natural dynamics of interactive conversation, which leads to unnatural interactions
and awkward transitions. To address this issue, we propose a new task—multi-round dual-speaker interaction for
3D talking head generation—which requires models to handle and generate both speaking and listening behaviors in
continuous conversation. To solve this task, we introduce
DualTalk, a novel unified framework that integrates the dynamic behaviors of speakers and listeners to simulate realistic and coherent dialogue interactions. This framework
not only synthesizes lifelike talking heads when speaking
but also generates continuous and vivid non-verbal feedback when listening, effectively capturing the interplay between the roles. We also create a new dataset featuring 50 hours of multi-round conversations with over 1,000
characters, where participants continuously switch between
speaking and listening roles. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly enhances the natu-

ralness and expressiveness of 3D talking heads in dualspeaker conversations. We recommend watching the supplementary video:https://ziqiaopeng.github.
io/dualtalk

1. Introduction

This work was done during Ziqiao Peng’s internship at Ant Group.

Interactive conversational agents [4, 7, 17, 37], particularly 3D talking heads [16, 25, 30, 34, 43], are increasingly central to diverse applications, such as customer service, remote work, educational platforms, and entertainment [2, 12, 27, 40, 41]. The ability of these agents to
engage in human-like conversations significantly enhances
user experience, offering more intuitive and accessible interactions [38]. Fluid conversations between participants
are crucial, as they make interactions more lifelike and
deepen emotional and cognitive engagement.
However, existing 3D talking head methods typically
model either the speaker [6, 9, 31, 44] or the listener [22, 32]
independently, overlooking the dynamic role-shifting inherent in real-world interactions, where individuals transition
seamlessly between speaking and listening. Speaker-only
models [28, 29, 35, 39] generate synchronized lip movements for speaking segments, yet largely neglect the essential listening behaviors that contribute to natural and cohe-

* Project Leader.
† Corresponding Authors.

21055

