This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Estimating Body and Hand Motion in an Ego-sensed World
Brent Yi1
Vickie Ye1
Maya Zheng1
Yunqi Li2
Lea Müller1
Georgios Pavlakos3 Yi Ma1 Jitendra Malik1 Angjoo Kanazawa1
1

Egocentric Inputs

UC Berkeley

2

ShanghaiTech

Body Pose, Height, and Hands

3

UT Austin
Example Results

Figure 1. EgoAllo. We present a system that estimates human body pose, height, and hand parameters from egocentric SLAM poses and images.
Outputs capture the wearer’s actions in the allocentric reference frame of the scene, which we visualize here with 3D reconstructions.

Abstract

unique in that their outputs are coupled to a human wearer’s motion in the world. Using these sensors to understand the wearer
in addition to the scene around them is essential for applications
in augmented reality, robotics, and assistive technologies.
We therefore introduce EgoAllo, a system that uses
egocentric inputs to estimate the wearer and their motion in the
world, or allocentric, coordinate frame. We take as input sensed
metric SLAM head poses and egocentric video from devices
like Project Aria [61]. We then output estimates of human body
pose, height, and hand motion parameters.
This is a difficult task: while body parts like hands
occasionally appear in egocentric frames, most body parameters
are never directly observed. Estimated body pose, body height,
and hand parameters must be consistent with both the sensed
egomotion and visual observations. This setting differs from
most prior works in egocentric human motion estimation [7, 48],
which focus on body pose and do not address the challenges
of height and hand motion.
Our proposed system uses a head pose-conditioned diffusion
model as a motion prior, as well as a Levenberg-Marquardt
guidance optimizer for sampling hand-body sequence that align
with image observations. Our results are enabled by a key

We present EgoAllo, a system for human motion estimation
from a head-mounted device. Using only egocentric SLAM
poses and images, EgoAllo guides sampling from a conditional
diffusion model to estimate 3D body pose, height, and hand
parameters that capture a device wearer’s actions in the allocentric coordinate frame of the scene. To achieve this, our key
insight is in representation: we propose spatial and temporal
invariance criteria for improving model performance, from
which we derive a head motion conditioning parameterization
that improves estimation by up to 18%. We also show how the
bodies estimated by our system can improve hand estimation:
the resulting kinematic and temporal constraints can reduce
world-frame errors in single-frame estimates by 40%.

1. Introduction
Head-mounted devices are becoming increasingly mainstream.
In addition to offering new challenges for 3D scene understanding [18, 57, 68, 111], egocentric sensors from these devices are

7072

