This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhyT2V: LLM-Guided Iterative Self-Reﬁnement for Physics-Grounded
Text-to-Video Generation
Qiyao Xue, Xiangyu Yin, Boyuan Yang and Wei Gao
University of Pittsburgh
{qix63, eric.yin, by.yang, weigao}@pitt.edu

An apple falls on the
hard ground
(quantity & material)
Multiple apples, bouncing

Single apple, no bouncing

Drawing content disappears

Drawing with causality

No water splashing

Water splashing

A pen scribbling
on paper
(causality)
A muddy wheel
splashes through
a deep puddle
(fluid dynamics)
The river water
is flooding over
the riverbank
(fluid dynamics)

Calm water

A rock tumbles
down on a steep
hillside
(motion & gravity)

Flooding river

No tumbling rock

Rock tumbling

Hot tea pouring
from a kettle into
a mug
(state & causality)
No tea filling and steam of hot tea

Tea is filling the cup with steam

CogVideoX-5B only

CogVideoX-5B + PhyT2V

User Prompt

Figure 1. Left: videos generated by the current text-to-video generation model (CogVideoX-5B [50]) cannot adhere to the real-world
physical rules (described in brackets following the user prompt). Right: our method PhyT2V, when applied to the same model, better
reﬂects the real-world physical knowledge.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Text-to-video (T2V) generation has been recently enabled
by transformer-based diffusion models, but current T2V
models lack capabilities in adhering to the real-world common knowledge and physical rules, due to their limited understanding of physical realism and deﬁciency in temporal
modeling. Existing solutions are either data-driven or require extra model inputs, but cannot be generalizable to outof-distribution domains. In this paper, we present PhyT2V,
a new data-independent T2V technique that expands the
current T2V model’s capability of video generation to outof-distribution domains, by enabling chain-of-thought and
step-back reasoning in T2V prompting. Our experiments
show that PhyT2V improves existing T2V models’ adherence to real-world physical rules by 2.3x, and achieves 35%
improvement compared to T2V prompt enhancers.

Text-to-video (T2V) generation has recently marked a signiﬁcant breakthrough of generative AI, with the advent of
transformer-based diffusion models such as Sora [3], Pika
[17] and CogVideoX [51] that can produce videos conditioned on textual prompts. These models demonstrate astonishing capabilities of generating complex and photorealistic scenes, and could even make it difﬁcult for humans to
distinguish between real-world and AI-generated videos, in
the aspect of individual video frames’ quality [1, 37].
On the other hand, as shown in Figure 1 - Left, current
T2V models still have signiﬁcant drawbacks in adhering to
the real-world common knowledge and physical rules, such
as quantity, material, ﬂuid dynamics, gravity, motion, collision and causality, and such limitations fundamentally prevent current T2V models from being used for real-world

18826

