This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P ROMPT-CAM: Making Vision Transformers Interpretable
for Fine-Grained Analysis
Arpita Chowdhury1 , Dipanjyoti Paul2 , Zheda Mai1 , Jianyang Gu1 , Ziheng Zhang1 ,
Kazi Sajeed Mehrab3 , Elizabeth G. Campolongo1 , Daniel Rubenstein4 , Charles V. Stewart5 ,
Anuj Karpatne3 , Tanya Berger-Wolf1 , Yu Su1 , Wei-Lun Chao1
1

The Ohio State University, 2 University of Tsukuba, 3 Virginia Tech, 4 Princeton University,
5
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Input Image

Trait 4

Input
Image

Class-Specific
Prompts

Input Image

True Class Probability

Logit

Trait 3

(b) Trait Localization

Pre-trained VIT

What's common
between Brewer
Blackbird and Scott
Oriole?
What's common
between Baltimore
Oriole and Scott
Oriole?

Trait 2

Head

Class: Scott Oriole

(a) Image Classification

Trait 1

Att.
head-1

Att.
head-11

Number of Masked Heads

(d) Species-specific Trait Ranking

(c) Trait Comparison

Figure 1. Illustration of P ROMPT-CAM. By learning class-specific prompts for a pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT), P ROMPT-CAM
enables multiple functionalities. (a) P ROMPT-CAM achieves fine-grained image classification using the output logits from the classspecific prompts. (b) P ROMPT-CAM enables trait localization by visualizing the multi-head attention maps queried by the true-class
prompt. (c) P ROMPT-CAM identifies common traits shared between species by visualizing the attention maps queried by another-class
prompt. (d) P ROMPT-CAM can identify the most discriminative traits per species (e.g., distinctive yellow chest and black neck for “Scott
Oriole”) by systematically masking out the least important attention heads. See subsection 2.3 for details.

Abstract

a result, the true class’s multi-head attention maps reveal
traits and their locations. Implementation-wise, P ROMPTCAM is almost a “free lunch,” requiring only a modification to the prediction head of Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT).
This makes P ROMPT-CAM easy to train and apply, in stark
contrast to other interpretable methods that require designing specific models and training processes. Extensive empirical studies on a dozen datasets from various domains
(e.g., birds, fishes, insects, fungi, flowers, food, and cars)
validate the superior interpretation capability of P ROMPTCAM. The source code and demo are available at https:
//github.com/Imageomics/Prompt_CAM .

We present a simple approach to make pre-trained Vision
Transformers (ViTs) interpretable for fine-grained analysis, aiming to identify and localize the traits that distinguish visually similar categories, such as bird species. Pretrained ViTs, such as DINO, have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in extracting localized, discriminative features.
However, saliency maps like Grad-CAM often fail to identify these traits, producing blurred, coarse heatmaps that
highlight entire objects instead. We propose a novel approach, Prompt Class Attention Map (P ROMPT-CAM),
to address this limitation. P ROMPT-CAM learns classspecific prompts for a pre-trained ViT and uses the corresponding outputs for classification. To correctly classify an
image, the true-class prompt must attend to unique image
patches not present in other classes’ images (i.e., traits). As

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViT) [9] pre-trained on huge datasets
have greatly improved vision recognition, even for fine-

4375

