This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapting Dense Matching for Homography Estimation with Grid-based
Acceleration
Kaining Zhang1 Yuxin Deng1 Jiayi Ma1 * Paolo Favaro2
Wuhan University, China 2 University of Bern, Switzerland

1

{zkn707196, acuo.dyx, jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract

paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

resolution images. However, their scalability to higher resolutions is constrained by limitations in (1) network architecture and (2) computational capacity. Specifically, 4point-based methods [5, 6, 11, 20, 30, 49] extract matching
information from image pairs and aggregate it to regress
corner offsets, followed by homography estimation using
DLT [17]. The aggregation process is typically implemented through a fixed number of large-kernel pooling operations. Consequently, the network’s downsampling factor
is predefined and constrained by the kernel sizes, inherently
limiting the input image resolution—typically to 128 × 128.
Matrix-based methods [7, 43–45] explicitly use the IC-LK
iterator [1] with deep features to refine the homography matrix. This approach requires multiple iterations to achieve
feature-metric alignment across all pixels, resulting in significant computational and memory overhead. As a result,
current methods are forced to work with inputs at low resolution. Unfortunately, doing so has also a direct negative
impact on the accuracy of the estimated homography.
Image matching methods, which first find correspondences and then estimate homography with robust estimators [16, 17], offer greater flexibility for high-resolution
inputs. However, they are often criticized for their limited effectiveness in low-texture scenarios [23], which are
common in homography applications. Recently, this issue
has been well-addressed by the powerful dense matching
methods [13, 14, 35], which find correspondences for every pixel. Yet, this strong performance comes with nonnegligible computational costs. For example, training the
SOTA dense matcher RoMa [14] on a 24GB GPU only supports a batch size of 1 for 560 × 560 images. This heavy
resource demand arises from attempting to resolve every
possible match between images, which is redundant for homography estimation, as it only has 8 degrees of freedom.
In this paper, we aim to solve the resolution issue of deep
homography methods by introducing the dense matching
framework, while tackling the computational challenges of
dense matching by considering the globally smooth nature
of homography transformations. This leads to Grid Flow
regression Network (GFNet). As shown in Figure 1, GFNet

Current deep homography estimation methods are typically
constrained to processing low-resolution image pairs due
to network architecture and computational limitations. For
high-resolution images, downsampling is often required,
which can greatly degrade estimation accuracy. In contrast,
image matching methods, which match pixels and compute homography from correspondences, provide greater
resolution flexibility. So in this work, we revisit the traditional image matching paradigm for homography estimation and propose GFNet, a Grid Flow regression Network that adapts the high-accuracy dense matching framework for homography estimation while enhancing efficiency
through a grid-based strategy—estimating flow only over
a coarse grid by leveraging homography’s global smoothness. We demonstrate the effectiveness of GFNet on a
wide range of experiments on multiple datasets, including the common scene MSCOCO, multimodal datasets VISIR and GoogleMap, and the dynamic scene VIRAT. Notably, on 448×448 GoogleMap, GFNet achieves an improvement of +13.5% in auc@3 while reducing MACs by
∼47% compared to the SOTA dense matching method. Additionally, it shows a 1.8× improvement in auc@3 over
the SOTA deep homography method. Code is available at
https://github.com/KN-Zhang/GFNet.

1. Introduction
Homography estimation is the task of determining the transformation that aligns two planes. This is a basic low-level
computer vision task widely used in various downstream
applications, including image/video stitching [47], image
fusion [38], GPS-denied UAV localization [36, 39], stereo
vision [19], and planar object tracking [24].
Deep homography estimation methods, which typically
parameterize homography using corner offsets or the homography matrix, have demonstrated high accuracy on low* Corresponding author.

6294

