This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

APHQ-ViT: Post-Training Quantization with Average Perturbation Hessian Based
Reconstruction for Vision Transformers
Zhuguanyu Wu1,2 , Jiayi Zhang1,2 , Jiaxin Chen1,2B , Jinyang Guo3 , Di Huang2 , Yunhong Wang1,2B
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{goatwu, zhangjyi, jiaxinchen, jinyangguo, dhuang, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

vit_small.blocks.5
vit_small.blocks.6

40
30

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have become one of the most
commonly used backbones for vision tasks. Despite their remarkable performance, they often suffer significant accuracy
drops when quantized for practical deployment, particularly by post-training quantization (PTQ) under ultra-low
bits. Recently, reconstruction-based PTQ methods have
shown promising performance in quantizing Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). However, they fail when applied to ViTs, primarily due to the inaccurate estimation
of output importance and the substantial accuracy degradation in quantizing post-GELU activations. To address
these issues, we propose APHQ-ViT, a novel PTQ approach
based on importance estimation with Average Perturbation
Hessian (APH). Specifically, we first thoroughly analyze
the current approximation approaches with Hessian loss,
and propose an improved average perturbation Hessian
loss. To deal with the quantization of the post-GELU activations, we design an MLP Reconstruction (MR) method
by replacing the GELU function in MLP with ReLU and
reconstructing it by the APH loss on a small unlabeled
calibration set. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
APHQ-ViT using linear quantizers outperforms existing PTQ
methods by substantial margins in 3-bit and 4-bit across
different vision tasks. The source code is available at
https://github.com/GoatWu/APHQ-ViT.

20
10
0
10

attn.qkv

attn.proj

mlp.fc1

mlp.fc2

(a) activation statistics of linear layers
Distribution Count

Distribution Count

104
107
105
103

Raw Weight
Reconstructed Weight

103
102
101

101
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

100

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

(b) activation distribution of mlp.fc2 (c) weight distribution of mlp.fc2

Figure 1. (a) shows the box plot of activations for each linear layer
in vit-small.blocks.5 and 6 by using the 0.99 quantile, highlighting
the varying ranges of post-GELU activations. (b) and (c) display
that the activation range of fc2 is significantly reduced after MLP
Reconstruction, while the weight range only exhibits slight changes.

usage and computational overhead make it a great challenge
to deploy these models on resource-constrained devices [23].
Model quantization has recently emerged as a promising
solution to reduce the computational cost of deep learning
models. This technique converts the weights or activations
from float-point precision to low bit-width, while preserving
the original model architectures. Most current quantization approaches are generally categorized into two groups:
quantization-aware training (QAT) [5, 12] and post-training
quantization (PTQ) [15, 40]. QAT methods typically achieve
superior accuracy compared to PTQ by performing end-toend training on the full pretraining dataset. Nevertheless,
they are often time-intensive and encounter substantial limitations when the original dataset is inaccessible. In contrast,
PTQ methods are more applicable as they rely solely on
a small unlabeled calibration dataset instead of requiring

1. Introduction
The success of Transformer-based models in natural language processing (NLP) [7, 45] has inspired their application
to various computer vision tasks, such as image classification [3, 11, 32], object detection [2, 6, 53, 57] and instance
segmentation [42, 48, 51, 52, 56]. Due to their sophisticated
architectures for representation learning, substantial memory
B Corresponding Authors

9686

