This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled Motion Expression Video Segmentation
Xiankai Lu3
Xiaofei Zhou4
Runmin Cong1,2 *
Sam Kwong5
Wei Zhang1,2
1
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and System Control, Ministry of Education
3
School of Software, Shandong University
4
School of Automation, Hangzhou Dianzi University
5
School of Data Science, Lingnan University
Hao Fang1,2

"The bird flying away"

Abstract
Motion expression video segmentation aims to segment objects based on input motion descriptions. Compared with
traditional referring video object segmentation, it focuses
on motion and multi-object expressions and is more challenging. Previous works achieved it by simply injecting
text information into the video instance segmentation (VIS)
model. However, this requires retraining the entire model
and optimization is difficult. In this work, we propose
DMVS, a simple framework constructed on the existing
query-based VIS model, emphasizing decoupling the task
into video instance segmentation and motion expression understanding. Firstly, we use a frozen video instance segmenter to extract object-specific contexts and convert them
into frame-level and video-level queries. Secondly, we interact two levels of queries with static and motion cues, respectively, to further encode visually enhanced motion expressions. Furthermore, we propose a novel query initialization strategy that uses video queries guided by classification priors to initialize motion queries, greatly reducing the
difficulty of optimization. Without bells and whistles, DMVS
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the MeViS dataset
at a lower training cost. Extensive experiments verify the
effectiveness and efficiency of our framework.

VIS
(a) previous framework
"The bird flying away"

VIS

DMVS

(b) our framework

Figure 1. Comparisons of previous framework and our DMVS
framework. (a) Previous methods inject textual information into
the video instance segmenter, which required retraining the overall framework. (b) Our DMVS decouples the task into video instance segmentation and motion expression understanding, video
instance segmenter freezes during the training process.

1. Introduction

results on these datasets. To alleviate this limitation, Motion Expression Video Segmentation (MEVS) is recently
proposed [10], which highlights the importance of the temporal motion characteristics of videos. The new dataset for
the task, MeViS [10], contains a large number of motion
expressions to indicate objects in intricate environments,
and one expression may refer to multiple target objects.
The current methods [2, 11, 38, 44] designed for traditional
RVOS datasets encounter significant performance degradation.

Referring Video Object Segmentation (RVOS) is a multimodal video task, which aims to segment the target object
that is specified by a provided language description across
the entire video. Existing RVOS datasets [15, 21, 38] typically consist of videos where the objects are salient and possess distinct and unchanging features. Therefore, referring
image segmentation methods [1, 9, 21, 25] can achieve good
* Corresponding author

Due to the multi-object and inter-frame motion correlation features of the dataset, researchers attempted to inject
textual information into the video instance segmentation
(VIS) model to address this new task, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
The VIS task aims to simultaneously detect, segment, and
track all object instances in videos [48]. A major challenge
in MEVS is the precise capture and alignment of cross-

13821

