This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Reconstruction of Static and Dynamic Scenes from Events
Qiyao Gao1,2,3# Peiqi Duan1,2# Hanyue Lou1,2 Minggui Teng1,2
Ziqi Cai1,2 Xu Chen3 Boxin Shi1,2 †
1

State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

2

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

Mechatronics, Automation, and Control Systems Laboratory, University of Washington

Event separation

Light source: Sunlight or
DC lighting

Static events
Events

Ours static frame

Reference

(c) Static frame reconstruction results

Static frame
E2VID

Dynamic events
Dynamic
event voxel

Ours

ERSD
Module

Trajectory of
dynamic foreground

Dynamic video reconstruction
with static backgrounds

(a) Illustration of our method

(b) URSEE framework

(d) Reconstruction comparison between E2VID and our
method on synthetic and real data.

Figure 1. Illustration of our method (a) and pipeline (b), result examples of static frame reconstruction (c) and static-dynamic fusion (d).

1. Introduction

Abstract

Event cameras are a novel type of neuromorphic sensors
that introduce a paradigm shift in visual representation by
responding to brightness changes rather than capturing absolute light intensity at a fixed rate [16, 33]. Each event
pixel operates asynchronously and triggers a stream of
events for dynamic scenes with high temporal resolution
[6, 9, 37], leading to their widespread application in dynamic vision tasks [12, 19, 36]. To enable event cameras
to leverage the mature vision algorithms designed for conventional frame cameras, event-based video reconstruction
methods have been developed to bridge the gap stemming
from the disparate output formats. However, current eventbased video reconstruction methods [2, 8, 20, 22, 26, 39]
often overlook restoring static backgrounds, resulting in a
lack of background detail in reconstructed videos. While
incorporating a frame-based camera may mitigate this issue, it diminishes the benefits associated with processing
pure event streams, especially in terms of data efficiency.

This paper addresses the challenge that current eventbased video reconstruction methods cannot produce static
background information. Recent research has uncovered
the potential of event cameras in capturing static scenes.
Nonetheless, image quality deteriorates due to noise interference and detail loss, failing to provide reliable background information. We propose a two-stage reconstruction strategy to address these challenges and reconstruct
static scene images comparable to frame cameras. Building on this, we introduce the URSEE framework designed
for reconstructing motion videos with static backgrounds.
This framework includes a parallel channel that can simultaneously process static and dynamic events, and a network
module designed to reconstruct videos encompassing both
static and dynamic scenes in an end-to-end manner. We also
collect a real-captured dataset for static reconstruction,
containing both indoor and outdoor scenes. Comparison
results indicate that the proposed method achieves state-ofthe-art performance on both synthetic and real data.
# Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

Recent work has made progress in reconstructing static
scenes from event streams, broadly categorized into two approaches based on whether external devices are required.
Han et al. [13] control active illumination and EvTemMap

Project page: https://github.com/gaoqiyao1997/URSEE

27914

