This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconciling Stochastic and Deterministic Strategies for Zero-shot Image
Restoration using Diffusion Model in Dual
Chong Wang1 , Lanqing Guo2 , Zixuan Fu1 , Siyuan Yang1 , Hao Cheng3 , Alex C. Kot1 , Bihan Wen1 *
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
The University of Texas at Austin, USA 3 Hebei University of Technology, China

Abstract
Plug-and-play (PnP) methods offer an iterative strategy for
solving image restoration (IR) problems in a zero-shot manner, using a learned discriminative denoiser as the implicit
prior. More recently, a sampling-based variant of this approach, which utilizes a pre-trained generative diffusion
model, has gained great popularity for solving IR problems through stochastic sampling. The IR results using
PnP with a pre-trained diffusion model demonstrate distinct advantages compared to those using discriminative denoisers, i.e.,improved perceptual quality while sacrificing
the data fidelity. The unsatisfactory results are due to the
lack of integration of these strategies in the IR tasks. In
this work, we propose a novel zero-shot IR scheme, dubbed
Reconciling Diffusion Model in Dual (RDMD), which leverages only a single pre-trained diffusion model to construct
two complementary regularizers. Specifically, the diffusion
model in RDMD will iteratively perform deterministic denoising and stochastic sampling, aiming to achieve highfidelity image restoration with appealing perceptual quality. RDMD also allows users to customize the distortionperception tradeoff with a single hyperparameter, enhancing the adaptability of the restoration process in different
practical scenarios. Extensive experiments on several IR
tasks demonstrate that our proposed method could achieve
superior results compared to existing approaches on both
the FFHQ and ImageNet datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/ChongWang1024/RDMD.

(a) Low-resolution

(c) Deterministic

(b) Ground truth

(d) Stochastic

(e) Reconciled

Figure 1. An example of super-resolution (4×) with noise level
0.05. From (a) to (e): (a) low-resolution input, (b) original image,
(c) ours result via pure deterministic regression, (d) ours result
via pure stochastic sampling, (e) ours by reconciling these two
variants, respectively.

a downsampling matrix, while in super-resolution tasks, A
acts as a decimation operator, which involves blurring followed by downsampling. Directly restoring a clean image x
from y becomes an ill-posed problem due to the underdetermined nature of the forward model A. A common approach
to address this restoration problem is to employ a maximum
a posteriori (MAP) optimization, formulated as:
min
x

1
∥y − Ax∥22 + λR(x),
2σn2

(1)

1. Introduction

where R(·) is the regularizer that encapsulates the image
prior or distribution of the underlying clean images with the
strength controlled by λ and σn is the noise level of additive
Gaussian noise. Recent deep learning-based methods have
achieved impressive restoration results using the power of
a large collection of data [6, 15, 35]. Although these taskspecific networks excel in narrowly defined problems, they
frequently struggle with generalizability across various IR
tasks. Consequently, there is a growing interest in exploring zero-shot approaches to address these generalizability
challenges.

Image restoration (IR) aims to recover the latent clean image x from its degraded measurements y. This degradation
process is typically modeled as y = Ax + n, where A represents the forward model and n denotes the additive noise.
Different IR tasks correspond to specific observation models A. For example, in image inpainting, A functions as
* Bihan Wen is the corresponding author.

23207

