This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Clean Training Data: A Versatile and Model-Agnostic Framework for
Out-of-Distribution Detection with Contaminated Training Data
Yuchuan Li
Queen’s University

Jae-Mo Kang
Kyungpook National University

Abstract
In real-world AI applications, training datasets are often
contaminated, containing a mix of in-distribution (ID) and
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples without labels. This contamination poses a significant challenge for developing and
training OOD detection models, as nearly all existing methods assume access to a clean training dataset of only ID
samples—a condition rarely met in real-world scenarios.
Customizing each existing OOD detection method to handle
such contamination is impractical, given the vast number
of diverse methods designed for clean data. To address
this issue, we propose a universal, model-agnostic framework that integrates with nearly all existing OOD detection
methods, enabling training on contaminated datasets while
achieving high OOD detection accuracy on test datasets.
Additionally, our framework provides an accurate estimation of the unknown proportion of OOD samples within the
training dataset—an important and distinct challenge in its
own right. Our approach introduces a novel dynamic weighting function and transition mechanism within an iterative
training structure, enabling both reliable estimation of the
OOD sample proportion of the training data and precise
OOD detection on test data. Extensive evaluations across diverse datasets, including ImageNet-1k, demonstrate that our
framework accurately estimates OOD sample proportions
of training data and substantially enhances OOD detection
accuracy on test data.

1. Introduction
The development of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection
methodologies has become paramount in the quest to fortify
the reliability and generalizability of deep neural networks
(DNNs). Within the conventional scenario of OOD detection
paradigms, a critical and often implicit assumption is that
the training dataset is clean, devoid of any OOD contaminants and composed solely of in-distribution (ID) samples
* Corresponding authors.

Il-Min Kim*
Queen’s University

[21]. This assumption is foundational to essentially all OOD
detection techniques. However, this idealistic assumption
often falls apart, even for the gold standard dataset, ImageNet, [36], not to mention almost all real-world datasets
[45]. OOD instances are ubiquitous in practice due to labeling errors for ID and OOD by humans, as well as imperfections in (semi-)automated annotations. The task of data
purification becomes exponentially more daunting as dataset
sizes burgeon. A dataset that contains a mixture of ID and
OOD samples is called a contaminated dataset. If such a
dataset is erroneously assumed to be uncontaminated during
the training process, the performance and reliability of OOD
detection methods can be severely compromised [2] (e.g., a
5% contamination of all training samples could lead to a 30point drop in OOD detection performance). Despite being a
more practical scenario for real-world AI applications, this
field remains mostly unexplored. Addressing this critical
issue is the primary motivation for our work.
Recent advancements in OOD detection have led to a
proliferation of diverse and unique methods [12, 40, 43],
designed for clean training data. While this variety has
strengthened OOD detection capabilities, it presents a critical
challenge when dealing with contaminated training data, as
individually customizing all those methods to handle such
contamination is impractical. This challenge underscores
the need for a model-agnostic framework that can integrate
with existing OOD detection methods, enabling them to be
trained on contaminated datasets—being model-agnostic is
additional motivation for our work.
Meanwhile, another important issue is accurately estimating the proportion of OOD samples within contaminated
training datasets, which can be useful for various purposes
on its own. However, this task presents a tricky challenge:
an OOD detection model may only be able to estimate the
OOD percentage accurately if it is already well-trained, yet
effective training becomes difficult when the training dataset
itself is contaminated. The core challenge arises from the
need to estimate the OOD proportion of the “training” data
itself (not the test data), requiring a model that can be trained
on the contaminated training data while simultaneously pro-

10183

