This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vid2Avatar-Pro: Authentic Avatar from Videos in the Wild via Universal Prior
Chen Guo∗1,2

Junxuan Li∗1 Yash Kant1,3 Yaser Sheikh1 Shunsuke Saito†1
1
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta 2 ETH Zürich 3 University of Toronto

In-the-Wild Video

Animatable Avatar

Driving Signal

Chen Cao†1

Animations

Vid2Avatar-Pro

Figure 1. We present Vid2Avatar-Pro, a method to create photorealistic 3D human avatars from monocular in-the-wild videos via pre-trained
universal prior. Our method can faithfully create high-fidelity human avatars from a single video and generate realistic animations.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Authentic digital humans are widely used for the synthesis
of novel animations of real persons in games and movies.
They are also expected to be an indispensable component
for virtual communications with immersive display devices
(AR/VR). However, creating such an authentic avatar typically requires expensive multi-view capture systems [2],
limiting its availability to professional studios. If we can effortlessly build a high-quality avatar just from an in-the-wild
monocular video, it unlocks myriads of applications not only
for professionals but also for everybody.
Despite its promise, it remains non-trivial to create a highquality avatar from in-the-wild videos that can be faithfully
animated with diverse poses and efficiently rendered from
arbitrary views. Monocular videos often do not cover the
entire space of pose and view points required for test-time
animation and rendering. The scarcity of pose variations
leads to poor generalization to novel poses. Specifically, the
avatar may exhibit artifacts and unnatural deformations when
animated using out-of-distribution poses. Moreover, inverse
rendering with limited view coverage is prone to overfitting,
resulting in distortions and artifacts when rendered from
unseen camera views.
Existing approaches [15, 22, 29, 52, 61, 78, 88] aim to
overcome its limitations by incorporating statistical prior
from a minimally-clothed human body model [50, 57] or
geometric prior based on heuristics (e.g., Laplacian regularization [52]). While these priors improve robustness under
this ill-posed problem setting, there remains a clear quality

We present Vid2Avatar-Pro, a method to create photorealistic and animatable 3D human avatars from monocular
in-the-wild videos. Building a high-quality avatar that supports animation with diverse poses from a monocular video
is challenging because the observation of pose diversity and
view points is inherently limited. The lack of pose variations typically leads to poor generalization to novel poses,
and avatars can easily overfit to limited input view points,
producing artifacts and distortions from other views. In
this work, we address these limitations by leveraging a universal prior model (UPM) learned from a large corpus of
multi-view clothed human performance capture data. We
build our representation on top of expressive 3D Gaussians
with canonical front and back maps shared across identities.
Once the UPM is learned to accurately reproduce the largescale multi-view human images, we fine-tune the model with
an in-the-wild video via inverse rendering to obtain a personalized photorealistic human avatar that can be faithfully
animated to novel human motions and rendered from novel
views. The experiments show that our approach based on the
learned universal prior sets a new state-of-the-art in monocular avatar reconstruction by substantially outperforming
existing approaches relying only on heuristic regularization
or a shape prior of minimally clothed bodies (e.g., SMPL)
on publicly available datasets.

* Equal contribution

† Equal advisory

5559

