This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Notes-guided MLLM Reasoning: Enhancing MLLM with Knowledge
and Visual Notes for Visual Question Answering

1

Jing Chen1†
Yun Xue1†
Qiaofeng Wu1 *
Wenlong Fang1 *
School of Electronic Science and Engineering (School of Microelectronics),
South China Normal University
{fsfwl1140, scnu wqf, chenjing1, xueyun}@m.scnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The knowledge-based visual question answering (KB-VQA)
task involves using external knowledge about the image
to assist reasoning. Building on the impressive performance of multimodal large language model (MLLM), recent
methods have commenced leveraging MLLM as an implicit
knowledge base for reasoning. However, the direct employment of MLLM with raw external knowledge might result
in reasoning errors due to misdirected knowledge information. Additionally, MLLM may lack fine-grained perception of visual features, which can result in hallucinations
during reasoning. To address these challenges, we propose Notes-guided MLLM Reasoning (NoteMR), a novel
framework that guides MLLM in better reasoning by utilizing knowledge notes and visual notes. Specifically, we
initially obtain explicit knowledge from an external knowledge base. Then, this explicit knowledge, combined with images, is used to assist the MLLM in generating knowledge
notes. These notes are designed to filter explicit knowledge
and identify relevant internal implicit knowledge within the
MLLM. We then identify highly correlated regions between
the images and knowledge notes, retaining them as image notes to enhance the model’s fine-grained perception,
thereby mitigating MLLM induced hallucinations. Finally,
both notes are fed into the MLLM, enabling a more comprehensive understanding of the image-question pair and
enhancing the model’s reasoning capabilities. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the OK-VQA and
A-OKVQA datasets, demonstrating its robustness and effectiveness across diverse VQA scenarios.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is a task combining computer vision and natural language processing, where the
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

19597

goal is to answer questions based on visual input. In recent
years, there has been growing interest in VQA [1, 3, 11].
A more challenging variant, knowledge-based VQA (KBVQA) [31, 35], requires external knowledge beyond the
provided image and question to generate correct answers.
These more complex application scenarios require models
with enhanced capabilities to integrate vision, language,
and external knowledge information. Success in this task
requires not only strong multimodal understanding, but also
the ability to reason with external information to produce
correct answers.
Since KB-VQA relies on external knowledge to support
answering, earlier approaches primarily focused on retrieving explicit information from external knowledge base to
assist reasoning. RAVQA-V2 [24] utilizes Google Search
to retrieve text aligned with the image and question, which
is then used by an answer generator. Similarly, TRIG [9]
retrieves passages from Wikidata to align visual and textual information for answer generation. With advances in
MLLM performance on multimodal tasks, researchers have
increasingly explored using MLLM as implicit knowledge
base to improve reasoning. Prophet [37] uses GPT-3 [4],
prompting it with candidate answers to improve task comprehension and generate responses. SKP [43] employs an
attention mechanism to adjust the weight of each word in
the explicit knowledge, which is then used directly for reasoning.
Despite the improved performance of methods based on
MLLM, they exhibit several limitations:
1) The retrieved explicit knowledge may contain redundancy or incorrect information, leading to noise. If this explicit knowledge is used as input to assist MLLM in answering the question, it can distract the model and result in
incorrect answers. For instance, in Figure 1(a), the question “What do they call running around...” retrieves knowledge stating, “... players trotting around the bases after
hitting the ball over the fence ...” (as detailed in the Appendix Figure E1). We conducted an experiment using the
image-question pair in Figure 1(a) as input, asking MLLM

