This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PSBD: Prediction Shift Uncertainty Unlocks Backdoor Detection
Wei Li1 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Sijia Liu3 , Ren Wang1 *
1
Illinois Institute of Technology
2
IBM Research
3
Michigan State University

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to backdoor attacks,
where adversaries manipulate model predictions by inserting malicious samples into the training data. Currently,
there is still a significant challenge in identifying suspicious
training data to unveil potential backdoor samples. In this
paper, we propose a novel method, Prediction Shift Backdoor Detection (PSBD), leveraging an uncertainty-based
approach requiring minimal unlabeled clean validation data.
PSBD is motivated by an intriguing Prediction Shift (PS)
phenomenon, where poisoned models’ predictions on clean
data often shift away from true labels towards certain other
labels with dropout applied during inference, while backdoor samples exhibit less PS. We hypothesize PS results
from the neuron bias effect, making neurons favor features
of certain classes. PSBD identifies backdoor training samples by computing the Prediction Shift Uncertainty (PSU),
the variance in probability values when dropout layers are
toggled on and off during model inference. Extensive experiments have been conducted to verify the effectiveness and
efficiency of PSBD, which achieves state-of-the-art results
among mainstream detection methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/WL-619/PSBD.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has heralded a new era in artificial intelligence, driving progress
across diverse sectors, including computer vision, autonomous driving and healthcare personalization [24, 31,
36, 41]. Yet, as their application scope broadens, DNNs
have become increasingly vulnerable from a security standpoint. One of the most notable threats in this arena is the rise
of backdoor attacks [7, 10, 13, 32]. These attacks involve
the surreptitious insertion of altered samples into training
data, enabling attackers to subtly manipulate a DNN’s output, leading to incorrect predictions under certain triggers.
* Corresponding author: Ren Wang (rwang74@iit.edu)

Figure 1. A simple conceptual diagram of the Prediction Shift Backdoor Detection (PSBD) framework. The introduction of dropout
during the inference stage induces a neuron bias effect in the model,
causing the final feature maps of clean data and backdoor data to
become highly similar, ultimately leading to the occurrence of the
Prediction Shift phenomenon, which serves as a basis for detecting
backdoor training data.

The implications of such vulnerabilities are especially severe
in contexts demanding high security, as they can lead to
catastrophic outcomes [1, 5].
Notwithstanding an increased recognition of these risks,
there are many different type of defense strategies currently,
such as backdoor model reconstruction [2, 20, 30, 33, 49],
backdoor model detection [3, 38, 46, 48], and poison suppression [26]. However, the majority of these methods primarily focus on determining whether trained models contain
backdoors or on mitigating the impact of such vulnerabilities.
In contrast, there is a noticeable shortage of advanced and
efficient approaches that can proactively identify backdoor
training samples at the initial stages. Current research in
identifying backdoor training data often suffers from either
a low true positive rate - indicating a low detection rate of

10255

