This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-Granularity Semantic Guided Sparse Routing Diffusion Model for General
Pansharpening
Yinghui Xing1 * Litao Qu1 * Shizhou Zhang1† Di Xu2† Yingkun Yang1 Yanning Zhang1
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd

1

{xyh 7491, szzhang, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn, {qlt, yyk0930}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, xudi21@huawei.com

Abstract
Pansharpening aims at integrating complementary information from panchromatic and multispectral images. Available deep-learning based pansharpening methods typically
perform exceptionally with particular satellite datasets. At
the same time, it has been observed that these models also
exhibit scene dependence, for example, if the majority of the
training samples come from the urban scenes, the model’s
performance may decline in the river scene. To address the
domain gap produced by varying satellite sensors and distinct scenes, we propose a dual-granularity semantic guided
sparse routing diffusion model for general pansharpening.
By utilizing the large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) in the
field of geoscience, e.g, GeoChat, we introduce the dual granularity semantics to generate dynamic sparse routing scores
for adaptation of different satellite sensors and scenes. This
scene-level and region-level dual-granularity semantic information serves as guidance for dynamically activating specialized experts within the diffusion model. Extensive experiments on WorldView-3, QuickBird, and GaoFen-2 datasets
show the effectiveness of our proposed method. Notably, the
proposed method outperforms the comparison approaches
in adapting to new satellite sensors and scenes. The codes
are available at https://github.com/codgodtao/SGDiff.

1. Introduction
Due to the technological and physical limitations of imaging
devices, remote sensing images obtained by satellite sensors
always have a trade-off between spatial and spectral resolution [47]. Low-Resolution MultiSpectral (LRMS) images,
which consist of multiple spectral bands, have relatively
low spatial resolution. In contrast, single-band panchromatic
(PAN) images exhibit high spatial resolution. Therefore,
pansharpening is a fundamental and essential process to
fuse an LRMS image with a PAN image to produce a High* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

Resolution MultiSpectral (HRMS) image.
Traditional pansharpening methods rely on manually designed transformations [8, 16], decompositions [1–3], or
optimization models [23, 30, 38], leading to suboptimal results in either enhancing spatial details or preserving spectral
information. In recent years, deep learning based methods
have gained significant attention by effectively learning the
relationships between HRMS and LRMS/PAN image pairs,
resulting in superior performance across various datasets.
However, most of them are sensor-dependent, indicating that
each satellite dataset requires a model tailored to the specific
characteristics of sensors. To address the sensor-dependent
issue, some general pansharpening methods have been proposed [5, 35, 46, 50]. Wang et al. [46] combined the advantages of deep learning and variational optimization to propose a universal pansharpening methods that can be applied
across different satellites. Sheng et al. [35] utilized a shared
spatial enhancement network to improve spatial details and
a branch of satellite-specific spectral adjustment networks
to capture the spectral characteristics. Xing et al. [50] introduced the pioneering text-prompt 3D diffusion model, which
was jointly trained on various satellite datasets to acquire
generalized insights across various satellites. Nevertheless,
dataset-level guidance alone in above methods is insufficient
to adequately capture the diversity of satellite imagery, since
significant variations exist in scenes and ground objects even
within the same satellite dataset, as shown in Figure 1.
Satellite imagery exhibits distinct characteristics when
compared with natural images. Because satellite images are
captured from high vertical heights, they encompass a wide
range of ground object categories, such as urban environments, green vegetation, water bodies, and more [12, 28]. It
has been observed that different pansharpening models tend
to exhibit particular preferences towards different types of
scenes and frequently encounter difficulties when applied
to novel scenes [13, 28, 43], indicating a scene-dependency.
This phenomenon can be explained by the imbalanced allocation of training data with substantial variations in scene
characteristics. For instance, if the majority of training examples are drawn from urban scenes, the model’s performance

12658

