This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perceptual Video Compression with Neural Wrapping
Muhammad Umar Karim Khan, Aaron Chadha, Mohammad Ashraful Anam, Yiannis Andreopoulos
Sony Interactive Entertainment
{Umarr.KKhan, Aaronn.CChadha, Russelll.AAnam, Yianniss.AAndreopoulos}@sony.com

Abstract
Standard video codecs are rate-distortion optimization
machines, where distortion is typically quantified using
PSNR versus the source. However, it is now widely accepted that increasing PSNR does not necessarily translate to better visual quality. In this paper, a better balance between perception and fidelity is targeted, in order
to provide for significant rate savings over state-of-the-art
standards-based video codecs. Specifically, pre- and postprocessing neural networks are proposed that enhance the
coding efficiency of standard video codecs when benchmarked with an array of well-established perceptual quality
scores. These “neural wrapper” elements are end-to-end
trained with a neural codec module serving as a differentiable proxy for standard video codecs. The codec proxy is
jointly optimized with the pre- and post components via a
novel two-phase pretraining strategy and end-to-end iterative refinement with stop-gradient. This allows the neural
pre- and postprocessor to learn to embed, remove and recover information in a codec-aware manner, thus improving its rate-quality performance. A single neural-wrapper
model is thereby established and used for the entire ratequality curve without needing any downscaling or upscaling. The trained model is tested with the AV1 and VVC
standard codecs via an array of well-established objective
quality scores (SSIM, MS-SSIM, VMAF, AVQT), as well as
mean opinion scores (MOS) derived from ITU-T P.910 subjective testing. Experimental results show that the proposed
approach improves all quality scores, with -18.5% average
Bjontegaard Delta-rate (BD-rate) saving over all objective
scores and MOS improvement over both standard codecs.
This illustrates the significant potential of neural wrapper
components over standards-based video coding.

objectively characterize visual quality. This has also led
to the research community now moving away from SNRoptimization [26] in favor of structural similarity (SSIM
[65]), video multimethod assessment fusion (VMAF) and
Apple’s advanced video quality tool (AVQT) optimization
[4, 42]. However, all current perceptual optimization approaches in standards-based video encoders have one or
more of the following detriments:
• they require multiple encoding passes or in-loop implementation within a specific encoder;
• they only optimize for a single quality scoring method
like VMAF or SSIM and are shown to be detrimental in
other quality scores;
• they comprise hand-crafted (shallow) models of low-level
human perception and fail to encapsulate several characteristics of more advanced quality scoring methods like
VMAF or AVQT in a data-driven and learnable manner;
• their Bjontegaard Delta-rate (BD-rate) improvement on
well-established quality scores like SSIM, VMAF and
AVQT is in the order of a few percentile points.
A neural codec “wrapper” is proposed in this paper as
the means to augment standard video codecs and optimize them for perceptual quality. Including neural preand postprocessing in conventional encoding pipelines
is shown to clearly outperform the equivalent codecs
without these components. This allows for conventional
streaming ecosystems to continue operating “as-is” and
does not break standards. That is, when neural components cannot be supported before encoding or after decoding, the system can just disable them with appropriate
adaptation, without jeopardizing video streaming. The
key contributions of the paper are listed as follows.
– A novel pretraining regime for modelling a conventional codec with a neural codec model is proposed,
which uses the implicit encoder-decoder structure of
the neural codec to align both video quality and rate.
– An end-to-end training regime for jointly training pre
and postprocessors is proposed. Starting with a pretrained neural codec model, it is proposed to iteratively
update the codec model. This approach allows for more
accurate gradients to be backpropagated to the prepro-

1. Introduction
It is now widely accepted that that signal-to-noise (SNR)
ratio is a poor indicator of visual quality in video coding
[6, 19, 26, 42]. Instead, quality scores that include elements
of human perception [42], perceptual modelling of encoding artifacts [51], as well as viewing setup awareness [4, 65]
have emerged as strong contenders for the best means to

17743

