This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D-Fly: Fast 4D Reconstruction from a Single Monocular Video
Diankun Wu1 , Fangfu Liu1 , Yi-Hsin Hung1 , Yue Qian2 , Xiaohang Zhan2 , Yueqi Duan1†
1
2
Tsinghua University
Tencent

!" $%&

Figure 1. In this work, we propose 4D-Fly for fast reconstructing 4D scenes from monocular videos in minutes. Compared to previous
methods, our approach achieves 20× speed-up while maintaining comparable or superior reconstruction quality.

optimization process to further improve visual quality and
motion accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of our 4D-Fly over state-of-the-art methods in
terms of speed and quality. Project page: https://diankunwu.github.io/4D-Fly/.

Abstract
4D reconstruction from a single monocular video is an
important but challenging task due to its inherent underconstrained nature. While most existing 4D reconstruction methods focus on multi-camera settings, they always
suffer from limited multi-view information in monocular
videos. Recent studies have attempted to mitigate the illposed problem by incorporating data-driven priors as additional supervision. However, they require hours of optimization to align the splatted 2D feature maps of explicit Gaussians with various priors, which limits the range of applications. To address the time-consuming issue, we propose 4DFly, an efficient and effective framework for reconstructing
the 4D scene from a monocular video (hundreds of frames
within 6 minutes), more than 20 × faster and even achieving
higher quality than previous optimization methods. Our key
insight is to unleash the explicit property of Gaussian primitives and directly apply data priors to them. Specifically,
we build a streaming 4D reconstruction paradigm that includes: propagating existing Gaussian to the next timestep
with an anchor-based strategy, expanding the 4D scene map
with the canonical Gaussian map, and an efficient 4D scene

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

In the field of computer vision and graphics, scene reconstruction has been a crucial task with a broad range of applications, including virtual reality [15], autonomous navigation [1, 54], and beyond [3, 4, 24, 25, 29]. While recent
works [18, 30] have made significant progress in modeling
static scenes, dynamic scene reconstruction remains a substantial challenge due to the geometry-motion interplay and
spatiotemporal sparse observations [12, 37, 44].
Recent advancements in this area are largely driven by
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [18], which has emerged as
a state-of-the-art approach for 3D reconstruction. By representing a static scene with a collection of 3D Gaussian primitives and splatting them onto the image plane, 3DGS enables efficient and photometric rendering, thereby facilitating both training and inference. Building upon 3DGS, several studies have extended it to the 4D domain by learning
a deformation field [12, 23, 46, 50], optimizing the trajecto-

16663

