This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVPaint: Synchronized Multi-View Diffusion for Painting Anything 3D
Wei Cheng1∗† Juncheng Mu2,5∗ Xianfang Zeng1 Xin Chen7 Anqi Pang3
Chi Zhang6 Zhibin Wang3 Bin Fu3 Gang Yu1 Ziwei Liu4 Liang Pan2‡
1
StepFun 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Tencent PCG 4 S-Lab, NTU
5
Tsinghua University 6 AGI Lab, Westlake University 7 ByteDance
http://mvpaint.github.io

Robust to UV Unwrapping

Generation Versatility

Multi-view Consistency

Figure 1. MVPaint generates multi-view consistent textures with arbitrary UV unwrapping and high generation versatility.

Abstract

To ensure complete 3D texturing, we introduce the S3I
method, specifically designed to texture previously unobserved areas effectively. 3) UV Refinement (UVR). Furthermore, MVPaint employs a UVR module to improve the
texture quality in the UV space, which first performs a UVspace Super-Resolution, followed by a Spatial-aware SeamSmoothing algorithm for revising spatial texturing discontinuities caused by UV unwrapping. Moreover, we establish two T2T evaluation benchmarks: the Objaverse T2T
benchmark and the GSO T2T benchmark, based on selected
high-quality 3D meshes from the Objaverse dataset and the
entire GSO dataset, respectively. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that MVPaint surpasses existing stateof-the-art methods. Notably, MVPaint could generate highfidelity textures with minimal Janus issues and highly enhanced cross-view consistency.

Texturing is a crucial step in the 3D asset production
workflow, which enhances the visual appeal and diversity of
3D assets. Despite recent advancements in Text-to-Texture
(T2T) generation, existing methods often yield subpar results, primarily due to local discontinuities, inconsistencies
across multiple views, and heavy dependence on UV unwrapping outcomes. To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel generation-refinement 3D texturing framework called MVPaint, which can generate high-resolution,
seamless textures while emphasizing multi-view consistency. MVPaint mainly consists of three key modules. 1)
Synchronized Multi-view Generation (SMG). Given a 3D
mesh model, MVPaint first simultaneously generates multiview images by employing a SMG model, which leads to
coarse texturing results with unpainted parts due to missing observations. 2) Spatial-aware 3D Inpainting (S3I).

585

