This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Difference Inversion: Interpolate and Isolate the Difference with Token
Consistency for Image Analogy Generation
Hyunsoo Kim1,2 , Donghyun Kim†1 , Suhyun Kim†3
1

Korea University 2 Korea Institute of Science and Technology 3 Kyung Hee University
{climba,d kim}@korea.ac.kr,dr.suhyun.kim@gmail.com

A

:

A’

::

B

:

B’

Make the cabin
a castle

Remove the
motorcycle

Make it
stormy

Add a
rainbow

Make the
sea a lake

text
instruction

Input

(a) SDEdit

(b) InstructPix2Pix

w/ text
instruction

(c) DIA

(d) Analogist

(e) VISII

(f) Ours

w/o text
instruction

Figure 1. We propose Difference Inversion, a method that generates B ′ conditioned on an image triplet {A, A′ , B} that satisfies A : A′ ::
B : B ′ . Our method produces a significantly more plausible B ′ than other baselines. Note that SDEdit and InstructPix2Pix take the text
instruction as input, whereas DIA, Analogist, VISII, and our Difference Inversion only use the image triplet A, A′ , B as input.

Abstract
How can we generate an image B ′ that satisfies A : A′ ::
B : B ′ , given the input images A,A′ and B? Recent works
have tackled this challenge through approaches like visual
in-context learning or visual instruction. However, these
methods are typically limited to specific models (e.g. InstructPix2Pix. Inpainting models) rather than general diffusion models (e.g. Stable Diffusion, SDXL). This dependency
may lead to inherited biases or lower editing capabilities.
In this paper, we propose Difference Inversion, a method
that isolates only the difference from A and A′ and applies
it to B to generate a plausible B ′ . To address model de-

pendency, it is crucial to structure prompts in the form of
a “Full Prompt” suitable for input to stable diffusion models, rather than using an “Instruction Prompt”. To this end,
we accurately extract the Difference between A and A′ and
combine it with the prompt of B, enabling a plug-and-play
application of the difference. To extract a precise difference,
we first identify it through 1) Delta Interpolation. Additionally, to ensure accurate training, we propose the 2) Token
Consistency Loss and 3) Zero Initialization of Token Embeddings. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that Difference Inversion outperforms existing baselines both quantitatively and qualitatively, indicating its ability to generate
more feasible B ′ in a model-agnostic manner.

† Co-corresponding author.

18250

