This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Let’s Chorus: Partner-aware Hybrid Song-Driven 3D Head Animation
Xiumei Xie1

Zikai Huang1

Wenhao Xu1 Peng Xiao1 Xuemiao Xu1,2† Huaidong Zhang1,2†
1
South China University of Technology
2
Guangdong Engineering Center for Large Model and GenAI Technology

(a) Solo Singer
3UHYLRXV
0HWKRGV

t
6LQJOH$XGLR6LJQDO

6LQJOH+HDG$QLPDWLRQ

(b) Multi Singers
࡭૚
6LQJHU

3D
&KRUXV

t

0L[HGVLJQDO
6LQJHU

࡭૛

Figure 1. Multi-singers Animation. (a): Previous methods construct the 3D facial animation conditioned with an input of single-person
audio. (b): With a hybrid song from multi-singers, we argue that it is essential to construct the emotional interaction between each singer for
accurate 3D head generation. Motivated by this, we propose the PaChorus framework conditioned on a segment of mixed audio consisting
of background music and vocals from multi-singers. With inter-singer interaction modeling, our method can generate emotion-consistent
animation sequences.

Abstract

3D chorus head generation framework driven by mixed audio inputs. The proposed framework extracts emotional
features from the background music and dependence between singers and models the head movement in a latent
space from the Variational Autoencoder (VAE), enabling
diverse interactive head animation generation. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that our approach effectively generates 3D facial animations of interacting singers,
achieving notable improvements in realism and handling
background music interference with strong robustness. The
dataset will be released for research purposes at the project
page: https://xxiexm.github.io/PaChorus/.

Singing is a vital form of human emotional expression and
social interaction, distinguished from speech by its richer
emotional nuances and freer expressive style. Thus, investigating 3D facial animation driven by singing holds signiﬁcant research value. Our work focuses on 3D singing facial
animation driven by mixed singing audio, and to the best
of our knowledge, no prior studies have explored this area.
Additionally, the absence of existing 3D singing datasets
poses a considerable challenge. To address this, we collect a novel audiovisual dataset, ChorusHead which features synchronized mixed vocal audio and 3D motions for
chorus singing. In addition, We propose a partner-aware
† Corresponding author (xuemx@scut.edu.cn, huaidongz@scut.edu.cn).

5467

