This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unbiasing through Textual Descriptions:
Mitigating Representation Bias in Video Benchmarks
Nina Shvetsova1,2,3 *, Arsha Nagrani4 , Bernt Schiele3 , Hilde Kuehne1,2,5 , Christian Rupprecht4
1

Goethe University Frankfurt, 2 Tuebingen AI Center/University of Tuebingen, 3 MPI for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
4

University of Oxford, 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
shvetsov@uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract
We propose a new “Unbiased through Textual Description (UTD)” video benchmark based on unbiased subsets
of existing video classification and retrieval datasets to enable a more robust assessment of video understanding capabilities. Namely, we tackle the problem that current video
benchmarks may suffer from different representation biases,
e.g., object bias or single-frame bias, where mere recognition of objects or utilization of only a single frame is sufficient for correct prediction. We leverage VLMs and LLMs
to analyze and debias benchmarks from such representation biases. Specifically, we generate frame-wise textual
descriptions of videos, filter them for specific information
(e.g. only objects) and leverage them to examine representation biases across three dimensions: 1) concept bias —
determining if a specific concept (e.g., objects) alone suffice
for prediction; 2) temporal bias — assessing if temporal information contributes to prediction; and 3) common sense
vs. dataset bias — evaluating whether zero-shot reasoning
or dataset correlations contribute to prediction. We conduct
a systematic analysis of 12 popular video classification and
retrieval datasets and create new object-debiased test splits
for these datasets. Moreover, we benchmark 30 state-ofthe-art video models on original and debiased splits and
analyze biases in the models. To facilitate the future development of more robust video understanding benchmarks
and models, we release: “UTD-descriptions”, a dataset
with our rich structured descriptions for each dataset, and
“UTD-splits”, a dataset of object-debiased test splits.1

Figure 1. Can you guess activity on a video based solely on the objects or a single frame? (The answer is on the next page in Fig. 2.)

1. Introduction

36], there has been an ongoing discussion about how much
of a system’s performance can be attributed to the recognition of the action itself compared to related or unrelated
visual cues such as objects or scene information in the
data [11, 15, 47], namely object/scene representation bias
(see Fig. 1). Different strategies have been proposed to separate action recognition from scene and object influences
such as segmenting the human figure in a video and placing it against a gray or black background [11, 15] as well
as miming actions in unrelated contexts [47]. Some works
focused on collecting datasets designed to minimize scene
or object representation bias [3, 14, 23]. However, debiased
solutions have so far rarely been adopted for benchmarking. Reasons for that may be that modified videos in case
of [11, 15] often introduce artifacts and benchmarks with
explicitly low scene bias [14, 23], might be considered outof-domain relative to standard training setups. Another line
of research questions whether current video benchmarks
truly require temporal understanding, as single-frame models have shown comparable performance on several benchmarks [5, 19]. While new benchmarks are emerging to assess temporal understanding [2, 7, 28], temporal represen-

Ever since action recognition moved from simple, staged
clip classification to real-life video understanding [18, 29,
* The work was done during PhD visit to the University of Oxford
within the ELLIS PhD program.
1 Project page: https://utd-project.github.io/

29050

