This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Theory-Inspired Deep Multi-View Multi-Label Learning with Incomplete Views
and Noisy Labels
Quanjiang Li, Tingjin Luo*, Jiahui Liao
National University of Defense Technology, China
liquanjiang@nudt.edu.cn,tingjinluo@hotmail.com, liaojiahui19@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Incomplete features and label noise in multi-view multilabel data significantly undermine the reliability and performance, motivating researchers to explore the mechanism of representation and information recovery. However,
learning for such dual deficiencies is crucial but rarely studied. In this paper, we propose a theory-inspired Deep MultiView Multi-Label Learning method with Incomplete Views
and Noisy Labels named DMMIvNL to address these problems. Specifically, to promote the synthesis of task-relevant
shared information and preserve the distinctiveness of individual features from limited views, we have developed a
feature extraction modular based on the information bottleneck theory, and formulated its theoretical upper bound into
its objective. Meanwhile, we theoretically prove that minimizing the volume of the transition matrix ensures the statistical consistency with classifier training. Besides, a cycleconsistency estimation principle is proposed in the volume
minimization network to improve the recognition stability
of multi-label noise. Moreover, leveraging inherent real semantics information and label correlations are employed as
model regularization to reduce the risk of excessive noise
fitting. Finally, extensive experimental results validate the
effectiveness and robustness of our DMMIvNL.

sition complexities and storage limitations [29, 47]. On the
other hand, real-world collections often contain label noise
as manual annotation can introduce incorrect labels beyond
human knowledge [34]. Therefore, insufficient features and
noisy labels severely reduce the classification performance.
Regarding MvMLC, many solutions have been proposed to
address missing views. iMvWL [37] used weighted matrix factorization to learn a shared subspace and AIMNet
[24] leveraged a cross-view attention mechanism to recover
missing views. Moreover, two types of label deficiencies
have been considered in MvMLC. The problem of Partial
Multi-Label (PML) [40] involves both relevant and irrelevant labels, while the problem of Multi-Label Learning
with Missing Labels (MLML)[36] occurs when some relevant labels are missing. TFMDD [38] addressed PML with
a two-stage manifold disambiguation model and LMVCAT
[23] tackled MLML by employing label-guided graphs and
category-aware transformers. While existing methods address each annotation problem separately, both issues tend
to occur simultaneously in practice. Thus, the challenge of
multi-label noise demands substantial attention, where each
category suffers from both over-labeled and missing labels.

1. Introduction

Existing research has not yet tackled the combined issues
of missing views and multi-label noise, which are prevalent
in real-world applications like incomplete and subjective
medical diagnostics [31]. In fact, overcoming the simultaneous challenges requires refined representation extraction
under missing views and effective classifier leaning with
multi-label noise. The core of multi-view learning lies in
extracting shared information across different views while
preserving unique features of each view [33]. DICNet [22],
DIMC [39] and SIP [26] concentrated solely on shared subspace and neglected distinctive characteristics of individual
views. MDDRL [16] and MTD [25] attempted to extract
both shared and specific representations with minimal interactions. However, their reliance on geometric orthogonality
or distance metrics restricted them to capture only linear
patterns, overlooking the complex nature of inter-view relations. Therefore, constraining feature semantics at the intrinsic information level is crucial for obtaining high-level

Advances in feature extraction has shifted data analysis towards multi-view frameworks [27], while growing data attributes drive multi-label learning to offer rich label semantics [13]. Therefore, Multi-view multi-label classification
(MvMLC) has emerged to address the intricate demands
of processing diverse features and numerous targets. Traditional methods [30, 46] assume the given data has complete views and clean labels, which is violated in practice [41]. On one hand, heterogeneous data from diverse
sources frequently encounters missing views due to acqui* Corresponding author.

20706

