This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EasyHOI: Unleashing the Power of Large Models for Reconstructing
Hand-Object Interactions in the Wild
Yumeng Liu1,2

Xiaoxiao Long3,⇤ Zemin Yang2 Yuan Liu3,4 Marc Habermann5
Christian Theobalt5 Yuexin Ma2,⇤ Wenping Wang6
1
The University of Hong Kong , 2 ShanghaiTech University,
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 4 Nanyang Technological University,
5
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 6 Texas A&M University

Figure 1. We leverage large models and prior-guided optimization to reconstruct physically plausible hand-object interactions from singleview in-the-wild images, effectively handling occlusions and diverse hand-object configurations.

Abstract

metric priors for reconstructing hand-object interactions.
Specifically, given a single image, we first design a novel
pipeline to estimate the underlying hand pose and object
shape using off-the-shelf large models. Furthermore, with
the initial reconstruction, we employ a prior-guided optimization scheme, which optimizes hand pose to comply
with 3D physical constraints and the 2D input image content. We perform experiments across several datasets and
show that our method consistently outperforms baselines
and faithfully reconstructs a diverse set of hand-object interactions. Here is the link of our project page: https:
//lym29.github.io/EasyHOI-page/.

Our work aims to reconstruct hand-object interactions from
a single-view image, which is a fundamental but ill-posed
task. Unlike methods that reconstruct from videos, multiview images, or predefined 3D templates, single-view reconstruction faces significant challenges due to inherent
ambiguities and occlusions. These challenges are further
amplified by the diverse nature of hand poses and the vast
variety of object shapes and sizes. Our key insight is
that current foundational models for segmentation, inpainting, and 3D reconstruction robustly generalize to in-thewild images, which could provide strong visual and geo* indicates the corresponding authors.
This work was finalized during the first author’s visit to ShanghaiTech University.

7037

