This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do computer vision foundation models learn
the low-level characteristics of the human visual system?
Yancheng Cai, Fei Yin, Dounia Hammou, Rafal Mantiuk; University of Cambridge, UK
yc613@cam.ac.uk, fy277@cam.ac.uk, dh706@cam.ac.uk, mantiuk@gmail.com
Test

Contrast
Detection

Abstract
Computer vision foundation models, such as DINO or
OpenCLIP, are trained in a self-supervised manner on large
image datasets. Analogously, substantial evidence suggests
that the human visual system (HVS) is influenced by the
statistical distribution of colors and patterns in the natural world, characteristics also present in the training data
of foundation models. The question we address in this paper is whether foundation models trained on natural images
mimic some of the low-level characteristics of the human
visual system, such as contrast detection, contrast masking,
and contrast constancy. Specifically, we designed a protocol comprising nine test types to evaluate the image encoders of 45 foundation and generative models. Our results
indicate that some foundation models (e.g., DINO, DINOv2,
and OpenCLIP), share some of the characteristics of human
vision, but other models show little resemblance. Foundation models tend to show smaller sensitivity to low contrast
and rather irregular responses to contrast across frequencies. The foundation models show the best agreement with
human data in terms of contrast masking. Our findings suggest that human vision and computer vision may take both
similar and different paths when learning to interpret images of the real world. Overall, while differences remain,
foundation models trained on vision tasks start to align with
low-level human vision, with DINOv2 showing the closest resemblance. Our code is available on https://
github.com/caiyancheng/VFM_HVS_CVPR2025.

Reference

Human
Visual
System

Contrast
Masking
Contrast
Constancy

Test

Reference

Image
Encoder
Embedding +
Attention ...

?
?
?

Contrast
Detection
Contrast
Masking
Contrast
Constancy

Figure 1. To determine whether image encoders of foundation
models exhibit a similar low-level characteristic as human vision,
we test them on psychophysical stimuli for which human data is
available. We want to test the alignment of contrast encoding between human and computational vision models.

1. Introduction

they share their low-level vision characteristics? If they do,
we will know that those low-level characteristics arise naturally and likely reflect the statistics of real-world scenes.
If they do not, it means that human low-level vision characteristics are specific to the optical/biological limitations of
human vision rather than natural image statistics. Our analysis is meant to shed some light on how the vision, either
biological or computational, may develop from observing
samples of the world, taking either the same or different
routes to accomplish their respective tasks.
In particular, we are interested in the characteristics that
are well understood and measured in human vision science
using psychophysical methods: contrast detection [4], contrast masking [25] and contrast constancy [18]. Contrast
detection and contrast masking quantify the ability of the visual system to detect small contrast patterns, either on uniform backgrounds (contrast detection) or on backgrounds
with patterns (contrast masking). Contrast detection and
masking capture the “bottlenecks” of the visual system —
the characteristic that may prevent us from detecting patterns that are too dark or too small. Similarly, cameras used

Computer vision foundation models, such as DINO [9] or
OpenCLIP [22, 33], show exceptional ability to generalize
to different tasks and are becoming cornerstones of many
computer vision methods. They owe their exceptional performance to self-supervised training on very large image
datasets. The human visual system also owes much of its
capability to being able to perceive the world, over many
years from infancy to childhood [6]. A question arises: if
the neural network and the visual system are trained by being exposed to a large number of images of the world, will

20039

