This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RePerformer: Immersive Human-centric Volumetric Videos from Playback to
Photoreal Reperformance
Yuheng Jiang1,2∗ Zhehao Shen1,2∗ Chengcheng Guo1 Yu Hong1 Zhuo Su3
Yingliang Zhang4 Marc Habermann5† Lan Xu1†
1
5

2
3
4
ShanghaiTech University
NeuDim
ByteDance
DGene
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Figure 1. We introduce RePerformer, a Gaussian-based approach for robust, high-fidelity volumetric video playback and realistic reperformance of general dynamic scenes. (Left: Sequential bass performances. Right: Synchronized violin players.)

Abstract
Human-centric volumetric videos offer immersive freeviewpoint experiences, yet existing methods focus either
on replaying general dynamic scenes or animating human
avatars, limiting their ability to re-perform general dynamic
scenes. In this paper, we present RePerformer, a novel
Gaussian-based representation that unifies playback and
re-performance for high-fidelity human-centric volumetric
videos. Specifically, we hierarchically disentangle the dynamic scenes into motion Gaussians and appearance Gaussians which are associated in the canonical space. We further employ a Morton-based parameterization to efficiently
encode the appearance Gaussians into 2D position and attribute maps. For enhanced generalization, we adopt 2D
CNNs to map position maps to attribute maps, which can
be assembled into appearance Gaussians for high-fidelity
rendering of the dynamic scenes. For re-performance, we
develop a semantic-aware alignment module and apply deformation transfer on motion Gaussians, enabling photo-

real rendering under novel motions. Extensive experiments
validate the robustness and effectiveness of RePerformer,
setting a new benchmark for playback-then-reperformance
paradigm in human-centric volumetric videos. Project
page: https://moqiyinlun.github.io/Reperformer/.

1. Introduction

* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding authors.

As the boundary between digital and real worlds continues
to blur, human-centric volumetric videos represent a significant advancement in visual media, allowing users to control
the virtual camera view freely. This facilitates interactive
exploration and various immersive applications in telepresence, education, and entertainment.
By far, the high-end solutions for volumetric videos utilize dense multi-view videos to faithfully record the dynamic scenes. Within this domain, we observe that there
are mainly two complementary workhorses for producing
such human-centric volumetric videos, dubbed “replay volumetric videos” and “animate volumetric videos” for short.
The former playback setting [7, 27, 72] merely reconstructs

11349

