This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Black Swan: Abductive and Defeasible Video Reasoning
in Unpredictable Events
Aditya Chinchure*1,2

Sahithya Ravi→1,2
Raymond Ng1
Vered Shwartz1,2
3
1,2
Boyang Li
Leonid Sigal
1
2
University of British Columbia
Vector Institute for AI 3 Nanyang Technological University
{aditya10, sahiravi, rng, vshwartz, lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract

boyang.li@ntu.edu.sg

The commonsense reasoning capabilities of visionlanguage models (VLMs), especially in abductive reasoning
and defeasible reasoning, remain poorly understood. Most
benchmarks focus on typical visual scenarios [1, 23, 42],
making it difficult to discern whether model performance
stems from keen perception and reasoning skills, or reliance
on pure statistical recall. We argue that by focusing on
atypical events in videos, clearer insights can be gained
on the core capabilities of VLMs. Explaining and understanding such out-of-distribution events requires models to
extend beyond basic pattern recognition and regurgitation
of their prior knowledge. To this end, we introduce BlackSwanSuite, a benchmark for evaluating VLMs’ ability to
reason about unexpected events through abductive and defeasible tasks. Our tasks artificially limit the amount of
visual information provided to models while questioning
them about hidden unexpected events, or provide new visual information that could change an existing hypothesis
about the event. We curate a comprehensive benchmark
suite comprising over 3,800 MCQ, 4,900 generative and
6,700 yes/no questions, spanning 1,655 videos. After extensively evaluating various state-of-the-art VLMs, including GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro, as well as open-source
VLMs such as LLaVA-Video, we find significant performance gaps of up to 32% from humans on these tasks. Our
findings reveal key limitations in current VLMs, emphasizing the need for enhanced model architectures and training strategies. Our data and leaderboard is available at
https://blackswan.cs.ubc.ca.

gent capabilities of their underlying large language models
(LLMs). Recent multi-frame video-language models such
as VILA [15], Video-LLaMA [4], and LLaVA-Video [43]
show promising results in tasks such as video captioning
and question answering. However, it remains unclear to
what extent they can reason about unexpected events.
Unexpected events pose a unique challenge to AI models, as they deviate from the patterns in the training set, leaving the models less equipped to handle them [2, 11, 28].
However, traditional benchmarks for video reasoning primarily focus on predictable scenarios (e.g. [39]), overlooking the critical challenge of assessing how models handle
rare, unforeseen events. Furthermore, these benchmarks often do not require models to revise their reasoning in response to conflicting or new evidence.
The human ability to understand, rationalize, and respond to unexpected events is underpinned by abductive
reasoning, or drawing the most likely explanation from limited observations, and defeasible reasoning, where initial
conclusions are revised in light of new or conflicting evidence. For example, a human may observe two damaged
cars in an intersection, and hypothesize the cause as one
driver running the red light (abductive). Later, on observing
that the traffic lights malfunctioning, they instead believe
the cause was faulty traffic lights rather than the driver (defeasability). If AI models are to function as autonomous
decision makers (e.g., in self-driving vehicles [20, 35]), reasoning about unexpected events abductively and defeasibly
would be critical to their safety and real-world utility.
Motivated by the need to evaluate the gap in abductive and defeasible reasoning abilities between humans and
models, and the limitations of existing benchmarks, we propose the novel BlackSwanSuite benchmark. Our benchmark contains a range of tasks that require nuanced perception, comprehension, and reasoning abilities. We focus on leveraging the visual information provided in videos
of expectation-violating events, including but not limited
to surprises, accidents, pranks and other uncommon situations. Such videos are ideal for evaluating abductive

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) are becoming increasingly capable of reasoning about the world thanks to their
exposure to vast amounts of visual data, and the emer* Denotes Equal Contribution

24201

