This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoxelSplat: Dynamic Gaussian Splatting as an Effective Loss for Occupancy and
Flow Prediction
Ziyue Zhu1 Shenlong Wang2 Jin Xie3† Jiang-jiang Liu4 Jingdong Wang4 Jian Yang1†
1
PCA Lab, VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University 2 UIUC
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou 4 Baidu
zhuziyue@mail.nankai.edu.cn

csjxie@nju.edu.cn

csjyang@nankai.edu.cn

Semantic Gaussians GSt

scene flow

Abstract
Recent advancements in camera-based occupancy prediction have focused on the simultaneous prediction of 3D
semantics and scene flow, a task that presents significant
challenges due to specific difficulties, e.g., occlusions and
unbalanced dynamic environments. In this paper, we analyze these challenges and their underlying causes. To address them, we propose a novel regularization framework
called VoxelSplat. This framework leverages recent developments in 3D Gaussian Splatting to enhance model performance in two key ways: (i) Enhanced Semantics Supervision through 2D Projection: During training, our method
decodes sparse semantic 3D Gaussians from 3D representations and projects them onto the 2D camera view. This provides additional supervision signals in the camera-visible
space, allowing 2D labels to improve the learning of 3D semantics. (ii) Scene Flow Learning: Our framework uses
the predicted scene flow to model the motion of Gaussians,
and is thus able to learn the scene flow of moving objects
in a self-supervised manner using the labels of adjacent
frames. Our method can be seamlessly integrated into various existing occupancy models, enhancing performance
without increasing inference time. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of VoxelSplat in improving the accuracy of both semantic occupancy
and scene flow estimation. The project page and codes are
available at https://zzy816.github.io/VoxelSplat-Demo/.

loss

rendering

update Gaussians’ centers

loss
rendering
2D ground truth t & t + 1

updated Gaussians GSt+1

Figure 1. During training, our method additionally predicts 3D
Gaussians GSt representing semantic logits of occupied regions
in the current frame. We then obtain Gaussians GSt+1 for the
future frame by updating their centers using the predicted scene
flow. By rendering these Gaussians into the camera views of different time stamps, both semantic and scene flow predictions can
be supervised using the multi-frame 2D ground truths.

maps shows great potential, as it can handle both semantic and dynamic understanding, which are key elements for
safe driving.
Despite advancements, camera-based occupancy perception faces key challenges. First, large portions of the annotated regions [36, 40, 43] are inaccessible to the camera
views due to occlusion. The supervision intended to improve performance on these invisible regions may propagate
misleading signals along the camera rays to the image features, potentially causing adverse effects and deteriorating
performance rather than enhancing it. Second, voxelized
representations, while advantageous for their grid structure
and planner integration, struggle with explicit motion modeling. Voxels are suited for implicit Eulerian motion, yet
explicit Laplacian motion is more critical for safe planning in self-driving. Finally, most benchmarks and datasets

1. Introduction
Robust and accurate perception is crucial for self-driving
systems. Camera-centric occupancy map perception has become popular in both industry and academia [11–13, 20–
22, 34, 36, 43, 56] due to its low-cost sensors, robustness,
generalizability, and seamless integration with motion planning. Joint semantic and flow prediction on occupancy
† Corresponding authors: Jian Yang and Jin Xie.

6761

