This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Dataset for Semantic Segmentation in the Presence of Unknowns
Zakaria Laskar∗,a , Tomáš Vojı́ř∗,a , Matej Grcic∗,b , Iaroslav Melekhov•,c , Shankar Gangisettye ,
Juho Kannalac,d , Jiri Matasa , Giorgos Toliasa , and C.V. Jawahare
a VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czechia
b University of Zagreb Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, Croatia
c Aalto University, Finland
e IIIT Hyderabad, India
d University of Oulu, Finland

Standard Anomaly Evaluation Setting
No evaluation of the primary objective

Not controlled evaluation

Cityscapes

SMIYC-RA21

RA
cr

os

s-

do

Controlled evaluation

Mostly toy-like scenes

Limited labels

SMIYC-RO21

Proposed ISSU Benchmark
ma

in

Open-set evaluation

Normal + low light

19 Classes + anomaly label

in-domain

ISSU - Train

ISSU - Test - Static
cross-sensor, temporal

ISSU - Test - Temporal

Figure 1. Standard benchmarks cannot separate the effects of domain shift, lighting conditions, and anomaly size during evaluation. The
proposed dataset allows controlled evaluation of these effects and supports evaluation of both closed-set and anomaly segmentation.

and test set for controlled in-domain evaluation. The test
set consists of a static and temporal part, with the latter
comprised of videos. The dataset provides annotations for
both closed-set (knowns) and anomalies, enabling closedset and open-set evaluation. The dataset covers diverse conditions, such as domain and cross-sensor shift, illumination
variation and allows ablation of anomaly detection methods
with respect to these variations. Evaluation results of current state-of-the-art methods confirm the need for improvements especially in domain-generalization, small and large
object segmentation. The code and the dataset are available
at https://github.com/vojirt/benchmark_issu.

Abstract
Before deployment in the real-world deep neural networks require thorough evaluation of how they handle both
knowns, inputs represented in the training data, and unknowns (anomalies). This is especially important for scene
understanding tasks with safety critical applications, such
as in autonomous driving. Existing datasets allow evaluation of only knowns or unknowns - but not both, which is
required to establish “in the wild” suitability of deep neural network models. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel
anomaly segmentation dataset, ISSU, that features a diverse
set of anomaly inputs from cluttered real-world environments. The dataset is twice larger than existing anomaly
segmentation datasets, and provides a training, validation

1. Introduction
Many successful computer vision applications rely heavily
or entirely on deep neural networks trained on extensive,
fully or partially labeled training data [6, 9, 16, 32]. The

∗ Equal Contribution. The corresponding author zakaria.nits@gmail.com
• The work was done prior to joining Amazon

1439

