This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Charm: The Missing Piece in ViT fine-tuning for Image Aesthetic Assessment
Fatemeh Behrad, Tinne Tuytelaars, Johan Wagemans
KU Leuven University, Belgium
{fatemeh.behrad, tinne.tuytelaars, johan.wagemans}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
The capacity of Vision transformers (ViTs) to handle
variable-sized inputs is often constrained by computational
complexity and batch processing limitations. Consequently,
ViTs are typically trained on small, fixed-size images obtained through downscaling or cropping. While reducing
computational burden, these methods result in significant
information loss, negatively affecting tasks like image aesthetic assessment. We introduce Charm, a novel tokenization approach that preserves Composition, High-resolution,
Aspect Ratio, and Multi-scale information simultaneously.
Charm prioritizes high-resolution details in specific regions
while downscaling others, enabling shorter fixed-size input
sequences for ViTs while incorporating essential information. Charm is designed to be compatible with pre-trained
ViTs and their learned positional embeddings. By providing multiscale input and introducing variety to input tokens, Charm improves ViT performance and generalizability for image aesthetic assessment. We avoid cropping or
changing the aspect ratio to further preserve information.
Extensive experiments demonstrate significant performance
improvements on various image aesthetic and quality assessment datasets (up to 8.1 %) using a lightweight ViT
backbone. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/FBehrad/Charm.

Figure 1. Traditional image preprocessing methods (right) often
distort image aesthetics by rescaling and cropping images to a
fixed size. To preserve critical aesthetic information, our approach
(left) selectively maintains some regions in their original resolution while downscaling the others.

sons. First, position embeddings of pre-trained ViTs are
learned for a specific, fixed input size. Additionally, batch
processing requires all sequences in a batch to be the same
length, which is challenging with images of different dimensions. Grouping images by size or padding can help.
However, grouping images may affect the learning process
and convergence, as it makes batches less representative of
the entire distribution, while padding can lead to inefficient
resource utilization.
This brings us to another major issue when processing
high-resolution images, which is the excessive computation and memory requirements. This can be particularly
challenging when dealing with limited computational resources. As a result, a standard approach is to resize and

1. Introduction
Humans are inherently drawn to aesthetically pleasing images, making image aesthetics a vital consideration in fields
like photography, advertising, e-commerce, and social media. Image aesthetic assessment (IAA) aims to develop
computational models that can accurately predict human
aesthetic preferences for images.
Deep learning approaches applied to IAA have evolved
significantly, with the Vision Transformer (ViT) architecture [9] demonstrating promising results [16, 21, 22]. ViTs
process images as sequences of non-overlapping patches,
allowing them to handle images of various sizes. However, in practice, this flexibility is limited for several rea-

7815

