This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incremental Object Keypoint Learning
Mingfu Liang1 Jiahuan Zhou2,∗ Xu Zou3 Ying Wu1
1
Northwestern University 2 Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Existing progress in object keypoint estimation primarily benefits from the conventional supervised learning
paradigm based on numerous data labeled with pre-defined
keypoints. However, these well-trained models can hardly
detect the undefined new keypoints in test time, which
largely hinders their feasibility for diverse downstream
tasks. To handle this, various solutions are explored but
still suffer from either limited generalizability or transferability. Therefore, in this paper, we explore a novel keypoint
learning paradigm in that we only annotate new keypoints
in the new data and incrementally train the model, without
retaining any old data, called Incremental object Keypoint
Learning (IKL). A two-stage learning scheme as a novel
baseline tailored to IKL is developed. In the first Knowledge Association stage, given the data labeled with only
new keypoints, an auxiliary KA-Net is trained to automatically associate the old keypoints to these new ones based on
their spatial and intrinsic anatomical relations. In the second Mutual Promotion stage, based on a keypoint-oriented
spatial distillation loss, we jointly leverage the auxiliary
KA-Net and the old model for knowledge consolidation to
mutually promote the estimation of all old and new keypoints. Owing to the investigation of the correlations between new and old keypoints, our proposed method can not
just effectively mitigate the catastrophic forgetting of old
keypoints, but may even further improve the estimation of
the old ones and achieve a positive transfer beyond antiforgetting. Such an observation has been solidly verified by
extensive experiments on different keypoint datasets, where
our method exhibits superiority in alleviating the forgetting
issue and boosting performance while enjoying labeling efficiency even under the low-shot data regime.

Figure 1. Medical analysis can frequently change and require new
keypoints essentially [6], while the labeling is time-consuming.

1. Introduction

pensable primitive to support numerous down-stream tasks,
e.g., object pose detection [29, 77, 80], tracking [28], action
recognition [7], generation [57] and animation [28, 58], etc.
Over a long period of time, supervised keypoint learning (SKL) [19, 36, 39, 68] has significantly advanced the
progress on keypoint estimation. By exploiting large-scale
pure 2D keypoint datasets [5, 44] with extreme variance,
SKL aims to train a deep neural network that can robustly
detect a set of pre-defined keypoints in test images.
However, the SKL models can not estimate newly-added
undefined keypoints of an object, while new demands from
downstream tasks will inevitably require new keypoints.
For instance, until now, models trained by existing keypoint
dataset [67] can only detect 19 keypoints to support Downs
analysis in the Cephalometric analysis, while they are infeasible for important analysis like Steiner analysis [53], as
shown in Fig. 1. Such an issue motivated a recent MICCAI challenge [6] on annotating much more keypoints to
support increasing analysis. However, keypoint labeling is
time-consuming [18, 45, 50], especially when keypoints are
defined sequentially. Another alternative solution is to train
separate new keypoint estimator [12, 31] for each set of new
keypoints as in Fig. 2. However, the number of estimators
will increase linearly, and the separate training strategy will
make each estimator easily overfit the new keypoints [12]
and hardly capture the intrinsic relation between old and
new keypoints, leading to sub-optimal performance.
To mitigate the above issues, unsupervised keypoint
learning (UKL) [22, 23, 49, 55, 84] is proposed for new
keypoint estimation. The models are firstly pretrained in an
unsupervised manner to predict numbers of keypoints ran-

As a fundamental task in computer vision, estimating the
visual keypoint locations of an object serves as the indis*: Corresponding author

25399

