This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
with Sliced-Wasserstein Feature Alignment and Uniformity
Chen-Yi Lu

Kasra Derakhshandeh
Purdue University

Somali Chaterji

lu842@purdue.edu, kderakhs@purdue.edu, schaterji@purdue.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation with consistency regularization capitalizes on unlabeled images to enhance the
accuracy of pixel-level segmentation. Current consistency
learning methods primarily rely on the consistency loss between pseudo-labels and unlabeled images, neglecting the information within the feature representations of the backbone
encoder. Preserving maximum information in feature embeddings requires achieving the alignment and uniformity objectives, as widely studied. To address this, we present SWS EG,
a semi-supervised semantic segmentation algorithm that optimizes alignment and uniformity using the Sliced-Wasserstein
Distance (SWD), and rigorously and empirically proves this
connection. We further resolve the computational issues
associated with conventional Monte Carlo-based SWD by
implementing a Gaussian-approximated variant, which not
only maintains the alignment and uniformity objectives but
also improves training efficiency. We evaluate SWS EG on
the PASCAL VOC 2012, Cityscapes, and ADE20K datasets,
outshining supervised baselines in mIoU by up to 11.8%,
8.9%, and 8.2%, respectively, given an equivalent number of
labeled samples. Further, SWS EG surpasses state-of-the-art
methods in multiple settings across these three datasets. Our
extensive ablation studies confirm the optimization of the
uniformity and alignment objectives of the feature representations.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, the task of assigning pixel-level
labels to images, is a cornerstone in domains such as autonomous driving and medical image analysis. Semantic
segmentation models typically comprise an encoder and a
decoder. The encoder extracts meaningful features from the
input images, while the decoder assigns the feature embeddings to desired pixel-level labels. However, its effectiveness
is often hampered by the need for costly pixel-level annotated data [9]. To mitigate this, semi-supervised learning

Figure 1. SWS EG demonstrates marked superiority in mIoU across
varying data splits of the ADE20K dataset.

(SSL) was proposed [3]. SSL leverages a limited amount of
labeled data in conjunction with a larger pool of readily available unlabeled data. The key lies in effectively harnessing
the unlabeled data to improve the model’s performance.
Pseudo-labeling and consistency regularization are two
prominent techniques in SSL. Pseudo-labeling generates
temporary labels from the model’s predictions during training and using these to train the model in a supervised manner [2, 26]. The model then computes the loss between
these pseudo-labels and the corresponding unlabeled images.
This technique allows the model to leverage unlabeled data,
thereby improving its performance. Consistency regularization, on the other hand, encourages the model to produce
consistent predictions for different perturbations of the same
input image, thereby promoting robustness and generalization [14, 32]. This technique is grounded in the smoothness
assumption, which posits that data points with similar features should have similar labels [3]. In practice, random
augmentations are applied to input images, and the model is
trained to minimize discrepancies between its predictions on
the original and augmented versions. In the realm of semantic segmentation, consistency regularization is often paired
with pseudo-labeling, where weakly augmented unlabeled

20233

