This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Correspondence Learning for Image-to-Point Cloud Registration
Xinjun Li1 , Wenfei Yang1 , Jiacheng Deng1 , Zhixin Cheng1 , Xu Zhou3 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2, *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
3
Sangfor Technologies
{lxj3017,dengjc,chengzhixin}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {yangwf,tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn, zhouxu@sangfor.com.cn

Abstract
Image-to-point cloud registration aims to estimate the camera pose of a given image within a 3D scene point cloud.
In this area, matching-based methods have achieved leading performance by first detecting the overlapping region,
then matching point and pixel features learned by neural
networks and finally using the PnP-RANSAC algorithm to
estimate camera pose. However, achieving accurate imageto-point cloud registration remains challenging because the
overlapping region detection is unreliable merely relying on
point-wise classification, direct alignment of cross-modal
data is difficult and indirect optimization objective leads
to unstable registration results. To address these challenges, we propose a novel implicit correspondence learning method, including a Geometric Prior-guided overlapping region Detection Module (GPDM), an Implicit Correspondence Learning Module (ICLM), and a Pose Regression Module (PRM). The proposed method enjoys several
merits. First, the proposed GPDM can precisely detect the
overlapping region. Second, the ICLM can generate robust
cross-modality correspondences. Third, the PRM can enable end-to-end optimization. Extensive experimental results on KITTI and nuScenes datasets demonstrate that the
proposed model sets a new state-of-the-art performance in
registration accuracy.

Point Features
PnP-RANSAC
algorithm

Feature Similarity
Pixel Features

a) Existing matching-based methods

K, V

⋯

Q

correspondence queries

Attention
K, V

⋯

3D keypoint detectors
2D keypoint detectors

⋯

Pose Regression
Module

b) Our Implicit Correspondence Learning method

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) The pipeline of mainstream matching-based methods. The green lines denote correct correspondences, and the red
lines denote incorrect correspondences. 2D-3D correspondences
are first established by calculating feature similarity. Then the
PnP-RANSAC algorithm is applied to obtain camera pose. (b) The
pipeline of our proposed method. A set of shared queries are used
to aggregate information from image and point cloud to generate
2D and 3D keypoint detectors. With paired 2D and 3D keypoint
detectors, we obtain a set of 2D-3D correspondences and estimate
camera pose through a pose regression network.

Image-to-point cloud registration [15] is a fundamental task
in the field of computer vision, aimed at estimating the camera pose of a given image within a 3D scene point cloud.
It plays an important role in many computer vision tasks,
including simultaneous localization and mapping [13], 3D
reconstruction [11], augmented/virtual reality [2], and visual localization [33]. Although significant progress has
been made in recent years, image-to-point cloud registra-

tion remains challenging due to the inherent disparities that
images capture appearances with 2D grid data while point
clouds represent structures in an unordered format.
To address these challenges, numerous methods have
been proposed for image-to-point cloud registration [15,
19, 21, 28, 44]. Generally, these methods can be categorized into two main classes, including matching-free methods [19, 21] and matching-based methods [15, 28, 44].
Matching-free methods utilize the camera imaging principle as a prior to predict camera pose. For example,
DeepI2P [21] casts the registration problem into a classi-

* Corresponding author

16922

