This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deterministic-to-Stochastic Diverse Latent Feature Mapping for Human Motion
Synthesis
Yu Hua1,3
1
2
5

Weiming Liu2 * Gui Xu 4 Yaqing Hou 3
Yew-Soon Ong 1,5 Qiang Zhang 3

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

ByteDance Inc.

3

Dalian University of Technology, China

4

Dalian University, China

Centre for Frontier AI Research, Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

yu hua,asysong@ntu.edu.sg

lwming95@gmail.com

guixu@s.dlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human motion synthesis aims to generate plausible human
motion sequences, which has raised widespread attention in
computer animation. Recent score-based generative models
(SGMs) have demonstrated impressive results on this task.
However, their training process involves complex curvature
trajectories, leading to unstable training process. In this
paper, we propose a Deterministic-to-Stochastic Diverse
Latent Feature Mapping (DSDFM) method for human motion synthesis. DSDFM consists of two stages. The first
human motion reconstruction stage aims to learn the latent
space distribution of human motions. The second diverse motion generation stage aims to build connections between the
Gaussian distribution and the latent space distribution of human motions, thereby enhancing the diversity and accuracy
of the generated human motions. This stage is achieved by
the designed deterministic feature mapping procedure with
DerODE and stochastic diverse output generation procedure
with DivSDE. DSDFM is easy to train compared to previous
SGMs-based methods and can enhance diversity without
introducing additional training parameters. Through qualitative and quantitative experiments, DSDFM achieves stateof-the-art results surpassing the latest methods, validating
its superiority in human motion synthesis.

1. Introduction
Human motion synthesis task aims to generate diverse and
high quality 3D human motion sequences. This task has
wide-ranging applications, such as human motion understanding [7, 14, 18], human-robot interactions [49, 61], and
computer graphics [44]. Recent efforts mainly focus on con* Corresponding author

houyq,zhangq@dlut.edu.cn

ditional and unconditional human motion generation. Conditional human motion generation aims to generate human
motion sequences under some limiting factors, such as music [16, 17], audio [1, 15, 28], and action labels [33, 33, 61].
Unconditional human motion generation intends to generate
diverse human motions [32, 35] from diverse data, which
still presents a significant challenge, especially when the human motion datasets are unstructured. In this paper, we focus
on conditional (under the action labels) and unconditional
human motion generations, as shown in Figure 1. Efficiently
generating diverse and accurate human motions remains a
tremendous challenge, which has led to the development of
many different generative models.
Recent advancements in deep generative models, including Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [53, 57, 60], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [31], score-based generative models (SGMs), and related techniques [12, 39, 46, 51,
58], emerge as the dominant approaches for capturing the
data distribution. Specifically, VAEs leverage an encoderdecoder network to learn the latent representation of human
motion distribution. VAEs require approximate variational
or Monte Carlo inference techniques, which tend to be intractable for complex models. GANs utilize a generator
and discriminator to generate real-like motions from random noise. Unfortunately, GANs are known to suffer from
numerical instability and mode collapse issues. SGMs define a forward diffusion process that maps data to noise by
gradually perturbing the input data. Generation corresponds
to a reverse process that synthesizes novel data via iterative denoising process. Even though they have presented
high fidelity in generation, it is important to note that these
methods have the challenge of curve trajectory modeling
within diffusion models, as their forward pass is inherently
designed to exhibit curvature in SDE, following either a
Variance Preserving SDE (VPSDE) or a Variance Exploding

22724

