This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Data-Centric Revisit of Pre-Trained Vision Models for Robot Learning
Xin Wen1 Bingchen Zhao2 Yilun Chen3 Jiangmiao Pang3 Xiaojuan Qi1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of Edinburgh 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wenxin, xjqi}@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
Pre-trained vision models (PVMs) are fundamental to modern robotics, yet their optimal configuration remains unclear.
Through systematic evaluation, we find that while DINO
and iBOT outperform MAE across visuomotor control and
perception tasks, they struggle when trained on non-(single)object-centric (NOC) data—a limitation strongly correlated
with their diminished ability to learn object-centric representations. This investigation indicates that the ability to form
object-centric representations from the non-object-centric
robotics dataset is the key to success for PVMs. Motivated by
this discovery, we designed SlotMIM, a method that induces
object-centric representations by introducing a semantic bottleneck to reduce the number of prototypes to encourage
the emergence of objectness as well as cross-view consistency regularization for encouraging multiview invariance.
Our experiments encompass pre-training on object-centric,
scene-centric, web-crawled, and ego-centric data. Across all
settings, our approach learns transferrable representations
and achieves significant improvements over prior work in
image recognition, scene understanding, and robot learning
evaluations. When scaled up with million-scale datasets,
our method also demonstrates superior data efficiency and
scalability. Our code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/SlotMIM .

1. Introduction
Pre-trained vision models (PVMs) have become fundamental building blocks in modern computer vision and
robotics. While these models have demonstrated remarkable success in traditional vision tasks, their optimal application in robot learning remains an open challenge. Recent
works [45, 55] have shown promising results using masked
autoencoders (MAEs) [29] pre-trained on ego-centric data
(e.g., Ego4D [24]). However, as suggested by [19], learning on (single-)object-centric datasets like ImageNet [20]
can obtain better representations than on ego-centric data.
* Corresponding author.

Additionally, scene-centric data (e.g., COCO [41] and Open
Images [39]) are also relevant to robot contexts and more
information-rich. Web-crawled data (e.g., CC12M [14])
offer another alternative, being easier to collect and more
scalable. Towards scaling up PVMs for real-world robotic
applications, it is important to explore diverse training data
sources and revisit learning algorithms accordingly. Our
study is thus motivated by two questions: 1) Is MAE the
optimal pre-training method for robot learning? 2) Is egocentric data the best choice for visuomotor pre-training?
To systematically answer these questions, we construct a
comprehensive benchmark that evaluates PVMs across both
visuomotor control and perception tasks. For a fair comparison, we control the pre-training data scale at 241K images
across different data sources and evaluate models on four
diverse downstream tasks: two robot manipulation benchmarks (Franka Kitchen [26] and Meta-World [76]), and two
segmentation tasks (Pascal VOC [8] and ADE20K [79]). As
shown in Fig. 2, our first key finding challenges the role of
MAE: DINO [13] and iBOT [80] significantly outperform
MAE across all tasks, particularly when trained on objectcentric data. However, we observe a critical limitation: these
models’ performance degrades substantially when trained
on scene-centric or non-(single-)object-centric (NOC) data.
In coherence with the findings of [8], we find that this performance drop strongly correlates with the models’ diminishing
ability to learn object-centric representations from NOC data.
This suggests that the challenge lies not in the choice of
pre-training method alone, but in maintaining object-centric
learning capabilities when training on diverse data sources.
Motivated by these insights, we introduce SlotMIM
(Fig. 5), a method that repurposes and integrates masked
image modeling (MIM) and contrastive learning for effective
representation learning from NOC datasets. The core idea
of SlotMIM is to group patch-level image tokens into objectlevel feature abstractions, referred to as “slots”, thereby
decomposing NOC data into object-centric slots so that
object-centric techniques can be effectively applied. To make
patch-level tokens more semantically aware for subsequent
grouping, we enhance MIM with cross-view consistency
regularization regarding prototype assignments. Addition-

12143

