This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wavelet and Prototype Augmented Query-based Transformer for Pixel-level
Surface Defect Detection
Feng Yan1 , Xiaoheng Jiang1,2,3∗ , Yang Lu1,2,3∗ , Jiale Cao4 , Dong Chen 1,2,3 and Mingliang Xu 1,2,3
1
Zhengzhou University
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Swarm Systems, Ministry of Education
3
National Supercomputing Center in Zhengzhou 4 Tianjin University
ieyanfeng@163.com

{jiangxiaoheng, ieylu, chendongai, iexumingliang}@zzu.edu.cn
connor@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
(a) FCN-based defect segmentation methods

SA

(c) Spatial transformer decoder

⋮

Q: N queries

CA

Q

𝑊𝑃

𝑭𝒊

SA
⋮

Encoder
&Decoder

Q

⋮

Transformer
decoder

WCA

As an important part of intelligent manufacturing, pixellevel surface defect detection (SDD) aims to locate defect
areas through mask prediction. Previous methods adopt the
image-independent static convolution to indiscriminately
classify per-pixel features for mask prediction, which leads
to suboptimal results for some challenging scenes such as
weak defects and cluttered backgrounds. In this paper,
inspired by query-based methods, we propose a Wavelet
and Prototype Augmented Query-based Transformer (WPFormer) for surface defect detection. Specifically, a set of
dynamic queries for mask prediction is updated through
the dual-domain transformer decoder. Firstly, a Waveletenhanced Cross-Attention (WCA) is proposed, which aggregates meaningful high- and low-frequency information
of image features in the wavelet domain to refine queries.
WCA enhances the representation of high-frequency components by capturing multi-scale relationships between different frequency components, enabling queries to focus
more on defect details. Secondly, a Prototype-guided CrossAttention (PCA) is proposed to refine queries through metaprototypes in the spatial domain. The prototypes aggregate semantically meaningful tokens from image features,
facilitating queries to aggregate crucial defect information under the cluttered backgrounds. Extensive experiments on three defect detection datasets (i.e., ESDIs-SOD,
CrackSeg9k, and ZJU-Leaper) demonstrate that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance in defect detection. The code will be available at https:
//github.com/yfhdm/WPFormer.

Decoder

PCA

Encoder

Conv

𝑭𝒊

M

(b) Query-based segmentation methods

(d) The proposed D2T decoder

* Corresponding authors: Xiaoheng Jiang, Yang Lu.

Figure 1. (a) The previous pixel-level defect detection methods
use the static convolution layer for mask prediction. (b) In the
query-based segmentation methods, a set of dynamic queries Q
are refined through a transformer decoder for mask prediction. The
mask prediction is obtained by aggregating mask predictions M of
all queries with weights W p . (c) The existing transformer decoder
layer in the spatial domain. (d) The proposed dual-domain transformer (D2T) decoder layer includes Wavelet-enhanced CrossAttention (WCA) in the frequency domain and Prototype-guided
Cross-Attention (PCA) in the spatial domain.

23860

1. Introduction
Surface defect detection (SDD) is an important task in industrial manufacturing. Automated defect detection improves the efficiency of quality inspections across production lines [2, 41] and infrastructure [24], enabling the rapid
identification of defects. Pixel-level SDD methods aim to
localize defect regions with mask prediction, which provides fine-grained detection results. However, different
from object detection in natural scenes, industrial surface
defect detection faces challenges such as weak appearances
characterized by small sizes, elongated shapes, and high
similarity to the background, as well as complex background noise.

