This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlexDrive: Toward Trajectory Flexibility in Driving Scene Gaussian Splatting
Reconstruction and Rendering
Jingqiu Zhou 1 * Lue Fan 1,2,3 * Linjiang Huang 4
Xiaoyu Shi 1 Si Liu 4 Zhaoxiang Zhang 3† Hongsheng Li 1,2†
1
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence, Hong Kong
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Beihang University
1155167063@link.cuhk.edu.hk, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

from the vehicle’s pre-recorded trajectories for data collection. Fig. 1 demonstrates this issue. NeuraD and StreetGaussian [21, 26] try to solve this problem through building a more accurate geometry, however, their improvements
are limited. The essential cause for this issue is the unavailability of ground-truth visual observations from out-of-path
viewpoints in driving scenes [1, 7, 18], where only prerecorded images along a single-pass driving trajectory are
available.
To address this issue, UniSim [28] first introduces the
concept of lane shift in their driving simulator, where they
leverage GAN-generated supervision to refine the rendering
quality of out-of-path viewpoints. LidaRF [19] proposed
to warp colors from in-path views to the target out-of-path
views through the sparse LiDAR points, generating pseudo
ground truth of the out-of-path views. However, due to the
sparsity of LiDAR points and occlusion in the target view,
the pseudo ground truth is usually broken and irregular, having quite different appearances from the real images captured by cameras. These limitations raise a natural question:
can we create a regular and complete pseudo-ground truth
for reconstructing the out-of-path views?
We propose Inverse View Warping (IVW) to solve this
challenge. Intuitively, IVW is the inverse process of the
aforementioned color-warping method. Considering an inpath view A and an adjacent out-of-path view B, all content
of A can be captured at viewpoint B if we omit the slight
color change and occlusions caused by their different view
direction. Inverse View Warping (IVW) tries to render the
complete content of A at the viewpoint B, and we use it
as the ground truth to reconstruct the out-of-path view B.
Specifically, to achieve this warping, we first lift the pixels
of view A into 3D points and then project those points into
view B. To render these points from view B, we consider
the rays connecting the camera position of B and the projected points. Due to occlusion, trivial alpha-blending can
not ensure the rendered colors match their colors at view
A, thus we perform occlusion-aware rasterization to eliminate the problem of occlusion. Finally, we form a regu-

Driving scene reconstruction and rendering have advanced
significantly using the 3D Gaussian Splatting. However,
most prior research has focused on the rendering quality
along a pre-recorded vehicle path and struggles to generalize to out-of-path viewpoints, which is caused by the lack
of high-quality supervision in those out-of-path views. To
address this issue, we introduce an Inverse View Warping
technique to create compact and high-quality images as supervision for the reconstruction of the out-of-path views, enabling high-quality rendering results for those views. For
accurate and robust inverse view warping, a depth bootstrap strategy is proposed to obtain on-the-fly dense depth
maps during the optimization process, overcoming the sparsity and incompleteness of LiDAR depth data. Our method
achieves superior in-path and out-of-path reconstruction
and rendering performance on the widely used Waymo
Open dataset. In addition, a simulator-based benchmark is
proposed to obtain the out-of-path ground truth and quantitatively evaluate the performance of out-of-path rendering, where our method outperforms previous methods by
a significant margin. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/zhou745/FlexDrive.git.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction in driving scenes is a cornerstone
of a high-quality driving visual simulator. Leveraging
NeRF [14] and the emerging 3D Gaussian Splatting [11],
the community has made significant progresses [2, 8, 12,
13, 26, 27, 30] in this area, possessing impressive rendering
quality in the pre-recorded driving trajectories.
However, a significant issue hinders the current methods from being used in a practical simulator: the rendering
quality declines significantly when the viewpoint deviates
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1549

