This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Rectangular Convolution for Remote Sensing Pansharpening
Xueyang Wang, Zhixin Zheng, Jiandong Shao, Yule Duan, Liang-Jian Deng*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
xywang uestc@std.uestc.edu.cn; zhengzx@std.uestc.edu.cn; shamy@std.uestc.edu.cn
yule.duan@outlook.com; liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

PAN

Recent advancements in convolutional neural network
(CNN)-based techniques for remote sensing pansharpening have markedly enhanced image quality. However, conventional convolutional modules in these methods have two
critical drawbacks. First, the sampling positions in convolution operations are confined to a fixed square window.
Second, the number of sampling points is preset and remains unchanged. Given the diverse object sizes in remote sensing images, these rigid parameters lead to suboptimal feature extraction. To overcome these limitations,
we introduce an innovative convolutional module, Adaptive
Rectangular Convolution (ARConv). ARConv adaptively
learns both the height and width of the convolutional kernel and dynamically adjusts the number of sampling points
based on the learned scale. This approach enables ARConv to effectively capture scale-specific features of various objects within an image, optimizing kernel sizes and
sampling locations. Additionally, we propose ARNet, a network architecture in which ARConv is the primary convolutional module. Extensive evaluations across multiple
datasets reveal the superiority of our method in enhancing
pansharpening performance over previous techniques. Ablation studies and visualization further confirm the efficacy
of ARConv. The source code can be available at https:
//github.com/WangXueyang-uestc/ARConv.

Neural
Network
MS

×𝟒↑

HRMS

LRMS

3x3 adaptive kernel

Kernel
Generator

3x3 adaptive kernel

5x3 adaptive kernel

5x3 adaptive kernel

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Top row: The flowchart of remote sensing pansharpening via a DL-based approach. Bottom row: An example of our
Adaptive Rectangular Convolution (ARConv), boasting two distinct advantages: 1) its convolution kernels can adaptively modify
sampling positions in accordance with object sizes; 2) the quantity of sampling points is dynamically determined across various
feature maps, for instance, achieving a 5 × 3 adaptive rectangular
convolution, which, to our knowledge, is the first attempt.

High-quality remote sensing imagery plays a pivotal role
in various domains, including military and agriculture.
However, existing technologies are only capable of capturing low-resolution multispectral images (LRMS) and
high-resolution panchromatic images (PAN). While LRMS
imagery preserves rich spectral signatures, it is compromized by limited spatial resolution. Conversely, PAN imagery exhibits superior spatial granularity but lacks multispectral discriminability due to its grayscale representa* Corresponding author.

17872

tion. As illustrated in Fig. 1, pansharpening addresses this
dichotomy through synergistic fusion to synthesize highresolution multispectral (HRMS) imagery. Many pansharpening methods have been proposed [20], among which
traditional methods are divided into Component Substitution (CS) [4, 28], Multi-Resolution Analysis (MRA) [30,
32], and variational optimization (VO) [11, 26]. Recent
paradigm shifts toward deep learning have catalyzed extensive deployment of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
in this domain. Different from traditional methods, the input feature of PAN and LRMS images is extracted mainly
through convolutional kernels. However, standard convo-

