This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SinGS: Animatable Single-Image Human Gaussian Splats with Kinematic Priors
Yufan Wu1 * Xuanhong Chen1† Wen Li1,3 Shunran Jia2 Hualiang Wei1* Kairui Feng4
Jialiang Chen1 Yuhan Li1 Ang He1* Weimin Zhang1 Bingbing Ni1 Wenjun Zhang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 DreamX Inc 3 Akool Research
4
The National Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems, Shanghai, China
{chen19910528,wmzhang,nibingbing,zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn, elvinfkr@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite signiﬁcant advances in accurately estimating
geometry in contemporary single-image 3D human reconstruction, creating a high-quality, efﬁcient, and animatable
3D avatar remains an open challenge. Two key obstacles persist: incomplete observation and inconsistent 3D
priors. To address these challenges, we propose SinGS,
aiming to achieve high-quality and efﬁcient animatable 3D
avatar reconstruction. At the heart of SinGS are two key
components: Kinematic Human Diffusion and GeometryPreserving 3D Gaussain Splatting. The former is a foundational human model that samples within pose space to generate a highly 3D-consistent and high-quality sequence of
human images, inferring unseen viewpoints and providing
kinematic priors. The latter is a system that reconstructs a
compact, high-quality 3D avatar even under imperfect priors, achieved through a novel semantic Laplacian regularization and a geometry-preserving density control strategy
that enable precise and compact assembly of 3D primitives.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that SinGS enables lifelike, animatable human reconstructions, maintaining both
high quality and inference efﬁciency (up to 70FPS).

1. Introduction
Single-image 3D human reconstruction (i.e., SIHR) is an
emerging modeling technique that aims to create a lifelike 3D avatar from just one image, offering a highly costeffective and promising approach to 3D modeling. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)[14] has made signiﬁcant breakthroughs in rendering efﬁciency and quality, establishing itself as a mainstream approach for 3D
avatar reconstruction. However, current 3DGS-based methods [23, 26] for single-image human 3D avatar reconstruction suffer from critical limitations in animation, as most are
* Work done during an internship at Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
† Corresponding author: Xuanhong Chen.

Camera Sampling

Implicit Field/Surface

`

Diffusion
Camera Prior
(Previous)

Poorly Informative

Slow (<10FPS)

Static

Kinematic Priors
(Ours)

Highly Informative

Fast (70FPS)

Animation

Pose Sampling

Semantic Laplacian

Kinematic Human
Diffusion

Geometric-Preserving
3D Gaussian Splatting

Figure 1. Existing single-image 3D avatar reconstruction methods
are limited to sampling prior information from camera space. In
contrast, SinGS proposes sampling from pose space, allowing us
to obtain both camera and kinematic priors simultaneously. Combined with our Geometry-Preserving 3D Gaussian Splatting, this
enables highly efﬁcient animation rendering.

designed primarily for static assets. This paper aims to develop an animation reconstruction framework that achieves
a high balance between efﬁciency and rendering quality.
Currently, the vast majority of SIHR methods [7, 10, 23,
24, 26, 40, 41, 46, 49, 50] focus solely on optimizing geometry while neglecting to enhance animation capabilities.
As a result, they are often incapable of animation or require third-party tools [7] to achieve approximate motion.
Unlike digital assets, the primary requirement for a human
avatar is its ability to animate, making animation the core
goal of SIHR [9]. Achieving animatable single-image human reconstruction (i.e., Animatable SIHR) is particularly

5571

