This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

nnWNet: Rethinking the Use of Transformers in Biomedical Image
Segmentation and Calling for a Unified Evaluation Benchmark
Yanfeng Zhou1 Lingrui Li2 Le Lu1 Minfeng Xu1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
{zhouyanfeng.zyf, eric.xmf}@alibaba-inc.com, lingrui.li@nottingham.ac.uk,
tiger.lelu@gmail.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is a crucial prerequisite in clinical
applications and computer-aided diagnosis. With the development of deep neural networks, biomedical image segmentation has achieved remarkable success. Encoder-decoder
architectures that integrate convolutions and transformers
are gaining attention for their potential to capture both
global and local features. However, current designs face
the contradiction that these two features cannot be continuously transmitted. In addition, some models lack a unified and standardized evaluation benchmark, leading to significant discrepancies in the experimental setup. In this
study, we review and summarize these architectures and analyze their contradictions in design. We modify UNet and
propose WNet to combine transformers and convolutions,
addressing the transmission issue effectively. WNet captures long-range dependencies and local details simultaneously while ensuring their continuous transmission and
multi-scale fusion. We integrate WNet into the nnUNet
framework for unified benchmarking. Our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance in biomedical image segmentation. Extensive experiments demonstrate their effectiveness on four 2D datasets (DRIVE, ISIC-2017, Kvasir-SEG,
and CREMI) and four 3D datasets (Parse2022, AMOS22,
BTCV, and ImageCAS). The code is available at https:
//github.com/Yanfeng-Zhou/nnWNet.

teristics of CNNs are local connections and parameter sharing. Local connections ensure that the extracted features are
specific to the local input, while parameter sharing makes
the features translationally invariant. This design enhances
computational efficiency while enabling CNNs to focus on
local details.
Recently, the sequence-to-sequence transformer architecture has gained significant attention [11, 34, 47]. It
utilizes a global self-attention mechanism to capture longrange dependencies and global information. However, it
also brings the limitations of high computational overhead
and a tendency to overlook local details.
Some studies have attempted to combine convolutions
and transformers to leverage both local and global receptive fields simultaneously. These combination strategies include: alternately stacking convolutional layers and transformer layers [3, 14, 29], using convolution (Conv) to build
the encoder and transformer (Trans) to build the decoder
(or vice versa) [17, 18], and incorporating transformers into
bottleneck blocks or bridge blocks between the encoder and
decoder [6, 7, 48, 50].
However, these designs are contradictory and flawed.
The purpose of the transformer layer is to extract long-range
dependencies and generate corresponding global features,
while the convolutional layer is to capture local details and
generate locally-focused features. The current combination
method forces the transformer layer to use local features
as input to extract global features, and enforces the convolutional layer to operate on global features to extract local
details. Global features and local features are generated alternately and cannot be transmitted continuously and stably
throughout the model. This contradiction leads to feature
confusion and instability of the training process.
In addition, the current biomedical image segmentation
models lack a unified evaluation benchmark [26]. Different studies have significant discrepancies in experimental
datasets, image preprocessing strategies (such as resam-

1. Introduction
Segmentation is a fundamental task in biomedical image
analysis, where the goal is to assign a class label to each
pixel (voxel). With the development of deep learning,
biomedical image segmentation has achieved superior results [16, 23, 25, 33, 41, 58, 60–62]. Convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) based on the encoder-decoder architecture are a mainstream paradigm [25, 41]. Two key charac-

20852

