This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Floating No More: Object-Ground Reconstruction from a Single Image
Yunze Man1 , Yichen Sheng2 , Jianming Zhang3 , Liang-Yan Gui1 , Yu-Xiong Wang1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Purdue University 3 Adobe
{yunzem2,lgui,yxw}@illinois.edu, sheng30@purdue.edu, jianmzha@adobe.com

Figure 1. ORG (Object Reconstruction with Ground) simultaneously reconstructs the 3D object, the object-ground relationship, and the
camera parameters from a monocular image. During shadow and reflection generation, prior methods have floating issues or unnatural
shadows on the ground (red boxes). On the other hand, ORG achieves significantly more realistic editing and generation (blue boxes).

Abstract
Recent advancements in 3D object reconstruction from
single images have primarily focused on improving the accuracy of object shapes. Yet, these techniques often fail
to accurately capture the inter-relation between the object,
ground, and camera. As a result, the reconstructed objects
often appear floating or tilted when placed on flat surfaces.
This limitation significantly affects 3D-aware image editing
applications, like shadow rendering and object pose manipulation. To address this issue, we introduce ORG (Object Reconstruction with Ground), a novel task aimed at
reconstructing 3D object geometry in conjunction with the
ground surface. Our method uses two compact pixel-level
representations to depict the relationship between camera,
object, and ground. Experiments show that the proposed
ORG model can effectively reconstruct object-ground geometry on unseen data, significantly enhancing the quality of shadow generation and pose manipulation compared
to conventional single-image 3D reconstruction techniques.
The project page can be found at this website.

1. Introduction
The task of reconstructing an object in conjunction with a
physically plausible ground, while not extensively explored,

is of significant importance. This is particularly relevant
in the realm of image editing applications, where it influences key aspects like controllable shadow/reflection synthesis and object view manipulation. In this work, we aim
at predicting an accurate and grounded representation of
objects in 3D space from a single image, specifically under unrestricted camera conditions. Recent single-view approaches have demonstrated considerable promise in tackling object reconstruction [26, 34, 39, 57, 61]. However, due
to the lack of integrated object-ground modeling, objects reconstructed using these methods often appear to be “floating” or tilted when placed on a flat surface, which greatly
hinders the realistic rendering.
More specifically, recent works on monocular depth estimation [6, 7, 34, 61] has shown great performance. They
aim to recover the 3D information of an object from a
single-view image by directly estimating the pixel-level
depth values. Their models have been trained on largescale datasets, and thus can generalize well on in-the-wild
images. However, as pointed out by [61], to project the
depth map into 3D point clouds, additional camera parameters are needed. In some cases, off-the-shelf estimators
can provide a rough estimate of these parameters, but this
approach can limit the flexibility and effectiveness of object reconstruction in uncontrolled environments. Moreover, the unknown shift in the depth or disparity map will

27134

