This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HoGS: Unified Near and Far Object Reconstruction
via Homogeneous Gaussian Splatting
Xinpeng Liu1†
Zeyi Huang1†
1
The University of Osaka

Fumio Okura1
Yasuyuki Matsushita1,2
2
Microsoft Research Asia – Tokyo

{liu.xinpeng,huang.zeyi,okura,yasumat}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

(3DGS) PSNR: 22.16

PSNR near: 23.01

PSNR far: 31.87

(Ours) PSNR: 22.60

PSNR near: 23.25

PSNR far: 33.61

Figure 1. Homogeneous Gaussian Splatting (HoGS) uses homogeneous coordinates in the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) framework
to represent both positions and scales. Homogeneous coordinates defined in the projective geometry represent nearby and distant objects
seamlessly, thus our HoGS enables the accurate rendering of unbounded scenes while preserving the 3DGS’s fast training time and real-time
performance. Compared to the traditional 3DGS, HoGS demonstrates improved robustness in capturing distant details while maintaining
high fidelity in near-field objects.

periments show that HoGS significantly enhances accuracy
in reconstructing distant objects while maintaining highquality rendering of nearby objects, along with fast training speed and real-time rendering capability. Our implementations are available on our project page https:
//kh129.github.io/hogs/.

Abstract
Novel view synthesis has demonstrated impressive progress
recently, with 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) offering efficient training time and photorealistic real-time rendering.
However, reliance on Cartesian coordinates limits 3DGS’s
performance on distant objects, which is important for reconstructing unbounded outdoor environments. We found
that, despite its ultimate simplicity, using homogeneous coordinates, a concept on the projective geometry, for the
3DGS pipeline remarkably improves the rendering accuracies of distant objects. We therefore propose Homogeneous Gaussian Splatting (HoGS) incorporating homogeneous coordinates into the 3DGS framework, providing a
unified representation for enhancing near and distant objects. HoGS effectively manages both expansive spatial positions and scales particularly in outdoor unbounded environments by adopting projective geometry principles. Ex-

1. Introduction

† Authors contributed equally.

Photorealistic scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis (NVS) have long been critical challenges in computer
vision (CV) and computer graphics (CG). Implicit representations like neural radiance fields (NeRF) [14] use neural networks to model 3D scenes as continuous functions
mapping spatial coordinates and viewing directions to color
and density to synthesize views using volumetric rendering. These implicit methods have achieved groundbreaking
performance in NVS but are limited by computationally intensive training and slow rendering processes. 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [7] addresses these limitations by intro-

26714

