This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPARS3R: Semantic Prior Alignment and Regularization for Sparse 3D
Reconstruction
Yutao Tang*

Yuxiang Guo˚
Deming Li
Johns Hopkins University

Cheng Peng

{ytang67, yguo87, dli90, cpeng26}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Recent efforts in Gaussian-Splat-based Novel View Synthesis can achieve photorealistic rendering; however, such capability is limited in sparse-view scenarios due to sparse
initialization and over-fitting floaters. Recent progress in
depth estimation and alignment can provide dense point
cloud using few views; however, the resulting pose accuracy
is suboptimal. In this work, we present SPARS3R, which
combines the advantages of accurate pose estimation from
Structure-from-Motion and dense point cloud from depth
estimation. To this end, SPARS3R first performs a Global
Fusion Alignment process that maps a prior dense point
cloud to a sparse point cloud from Structure-from-Motion
based on triangulated correspondences. RANSAC is applied during this process to distinguish inliers and outliers.
SPARS3R then performs a second, Semantic Outlier Alignment step, which extracts semantically coherent regions
around the outliers and performs local alignment in these
regions. Along with several improvements in the evaluation
process, we demonstrate that SPARS3R can achieve photorealistic rendering with sparse images and significantly
outperforms existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic scene reconstruction and Novel View Synthesis (NVS) from unposed 2D images is a challenging task
with numerous applications in site modeling, autonomous
driving, robotics, urban and agricultural planning, etc. The
introduction of methods such as Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) [35] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [24] have
introduced significant advances in rendering quality and efficiency based on dense multi-view imagery. However, applications of these methods still face issues in practical scenarios where a dense coverage of the scene is not available.
Given sparse images, over-fitting the photometric objectives to an incorrect geometry is a common issue in
* Equal contribution.

Instant-NGP [36]

FSGS [65]

InstantSplat [14]

SPARS3R

Figure 1. A visualization of SPARS3R in comparison to current SoTA. Without additional prior, sparse NVS leads to incorrect geometry by Instant-NGP [36]. FSGS [65] can be blurry
due to sparse initialization and insufficient densification. InstantSplat [14] relies on DUSt3R [52] initialization with suboptimal poses. Our method, SPARS3R, can reliably render details in
the foreground and background with accurate poses.

NVS. Various constraints, such as semantic consistent loss
[23], depth and novel-view regularization [12, 39, 51], frequency regularization [57], and ray entropy minimization
[25] have been introduced to improve upon NeRF. These
methods often lead to significant computation overhead due
to the costly patch rendering from ray-tracing. More recently, Gaussian-Splatting-based approaches have further
improved sparse NVS by leveraging the explicit representation and fast differentiable rasterization. Depth regularization [30], Gaussian floater pruning [55], and proximitybased Gaussian densification strategy [65] have been proposed to constrain and guide the scene structures. As
demonstrated in Fig. 1, despite improved geometry, these
approaches tend to produce overly smooth rendering in the
background. This issue can be attributed to a sparse initial

26810

