This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iG-6DoF: Model-free 6DoF Pose Estimation for Unseen Object via
Iterative 3D Gaussian Splatting
Tuo Cao1 , Fei Luo1 , Jiongming Qin1 , Yu Jiang1 , Yusen Wang1 , and Chunxia Xiao1 *
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
{maplect,luofei,jiongming,jiangyu1181,wangyusen,cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn
http://graphvision.whu.edu.cn/

Abstract
Traditional methods in pose estimation often rely on precise 3D models or additional data such as depth and normals, limiting their generalization, especially when objects
undergo large translations or rotations. We propose iG6DoF, a novel model-free 6D pose estimation method using
iterative 3D Gaussian Splatting to estimate the pose of unseen objects. We first estimates an initial pose by leveraging
multi-scale data augmentation and the rotation-equivariant
features to create a better pose hypothesis from a set of
candidates. Then, we propose an iterative 3DGS approach
through iteratively rendering and comparing the rendered
image with the input image to further progressively improve
pose estimation accuracy. The proposed method consists of
an object detector, a multi-scale rotation-equivariant feature based initial pose estimator, and a coarse-to-fine pose
refiner. Such combination allows our method to focus on the
target object in a complex scene dealing with large movement and weak textures. Our method achieves state-of-theart results on the LINEMOD, OnePose-LowTexture, GenMOP datasets and our self-captured data, demonstrating
its strong generalization to unseen objects and robustness
across various scenes.

Input Images

Predicted Mask

Predicted Pose

Reference Images

3DGS model

Rendered Object

Figure 1. Given a set of reference images and an input image, our
method outputs the object mask, constructs a 3D Gaussian model,
and estimates its 6D pose.

tion methods [15, 19, 63, 73, 77], which can estimate the
pose parameters of objects within the same category, even
if the specific instance is not present in the training set. They
demonstrate a degree of generalization.
Recently, research has increasingly focused on generalizable pose estimation, aiming to develop a universal model
to estimate an object’s pose using only its CAD model or a
few specific-view images [41]. Existing generalizable pose
estimation methods can be primarily categorized into two
types. The first type is CAD model-based. These methods [14, 21, 22, 36, 50] typically utilize the 3D or texture information of a precise CAD model as prior knowledge. They often employ feature-matching techniques to
obtain 2D-3D correspondences between the query image
and the CAD model. Then, they calculate pose parameters
using traditional numerical algorithms such as PnP [20] or
ICP [6]. The second type is model-free object pose estimation. These methods [8, 13, 25, 27, 42, 59] do not require
precise CAD models but rely on a set of annotated reference
images of the object. Multi-view stereo geometry provides
geometric information about the object as prior knowledge.
Compared to CAD-based methods, model-free methods offer greater potential for practical applications without the
need to acquire accurate CAD models.

1. Introduction
Estimating the rotation and translation parameters of objects within images has been a longstanding and widely
studied problem in computer vision. It has extensive applications in virtual reality, robotic manipulation, and autonomous driving. Early pose estimation methods [10, 11,
26, 48, 61, 62, 71] primarily focused on pose estimation
at instance-level, requiring the target object to be included
in the training set. They often lack generalization capabilities and hinder the estimation of unseen objects. Subsequently, researchers introduced category-level pose estima* Chunxia Xiao is corresponding author.

6436

