This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building a Mind Palace: Structuring Environment-Grounded Semantic Graphs
for Effective Long Video Analysis with LLMs
Zeyi Huang2? , Yuyang Ji3? , Xiaofang Wang1 , Nikhil Mehta1 , Tong Xiao1 , Donghyun Lee2 ,
Sigmund Vanvalkenburgh2 , Shengxin Zha1 , Bolin Lai3 , Licheng Yu1 , Ning Zhang1 ,
Yong Jae Lee2† , Miao Liu1†
1
2
3
Meta, GenAI
University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Illinois Urbaba-Champaign
Abstract
Long-form video understanding with Large Vision Language Models is challenged by the need to analyze temporally dispersed yet spatially concentrated key moments
within limited context windows. In this work, we introduce
VideoMindPalace, a new framework inspired by the “Mind
Palace”, which organizes critical video moments into a
topologically structured semantic graph. VideoMindPalace
organizes key information through (i) hand-object tracking and interaction, (ii) clustered activity zones representing specific areas of recurring activities, and (iii) environment layout mapping, allowing natural language parsing
by LLMs to provide grounded insights on spatio-temporal
and 3D context. In addition, we propose the Video MindPalace Benchmark (VMB), to assess human-like reasoning, including spatial localization, temporal reasoning, and
layout-aware sequential understanding. Evaluated on VMB
and established video QA datasets, including EgoSchema,
NExT-QA, IntentQA, and the Active Memories Benchmark,
VideoMindPalace demonstrates notable gains in spatiotemporal coherence and human-aligned reasoning, advancing long-form video analysis capabilities in VLMs. Project
website: https://oodbag.github.io/VMP/.

Figure 1. (Right) Our VideoMindPalace represents video data as a
layered, topological structured graph, where nodes capture spatial
concepts (e.g., objects, activity zones, rooms), and edges signify
spatiotemporal, layout relationships and human-object interaction.
This graph can be represented in JSON format and used as input to
text-only LLMs. (Center) VideoTree [41] extracts query-relevant
information by organizing videos as tree structures, with deeper
branches capturing finer, query-specific details. A captioner then
generates video descriptions from this structure, enabling the LLM
to perform reasoning over long videos. (Left) LLoVi [47] processes videos following temporal order, where visual captioners
sequentially generate textual descriptions within each temporal
sliding window, which the LLM then aggregates for reasoning.

and concentrated spatial activity zones calls for a novel representation tailored specifically for long video analysis.
Inspired by “Mind Palace”, a memorization enhancement technique that involves associating temporal information with specific locations, then organizing these locations in a structured and orderly manner to enhance
memory recall [46], we introduce a novel VLM system –
VideoMindPalace, which captures a rich topological and
hierarchically-organized semantic graph representation of
an environment with the versatility to encode the necessary information required for tasks like spatial grounding,
temporal grounding, 3D environment comprehension using
natural language suitable for parsing by an LLM.
Specifically, VideoMindPalace comprises (i) a collection

1. Introduction
One key challenge for long-form video understanding
with Large Vision Language Models (VLMs) lies in jointly
analyzing key moments that are temporally distant yet
strongly correlated, as the context window of LLMs is
bounded. Notably, one intriguing property of long-form
video, which has been largely overlooked by existing long
video VLM works [7, 11, 18, 21, 22, 25–27, 34, 36, 41, 44,
45, 47], is that these critical moments often occur within
a limited set of spatial zones despite their temporal dispersion. This unique combination of extensive temporal span
? ,† equal contribution and advising. This work was done during Zeyi’s
internship at Meta.

24169

