This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Good, Cheap, and Fast:
Overfitted Image Compression with Wasserstein Distortion
Jona Ballé*, Luca Versari†, Emilien Dupont‡, Hyunjik Kim‡, Matthias Bauer‡
* New York University † Google Paradigms Of Intelligence ‡ Google DeepMind
jona.balle@nyu.edu, {veluca,edupont,hyunjikk,msbauer}@google.com

Abstract
Inspired by the success of generative image models, recent
work on learned image compression increasingly focuses
on better probabilistic models of the natural image distribution, leading to excellent image quality. This, however,
comes at the expense of a computational complexity that is
several orders of magnitude higher than today’s commercial codecs, and thus prohibitive for most practical applications. With this paper, we demonstrate that by focusing
on modeling visual perception rather than the data distribution, we can achieve a very good trade-off between visual
quality and bit rate similar to “generative” compression
models such as HiFiC, while requiring less than 1% of the
multiply–accumulate operations (MACs) for decompression.
We do this by optimizing C3, an overfitted image codec, for
Wasserstein Distortion (WD), and evaluating the image reconstructions with a human rater study, showing that WD
clearly outperforms LPIPS as an optimization objective. The
study also reveals that WD outperforms other perceptual
metrics such as LPIPS, DISTS, and MS-SSIM as a predictor
of human ratings, remarkably achieving over 94% Pearson
correlation with Elo scores.

1. Introduction
Methods of lossy data compression are characterized by a
long tradition of exploiting both:
• correlations in the statistics of the compressed data, for
example by linearly or nonlinearly predicting the next
sample in audio codecs, or by applying decorrelating transformations such as the DCT [2]; and
• information bottlenecks of human perception, for example
by representing chrominance in images with lower resolution than luminance, or by modeling frequency masking
in the auditory system.
Owing to the conceptual connection between decoding of
an image and sampling one from a conditional distribution,
research on learned image compression has recently been

greatly influenced by generative methods such as GANs [15]
or diffusion models [9], which excel at probabilistic modeling of real-world data, as evidenced by the impressive quality
of samples drawn from such models. The generated samples
are visually so convincing that measures of sample quality
(i.e., realism, formalized by divergences between the distribution of the source data and the distribution of generated
data) have even been called “perception” [6].
Unfortunately, a model which is extremely good at sampling real-world data has to have a certain computational
complexity, because the world (and hence the space of possible images) is very complex. This is evidenced by the
complexity of generative models such as Imagen, Stable Diffusion, or DALL-E. When it comes to image compression,
this would make it seem that we ultimately need highly complex methods to achieve high image quality. In other words:
out of the three qualities, good (image quality), fast (decoding speed), and cheap (low bit rate), we must pick two, as in
the old proverb. Luckily, while good probabilistic models
can lead to remarkable perceived quality, the inverse does
not hold: good image quality does not require precisely modeling the distribution of natural images, as we demonstrate
in this paper.
Here, we focus on modeling human perception (specifically, texture perception in the periphery of the human visual
system [3, 13]) instead of the data distribution. We take an
existing low-complexity neural codec, C3 [22], and replace
its distortion loss by either of two variants of Wasserstein
Distortion (WD) [34]: one which assumes the observer to
gaze at each image location with equal probability, and one
which uses EML-net [20], a saliency model, to predict image
locations that are more likely to be scrutinized. To aid texture
reproduction, we supply the codec with common randomness (CR), i.e., randomness available to both the encoder and
the decoder, implemented using a pseudo-random number
generator with identical seeds.
These changes lead to significantly better image quality at
the same bit rate compared to baseline C3 [22], illustrated in
Fig. 1, but retain its low decoding complexity. The encoding
complexity increases with the complexity of the loss func-

23259

