This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Library Adaptation:
LoRA Retrieval and Fusion for Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Reza Qorbani3 *
Gianluca Villani1,2∗
Theodoros Panagiotakopoulos1,5
Marc Botet Colomer1
Linus Härenstam-Nielsen6,7
Mattia Segu1,9
Pier Luigi Dovesi1,4†
1,4
6,7
6,8
Jussi Karlgren
Daniel Cremers
Federico Tombari
Matteo Poggi10
1

2
3
4
The Good AI Lab
University of Toronto
KTH
AMD Silo AI
5
6
7
King
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
8
9
10
Google
ETH Zurich
University of Bologna

https://thegoodailab.org/semla

Abstract

CLIP

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation models associate vision and text to label pixels from an undefined set
of classes using textual queries, providing versatile performance on novel datasets. However, large shifts between
training and test domains degrade their performance, requiring fine-tuning for effective real-world applications. We
introduce Semantic Library Adaptation (SemLA), a novel
framework for training-free, test-time domain adaptation.
SemLA leverages a library of LoRA-based adapters indexed
with CLIP embeddings, dynamically merging the most relevant adapters based on proximity to the target domain
in the embedding space. This approach constructs an adhoc model tailored to each specific input without additional
training. Our method scales efficiently, enhances explainability by tracking adapter contributions, and inherently
protects data privacy, making it ideal for sensitive applications. Comprehensive experiments on a 20-domain benchmark built over 10 standard datasets demonstrate SemLA ’s
superior adaptability and performance across diverse settings, establishing a new standard in domain adaptation for
open-vocabulary semantic segmentation.

LoRA fusion

weighted on proximity

MODEL
custom
LoRA

SemLA adapts to unseen
domains by dynamically
merging LoRA adapters
indexed in CLIP space.

Figure 1. Overview of SemLA. During test-time, SemLA uses
CLIP as a domain navigator, to retrieve and fuse relevant adapters,
to get a LoRA tailored to the target domain.

visual embeddings [51], enabling flexible and dynamic labeling [10, 71]. However, like all models, OV semantic
segmentation models are vulnerable to domain shifts – situations where the model encounters data distributions different from those it was trained on, leading to degraded performance. This issue is significant because it impacts both
segmentation accuracy and open-vocabulary generalization
capabilities, which are crucial in real-world applications.
Data is plentiful but heterogeneous – varying in labels,
annotation styles, and other factors – and often contains sensitive information, limiting its accessibility. Consequently,
we find ourselves in a paradox where an abundance of data
does not necessarily translate into robust models capable

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to classify images at the pixel
level, assigning a label to each pixel in an image. Traditionally, models are trained to recognize a fixed set of
classes, but recent advances have led to open-vocabulary
(OV) semantic segmentation, where models identify categories from an undefined and unbounded set using textual
queries. This task leverages the synergy between text and
∗ Joint first authorship

LoRA library in CLIP space

† Project Lead

9804

