This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incomplete Multi-View Multi-Label Learning via Disentangled Representation
and Label Semantic Embedding

1

Xu Yan1 , Jun Yin1, *, Jie Wen2
Shanghai Maritime University, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
yanxu@stu.shmtu.edu.cn, junyin@shmtu.edu.cn, jiewen pr@126.com

Abstract
In incomplete multi-view multi-label learning scenarios,
it is crucial to use the incomplete multi-view data to extract consistent and specific representations from different
data sources and to fully exploit the missing label information. However, most previous approaches ignore the separation problem between view-shared and specific information. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a method that can separate view-consistent features
from view-specific features under the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework. Specifically, we first introduce
cross-view reconstruction to capture view-consistent features and extract shared information from different views
through unsupervised pre-training. Subsequently, we develop a disentangling module to learn specific features by
minimizing the variational upper bound of mutual information between consistent and specific features. Finally, we
utilize prior label relevance information derived from training data to guide the learning of the distribution of label
semantic embeddings, aggregating relevant semantic embeddings and maintaining the label relevance topology in
the semantic space. In extensive experiments, our model
outperforms existing state-of-the-art algorithms on several
real-world datasets, which fully validates its strong adaptability to missing views and labels.

of view completeness [4, 30, 38]. However, it is not uncommon to have missing views when dealing with multi-view
data, which poses a challenge to the learning effectiveness
of the model [19, 39].
Meanwhile, multi-label learning is an equally important research area. Unlike traditional single-label classification tasks, multi-label learning aims to deal with situations
where instances may belong to more than one category at
the same time. The key to multi-label learning is how to
deal with the correlation between labels, which is helpful in
improving the classification performance [12, 42]. Multilabel datasets are often incomplete due to various uncertainties involved in manual labeling. So research on incomplete
multi-label learning is particularly important.
Traditional multi-label classification relies on features
extracted from a single view for classification, which leads
to insufficient feature information. Using multi-view data
for multi-label classification can effectively alleviate this
problem. Currently, there are many models dealing with
multi-view multi-label classification (MVMLC) tasks that
show promising performance [33, 37, 41]. These models
typically assume that the data is complete, and currently,
only a few methods are capable of handling both missing
views and missing labels simultaneously.
To deal with the Double Incomplete Multi-View MultiLabel Classification problem (DIMVMLC), several deep
learning models based on autoencoders have been proposed
[22, 23, 31]. However, there are still only a few methods for disentangling consistent features and specific features. SIMM [33] identifies consistent features by minimizing confusing adversarial loss and multi-label loss, uses orthogonal constraints to eliminate shared information, and
extracts specific information from raw information. However, SIMM cannot be applied to the missing data case, and
the forced orthogonality constraint eliminates linear correlation, and there may still be a nonlinear relationship between shared and specific features. This relationship may
be difficult to capture by simple orthogonality constraints,
affecting the expressiveness of the features. MTD [23] simultaneously learns consistent and specific features, sepa-

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the increasing diversity and complexity of data, multi-view learning has gained widespread attention as an effective data processing technique. In many
real-world applications, such as image categorization, video
analysis, and text mining, data is often presented in the
form of multiple views, which makes multi-view learning
methods an effective tool for solving complex problems
[28, 35, 36]. In the past few years, many multi-view learning methods have been proposed based on the assumption
* Corresponding author

30722

