This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Arc2Avatar: Generating Expressive 3D Avatars from a Single Image
via ID Guidance
Dimitrios Gerogiannis

Foivos Paraperas Papantoniou
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias
Alexandros Lattas
Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London, UK

{d.gerogiannis22, f.paraperas, r.potamias, a.lattas, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. Arc2Avatar creates detailed 3D head avatars from a single image with unprecedented realism and identity similarity through a
carefully designed Score Distillation Sampling approach on top of an adapted 2D face foundation model. Our method supports blendshapedriven expression generation by retaining dense correspondence between the 3D Gaussian Splats and an underlying facial mesh template.

Abstract

are available on our project page.

Inspired by the effectiveness of 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) in reconstructing detailed 3D scenes within multiview setups and the emergence of large 2D human foundation models, we introduce Arc2Avatar, the first Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) based method utilizing a human face
foundation model as guidance with just a single image as
input. To achieve that, we extend such a model for diverseview human head generation by fine-tuning on synthetic
data and modifying its conditioning. Our avatars maintain
a dense correspondence with a human face mesh template,
allowing blendshape-based expression generation. This is
achieved through a modified 3DGS approach, connectivity
regularizers, and a strategic initialization tailored for our
task. Additionally, we propose an optional efficient SDSbased correction step to refine the blendshape expressions.
Experiments demonstrate that Arc2Avatar achieves stateof-the-art realism and identity preservation, effectively addressing color issues by allowing the use of very low guidance, enabled by our strong identity prior and initialization
strategy, without compromising detail. Code and models

1. Introduction

10770

Recent advances in 3D representations have significantly
transformed the field of 3D avatar generation. For many
years, 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) [3, 4, 40, 57, 58]
have been the standard solution, offering precise control
over avatars through manipulation of the underlying meshes
and a decent degree of identity representation through PCA.
However, 3DMMs often struggle to capture fine details,
such as the complexity of hair, limiting their ability to represent the entirety of the head. The emergence of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [50], opened new possibilities by implicitly modeling complex geometries and textures present
in human heads [16, 32, 34, 92, 96] via MLPs, however their
representation is computationally intensive and difficult to
manipulate. Recently, 3DGS [33] has emerged as a groundbreaking solution for 3D scene representation. Characterized by real-time performance and enhanced detail capturing abilities, 3DGS has been applied to represent 3D head

