This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPC-GS: Gaussian Splatting with Semantic-Prompt Consistency for Indoor
Open-World Free-view Synthesis from Sparse Inputs
Guibiao Liao1,2
Qing Li2
Zhenyu Bao1,2
Guoping Qiu3
Kanglin Liu2 *
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, 3 University of Nottingham

#Points:122

Gau-Grouping

Ours

0.792

23.960

22.011

...

17.297

(a1) SfM Points (Gau-Grouping)

15.028

(a2) Rendered RGB/Semantic Results (Gau-Grouping)

0.691

#Points:57524

PSNR

Sparse Input Images

(b1) Scene-layout Points (Ours)

(b2) Rendered RGB/Semantic Results (Ours)

SSIM

mIoU

(c) Comparison Results

Figure 1. Visual comparisons of open-world free-view synthesis from sparse inputs (12 training views). The previous 3DGS-based
method, Gau-Grouping [50], utilizes sparse SfM points for Gaussian initialization and limited training views for supervision, leading to
inferior rendering results. In contrast, our approach leverages scene-layout-based points for instructive initialization, and cooperates with
semantic-prompt consistency constraints (detailed in Sec. 3.3), yielding superior reconstruction and segmentation results.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting-based indoor open-world freeview synthesis approaches have shown significant performance with dense input images. However, they exhibit poor
performance when confronted with sparse inputs, primarily due to the sparse distribution of Gaussian points and
insufficient view supervision. To relieve these challenges,
we propose SPC-GS, leveraging Scene-layout-based Gaussian Initialization (SGI) and Semantic-Prompt Consistency
(SPC) Regularization for open-world free view synthesis
with sparse inputs. Specifically, SGI provides a dense,
scene-layout-based Gaussian distribution by utilizing viewchanged images generated from the video generation model
and view-constraint Gaussian points densification. Additionally, SPC mitigates limited view supervision by employing semantic-prompt-based consistency constraints developed by SAM2. This approach leverages available semantics from training views, serving as instructive prompts, to
optimize visually overlapping regions in novel views with

2D and 3D consistency constraints. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superior performance of SPC-GS across
Replica and ScanNet benchmarks. Notably, our SPC-GS
achieves a 3.06 dB gain in PSNR for reconstruction quality
and a 7.3% improvement in mIoU for open-world semantic
segmentation. Project website at: https://gbliao.
github.io/SPC-GS.github.io.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author

3D Gaussian Splatting-based open-world free-view synthesis seeks to construct semantic Gaussian radiance fields using a set of 3D Gaussian primitives enriched with color
and semantic attributes. This task enables the free novel
view synthesis of both realistic appearances and openvocabulary semantic understanding (also referred to as
3D open-vocabulary semantic segmentation) of the scenes,
with significant implications for augmented/virtual reality,
robot navigation, and manipulation [16, 18, 26, 28, 30, 58].
Existing methods [35, 50, 59] generally require dense, large
sets of input views to train the semantic Gaussian radiance

11264

