This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent Drifting in Diffusion Models for Counterfactual Medical Image Synthesis
Yousef Yeganeh1,2 *, Azade Farshad1,2 *†, Ioannis Charisiadis1 , Marta Hasny1 , Martin Hartenberger1 ,
Björn Ommer2,3 , Nassir Navab1,2 , Ehsan Adeli4†
1

2

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany
3
CompVis @ LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
4
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

{y.yeganeh,azade.farshad,ge83cid,marta.hasny,martin.hartenberger,nassir.navab}@tum.de,
b.ommer@lmu.de, eadeli@stanford.edu

Alzheimer’s Disease → Healthy

Young → Old

Disease: Pneumonia

Healthy → Alzheimer’s Disease

Young → Old

Disease: Pleural Effusion

Source

LD (Ours)

Difference

Source

Target

LD (Ours)

Real Sample

w/o LD

LD (Ours)

Figure 1. Medical Image Generation and Manipulation using LD. Left to right: (1) (text, image)-to-image without ground-truth (GT) pairs
: Removal, : Addition , (2) Aging: (text, image)-to-image with GT pairs, (3) text-to-image without GT pairs.

Abstract

ing enables diffusion models to be conditioned for medical
images fitted for the complex task of counterfactual image
generation, which is crucial to investigate how parameters
such as gender, age, and adding or removing diseases in a
patient would alter the medical images. We evaluate our
method on three public longitudinal benchmark datasets of
brain MRI and chest X-rays for counterfactual image generation. Our results demonstrate significant performance
gains in various scenarios when combined with different
fine-tuning schemes.

Scaling by training on large datasets has been shown to
enhance the quality and fidelity of image generation and
manipulation with diffusion models; however, such large
datasets are not always accessible in medical imaging due
to cost and privacy issues, which contradicts one of the
main applications of such models to produce synthetic samples where real data is scarce. Also, fine-tuning on pretrained general models has been a challenge due to the
distribution shift between the medical domain and the pretrained models. Here, we propose Latent Drift (LD) for
diffusion models that can be adopted for any fine-tuning
method to mitigate the issues faced by the distribution shift
or employed in inference time as a condition. Latent Drift-

1. Introduction
In recent years, high-resolution image generation models
such as the latent diffusion model (LDM) [40] have gained
popularity for their ability to generate photorealistic images
from prompts. These models are trained on large datasets
such as LAION-5B [43], consisting of billions of primar-

* Equal Contribution
† Project Lead

Project page: https://latentdrifting.github.io/

7685

