This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MegaSynth: Scaling Up 3D Scene Reconstruction with Synthesized Data
Hanwen Jiang1 Zexiang Xu2 Desai Xie3 Ziwen Chen4 Haian Jin5 Fujun Luan2 Zhixin Shu2
Kai Zhang2 Sai Bi2 Xin Sun2 Jiuxiang Gu2 Qixing Huang1 Georgios Pavlakos1 Hao Tan2
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Adobe Research
3
Stony Brook University 4 Oregon State University 5 Cornell University
Project & Code: https://hwjiang1510.github.io/MegaSynth/
Training Data

Inference Input

…

700K
(99%)

Train
10K

(1%)

MegaSynth

Model

(GS-LRM
or
Long-LRM)

Gaussian
Reconstruction

Novel View & GT

0.1-0.3 sec.

DL3DV

Figure 1. We introduce MegaSynth, a non-semantic synthesized dataset for training LRMs. MegaSynth benefits from its scalability and
controllability, enabling us to generate 700K scenes in 3 days. We train LRMs with both the large-scale MegaSynth data and small-scale real
data, improving LRMs for reconstructing wide-coverage scenes from dense-view images.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We propose scaling up 3D scene reconstruction by training with synthesized data. At the core of our work is
MegaSynth, a procedurally generated 3D dataset comprising 700K scenes—over 50 times larger than the prior real
dataset DL3DV—dramatically scaling the training data. To
enable scalable data generation, our key idea is eliminating
semantic information, removing the need to model complex
semantic priors such as object affordances and scene composition. Instead, we model scenes with basic spatial structures
and geometry primitives, offering scalability. Besides, we
control data complexity to facilitate training while loosely
aligning it with real-world data distribution to benefit realworld generalization. We explore training LRMs with both
MegaSynth and available real data. Experiment results show
that joint training or pre-training with MegaSynth improves
reconstruction quality by 1.2 to 1.8 dB PSNR across diverse image domains. Moreover, models trained solely on
MegaSynth perform comparably to those trained on real data,
underscoring the low-level nature of 3D reconstruction. Additionally, we provide an in-depth analysis of MegaSynth’s
properties for enhancing model capability, training stability,
and generalization, as well as application to other tasks.

The scaling law has shifted the focus of contemporary AI research toward large foundation models, which are built with
scalable neural network architectures [27, 70] and trained
on vast datasets [5, 61]. Following the scaling recipe seen
in NLP and 2D vision [1, 3, 4], the Large Reconstruction
Model (LRM) has been introduced to learn general 3D reconstruction priors [29]. For object-level reconstruction, LRMs
have shown impressive reconstruction quality using either
single-view or sparse-view inputs [29, 35, 72, 88], enabling
a range of applications [40, 90].

16441

Despite progress, enhancing LRM for reconstructing
wide-coverage scenes remains challenging due to two key
limitations of training data. First, scene-level datasets are
significantly smaller in scale compared to object-level counterparts. For instance, Objaverse [17] contains 800K shape
instances, whereas the largest clean scene dataset, DL3DV,
includes just 10K scenes. Collecting more intentionally
captured scene data is labor-intensive and difficult to scale.
Second, existing scene-level datasets suffer from a suboptimal data distribution. They are often limited by insufficient
scene diversity [15], small camera motions [49, 92], noisy
content [69], and inaccurate annotations [41]. However,
given the inherent complexity of 3D scenes, effective train-

