This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Image-Dense Annotation Generation Model for Underwater Scenes

Mask

Depth

Image

Mask

Depth

Image

Hongkai Lin Dingkang Liang Zhenghao Qi Xiang Bai*
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{hklin,dkliang,xbai}@hust.edu.cn

Figure 1. We present TIDE, a unified underwater image-dense annotation generation model. Its core lies in the shared layout
information and the natural complementarity between multimodal features. Our model, derived from the text-to-image model and finetuned with underwater data, enables the generation of highly consistent underwater image-dense annotations from solely text conditions.

Abstract

text-to-image and text-to-dense annotations within a single model. The Implicit Layout Sharing mechanism (ILS)
and cross-modal interaction method called Time Adaptive
Normalization (TAN) are introduced to jointly optimize the
consistency between image and dense annotations. We synthesize a large-scale underwater dataset using TIDE to validate the effectiveness of our method in underwater dense
prediction tasks. The results demonstrate that our method
effectively improves the performance of existing underwater
dense prediction models and mitigates the scarcity of underwater data with dense annotations. We hope our method
can offer new perspectives on alleviating data scarcity issues in other fields. The code is available at https:
//github.com/HongkLin/TIDE.

Underwater dense prediction, especially depth estimation
and semantic segmentation, is crucial for gaining a comprehensive understanding of underwater scenes. Nevertheless, high-quality and large-scale underwater datasets with
dense annotations remain scarce because of the complex
environment and the exorbitant data collection costs. This
paper proposes a unified Text-to-Image and DEnse annotation generation method (TIDE) for underwater scenes.
It relies solely on text as input to simultaneously generate
realistic underwater images and multiple highly consistent
dense annotations. Specifically, we unify the generation of
* Corresponding author.

961

