This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Occlusion-Robust Vision Transformers for Real-Time UAV Tracking
You Wu1† , Xucheng Wang2† , Xiangyang Yang1 , Mengyuan Liu1 , Dan Zeng3 ,
Hengzhou Ye1 , Shuiwang Li1∗
1
College of Computer Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Technology, China
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China
wuyou@glut.edu.cn, xcwang317@glut.edu.cn, xyyang317@163.com, mengyuaner1122@foxmail.com
zengd8@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yehengzhou@glut.edu.cn, lishuiwang0721@163.com

Abstract
Single-stream architectures using Vision Transformer (ViT)
backbones show great potential for real-time UAV tracking recently. However, frequent occlusions from obstacles
like buildings and trees expose a major drawback: these
models often lack strategies to handle occlusions effectively. New methods are needed to enhance the occlusion
resilience of single-stream ViT models in aerial tracking. In
this work, we propose to learn Occlusion-Robust Representations (ORR) based on ViTs for UAV tracking by enforcing an invariance of the feature representation of a target
with respect to random masking operations modeled by a
spatial Cox process. Hopefully, this random masking approximately simulates target occlusions, thereby enabling
us to learn ViTs that are robust to target occlusion for UAV
tracking. This framework is termed ORTrack. Additionally,
to facilitate real-time applications, we propose an Adaptive Feature-Based Knowledge Distillation (AFKD) method
to create a more compact tracker, which adaptively mimics the behavior of the teacher model ORTrack according to
the task’s difficulty. This student model, dubbed ORTrackD, retains much of ORTrack’s performance while offering
higher efficiency. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our method, demonstrating its state-of-the-art performance. Codes is available at
https://github.com/wuyou3474/ORTrack.

Figure 1. Compared to SOTA UAV trackers on UAVDT, our
ORTrack-DeiT sets a new record with 83.4% precision and a speed
of 236 FPS. Our ORTrack-D-DeiT strikes a better trade-off with
82.5% precision and a speed of about 313 FPS.

efficiency due to UAVs’ restricted battery life and computational resources [5, 41, 80, 83]. Consequently, designing an effective UAV tracker requires a delicate balance between precision and efficiency. It needs to ensure accuracy
while being conscious of the UAV’s energy and computational constraints.

1. Introduction

In recent years, there has been a notable shift from discriminative correlation filters (DCF)-based methods, because of their unsatisfactory robustness, towards DL-based
approaches, particularly with the adoption of single-stream
architectures that integrate feature extraction and fusion via
pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone networks.
This single-stream paradigm has proven highly effective in
generic visual tracking, as evidenced by the success of recent methods such as OSTrack [91], SimTrack [8], Mixformer [13], and DropMAE [82]. Building on these advancements, Aba-VTrack [44] introduces a lightweight DLbased tracker within this framework, employing an adap-

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are leveraged in a
plethora of applications, with increasing emphasis on UAV
tracking [4, 43, 46, 49, 52, 79, 84]. This form of tracking
poses an exclusive set of challenges such as tricky viewing angles, motion blur, severe occlusions, and the need for
† Equal contribution.

∗ Corresponding authors.

17103

