This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-World Amodal Appearance Completion
Jiayang Ao1 Yanbei Jiang1 Qiuhong Ke2 Krista A. Ehinger1
1
2
The University of Melbourne
Monash University

Figure 1. Examples of our open-world amodal completion using both specific (e.g., “polar bear”) and abstract (e.g., “What is the mammal in
this image”) text queries. Our approach supports various applications, including image editing, novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Imagine taking a photograph where part of a landmark is
hidden behind trees, or watching a video where an interesting object is partly occluded by other objects in the frame.
What if you could automatically reconstruct the hidden
parts of these objects to use them in photo editing, augmented reality (AR), or even 3D modelling? This capability, known as amodal completion [12], allows systems
to infer and generate the occluded parts of objects, providing users with full representations of partially visible items.
Amodal appearance completion is critical in applications
such as AR [8, 19, 25], 3D reconstruction [17, 37], and content creation [2, 31, 39], where intuitive, language-based interaction allows users to specify objects directly [3, 9, 22].
Traditional amodal appearance completion methods, however, are typically constrained by fixed sets of object categories [35], or necessitating extensive training and limiting their applicability in diverse and changing environments [23]. The real world presents a more complex challenge: completing occluded objects that can belong to any
categories and exhibit diverse, unseen visual features.

Understanding and reconstructing occluded objects is a
challenging problem, especially in open-world scenarios
where categories and contexts are diverse and unpredictable. Traditional methods, however, are typically restricted to closed sets of object categories, limiting their use
in complex, open-world scenes. We introduce Open-World
Amodal Appearance Completion, a training-free framework
that expands amodal completion capabilities by accepting flexible text queries as input. Our approach generalizes to arbitrary objects specified by both direct terms
and abstract queries. We term this capability reasoning amodal completion, where the system reconstructs the
full appearance of the queried object based on the provided image and language query. Our framework unifies segmentation, occlusion analysis, and inpainting to
handle complex occlusions and generates completed objects as RGBA elements, enabling seamless integration into
applications such as 3D reconstruction and image editing. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach in generalizing to novel objects and occlusions, establishing a new benchmark for amodal completion in open-world settings. Code and datasets available:
https://github.com/saraao/amodal.

To address the gap, we propose Open-World Amodal
Appearance Completion, a framework that generalizes
amodal completion to arbitrary objects specified by flexible natural language queries—a task we term reasoning

6490

