This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HMAR: Efficient Hierarchical Masked Auto-Regressive Image Generation
Hermann Kumbong1,2* Xian Liu2,3* Tsung-Yi Lin2 Ming-Yu Liu2 Xihui Liu4
Ziwei Liu5 Daniel Y. Fu6,7 Christopher Ré1† David W. Romero2†
1
Stanford University 2NVIDIA 3CUHK 4HKU 5NTU 6UCSD 7Together AI

Figure 1. HMAR Samples: Class-conditional ImageNet generated samples at 256×256 (HMAR-d30) and 512×512 (HMAR-d24) resolutions.

Abstract

ImageNet 256×256 and 512×512 benchmarks, HMAR models
match or outperform parameter-matched VAR, diffusion, and
autoregressive baselines. We develop efficient IO-aware blocksparse attention kernels that allow HMAR to achieve faster
training and inference times over VAR by over 2.5× and 1.75×
respectively, as well as over 3× lower inference memory footprint. Finally, HMAR yields additional flexibility over VAR; its
sampling schedule can be changed without further training, and
it can be applied to image editing tasks in a zero-shot manner.

Visual Auto-Regressive modeling (VAR) has shown promise
in bridging the speed and quality gap between autoregressive
image models and diffusion models. VAR reformulates autoregressive modeling by decomposing an image into successive
resolution scales. During inference, an image is generated by
predicting all the tokens in the next (higher-resolution) scale,
conditioned on all tokens in all previous (lower-resolution)
scales. However, this formulation suffers from reduced image
quality due to the parallel generation of all tokens in a resolution
scale; has sequence lengths scaling superlinearly in image resolution; and requires retraining to change the sampling schedule.
We introduce Hierarchical Masked AutoRegressive modeling (HMAR), a new image generation algorithm that alleviates
these issues using next-scale prediction and masked prediction
to generate high-quality images with fast sampling. HMAR reformulates next-scale prediction as a Markovian process, wherein
the prediction of each resolution scale is conditioned only on
tokens in its immediate predecessor instead of the tokens in all
predecessor resolutions. When predicting a resolution scale,
HMAR uses a controllable multi-step masked generation procedure to generate a subset of the tokens in each step. On
* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Autoregressive modeling is the dominant approach for text
generation [1, 32, 33]. However, for images and videos,
autoregressive models are yet to match diffusion models in
speed and quality, making the latter the de-facto generative
approach for these modalities [12, 36, 41]. This disparity
raises the question of whether autoregressive models can match
diffusion models in speed and quality for image generation.
Adapting the next-token autoregressive generation paradigm
from language to images introduces multiple challenges. Images
are multi-dimensional, making it difficult to determine an appropriate causal ordering. Orderings like raster-scan [14, 42, 49]
break the natural spatial relationships within images, resulting
in lower-quality outputs. Additionally, sequential pixel-by-pixel

† Equal senior authorship.

2535

