This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientViM: Efficient Vision Mamba with
Hidden State Mixer based State Space Duality
Sanghyeok Lee1
1

Joonmyung Choi1
Korea University

{cat0626, pizard}@korea.ac.kr

2

Hyunwoo J. Kim2 *

KAIST

hyunwoojkim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
For the deployment of neural networks in resourceconstrained environments, prior works have built
lightweight architectures with convolution and attention
for capturing local and global dependencies, respectively.
Recently, the state space model (SSM) has emerged as an
effective operation for global interaction with its favorable
linear computational cost in the number of tokens. To
harness the efficacy of SSM, we introduce Efficient Vision
Mamba (EfficientViM), a novel architecture built on
hidden state mixer-based state space duality (HSM-SSD)
that efficiently captures global dependencies with further
reduced computational cost. With the observation that the
runtime of the SSD layer is driven by the linear projections
on the input sequences, we redesign the original SSD layer
to perform the channel mixing operation within compressed
hidden states in the HSM-SSD layer. Additionally, we
propose multi-stage hidden state fusion to reinforce the representation power of hidden states and provide the design
to alleviate the bottleneck caused by the memory-bound
operations. As a result, the EfficientViM family achieves a
new state-of-the-art speed-accuracy trade-off on ImageNet1k, offering up to a 0.7% performance improvement over
the second-best model SHViT with faster speed. Further,
we observe significant improvements in throughput and
accuracy compared to prior works, when scaling images
or employing distillation training. Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/EfficientViM .

Figure 1. Comparison of efficient networks on ImageNet1K [9] classification. The family of our EfficientViM, marked
as red and blue stars, shows the best speed-accuracy trade-offs. ✝
indicates the model trained with distillation following [55].

1. Introduction

tion [20, 65, 67, 68, 75], etc. Earlier works [5, 15, 36]
have explored the efficient convolutional neural networks
(CNN). One such technique is depthwise separable convolution (DWConv), introduced in Xception [5], which
has been widely adopted for modeling lightweight architectures, especially CNN-based networks including MobileNet [18, 19, 46] and following works [52, 59].
Meanwhile, with the advent of Vision Transformer (ViT)
[11], attention mechanisms have become a key operation for
capturing long-range dependencies within image patches.
However, the quadratic cost of self-attention presents challenges for designing efficient architectures. To address this,
prior works have attempted to approximate self-attention
with reduced cost [6, 26, 62, 66], or restrict the number of
tokens [1, 4, 7, 27, 35, 70]. For on-device deployment, several works [3, 33, 38, 39, 41, 58, 72, 73] devoted effort to
developing hybrid ViTs combined with CNNs (DWConv).
While prior works have demonstrated superior performance
over traditional CNNs, the inherent quadratic complexity of
self-attention in the number of tokens remains a major bottleneck limiting their efficiency and scalability.
Recently, state space models (SSMs) [8, 12–14, 51] have
emerged as a promising alternative to self-attention, of-

Efficient vision architectures for resource-constrained environments have been consistently explored in computer vision tasks, including image classification [5, 19, 22, 38,
39, 52, 74], object detection [28, 44, 53, 61], segmenta* Corresponding author.

14923

