This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Text-to-Video Generation help Video-Language Alignment?
Luca Zanella1 Massimiliano Mancini1
Sergey Tulyakov2 Yiming Wang3
1

University of Trento

2

3

Snap Inc.

Willi Menapace2
Elisa Ricci1,3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

https://lucazanella.github.io/synvita/

State-of-the-art methods

Abstract

Positive caption

Recent video-language alignment models are trained on
sets of videos, each with an associated positive caption and
a negative caption generated by large language models. A
problem with this procedure is that negative captions may
introduce linguistic biases, i.e., concepts are seen only as
negatives and never associated with a video. While a solution would be to collect videos for the negative captions,
existing databases lack the fine-grained variations needed
to cover all possible negatives. In this work, we study
whether synthetic videos can help to overcome this issue.
Our preliminary analysis with multiple generators shows
that, while promising on some tasks, synthetic videos harm
the performance of the model on others. We hypothesize this
issue is linked to noise (semantic and visual) in the generated videos and develop a method, S YN V I TA, that accounts for those. S YN V I TA dynamically weights the contribution of each synthetic video based on how similar its
target caption is w.r.t. the real counterpart. Moreover, a
semantic consistency loss makes the model focus on finegrained differences across captions, rather than differences
in video appearance. Experiments show that, on average,
S YN V I TA improves over existing methods on VideoCon
test sets and SSv2-Temporal, SSv2-Events, and ATP-Hard
benchmarks, being a first promising step for using synthetic
videos when learning video-language models.

a man talks about
his plate of tacos

Positive video
Positive

Negative

Negative

Positive

Negative caption
a man talks about his
plate of tacos while
wearing a sombrero

Negative video

SynViTA
Positive video
Negative

Positive

a man talks about his
plate of tacos while
wearing a sombrero

a man talks about
his plate of tacos

Negative

Positive
Negative video

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We study the problem of video-language alignment, i.e.,
modeling the relationship between video content and text descriptions. Top: current methods use LLM-generated negative captions,
which may introduce certain concepts (e.g., wearing a sombrero)
only as negatives, as they are not associated with any video. Bottom: we study whether overcoming this issue by pairing negative
captions with generated videos can improve VLA.

Video-language alignment (VLA) aims to model the relationship between video content and natural language descriptions [55], a fundamental multimodal task that enables
various applications, such as video captioning [15] and
video-text retrieval [47]. This task is challenging because
it requires the models to recognize not only the entities but
also their spatial and temporal relationships.
Recent approaches exploit multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) to address VLA [3, 28, 29] by tasking the

24097

MLLM to answer whether a given video and description are
aligned. While effective, such MLLMs often lack sufficient
understanding of temporal dynamics, such as action types
or temporal orders [10, 31]. This limitation also stems from
the video-and-language datasets used for the MLLM pretraining, as they are biased towards frame-level semantics:
the appearance of a single frame is often sufficient to infer
the alignment with the textual caption [25, 35].
While a possible solution is to augment datasets with
negative captions, e.g., captions from other videos, these
negatives can be “easy” for VLA models to distinguish simply by focusing on nouns; therefore, recent works focus on
LLM-generated captions as hard negatives [3]. However,
relying solely on textual negatives may cause the MLLM
to encounter concepts only as negatives, thus developing
incorrect linguistic biases. For instance, in the VideoCon
dataset [3], words like sombrero, marshmallow, and bland
appear as textual negatives but not as positives. While

