This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DistinctAD: Distinctive Audio Description Generation in Contexts
Bo Fang1 , Wenhao Wu2,3 , Qiangqiang Wu1 , Yuxin Song2 , Antoni B. Chan1B
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
3
Baidu Inc.
The University of Sydney
{bofang6-c,qiangqwu2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, wenhao.wu@sydney.edu.au
songyuxin02@baidu.com, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

VLM

❄
LLM

😑

Rebecca looks at
someone.
Rebecca looks in
the mirror.
Sara looks at
someone.

1 clip

(b)

🤔

Distinct

N clips

🔥Module

VLM
-AD

🔥Adapter

❄

❄

Rebecca’s eyes
widen.

LLM

Rebecca stares
at her reflection
in the mirror.

ℒ!"#$

Audio Descriptions (ADs) aim to provide a narration of a
movie in text form, describing non-dialogue-related narratives, such as characters, actions, or scene establishment.
Automatic generation of ADs remains challenging due to: i)
the domain gap between movie-AD data and existing data
used to train vision-language models, and ii) the issue of
contextual redundancy arising from highly similar neighboring visual clips in a long movie. In this work, we propose DistinctAD, a novel two-stage framework for generating ADs that emphasize distinctiveness to produce better narratives. To address the domain gap, we introduce
a CLIP-AD adaptation strategy that does not require additional AD corpora, enabling more effective alignment between movie and AD modalities at both global and finegrained levels. In Stage-II, DistinctAD incorporates two key
innovations: (i) a Contextual Expectation-Maximization Attention (EMA) module that reduces redundancy by extracting common bases from consecutive video clips, and (ii)
an explicit distinctive word prediction loss that filters out
repeated words in the context, ensuring the prediction of
unique terms specific to the current AD. Comprehensive
evaluations on MAD-Eval, CMD-AD, and TV-AD benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of DistinctAD, with the
model consistently outperforming baselines, particularly
in Recall@k/N, highlighting its effectiveness in producing
high-quality, distinctive ADs.

❄

🔥Adapter

(a)

Sara helps her
out of her dress.

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods approach the AD task similar to
video captioning, using only a single video clip as input, which
leads to repetitive ADs due to highly similar neighboring clips. (b)
Our DistinctAD method generates distinctive ADs across N consecutive clips, with three key innovations: VLM-AD adaptation,
the Distinct Module, and explicit distinctive words prediction.

1. Introduction

sighted viewers in supporting eye-free activities and facilitating child language development [31, 55], reinforcing its
pivotal role in fostering inclusivity by bridging the perceptual gap between visual and non-visual elements. Crafting
ADs requires careful attention to timing, language, and context to integrate smoothly with dialogue [22]. However,
despite the availability of advanced AD platforms [9, 54],
human-annotated methods are costly and difficult to scale,
highlighting the need for automated generation systems, especially with the rise of user-generated content.
Advancements in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and
Large-Language Models (LLMs) have led to growing interest in automatic AD generation for media. Current approaches fall into two categories: (i) using powerful proprietary models like GPT-4 [3] or GPT-4V [53] in a trainingfree manner [14, 39, 82, 86], and (ii) fine-tuning opensource VLM components, such as visual-text adapters [5,
34, 42], for AD tasks [21–23, 40, 56, 74]. Both approaches
have limitations: (i) Training-free methods often perform
poorly and suffer from hallucinations due to the unique na-

Audio description (AD) [20, 67] is a crucial accessibility
service that provides verbal narration of visual elements
in media content for individuals who are blind or have
low vision. By offering succinct and vivid descriptions,
ADs enable visually impaired audiences to fully comprehend and engage with non-dialogue-related narratives, e.g.,
characters, facial expressions, non-verbal actions, or scene
establishment. Recent studies also show ADs’ value for

13571

