This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Gaussian Head Avatars with Expressive Dynamic Appearances by
Compact Tensorial Representations
Yating Wang1

Yanbo Fan2
Jichen Hu1
Ran Yi1 *
1∗
Lizhuang Ma
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 AntGroup Research

Xuan Wang2

Jingcheng Zhu1

Abstract
Recent studies have combined 3D Gaussian and 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) to construct high-quality 3D head
avatars. In this line of research, existing methods either fail
to capture the dynamic textures or incur significant overhead in terms of runtime speed or storage space. To this
end, we propose a novel method that addresses all the aforementioned demands. In specific, we introduce an expressive
and compact representation that encodes texture-related attributes of the 3D Gaussians in the tensorial format. We
store appearance of neutral expression in static tri-planes,
and represents dynamic texture details for different expressions using lightweight 1D feature lines, which are then decoded into opacity offset relative to the neutral face. We further propose adaptive truncated opacity penalty and classbalanced sampling to improve generalization across different expressions. Experiments show this design enables accurate face dynamic details capturing while maintains realtime rendering and significantly reduces storage costs, thus
broadening the applicability to more scenarios.

Figure 1. Our method improves rendering quality while ensuring
real-time performance and minimum storage. The points radius in
the figure is proportional to the square root of the storage.

ployment. However, meeting all of the aforementioned requirements remains a significantly challenge.
Early methods are based on 3D face Morphable Models
(3DMM) [2, 32] to achieve 3D avatar reconstruction, which
can easily control facial expressions using low-dimensional
PCA coefficients, but the rendering effect lacks realism.
With the development of NeRF [25], some approaches combine NeRF and 3DMM to achieve high-quality, animatable head avatars, but the volumetric rendering process of
NeRF requires substantial computation, making it difficult
to achieve real-time performance. Recently, 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [18] has gained widespread attention for
its high-quality rendering and real-time performance, with
some works attempting to combine 3DGS with 3DMM to
achieve fast, realistic, and animatable head avatars.
To enhance realism of head avatar rendering, it is important to model the dynamic facial details that change with

1. Introduction
Photorealistic 3D head avatars reconstruction is a fundamental research topic in the field of computer graphics and
vision, encompassing a variety of applications including
films, gaming, and AR/VR etc. A highly practical 3D head
avatar needs to meet various technical requirements: 1) It
needs to faithfully render the expressions and movements
depicted in the driving signal into high-quality rendered images, including clear texture details, consistent geometric
structures, and vivid texture variations under dynamic expressions; 2) It requires extremely high inference and rendering efficiency to meet the demands of tasks that require
real-time performance; 3) It needs to meet the requirements
of lightweight design to facilitate easy distribution and de* Corresponding author

21117

