This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Video Face Enhancement with Enhanced Spatial-Temporal Consistency
Yutong Wang1

Jiajie Teng2

Jiajiong Cao Yuming Li Chenguang Ma Hongteng Xu3
Dixin Luo1 *
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
Zhejiang University 3 Renmin University of China

Abstract

AI-generated videos have few problems with content quality. Still, the inherent randomness of the generative model
often leads to inconsistency between frames thus causing
AI-based (pixel) flickering, resulting in its limited practical applications. In recent years, deep learning techniques
have greatly contributed to the development of the computer vision field, giving rise to a series of works dedicated
to achieving video enhancement, including video restoration [28, 44], video super-resolution [19, 38], video deflickering [13, 26], video colorization [51, 55], and so on.

As a very common type of video, face videos often appear
in movies, talk shows, live broadcasts, and other scenes.
Real-world online videos are often plagued by degradations
such as blurring and quantization noise, due to the high
compression ratio caused by high communication costs and
limited transmission bandwidth. These degradations have a
particularly serious impact on face videos because the human visual system is highly sensitive to facial details. Despite the significant advancement in video face enhancement, current methods still suffer from i) long processing time and ii) inconsistent spatial-temporal visual effects (e.g., flickering). This study proposes a novel and efficient blind video face enhancement method to overcome the
above two challenges, restoring high-quality videos from
their compressed low-quality versions with an effective deflickering mechanism. In particular, the proposed method
develops upon a 3D-VQGAN backbone associated with
spatial-temporal codebooks recording high-quality portrait
features and residual-based temporal information. We develop a two-stage learning framework for the model. In
Stage I, we learn the model with a regularizer mitigating the codebook collapse problem. In Stage II, we learn
two transformers to look up code from the codebooks and
further update the encoder of low-quality videos. Experiments conducted on the VFHQ-Test dataset demonstrate
that our method surpasses the current state-of-the-art blind
face video restoration and de-flickering methods on both efficiency and effectiveness. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Dixin-Lab/BFVR-STC.

The face usually serves as a common focal point or region of interest in media such as images and videos, and a
huge amount of research has been devoted to realizing face
restoration. Blind face restoration (BFR) aims to reconstruct high-quality faces from low-quality faces suffering
from multiple degradations [27]. Numerous studies have
addressed blind face image restoration (BFIR) by leveraging face geometry priors [6, 7, 15], generative priors [3, 20,
21, 50], and codebook priors [14, 47, 58]. However, applying BFIR methods directly to degraded videos frameby-frame will lead to inconsistencies in background and
portrait features between frames due to the lack of temporal constraints. Consequently, blind face video restoration
(BFVR) approaches typically adopt carefully crafted strategies to enhance the inter-frame correlation [12, 41, 49].
Despite these advancements, these works suffer from inefficiency, e.g., long inference times, and an inadequate
temporal perceptive field. KEEP [12] needs an additional
restoration method RealESRGAN [46] and face detection
model to process background and faces separately, while
StableBFVR [41] requires BasicVSR++ [4] for preliminary
restoration. Additionally, PGTFormer [49] only considers
two neighboring frames in its perceptive field, making it
difficult to achieve global consistency across the video.

1. Introduction

To improve the above BFVR paradigms, in this study,
we propose a novel 3D-VQGAN framework to enable efficient video-level compression and quantization. To conquer the instability and artifacts caused by video-level compression, we leverage a pre-trained feature network, such
as DINOv2, as a more powerful discriminator, followed by
multiple multi-scale discriminator heads. In terms of quan-

Real-world videos usually suffer from varying degradations due to shooting methods, transmission compression,
etc., which leads to blurring, noise, brightness flickering,
color jitter, and other perturbations. With the development of video generation technologies such as Sora [32],
* Corresponding author: dixin.luo@bit.edu.cn.

2183

