This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R ELOCATE: A Simple Training-Free Baseline for Visual Query Localization
Using Region-Based Representations
Savya Khosla

Sethuraman T V

Alexander Schwing

Derek Hoiem

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{savyak2, st34, aschwing, dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Abstract

no exact or neighboring frame for reliable matching. Further, the object’s appearance may vary significantly from
the visual query due to changes in orientation, scale, context, lighting, motion blur, and occlusions. Compounding
these issues, the object of interest usually appears briefly in
a long, untrimmed video.
Classic VQL methods typically use a stage-wise
pipeline [17, 45, 46]: (1) identify all objects in each video
frame, (2) compare these objects with the given query to
select the most similar ones, and (3) perform bidirectional
tracking to obtain a spatio-temporal response. While this
pipeline is well-grounded in the object localization literature, it is effective only for large, consistently visible objects that closely match the visual query in short video
clips. A more recent work [20] has proposed an end-toend framework that aims to understand the holistic relationship between a given query and the video, performing spatio-temporal localization in a single step. However,
this approach requires extensive training on large, annotated
datasets, which can be challenging to obtain. Additionally,
since such a method learns a holistic video-query relationship, it must process the entire video for each query, even
when multiple queries are to be localized in the same video.
To address these limitations, we propose Region-based
representations for Localizing Anything in Episodic memory (R ELOCATE), a simple training-free baseline for VQL.
Being training-free, R ELOCATE eliminates the need for extensive task-specific training and large annotated datasets.
Moreover, it encodes a video independently of the query,
allowing the same video encoding to be reused for multiple
queries. This makes the method more suitable for episodic
memory tasks, as it enables us to perform the resourceintensive video encoding just once for multiple queries.
R ELOCATE follows a classic stage-wise setup for object
localization while integrating techniques to efficiently encode long videos, handle small and fleeting objects, and
manage varying appearances of the query object. Specifically, it begins by extracting region-based representations
from the video and searching for candidates that match the
visual query. The selected candidates are then refined to improve precision, and the most relevant candidate is tracked

We present R ELOCATE, a simple training-free baseline designed to perform the challenging task of visual query
localization in long videos. To eliminate the need for
task-specific training and efficiently handle long videos,
R ELOCATE leverages a region-based representation derived from pretrained vision models. At a high level, it
follows the classic object localization approach: (1) identify all objects in each video frame, (2) compare the objects
with the given query and select the most similar ones, and
(3) perform bidirectional tracking to get a spatio-temporal
response. However, we propose some key enhancements
to handle small objects, cluttered scenes, partial visibility,
and varying appearances. Notably, we refine the selected
objects for accurate localization and generate additional
visual queries to capture visual variations. We evaluate
R ELOCATE on the challenging Ego4D Visual Query 2D Localization dataset, establishing a new baseline that outperforms prior task-specific methods by 49% (relative improvement) in spatio-temporal average precision.

1. Introduction
Visual Query Localization (VQL) requires localizing the
last appearance of an object of interest in a long video.
The object of interest is specified via a reference image,
also known as the visual query. Figure 1 provides illustrative examples. VQL is an important task, e.g., for surveillance, legal investigations, wildlife monitoring, or simply
for tracking down a misplaced item. However, the task
presents several unique challenges that push the boundaries
of contemporary computer vision methods. For instance,
unlike classic object detection models that are trained to
identify a fixed set of object categories [6, 37], VQL requires localizing an open-ended range of objects. Additionally, while typical object tracking methods are initialized
with a bounding box close to the object’s temporal location
in the video [24, 27, 47], the VQL reference image (visual
query) often originates outside the video, i.e., there may be

3697

