This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Emphasizing Discriminative Features for Dataset Distillation in Complex
Scenarios
Kai Wang1,2∗ , Zekai Li1,2∗ , Zhi-Qi Cheng2† , Samir Khaki3 , Ahmad Sajedi3 , Ramakrishna
Vedantam4 , Konstantinos N Plataniotis3 , Alexander Hauptmann2 , Yang You1†
1
NUS, 2 CMU, 3 University of Toronto, 4 Independent Researcher

Abstract

CIFAR-10

Select 10 similar classes
from ImageNet-1K(IN1K)

IN1K
CIFAR-10

1.0

Dataset Distillation (Trajectory-Matching)

Dataset distillation has demonstrated strong performance
on simple datasets like CIFAR, MNIST, and TinyImageNet
but struggles to achieve similar results in more complex
scenarios. In this paper, we propose EDF (emphasizes the
discriminative features), a dataset distillation method that
enhances key discriminative regions in synthetic images using Grad-CAM activation maps. Our approach is inspired
by a key observation: in simple datasets, high-activation areas typically occupy most of the image, whereas in complex
scenarios, the size of these areas is much smaller. Unlike previous methods that treat all pixels equally when synthesizing
images, EDF uses Grad-CAM activation maps to enhance
high-activation areas. From a supervision perspective, we
downplay supervision signals produced by lower trajectorymatching losses, as they contain common patterns. Additionally, to help the DD community better explore complex
scenarios, we build the Complex Dataset Distillation (CompDD) benchmark by meticulously selecting sixteen subsets,
eight easy and eight hard, from ImageNet-1K. In particular, EDF consistently outperforms SOTA results in complex
scenarios, such as ImageNet-1K subsets. Hopefully, more
researchers will be inspired and encouraged to improve the
practicality and efficacy of DD. Our code and benchmark
have been made public at NUS-HPC-AI-Lab/EDF.

1. Introduction
Dataset Distillation (DD) has been making remarkable
progress since it was first proposed by [54]. Currently, the
mainstream of DD is matching-based methods [1, 68, 69, 71],
which first extract patterns from the real dataset, then define
different types of supervision to inject extracted patterns into
the synthetic data. On several simple benchmarks, such as
CIFAR [19] and TinyImageNet [21], existing DD methods
can achieve lossless performance [13, 25].

0.5

0.1

1

Compressing Ratio (%)

5

0.0

Activation mean: 0.49
High activation ratio: 43.2%
CIFAR-10 Bird

Activation mean: 0.47
High activation ratio: 42.5%
CIFAR-10 Dog

Activation mean: 0.25
High activation ratio: 25.4%

Activation mean: 0.28
High activation ratio: 30.0%

IN1K-CIFAR-10 Bird
IN1K-CIFAR-10 Dog
(a) The performance of
dataset distillation drops (b) Images from IN1K-CIFAR-10 have much
remarkably in complex lower activation means and smaller highly actiscenarios.
vated areas.

Figure 1. (a) DD recovery ratio (distilled data accuracy over full
data accuracy) comparison between CIFAR-10 and IN1K-CIFAR10. We use trajectory matching for demonstration. (b) Comparison
between Grad-CAM activation map statistics of CIFAR-10 and
IN1K-CIFAR-10. The ratio refers to the percentage of pixels whose
activation values are higher than 0.5.

However, DD still struggles to be practically used in realworld applications, i.e., images in complex scenarios are
characterized by significant variations in object sizes and the
presence of a large amount of class-irrelevant information.
To show that current DD methods fail to achieve satisfying performance in complex scenarios, we apply trajectory
matching [13] on a 10-class subset from ImageNet-1K extracted by selecting similar classes of CIFAR-10, called
IN1K-CIFAR-10. As depicted in Figure 1a, under three compressing ratios, DD’s performances on IN1K-CIFAR-10 are
consistently worse than those on CIFAR-10.
To figure out the reason, we take a closer look at the
ImageNet-1K and CIFAR-10 from the data perspective. One
key observation is that the percentage of discriminative features in the complex scenario, which can be visualized by
Grad-CAM [42], is much lower. From Figure 1b, CIFAR10 images are sticker-like, and activation maps have higher
means and larger highly activated areas. By contrast, activation maps of the IN1K-CIFAR-10 subset exhibit much
lower activation means and smaller highly activated areas.
Previous methods [1, 13] treat all pixels of synthetic images

∗ equal contribution (kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg, lizekai@u.nus.edu)
† advising contribution. Part of this work was completed at CMU.

We compare recovery ratios because datasets are different.

30451

