This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous, Subject-Specific Attribute Control in T2I Models
by Identifying Semantic Directions
Stefan Andreas Baumann1 , Felix Krause1 , Michael Neumayr2 , Nick Stracke1 , Melvin Sevi3 ,
Vincent Tao Hu1 , Björn Ommer1
1
CompVis @ LMU Munich, MCML, 2 TU Munich, 3 ENS Paris-Saclay
{stefan.baumann, b.ommer}@lmu.de

compvis.github.io/attribute-control
(b) Concept Sliders [14]: Only Global Control
(a) Our Method: Detailed Control
of Localization and Expression
“A close-up photo of a man and a woman sitting on a bench”
+•
•+
∆age

∆age

Original Generated
without Modifications

Gradual Global Age Increase

(c) Prompt-to-Prompt [17]: No Fully Continuous Control

Original Generated
without Modifications

Gradually Stronger Age Modulation Applied

Original Generated
without Modifications

× continuity breaks

×

No Gradual, Fine-Grained Control

Image Generated
with Modified Prompt

Figure 1. (a) We augment the prompt input of image generation models with fine-grained control of attribute expression in generated images
(unmodified images are marked in green) in a subject-specific manner without additional cost during generation. (b, c) Previous methods
only allow either fine-grained expression control or fine-grained localization when starting from the image generated from a basic prompt.

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models
have significantly improved the quality of generated images. However, providing efficient control over individual
subjects, particularly the attributes characterizing them,
remains a key challenge. While existing methods have introduced mechanisms to modulate attribute expression, they
typically provide either detailed, object-specific localization
of such a modification or full-scale fine-grained, nuanced
control of attributes. No current approach offers both simultaneously, resulting in a gap when trying to achieve precise
continuous and subject-specific attribute modulation in image generation. In this work, we demonstrate that token-level
directions exist within commonly used CLIP text embeddings
that enable fine-grained, subject-specific control of high-

level attributes in T2I models. We introduce two methods to
identify these directions: a simple, optimization-free technique and a learning-based approach that utilizes the T2I
model to characterize semantic concepts more specifically.
Our methods allow the augmentation of the prompt text input, enabling fine-grained control over multiple attributes
of individual subjects simultaneously, without requiring any
modifications to the diffusion model itself. This approach
offers a unified solution that fills the gap between global
and localized control, providing competitive flexibility and
precision in text-guided image generation.

1. Introduction

13231

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have rapidly advanced,
achieving remarkable quality in generating visually stunning

