This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lost in Translation, Found in Context:
Sign Language Translation with Contextual Cues
Youngjoon Jang∗1,2

Haran Raajesh∗3,4

Liliane Momeni1

Gül Varol1,3

Andrew Zisserman1

1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, UK
2
KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
3
LIGM, École des Ponts, IP Paris, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
4
CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad, India
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/litfic/
∗
denotes equal contribution

Abstract
Our objective is to translate continuous sign language into
spoken language text. Inspired by the way human interpreters
rely on context for accurate translation, we incorporate
additional contextual cues together with the signing video, into
a new translation framework. Specifically, besides visual sign
recognition features that encode the input video, we integrate
complementary textual information from (i) captions describing
the background show, (ii) translation of previous sentences, as
well as (iii) pseudo-glosses transcribing the signing. These
are automatically extracted and inputted along with the visual
features to a pre-trained large language model (LLM), which
we fine-tune to generate spoken language translations in text
form. Through extensive ablation studies, we show the positive
contribution of each input cue to the translation performance.
We train and evaluate our approach on BOBSL – the largest
British Sign Language dataset currently available. We show
that our contextual approach significantly enhances the quality
of the translations compared to previously reported results on
BOBSL, and also to state-of-the-art methods that we implement
as baselines. Furthermore, we demonstrate the generality of
our approach by applying it also to How2Sign, an American
Sign Language dataset, and achieve competitive results.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are the natural means of communication for deaf
communities [66]. They are visual-spatial languages and lack
standardised written forms [3, 26]. Sign languages exist independently of spoken languages, with their own unique lexicons, ordering, and grammatical structures. Furthermore, sign languages
are expressed through both manual and non-manual components,
e.g. mouthings, which can be conveyed simultaneously [19, 74].
The focus of this work is sign language translation (SLT), the

Figure 1. Contextual cues in SLT: In addition to information extracted
from the signing content (at the bottom right corner), we give the sign
language translation model two contextual cues: the background description that identifies keywords describing the scene behind the signer,
and the previous sentence translations. In this example, the ground truth
(GT) translation has common words or semantics with the background
context (e.g., flower), and the previous sentence (e.g., wind).

process of transforming sign language into spoken language, in
the open-vocabulary setting. Achieving SLT could significantly
improve accessibility and inclusion for the deaf and hard-ofhearing communities by reducing communication barriers.
A key challenge in SLT is the fact that sign languages
rely heavily on contextual discourse and spatial awareness
due to their visual-spatial nature [42, 48, 52, 67]. Indeed, a
study by [67] with fluent deaf signers found that a third of
their sentence-level signing clips could only be fully translated
when provided with additional discourse-level context. We next

8742

