This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DSV-LFS: Unifying LLM-Driven Semantic Cues with Visual Features for Robust
Few-Shot Segmentation
Amin Karimi, Charalambos Poullis
Immersive and Creative Technologies Lab, Concordia University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
aminpdi@gmail.com, charalambos@poullis.org

Abstract

labeled examples, similar to human learning.
In the context of image segmentation [28, 47], which requires pixel-level annotations, few-shot learning provides a
resource-efficient solution. Few-shot semantic segmentation methods focus on predicting detailed masks for novel
classes using only a limited number of labeled samples
(support images). These methods utilize a range of strategies to effectively leverage the limited labeled samples
available for segmentation [2, 9, 13, 18, 27, 34, 40, 44,
46, 51, 63]. However, current methods face challenges
such as overfitting to the feature distribution of the training data during meta-training, leading to misclassification
of seen classes as unseen ones. Additionally, occlusion, deformation, or texture differences between query and support images significantly reduce segmentation accuracy.
The root cause for these challenges is the incomplete and
appearance-biased feature representation of the novel class
learned from the limited data available. Recent methods
address these challenges by leveraging class text descriptions, which provide detailed semantic information to improve segmentation performance [20, 29, 62, 68]. These
descriptions help models capture nuanced features of novel
classes, enhancing generalization and accuracy even with
limited support images. Advances in large language models
(LLMs) [3, 48] further enable the efficient encoding of this
semantic information, offering a more robust integration of
textual and visual cues for improved segmentation.
Large language models (LLMs) have shown great potential in few-shot learning, enhancing performance across
tasks in both computer vision and natural language processing [3, 4, 6, 16, 21, 48]. In few-shot segmentation
(FSS), integrating LLMs to encode textual information has
proven effective in addressing key limitations. While earlier FSS methods used language models for auxiliary tasks
such as feature extraction [12, 20, 59] or generating attribute
prompts [29], recent work [68] presents the first direct application of LLMs to FSS, achieving notable improvements
in segmentation accuracy. [68] engineered prompts leveraging both the support set and class description to guide

Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) aims to enable models to segment novel/unseen object classes using only a
limited number of labeled examples. However, current
FSS methods frequently struggle with generalization due to
incomplete and biased feature representations, especially
when support images do not capture the full appearance
variability of the target class. To improve the FSS pipeline,
we propose a novel framework that utilizes large language
models (LLMs) to adapt general class semantic information to the query image. Furthermore, the framework employs dense pixel-wise matching to identify similarities between query and support images, resulting in enhanced FSS
performance. Inspired by reasoning-based segmentation
frameworks, our method, named DSV-LFS, introduces an
additional token into the LLM vocabulary, allowing a multimodal LLM to generate a ”semantic prompt” from class
descriptions. In parallel, a dense matching module identifies visual similarities between the query and support images, generating a ”visual prompt”. These prompts are then
jointly employed to guide the prompt-based decoder for accurate segmentation of the query image. Comprehensive experiments on the benchmark datasets Pascal-5i and COCO20i demonstrate that our framework achieves state-ofthe-art performance-by a significant margin-demonstrating
superior generalization to novel classes and robustness
across diverse scenarios. The source code is available at
https://github.com/aminpdik/DSV-LFS

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown remarkable success in
learning visual features from large labeled datasets [8, 11,
37–39]. However, their ability to generalize to new classes
diminishes when only a limited labeled data is available.
Few-shot learning [10, 43, 49] addresses this limitation by
enabling models to learn effectively from a small number of

4584

