This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICP: Immediate Compensation Pruning for Mid-to-high Sparsity
S.Kevin Zhou1,2,3,4 *
Xin Luo1,2
Xueming Fu1,2
Zihang Jiang1,2 *
1
School of Biomedical Engineering, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, USTC
2
MIRACLE Center, Suzhou Institute for Advance Research, USTC
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of CAS, ICT, CAS
4
State Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC
{luoxin ustc, xuemingfu, jzh0103}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{s.kevin.zhou}@gmail.com

Abstract

sion is necessary to further reduce their size for deployment.
Moreover, on a single desktop-class GPU, it is typically
only feasible to perform inference with these models, while
fine-tuning remains impractical due to hardware limitations.
Pruning is a critical model compression technique, often categorized into multi-shot and one-shot methods based
on pruning frequency. Traditional iterative pruning methods, based on the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis [6], involve
an iterative prune-and-finetune process to gradually identify a sparse subnetwork that performs comparably to the
original model, thereby reducing the number of model parameters. Classic methods like magnitude pruning [8] and
more recent approaches such as LLM-Pruner [18], which
utilizes block pruning with LoRA [11] fine-tuning, adhere
to this hypothesis. However, for large models, global finetuning is resource-intensive, demanding significant GPU
memory. Although LLM-Pruner reduces memory requirements using LoRA, it still requires storage for intermediate results and gradients, while methods like LLM Surgeon [30], despite avoiding global fine-tuning, also demand
substantial memory and time due to the use of second-order
derivatives. In contrast, one-shot pruning methods have
gained traction by minimizing memory usage during finetuning. SparseGPT [7] avoids global fine-tuning by compensating for precision within each basic layer, thus accelerating the pruning process. Wanda [27] further simplifies this by eliminating compensation altogether, using
a unique significance score to achieve performance comparable to SparseGPT without the need for fine-tuning. PruneZero[4] constructs an operator search space by combining
input, output, and gradient operations to optimize model
metrics. While, it requires multiple full inferences across
models, which is computationally expensive. In memoryconstrained settings, chunked model loading further exacerbates the inference time.
However, both SparseGPT and Wanda have notable limitations. (i) While these methods perform well at lower

The increasing adoption of large-scale models under 7 billion parameters in both language and vision domains enables inference tasks on a single consumer-grade GPU but
makes fine-tuning models of this scale, especially 7B models, challenging. This limits the applicability of pruning
methods that require full fine-tuning. Meanwhile, pruning
methods that do not require fine-tuning perform well at low
sparsity levels (10%-50%) but struggle at mid-to-high sparsity levels (50%-70%), where the error behaves equivalently
to that of semi-structured pruning. To address these issues,
this paper introduces ICP, which finds a balance between
full fine-tuning and zero fine-tuning. First, Sparsity Rearrange is used to reorganize the predefined sparsity levels,
followed by Block-wise Compensate Pruning, which alternates pruning and compensation on the model’s backbone,
fully utilizing inference results while avoiding full model
fine-tuning. Experiments show that ICP improves performance at mid-to-high sparsity levels compared to baselines,
with only a slight increase in pruning time and no additional
peak memory overhead.

1. Introduction
Introduction of Transformer [5, 31] propelled both language
and vision models toward larger scales, leading to the development of high-performance models such as the OPT [37]
and Llama [17, 28, 29] series for language tasks, and the
SAM [13] series for vision tasks. However, their large scale
presents significant deployment challenges. In scenarios
with downstream tasks or hardware constraints, models under 8 billion (8B) parameters for language tasks and under
650 million parameters for vision tasks are most commonly
used [12, 14, 16, 34, 36]. Nevertheless, model compres* Corresponding author.

9487

