This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MUSt3R: Multi-view Network for Stereo 3D Reconstruction
Yohann Cabon∗
Lucas Stoffl†
Leonid Antsfeld∗
Gabriela Csurka∗
Boris Chidlovskii∗
Jerome Revaud∗
Vincent Leroy∗
∗
†
Naver Labs Europe
EPFL
firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

lucas.stoffl@epfl.ch

Abstract
DUSt3R introduced a novel paradigm in geometric computer vision by proposing a model that can provide dense
and unconstrained Stereo 3D Reconstruction of arbitrary
image collections with no prior information about camera
calibration nor viewpoint poses. Under the hood, however,
DUSt3R processes image pairs, regressing local 3D reconstructions that need to be aligned in a global coordinate
system. The number of pairs, growing quadratically, is an
inherent limitation that becomes especially concerning for
robust and fast optimization in the case of large image collections. In this paper, we propose an extension of DUSt3R
from pairs to multiple views, that addresses all aforementioned concerns. Indeed, we propose a Multi-view Network
for Stereo 3D Reconstruction, or MUSt3R, that modifies the
DUSt3R architecture by making it symmetric and extending
it to directly predict 3D structure for all views in a common coordinate frame. Second, we entail the model with a
multi-layer memory mechanism which allows to reduce the
computational complexity and to scale the reconstruction to
large collections, inferring thousands of 3D pointmaps at
high frame-rates with limited added complexity. The framework is designed to perform 3D reconstruction both offline
and online, and hence can be seamlessly applied to SfM
and visual SLAM scenarios showing state-of-the-art performance on various 3D downstream tasks, including uncalibrated Visual Odometry, relative camera pose, scale and
focal estimation, 3D reconstruction and multi-view depth
estimation.

Figure 1. Qualitative example of MUSt3R reconstructions of
Aachen Day-Night [82] nexus4 sequence 5 (offline, top) and
TUM-RGBD [56] Freiburg1-room sequence (online, bottom).
More qualitative examples can be found in the Supplementary.

mapping between pixels and 3D points, it effectively relaxes the hard constraints of usual projective camera models. The pointmap representation, now used in subsequent
works [18, 30], encompasses both 3D geometry and the
camera parameters, and allows to unify and jointly solve
various 3D vision tasks such as depth, camera pose and
focal length estimation, dense 3D reconstruction and pixel
correspondences. Trained from millions of image pairs with
ground-truth annotations for depth and camera parameters,
DUSt3R shows unprecedented performance and generalization across various real-world scenarios with different camera sensors in zero-shot settings.
Such architecture works seamlessly in monocular and
binocular cases, yet when feeding many images, the pair-

1. Introduction
Recently, DUSt3R [69] introduced a novel paradigm in
geometric computer vision. In a nutshell, it can provide
dense and unconstrained Stereo 3D Reconstruction of arbitrary image collections, i.e. without any prior information about camera calibration nor viewpoint poses. By casting the pairwise reconstruction problem as a regression of
pairs of pointmaps, where a pointmap is defined as a dense

1050

