This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noise Modeling in One Hour: Minimizing Preparation Efforts for
Self-supervised Low-Light RAW Image Denoising
Feiran Li
Sony Research

Haiyang Jiang*
Tokyo University

1. Introduction
Noise, as a key factor influencing image quality, becomes
more pronounced in low-light conditions due to the reduced
signal-to-noise ratio. Compared to standard RGB images [1–
3], denoising in the unprocessed RAW domain shows great
potential as it retains the primitive noise characteristics and
preserves more information owing to the higher bit-depth.
Although learning-based approaches trained with real-world
noisy-clean image pairs have made significant progress in
RAW image denoising [4–7], their practicality is severely
limited by the need for collecting paired data. As a result,
self-supervised denoising methods based on noise synthesis
have gained increasing attention recently [8–12].
Precise noise generation is typically achieved through
sensor-specific modeling, encompassing two steps: signaldependent and signal-independent noise synthesis. However,
these steps often require extensive human intervention and
* Work done during an internship in Sony Research.

System gain calibration for
shot noise (hours to days)

Signal-independent noise collection
(~one hour) and profiling ( ≥one day)
NN profile

Dist. profile

Existing
works

Noise samples

Fully required

Fully required

Ours

Noise synthesis is a promising solution for addressing
the data shortage problem in data-driven low-light RAW
image denoising. However, accurate noise synthesis methods often necessitate labor-intensive calibration and profiling procedures during preparation, preventing them from
landing to practice at scale. This work introduces a practically simple noise synthesis pipeline based on detailed
analyses of noise properties and extensive justification of
widespread techniques. Compared to other approaches, our
proposed pipeline eliminates the cumbersome system gain
calibration and signal-independent noise profiling steps, reducing the preparation time for noise synthesis from days
to hours. Meanwhile, our method exhibits strong denoising performance, showing an up to 0.54dB PSNR improvement over the current state-of-the-art noise synthesis technique. Code is released at https://github.com/
SonyResearch/raw_image_denoising

Common preparation steps

Abstract

Daisuke Iso
Sony Research

Not required

Collection only

Figure 1. Comparing preparation efforts for noise synthesis. While
existing methods typically spend hours to days on preparation,
our pipeline requires collecting dark frames only, which is a fully
automatic process and finishable within even one hour.

involve complex procedures. As illustrated in Fig. 1, synthesizing signal-dependent noise demands system gain calibration under controlled lighting conditions, costing up to days
for hardware setup (e.g., protocol camera boards or irregularshaped devices like endoscopies may require customizing
mounting modules). Meanwhile, signal-independent noise
synthesis leads to noise profiling, necessitating careful justification of statistical distributions [10, 12], and even the training of intermediate profiling neural networks [9, 11, 13, 14].
Consequently, deploying self-supervised RAW image denoising at scale remains resource-intensive.
In this work, we seek to develop a noise synthesis pipeline
that, while retaining effective denoising performance, is as
simple as possible for practical deployment. To achieve this,
we analyze in detail the properties of photon shot noise and
demonstrate that it can be adequately synthesized via hypothesizing quantum efficiencies. We also carefully justify
the typical efforts spent on signal-independent noise synthesis and propose to omit any unnecessary steps therein,
such as explicit noise profiling and bit-depth expansion. We
summarize our key contributions as follows:

5699

