This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-XL:
Extra-Long Vision Language Model for Hour-Scale Video Understanding
Yan Shu1,2 * Zheng Liu2,6*† Peitian Zhang2,3 Minghao Qin2,4
Junjie Zhou2,5 Zhengyang Liang2 Tiejun Huang2,7 Bo Zhao1,2†
1

2

School of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

BAAI

3

RUC

4

CAS

5

BUPT

6

PolyU

7

PKU

https://github.com/VectorSpaceLab/Video-XL

Abstract

1. Introduction

Long video understanding poses a significant challenge
for current Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs).
Notably, the MLLMs are constrained by their limited context lengths and the substantial costs while processing long
videos. Although several existing methods attempt to reduce visual tokens, their strategies encounter severe bottleneck, restricting MLLMs’ ability to perceive fine-grained
visual details. In this work, we propose Video-XL, a novel
approach that leverages MLLMs’ inherent key-value (KV)
sparsification capacity to condense the visual input. Specifically, we introduce a new special token, the Visual Summarization Token (VST), for each interval of the video, which
summarizes the visual information within the interval as
its associated KV. The VST module is trained by instruction fine-tuning, where two optimizing strategies are offered.
1. Curriculum learning, where VST learns to make small
(easy) and large compression (hard) progressively. 2. Composite data curation, which integrates single-image, multiimage, and synthetic data to overcome the scarcity of longvideo instruction data. The compression quality is further
improved by dynamic compression, which customizes compression granularity based on the information density of
different video intervals. Video-XL’s effectiveness is verified from three aspects. First, it achieves a superior longvideo understanding capability, outperforming state-of-theart models of comparable sizes across multiple popular
benchmarks. Second, it effectively preserves video information, with minimal compression loss even at 16× compression ratio. Third, it realizes outstanding cost-effectiveness,
enabling high-quality processing of thousands of frames on
a single A100 GPU.

* Equal contribution.
† Correspondence

to
<bo.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn>
<zhengliu1026@gmail.com>

Figure 1. Video-XL achieves state-of-the-art results across several
video benchmarks, surpassing other models of comparable sizes.

and

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have attracted widespread attention from the AI community. By
augmenting large language models (LLMs) [34, 35, 42]
with vision encoders, MLLMs are enabled to perform various vision-language modeling tasks, e.g., image captioning
and visual question answering [15, 23, 28]. Recently, there
has been growing interest in applying MLLMs for video understanding given MLLMs’ proficiency in comprehending
and reasoning over visual information [9, 16, 18, 38, 52].
However, it remains a significant challenge for the existing MLLMs to process long videos due to their limited context lengths and the huge costs involved. Particularly, a long
video consists of a long sequence of frames, where each
frame usually consumes a large number of visual tokens
for MLLMs to perceive (e.g., 144 tokens per frame). As
a result, the input may easily exceed the limits of MLLMs’
context lengths. Even if the context lengths can be extended
sufficiently, it will still take considerable computation and
memory costs to process long videos, making it challenging in real-world scenarios. Recently, many studies have attempted to reduce the token count from the visual encoder
for each frame [10, 18, 32, 41, 45]. While these approaches

26160

