This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Change3D: Revisiting Change Detection and Captioning from A Video Modeling
Perspective
Duowang Zhu1 , Xiaohu Huang2 , Haiyan Huang1 , Hao Zhou3 , and Zhenfeng Shao1 *
1
Wuhan University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Bytedance
https://zhuduowang.github.io/Change3D

Abstract

Image Encoder

Video Encoder

Change Extractor

Decoder

40

70

AMTNet

In this paper, we present Change3D, a framework that
reconceptualizes the change detection and captioning tasks
through video modeling. Recent methods have achieved
remarkable success by regarding each pair of bi-temporal
images as separate frames. They employ a shared-weight
image encoder to extract spatial features and then use a
change extractor to capture differences between the two
images. However, image feature encoding, being a taskagnostic process, cannot attend to changed regions effectively. Furthermore, different change extractors designed
for various change detection and captioning tasks make
it difficult to have a unified framework. To tackle these
challenges, Change3D regards the bi-temporal images as
comprising two frames akin to a tiny video. By integrating learnable perception frames between the bi-temporal
images, a video encoder enables the perception frames to
interact with the images directly and perceive their differences. Therefore, we can get rid of the intricate change extractors, providing a unified framework for different change
detection and captioning tasks. We verify Change3D on
multiple tasks, encompassing change detection (including binary change detection, semantic change detection,
and building damage assessment) and change captioning,
across eight standard benchmarks. Without bells and whistles, this simple yet effective framework can achieve superior performance with an ultra-light video model comprising only ∼6%-13% of the parameters and ∼8%-34% of the
FLOPs compared to state-of-the-art methods. We hope that
Change3D could be an alternative to 2D-based models and
facilitate future research.

ChangeMask
Bi-SRNet
DEFO
ChangeOS-R101
DamFormer
SEN
Change3D (Ours)
0

10

20

30

50

60

80

Number of Parameters (M)

Figure 1. The parameter distribution in existing change detection
and captioning methods indicates most parameters focused on image encoding, with few allocated to change extraction. This imbalance suggests an insufficient emphasis on task-related parameter learning. In contrast, our approach primarily focuses on video
encoding, a task-specific process that effectively extracts changes.

1. Introduction

to track and analyze changes on the Earth’s surface over
time [63]. It has been widely applied in various applications such as damage assessment [8, 86], urban planning
[74], arable land protection [55], and environmental management [38]. Existing studies have explored various 2D
models for bi-temporal change detection and captioning
modeling, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)based [24, 79, 85, 88], Transformer-based [1, 8, 48, 83],
and their hybrid models [7, 50, 88]. As shown in Fig. 2
(a), most of the methods typically follow such a paradigm:
(1) A pair of bi-temporal images are treated as distinct inputs, processing each image individually through a sharedweight image encoder (e.g., ResNet [29], UNet [64], Swin
Transformer [52]) for spatial feature extraction. (2) Then,
a well-designed change extractor, primarily leveraging attention mechanisms [70] like cross-attention [5] or spatialchannel attention [78], is introduced for bi-temporal feature
interaction to detect the differences between them. (3) Finally, a decoder is employed to restore the feature map to
its original resolution.
While encouraging results have been observed, these

Change detection and captioning play a crucial role in the
remote sensing field, employing pairs of bi-temporal images taken from the same geographic area at different times
* Corresponding author: shaozhenfeng@whu.edu.cn.

24011

