This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StarGen: A Spatiotemporal Autoregression Framework with Video Diffusion
Model for Scalable and Controllable Scene Generation
Shangjin Zhai1∗ , Zhichao Ye1∗ , Jialin Liu1 , Weijian Xie1 , Jiaqi Hu1 , Zhen Peng1 , Hua Xue1 ,
Danpeng Chen2,3 , Xiaomeng Wang1 , Lei Yang1 , Nan Wang1 , Haomin Liu1† , Guofeng Zhang2†
1

SenseTime Research

2

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

3

Tetras.AI

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method: (a) We introduce a spatiotemporal autoregression framework for long-range scene generation.
The generated scene is represented as a set of sparsely sampled posed images. The generation of the current sliding window of images (blue
dotted box) is conditioned on spatially adjacent images (green frustums) and temporally overlapping image (blue solid box). (b) Spatial
conditioning images are processed by a large reconstruction model, which extracts the 3D information and renders the reconstructed latent
features to each novel view. These spatial features, together with the temporal conditioning image, are used to condition the generation of
the current window through a video diffusion model and a ControlNet. (c) The framework is used to implement three downstream tasks,
including sparse view interpolation, perpetual view generation, and layout-conditioned city generation.

Abstract
Recent advances in large reconstruction and generative
models have signiﬁcantly improved scene reconstruction
and novel view generation. However, due to compute limitations, each inference with these large models is conﬁned to a
small area, making long-range consistent scene generation
challenging. To address this, we propose StarGen, a novel
framework that employs a pre-trained video diffusion model
in an autoregressive manner for long-range scene generation. The generation of each video clip is conditioned on
the 3D warping of spatially adjacent images and the tem∗ indicates equal contribution.

† indicates corresponding author.

This work was partially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2023YFF0905104) and NSF of China
(No. 62425209).

26822

porally overlapping image from previously generated clips,
improving spatiotemporal consistency in long-range scene
generation with precise pose control. The spatiotemporal
condition is compatible with various input conditions, facilitating diverse tasks, including sparse view interpolation,
perpetual view generation, and layout-conditioned city generation. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate StarGen’s superior scalability, ﬁdelity, and pose accuracy compared to state-of-the-art methods. Project page:
https://zju3dv.github.io/StarGen.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid development of large models has
driven signiﬁcant progress in 3D reconstruction and generation, with the two ﬁelds increasingly intertwining and
complementing each other. On the reconstruction side,
the emergence of large reconstruction models [30, 70, 75]
has successfully reduced the reliance on dense multi-view

