This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask-Adapter: The Devil is in the Masks for Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
Yongkang Li⋆ , Tianheng Cheng⋆ , Bin Feng, Wenyu Liu, Xinggang Wang†
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
{liyk, thch, fengbin, liuwy, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn

80

Abstract

70
60

Recent open-vocabulary segmentation methods adopt mask
generators to predict segmentation masks and leverage pretrained vision-language models, e.g., CLIP, to classify these
masks via mask pooling. Although these approaches show
promising results, it is counterintuitive that accurate masks
often fail to yield accurate classification results through
pooling CLIP image embeddings within the mask regions.
In this paper, we reveal the performance limitations of mask
pooling and introduce Mask-Adapter, a simple yet effective
method to address these challenges in open-vocabulary segmentation. Compared to directly using proposal masks, our
proposed Mask-Adapter extracts semantic activation maps
from proposal masks, providing richer contextual information and ensuring alignment between masks and CLIP. Additionally, we propose a mask consistency loss that encourages proposal masks with similar IoUs to obtain similar
CLIP embeddings to enhance models’ robustness to varying predicted masks. Mask-Adapter integrates seamlessly
into open-vocabulary segmentation methods based on mask
pooling in a plug-and-play manner, delivering more accurate classification results. Extensive experiments across
several zero-shot benchmarks demonstrate significant performance gains for the proposed Mask-Adapter on several
well-established methods. Notably, Mask-Adapter also extends effectively to SAM and achieves impressive results
on several open-vocabulary segmentation datasets. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
hustvl/MaskAdapter.

50
40
30

Accuracy
mIoU

66.7
53.1
43.4

40.1
25.6

31.4

20
10
0
Mask Cropping

Mask Pooling

Mask-Adapter

Figure 1. Upper bound analysis of mask embedding extraction methods. Using ADE20K [52] ground-truth masks as input, we evaluate the upper bound of different extraction methods.
Although mask cropping and mask pooling show limited performance with ground-truth masks, our Mask-Adapter significantly
enhances the upper bound for open-vocabulary segmentation.

1. Introduction

limiting their applicability in open-world scenarios. Openvocabulary segmentation (OVS) has expanded traditional
image segmentation from fixed-set to open-set, enabling
the segmentation of categories not appeared in the training set. In contrast to fixed-category segmentation, openvocabulary segmentation not only supports open-set segmentation but also enables challenging segmentation based
on arbitrary text inputs, e.g., categories and descriptions.
Recent research tackles open-vocabulary segmentation
by leveraging pre-trained vision-language models, e.g.,
CLIP [30] and ALIGN [17], which are pre-trained on largescale image-text pairs and have strong zero-shot recognition capabilities. Notably, several works [10, 16, 19,
23, 32, 44, 46, 48], such as SimpleBaseline [44] and FCCLIP [48], follow a segment-then-recognize paradigm for
open-vocabulary segmentation, which adopts mask generators to predict proposal masks from images and then classify the proposal masks by transferring the zero-shot recognition capability from the frozen CLIP. Recognizing segmentation masks is primarily achieved by extracting mask
embeddings through the CLIP visual encoder and matching them with text embeddings. Specifically, the mask
embeddings can be obtained in two ways: (1) mask cropping [10, 23, 44]: cropping the segmented region from

Image segmentation, which aims to assign each pixel a label from a predefined set of categories, has seen significant advancements. Despite the success of numerous image
segmentation approaches [5–7, 35, 38, 42, 51], these approaches cannot segment categories unseen during training,
⋆ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Xinggang Wang

14998

