This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Sparse Signal to Smooth Motion: Real-Time Motion Generation with
Rolling Prediction Models
German Barquero1,2,3 , Nadine Bertsch1 , Manojkumar Marramreddy1 , Carlos Chacón1 , Filippo Arcadu1
Ferran Rigual1 , Nicky Sijia He1 , Cristina Palmero2,4 , Sergio Escalera2,3 , Yuting Ye1 , Robin Kips1
1

Meta Reality Labs, 2 Universitat de Barcelona, 3 Computer Vision Center, 4 King’s College London
https://barquerogerman.github.io/RPM/

Figure 1. We introduce Rolling Prediction Model, an approach that generates smooth and realistic full-body human motion in the two of
the most common XR sensing signals: hand controllers, in which the tracking signal is always available (left), and hand tracking, in which
the tracking signal is noisy and might be lost for long periods of time (right). Tracking input trajectories are shown as magenta lines.

Abstract

people using motion controllers (spatially sparse) and hand
tracking (spatially and temporally sparse). We benchmark
RPM against the state of the art on both synthetic data and
GORP to highlight how we can bridge the gap for realworld applications with a realistic dataset and by handling
unreliable input signals. Our code, pretrained models, and
GORP dataset are available in the project webpage.

In extended reality (XR), generating full-body motion of the
users is important to understand their actions, drive their
virtual avatars for social interaction, and convey a realistic
sense of presence. While prior works focused on spatially
sparse and always-on input signals from motion controllers,
many XR applications opt for vision-based hand tracking
for reduced user friction and better immersion. Compared
to controllers, hand tracking signals are less accurate and
can even be missing for an extended period of time. To handle such unreliable inputs, we present Rolling Prediction
Model (RPM), an online and real-time approach that generates smooth full-body motion from temporally and spatially sparse input signals. Our model generates 1) accurate motion that matches the inputs (i.e., tracking mode)
and 2) plausible motion when inputs are missing (i.e., synthesis mode). More importantly, RPM generates seamless
transitions from tracking to synthesis, and vice versa. To
demonstrate the practical importance of handling noisy and
missing inputs, we present GORP, the first dataset of realistic sparse inputs from a commercial virtual reality (VR)
headset with paired high quality body motion ground truth.
GORP provides >14 hours of VR gameplay data from 28

1. Introduction
We are witnessing an explosion of extended reality (XR)
applications in recent years [5, 44]. Whether in a fully immersive virtual world, or in augmented reality (AR), being aware of the users’ full-body motion is critical to understand their interactions with the world and other people. However, the users’ full-body motion can only be inferred from spatially-sparse egocentric sensing signal from
Inertial Measurements Units (IMU) or SLAM. Prior works
achieved good results assuming the input signals are always
available and reliable [11, 12, 15, 20, 59]. While this is
mostly true for motion controllers (MC), it does not apply
to the frequent and more user-friendly hand tracking (HT)
setup. In this mode, hand occlusions are frequent, leading to
missing hand signals as in Fig. 1. During such sensing sig-

1850

