This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoT-VLA: Visual Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for
Vision-Language-Action Models

Zhuoyang Zhang3
Ankur Handa1

Qingqing Zhao1,2,* Yao Lu1 Moo Jin Kim2 Zipeng Fu2
Yecheng Wu1,3 Zhaoshuo Li1 Qianli Ma1 Song Han1,3 Chelsea Finn2
†
†
†
†
Tsung-Yi Lin1
Gordon Wetzstein2
Ming-Yu Liu1
Donglai Xiang1
1

NVIDIA

2

Stanford University

3

MIT

Abstract
Vision-language-action models (VLAs) have shown potential
in leveraging pretrained vision-language models and diverse
robot demonstrations for learning generalizable sensorimotor control. While this paradigm effectively utilizes largescale data from both robotic and non-robotic sources, current VLAs primarily focus on direct input–output mappings,
lacking the intermediate reasoning steps crucial for complex
manipulation tasks. As a result, existing VLAs lack temporal planning or reasoning capabilities. In this paper, we
introduce a method that incorporates explicit visual chain-ofthought (CoT) reasoning into vision-language-action models
(VLAs) by predicting future image frames autoregressively
as visual goals before generating a short action sequence
to achieve these goals. We introduce CoT-VLA, a state-ofthe-art 7B VLA that can understand and generate visual and
action tokens. Our experimental results demonstrate that
CoT-VLA achieves strong performance, outperforming the
state-of-the-art VLA model by 17% in real-world manipulation tasks and 6% in simulation benchmarks. Videos are
available at: https://cot-vla.github.io/.
Figure 1. Comparison between vanilla VLA and CoT-VLA
frameworks. Prior VLA models (top) directly predict robot actions from task inputs without explicit reasoning steps and only
use action-annotated robot demonstration data for training. Unlike
vanilla VLAs, CoT-VLA (bottom) can also leverage action-less
datasets like EPIC-KITCHEN-100 [27] to enhance subgoal image
generation ability, unlocking the potential of using abundant unlabeled video data to improve VLA’s visual reasoning capability.
CoT-VLA first generates a subgoal image as an intermediate reasoning step, and then generate a short action sequence to achieve
the subgoal. We outline the robot arm for better visualization.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in robot learning have demonstrated impressive progress in training policies that can act across diverse
tasks and environments [1, 5, 12, 14, 18, 29, 36, 44, 45,
48, 54, 59, 63, 66, 70, 76, 78]. One promising direction is
vision-language-action (VLA) models, which leverage the
rich understanding capabilities of pretrained vision-language
models (VLMs) to map natural language instructions and
visual observations to robot actions [12, 29, 48]. By training
VLMs on robot demonstrations, VLAs inherit their ability to
understand diverse scenes, objects, and natural language in-

structions, leading to better generalization capabilities when
fine-tuned for downstream testing scenarios. While these approaches have shown impressive results, they typically map

* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
† Equal Advising

1702

