This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Scene Modeling:
Narrowing the Gap Between Supervised and Self-Supervised Learning
in 3D Scene Understanding
Pedro Hermosilla
TU Wien

Christian Stippel
TU Wien

Leon Sick
Ulm University

Figure 1. Self-Supervised Feature Visualization using PCA. We reduce the point features obtained with our self-supervised model to
three dimensions using PCA and visualize them as colors. Features learned by our model are semantic-aware, which is visible from the
color separation: Similar objects result in similar features, such as the sofas in the first figure or the chairs in the last one, while different
objects result in different features, such as the counter and the tables in the second image or the crib and the curtains in the third one.

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has transformed 2D computer vision by enabling models trained on large, unannotated
datasets to provide versatile off-the-shelf features that perform similarly to models trained with labels. However,
in 3D scene understanding, self-supervised methods are
typically only used as a weight initialization step for
task-specific fine-tuning, limiting their utility for generalpurpose feature extraction. This paper addresses this shortcoming by proposing a robust evaluation protocol specifically designed to assess the quality of self-supervised features for 3D scene understanding. Our protocol uses multiresolution feature sampling of hierarchical models to create rich point-level representations that capture the semantic capabilities of the model and, hence, are suitable for
evaluation with linear probing and nearest-neighbor methods. Furthermore, we introduce the first self-supervised
model that performs similarly to supervised models when
only off-the-shelf features are used in a linear probing setup.
In particular, our model is trained natively in 3D with a
novel self-supervised approach based on a Masked Scene
Modeling objective, which reconstructs deep features of
masked patches in a bottom-up manner and is specifically
tailored to hierarchical 3D models. Our experiments not

only demonstrate that our method achieves competitive performance to supervised models, but also surpasses existing
self-supervised approaches by a large margin. The model
and training code can be found at our Github repository.

1. Introduction

14835

2D self-supervised models, such as DINOv2 [19], have become an integral part of modern computer vision. These
models are typically pre-trained on large unlabeled datasets,
providing task-agnostic features that can be used off-theshelf to solve any computer vision task without the need
for fine-tuning, making them particularly useful in scenarios with limited data [10]. In contrast to 2D computer vision, the field of 3D scene understanding lacks comparable
models. Instead, it relies on consolidating features from 2D
foundation models into 3D [18, 21, 30] or using them in a
2D-3D knowledge distillation setup [7, 44, 47].
Although this is still an emerging field, self-supervised
methods for processing 3D scenes have started to gain traction, with several approaches emerging in recent years [14,
32, 33, 35, 36, 40]. Some of these methods incorporate
Masked Image Modelling (MIM) objectives [13, 19, 38, 46]
in their 3D scene-based frameworks [33, 40], where the

