This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unbiased Video Scene Graph Generation via Visual and Semantic Dual
Debiasing
Yanjun Li1† , Zhaoyang Li1 , Honghui Chen2 , Lizhi Xu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
College of Physics and Information Engineering, Fuzhou University
ballinli@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lizhaoyang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chh5840996@gmail.com
xulizhi@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Corresponding Author

(a)

person

Low Visual Intensity

Encoder

glass

(b)

High Visual Intensity

person

Decoder

holding (wrong)

Relation Generator

food (wrong)

visual representation

visual
representation
semantic
representation
Hierarchical Multimodal
Fusion Module

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) [22] constructs structured scene representations by identifying objects and
their relationships as triplets (<subject, predicate,
object>). This structure enables various downstream
tasks [7, 10, 14, 27], highlighting SGG as a pivotal area
in computer vision. Initially applied to static images
(ImgSGG) [36], SGG has been extended to video data
(VidSGG) [3] to model dynamic interactions over time.
However, VidSGG faces challenges due to biases favoring
overrepresented classes, leading to the underrepresentation
of rare classes.
Recent methods have adopted attention-based strategies
to address class imbalance and mitigate classification biases [23, 25]. However, these approaches, primarily relying
on learnable attention layers, often amplify biases towards

……

(wrong)

Encoder

person food

accurate
visual representation
……

Video Scene Graph Generation (VidSGG) aims to capture
dynamic relationships among entities by sequentially analyzing video frames and integrating visual and semantic
information. However, VidSGG is challenged by significant biases that skew predictions. To mitigate these biases, we propose a VIsual and Semantic Awareness (VISA)
framework for unbiased VidSGG. VISA addresses visual
bias through memory-enhanced temporal integration that
enhances object representations and concurrently reduces
semantic bias by iteratively integrating object features with
comprehensive semantic information derived from triplet
relationships. This visual-semantics dual debiasing approach results in more unbiased representations of complex
scene dynamics. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, where VISA outperforms existing unbiased VidSGG approaches by a substantial margin
(e.g., +13.1% improvement in mR@20 and mR@50 for the
SGCLS task under Semi Constraint).

Encoder

Concatenate

visual representation

Inter-frame
Enhancement

Abstract

†

(c)

Decoder

Encoder

Relation Generator

×N

predicate
distribution

scene graphs

person
drinking
from

Hierarchical
Semantic
Extractor

glass

(d)

scene graphs

predicate
distribution

Figure 1. Framework Comparison. We identify visual and semantic biases in VidSGG. Figures (a) and (c) show that prior methods rely on weak visual features and limited context, leading to
inaccurate attention maps and skewed predicate distributions. In
(b) and (d), our memory-enhanced visual debiasing and iterative
semantic fusion mitigate both biases, resulting in stronger feature
representations and more balanced predicate outcomes.

19047

high-frequency classes [12]. To overcome this limitation,
alternative methods have been proposed [12, 18] aiming
to reduce spurious correlations and better account for label correlations. Although these methods alleviate bias to
some extent, they often fall short of achieving the desired
performance. A key oversight of these approaches is their
heavy reliance on debiasing techniques, which neglect the

