This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Code-as-Monitor: Constraint-aware Visual Programming for
Reactive and Proactive Robotic Failure Detection
Enshen Zhou1,3 *, Qi Su2,3,4 *, Cheng Chi3 * †,
Zhizheng Zhang , Zhongyuan Wang3 , Tiejun Huang2,3 , Lu Sheng1†, He Wang2,3,4†
4

1

Beihang University

zhouenshen@buaa.edu.cn

2

Peking University

3

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

chicheng15@mails.ucas.ac.cn

lsheng@buaa.edu.cn

4

Galbot

hewang@pku.edu.cn

Task: Move the pan with the lobster to the stove, and be careful not to let the lobster drop out.

Lobster

Stove

Pan
jump out

(a) Reactive Failure Detection

(b) Proactive Failure Detection

(c) Real-world Test

Figure 1. For the task “Move the pan with lobster to the stove without losing the lobster”, (a) reactive failure detection identifies failures
after they occur, and (b) proactive failure detection prevents foreseeable failures. In (a), at  t^R_4  , the robot detects the failure after the lobster
unpredictably jumps out due to the heat. In (b), pan tilting is detected at  t^P_3  and corrected it at  t^{P'}_3  , requiring real-time precision. We
formulate both tasks as spatio-temporal constraint satisfaction problems, leveraging our proposed constraint elements for precise, real-time
checking. For example, in (a), a large relative distance between pan and lobster indicates failure; in (b), a large angle between the pan and
the horizontal plane needs correction. (c) shows that our method combined with an open-loop policy forms a closed-loop system, enabling
proactive (e.g., detecting moving glass during grasping) and reactive (e.g., removing toy after grasping) failure detection in cluttered scenes.

Abstract

ments. This approach offers greater generality, simplifies
tracking, and facilitates constraint-aware visual programming by leveraging these elements as visual prompts. Experiments show that CaM achieves a 28.7% higher success rate and reduces execution time by 31.8% under severe disturbances compared to baselines across three simulators and a real-world setting. Moreover, CaM can be
integrated with open-loop control policies to form closedloop systems, enabling long-horizon tasks in cluttered
scenes with dynamic environments. See the project page
at https://zhoues.github.io/Code-as-Monitor.

Automatic detection and prevention of open-set failures
are crucial in closed-loop robotic systems. Recent studies often struggle to simultaneously identify unexpected
failures reactively after they occur and prevent foreseeable ones proactively. To this end, we propose Code-asMonitor (CaM), a novel paradigm leveraging the visionlanguage model (VLM) for both open-set reactive and
proactive failure detection. The core of our method is to
formulate both tasks as a unified set of spatio-temporal
constraint satisfaction problems and use VLM-generated
code to evaluate them for real-time monitoring. To enhance the accuracy and efficiency of monitoring, we further introduce constraint elements that abstract constraintrelated entities or their parts into compact geometric ele∗ Equal contribution

1. Introduction
As expectations grow for robots to handle long-horizon
tasks within intricate environments, failures are unavoidable. Therefore, automatically detecting and preventing
those failures plays a vital role in ensuring the tasks can

† Corresponding author

6919

