This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auto-Encoded Supervision for Perceptual Image Super-Resolution
MinKyu Lee, Sangeek Hyun, Woojin Jun, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{bluelati98, hsi1032, junwoojin, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract
This work tackles the fidelity objective in the perceptual
super-resolution (SR) task. Specifically, we address the
shortcomings of pixel-level Lp loss (Lpix ) in the GAN-based
SR framework. Since Lpix is known to have a trade-off
relationship against perceptual quality, prior methods often multiply a small scale factor or utilize low-pass filters.
However, this work shows that these circumventions fail to
address the fundamental factor that induces blurring. Accordingly, we focus on two points: 1) precisely discriminating the subcomponent of Lpix that contributes to blurring, and 2) only guiding based on the factor that is free
from this trade-off relationship. We show that they can be
achieved in a surprisingly simple manner, with an AutoEncoder (AE) pretrained with Lpix . Accordingly, we propose the Auto-Encoded Supervision for Optimal Penalization loss (LAESOP ), a novel loss function that measures distance in the AE space 1 , instead of the raw pixel space. By
simply substituting Lpix with LAESOP , we can provide effective reconstruction guidance without compromising perceptual quality. Designed for simplicity, our method enables
easy integration into existing SR frameworks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of AESOP.

1. Introduction
Image Super-Resolution is a fundamental challenge in image processing, where the goal is to reconstruct an unknown
high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR)
counterpart. Recent advances in this field have branched
into two distinct mainstreams; fidelity-oriented SR and
perceptual quality oriented SR (perceptual SR). Fidelityoriented SR methods aim for high fidelity towards the HR
image on a pixel-wise basis. These methods generally adopt
the per-pixel reconstruction loss Lpix (i.e., pixel-level Lp
loss), thereby regressing the unique point that minimizes the
expected error. This unique point of minimum expected error is known as the average point over multiple plausible
solutions [31], which we will refer to as the optimal fidelity

point (brown dot in Fig.1.(a)) throughout this work. Another
branch of research is the perceptual SR task where the emphasis is on generating visually plausible SR images rather
than mere minimum pixel-wise error. Notably, the inherent
ill-posedness leads perceptual SR to exhibit a range of variant realistic solutions (multiple purple points in Fig.1.(a)),
each pivotal to the aforementioned optimal fidelity point.
Here, the representative framework in perceptual SR is
the SRGAN-based [30] framework, which utilizes perceptual quality oriented losses [22, 54] together with Lpix , the
de facto training scheme. Yet, since these methods rely on
Lpix as their fidelity loss term, they cannot avoid the blurring
phenomenon as shown in the perception-distortion (PD)
trade-off [2]. To address this, they either apply a small coefficient [30, 54] to Lpix or use low-pass filters (LPF) [11, 69]
before calculating Lpix . However, we point out that these
circumventions result in suboptimal performance, as they
misinterpret the implications of Lpix and fail to distinguish
between factors that cause blurring and those that do not.
Accordingly, this work revisits Lpix and aims to correctly
analyze the implications of it, by introducing two key factors of an SR image: 1) the perceptual variance factor, and
2) the fidelity bias factor. Here, the perceptual variance is a
necessary variance that captures realistic textures and fine
details (red line in Fig.1.(a)). Meanwhile, the fidelity bias
is the residual component of the SR image, apart from the
perceptual variance factor. This can be understood as the
blurry average solution without the fine-grained texture that
possesses randomness (no variance, Fig.3.(d)), or can also
be understood as the centroid of the distribution where the
SR image was originally expected to be sampled from (orange dot in Fig.1.(a)). For an optimal SR image (or the HR),
the fidelity bias of itself is the optimal fidelity point.

* Corresponding author.
1 AE space indicates the space after the decoder, not the bottleneck.

17958

In terms of these two key components defined above, we
will show that Lpix is identical to minimizing both the fidelity bias induced errors and the perceptual variance factor.
However, while minimizing the fidelity bias induced error is
an intended aspect of Lpix , vanishing perceptual variance is
not suitable in perceptual SR. Specifically, when the perceptual variance factor is minimized, the prediction space degenerates and the SR image converges to the blurry average

