This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incorporating Dense Knowledge Alignment into
Unified Multimodal Representation Models
Yuhao Cui1
1

Xinxing Zu1

Alibaba Cloud Computing, China

Wenhua Zhang1,2
2

Zhongzhou Zhao1

Dalian University of Technology, China

3

Jinyang Gao3
Tongyi Lab, China

cyhbrilliant@gmail.com, patrickfollow@gmail.com, 1062894314zwh@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
flyhdq@gmail.com, jinyang.gjy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) for text representation has achieved significant success, but the exploration of using Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) for multimodal
representation remains limited. Previous MLLM-based representation studies have primarily focused on unifying the
embedding space while neglecting the importance of multimodal alignment. As a result, their cross-modal retrieval
performance falls markedly behind that of the CLIP series models. To address this, in our work, we 1) construct
DeKon5M, a contrastive learning dataset enriched with
dense multimodal knowledge, which efficiently enhances
multimodal alignment capabilities in representation tasks.
2) design a framework for training unified representation on
MLLMs. Building upon this unified representation framework and the dense knowledge dataset DeKon5M, we developed the Dense Knowledge Representation model DeKR
on Qwen2VL. Through extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments, our results demonstrate that DeKR not
only aligns text, image, video, and text-image combinations
within a unified embedding space but also achieves crossmodal retrieval performance comparable to SoTA CLIP series models. This fully validates the effectiveness of our approach and provides new insights for multimodal representation research.

Figure 1. Comparison of performance with SoTA models in different retrieval tasks. ”ZS” stands for Zero-shot.

1. Introduction

representation tasks based on Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs). To obtain combined representations of
image and text modalities, Zhou et al. [67] encoded images
into visual features using a Vision Transformer (ViT) [11]
and then input them together with text tokens into a text
encoder. This process can be approximated as an MLLM.
Jiang et al. [17] were the first to utilize an MLLM for
multimodal representation learning directly. Building upon
LLaVA-NeXT [31], they trained using text-pair data to embed image and text modalities within a unified embedding
space. Their retrieval performance demonstrates the feasibility of the MLLM-based representation model. However,
previous MLLM-based representations shared a common
issue: their cross-modal performance significantly lagged
behind the SOTA CLIP series models. We believe this gap
arises because their training data didn’t activate the multimodal alignment capabilities within MLLMs.

Multimodal retrieval has consistently been a crucial component in applications such as search systems and retrievalaugmented generation. Due to the outstanding cross-modal
retrieval performance of CLIP [45], models from the CLIP
family [9, 15, 26, 27, 33, 49, 50, 54, 56, 61] are widely
employed in multimodal retrieval tasks. In light of the
tremendous success Large Language Models (LLMs) have
achieved in text representation tasks [2, 7, 19, 20, 28, 36,
37, 52, 64], recent explorations have begun to investigate

29733

As illustrated in Figure 2(a), we observed that early multimodal pretraining studies, such as Ernie-VIL [60] and

