This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mono3DVLT: Monocular-Video-Based 3D Visual Language Tracking
†

†

†

Hongkai Wei1* , Yang Yang1* , Shijie Sun1 , Mingtao Feng2 , Xiangyu Song1 , Qi Lei1 , Hongli Hu1 ,
Rong Wang1 , Huansheng Song1 , Naveed Akhtar3 , Ajmal Saeed Mian4
1
Chang’an University, China 2 Xidian University, China 3 The University of Melbourne, Australia
4
University of Western Australia, Australia
Abstract
Visual-Language Tracking (VLT) is emerging as a promising paradigm to bridge the human-machine performance
gap. For single objects, VLT broadens the problem scope
to text-driven video comprehension. Yet, this direction
is still conﬁned to 2D spatial extents, currently lacking
the ability to deal with 3D tracking in the conﬁnes of
monocular video. Unfortunately, advances in 3D tracking
mainly rely on expensive sensor inputs, e.g., point clouds,
depth measurements, radar. Absence of language counterpart for the outputs of these mildly democratized sensors in the literature also hinders VLT expansion to 3D
tracking. Addressing that, we make the ﬁrst attempt towards extending VLT to 3D tracking based on monocular
video. We present a comprehensive framework, introducing (i) the Monocular-Video-based 3D Visual Language
Tracking (Mono3DVLT) task, (ii) a large-scale dataset for
the task, called Mono3DVLT-V2X, and (iii) a customized
neural model for the task. Our dataset is carefully curated, leveraging a Large Langauge Model (LLM) followed by human veriﬁcation, composing natural language
descriptions for 79,158 video sequences aiming at single
object tracking, providing 2D and 3D bounding box annotations. Our neural model, termed Mono3DVLT-MT,
is the ﬁrst targeted approach for the Mono3DVLT task.
Comprising the pipeline of multi-modal feature extractor,
visual-language encoder, tracking decoder and a tracking head, our model sets a strong baseline for the task
on Mono3DVLT-V2X. Experimental results show that our
method signiﬁcantly outperforms existing techniques on the
Mono3DVLT-V2X dataset. Our dataset and code are available in https://github.com/hongkai-wei/Mono3DVLT.

1. Introduction
Object tracking [36, 37, 47], the capability to visually follow objects over time, is a fundamental human skill that
has inspired extensive research in vision. Recently, efforts
∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding authors.

have intensiﬁed to develop tracking models that emulate
human tracking behaviors [11, 12]. Nevertheless, despite
progress, Single Object Tracking (SOT) [10, 42] remains
limited by the constraints of unimodal approaches, which
impede human-like perception and restrict its applications
in complex tasks. Visual Language Tracking (VLT) [19] has
recently emerged as a promising framework, adding language as an auxiliary modality to enhance perceptual depth.
However, existing VLT methods are limited to 2D spatial
extents and lack the capacity for 3D object perception, limiting their suitability for applications requiring spatial depth
and comprehensive scene understanding.
In computer vision, 3D object tracking is a wellestablished area [21, 22]. However, approaches to this task
predominantly rely on specialized sensors, such as LiDAR,
radar, or depth cameras, which diverge signiﬁcantly from
natural human perception. Humans typically rely on passive
visual input (i.e., sight) and may also utilize supplementary cues like natural language descriptions (i.e., speech)
to track objects without requiring active sensory input [34].
Inspired by this observation, this work introduces the task
of Monocular-Video-based 3D Visual Language Tracking
(Mono3DVLT) - see Fig. 1.
The Mono3DVLT task focuses on 3D single object tracking from a monocular video guided by natural language
cues. To facilitate research on this newly introduced task,
we release a comprehensive dataset called Mono3DVLTV2X, derived from V2X-Seq [48], comprising 79,158 segments of natural language descriptions that map to speciﬁc
single object tracking within a monocular video. These
descriptions are generated by ChatGPT [2] and then reﬁned manually. This task bridges traditional machine object tracking and human-like object tracking by utilizing visual and language inputs to interpret real-world 3D objects
through monocular videos.
We additionally develop an end-to-end neural network as the ﬁrst tailored approach for the task, termed
Mono3DVLT-MT, which is a 3D Visual Language Tracking Model utilizing a Memory-improved Token Turing Machine (TTM) [31] for Monocular Videos. Our network

13886

