This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpatialLLM: A Compound 3D-Informed Design towards
Spatially-Intelligent Large Multimodal Models
Wufei Ma1 , Luoxin Ye1 , Celso M de Melo2 , Alan Yuille1 , Jieneng Chen1
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Abstract
Humans naturally understand 3D spatial relationships, enabling complex reasoning like predicting collisions of vehicles from different directions. Current large multimodal
models (LMMs), however, lack of this capability of 3D spatial reasoning. This limitation stems from the scarcity of
3D training data and the bias in current model designs toward 2D data. In this paper, we systematically study the impact of 3D-informed data, architecture, and training setups,
introducing SpatialLLM, a large multi-modal model with
advanced 3D spatial reasoning abilities. To address data
limitations, we develop two types of 3D-informed training
datasets: (1) 3D-informed probing data focused on object’s
3D location and orientation, and (2) 3D-informed conversation data for complex spatial relationships. Notably, we
are the first to curate VQA data that incorporate 3D orientation relationships on real images. Furthermore, we systematically integrate these two types of training data with
the architectural and training designs of LMMs, providing
a roadmap for optimal design aimed at achieving superior
3D reasoning capabilities. Our SpatialLLM advances machines toward highly capable 3D-informed reasoning, surpassing GPT-4o performance by 8.7%. Our systematic empirical design and the resulting findings offer valuable insights for future research in this direction. Our project page
is available at this link.

Figure 1. 3D spatial reasoning is crucial for LMMs to ground objects in 3D space and infer their 3D spatial relationships, such as
distance, orientation, and spatial interactions. We systematically
study the impact of 3D-informed data, architecture, and training
setups, introducing SpatialLLM, an LMM with advanced 3D spatial reasoning abilities.

1. Introduction

ing. These models excel at identifying objects and generating descriptive captions but struggle with tasks that require
intricate 3D reasoning, such as predicting object interactions or understanding physical events.
The primary challenge lies in the scarcity of high-quality
3D spatial relationship data, which prevents models from
learning effective 3D spatial reasoning. Collecting a small
set of high-quality 3D-aware data to tackle the first challenge is feasible, albeit labor-intensive, using readily available tools. Recent efforts [2, 14] leverage vision foundation
models to recognize [67], detect [42], segment [31] and estimate the depth [10, 63] in images. These approaches form
semi-automated pipelines to construct pseudo-2.5D datasets
for training LMMs with spatial reasoning capabilities, such
as depth ordering [14, 58].
However, a significant gap remains: previous works [2,
14, 16] have primarily focused on 3D distance relationships,
overlooking the crucial role of 3D object orientation. This
is primarily due to the absence of robust 6D pose estima-

When humans observe a scene, they perceive more than isolated objects; they intuitively understand the spatial relationships among these objects [55], enabling complex reasoning and interaction with the environment. For example,
recognizing that a car is approaching an obstacle and might
collide involves interpreting the 3D object orientations and
spatial relationships. This innate ability to comprehend and
reason about 3D space is crucial for navigating and interacting with the physical world.
Despite significant advancements, current LMMs [1, 4,
39, 41, 57], exhibit limited capability of 3D spatial reason-

17249

