This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Multi-modal Large Language Models for Autonomous Driving
Deepti Hegde1†∗ , Rajeev Yasarla2∗ , Hong Cai2 , Shizhong Han2 , Apratim Bhattacharyya2 ,
Shweta Mahajan2 , Litian Liu2 , Risheek Garrepalli2 , Vishal M. Patel1 , Fatih Porikli2
1

Johns Hopkins University, 2 Qualcomm AI Research‡
∗

Equal contribution

Abstract
Autonomous driving demands safe motion planning, especially in critical “long-tail” scenarios. Recent end-to-end
autonomous driving systems leverage large language models (LLMs) as planners to improve generalizability to rare
events. However, using LLMs at test time introduces high
computational costs. To address this, we propose DiMA, an
end-to-end autonomous driving system that maintains the
efficiency of an LLM-free (or vision-based) planner while
leveraging the world knowledge of an LLM. DiMA distills the information from a multi-modal LLM to a visionbased end-to-end planner through a set of specially designed surrogate tasks. Under a joint training strategy, a
scene encoder common to both networks produces structured representations that are semantically grounded as
well as aligned to the final planning objective. Notably,
the LLM is optional at inference, enabling robust planning
without compromising on efficiency. Training with DiMA
results in a 37% reduction in the L2 trajectory error and
an 80% reduction in the collision rate of the vision-based
planner, as well as a 44% trajectory error reduction in longtail scenarios. DiMA also achieves state-of-the-art performance on the nuScenes planning benchmark.

Figure 1. Comparison of planning performance in long-tail scenarios from nuScenes: DiMA-VAD demonstrates greater robustness compared to VAD [20] in long-tail navigation scenarios such
as overtaking a vehicle and performing a 3-point turn. DiMAVAD also outperforms recent vision-planner PARA-Drive [48] and
LLM planner TOKEN [38]. Notably, the 3-point turn is a zeroshot scenario that is only present in the validation set.

1. Introduction

scale datasets, LLMs can leverage world knowledge to generalize to unseen or rare scenarios. These models can perform high-level reasoning tasks using mechanisms such as
chain-of-thought [46]. Going beyond text-based prompting,
multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) integrate image and video inputs to the LLM, enabling tasks such as
visual question answering and dense captioning [21, 24].
Recent end-to-end autonomous driving systems leverage
LLMs to achieve higher interpretability through languageguided reasoning and superior robustness to long-tail scenarios [19, 37–39, 43, 44]. To differentiate between these
methods, we call end-to-end planners that depend on LLMs
to perform trajectory prediction as “LLM-based” planners
and ones that do not as “vision-based” planners [18, 20, 48].
In spite of their recent success “LLM-based” planners face
significant challenges.

Research in autonomous driving has moved away from the
traditional strategy of integrating sequential, independently
trained models [4, 22, 26, 29, 31, 45, 52], and moved towards developing multi-task systems that are trained in
an end-to-end manner [3, 5, 7, 16, 20, 49]. These approaches demonstrate improved performance and interpretability while being highly efficient. However, they
struggle with long-tail navigation and perception scenarios,
primarily because they are trained on task-specific, limited
datasets [2, 11, 13].
Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as a
promising solution to this issue. Trained on vast, internet‡Qualcomm AI Research is initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

27575

