This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAMM-Diffusion: Learning Divergence-Aware Multi-Modal Diffusion Model
for Nanoparticles Distribution Prediction
Junjie Zhou1,2 , Shouju Wang3 *, Yuxia Tang3 , Qi Zhu1,2 , Daoqiang Zhang1,2 ,* Wei Shao1,2 *
1
The College of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
The Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education
3
Department of Radiology, Nanjing Medical University
junjiezhou@nuaa.edu.cn, dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn, shaowei20022005@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
(a)

The prediction of nanoparticles (NPs) distribution is crucial
for the diagnosis and treatment of tumors. Recent studies
indicate that the heterogeneity of tumor microenvironment
(TME) highly affects the distribution of NPs across tumors.
Hence, it has become a research hotspot to generate the NPs
distribution by the aid of multi-modal TME components.
However, the distribution divergence among multi-modal
TME components may cause side effects i.e., the best unimodal model may outperform the joint generative model. To
address the above issues, we propose a Divergence-Aware
Multi-Modal Diffusion model (i.e., DAMM-Diffusion) to
adaptively generate the prediction results from uni-modal
and multi-modal branches in a uniﬁed network. In detail,
the uni-modal branch is composed of the U-Net architecture while the multi-modal branch extends it by introducing
two novel fusion modules i.e., Multi-Modal Fusion Module
(MMFM) and Uncertainty-Aware Fusion Module (UAFM).
Speciﬁcally, the MMFM is proposed to fuse features from
multiple modalities, while the UAFM module is introduced
to learn the uncertainty map for cross-attention computation. Following the individual prediction results from
each branch, the Divergence-Aware Multi-Modal Predictor
(DAMMP) module is proposed to assess the consistency of
multi-modal data with the uncertainty map, which determines whether the ﬁnal prediction results come from multimodal or uni-modal predictions. We predict the NPs distribution given the TME components of tumor vessels and
cell nuclei, and the experimental results show that DAMMDiffusion can generate the distribution of NPs with higher
accuracy than the comparing methods. Additional results
on the multi-modal brain image synthesis task further validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The code is
released † .
* Corresponding authors
† https://github.com/JJ-ZHOU-Code/DAMM-Diffusion

(b)
Vessels

Vessels
NPs

NPs

Uni-modal Generator
(c)

Nuclei

Multi-modal Generator

Forward process

‫ݔ‬௧ିଵ

‫்ݔ‬

‫ݔ‬௧

߳୭
Reverse process

Noise

‫ݔ‬଴
NPs

௨
߳ఏ ሺ‫ݔ‬௧ ǡ ‫ ݕ‬௩ ǡ ‫ ݕ‬௡ ǡ ‫ݐ‬ሻ

Nuclei Vessels
‫ݕ‬௩
‫ݕ‬୬

߳ఏ௠ ሺ‫ݔ‬௧ ǡ ‫ ݕ‬௩ ǡ ‫ݐ‬ሻ

DAMM-Diffusion

Figure 1. The illustration of different NPs distribution prediction
methods. (a) The Uni-modal method predicts the distribution of
NPs by vessels. (b) The multi-modal method predicts the distribution of NPs by the combination of vessels and nuclei. (c)
Our DAMM-Diffusion considers both uni-modal and multi-modal
branches for NPs distribution prediction by considering the divergence among nuclei and vessels channels.

1. Introduction
Nanoparticles (NPs) present a promising avenue for the diagnosis and treatment of tumors [7, 20]. Leveraging the Enhanced Permeability and Retention (EPR) effect, NPs can
selectively accumulate in tumor tissues due to their leaky
blood vessels and compromised lymphatic drainage [9, 25].
Hence, the accurate prediction of NPs distribution can help
deliver drugs to the tumor site, resulting in improved therapeutic outcomes [33]. Recent studies indicate that the tumor
microenvironment (TME) components, such as blood vessels and nuclei, highly affect the delivery and distribution
of NPs across tumors [14, 33]. It has become a research
hotspot to infer the distribution of NPs by considering the
spread of multiple TME components basing on the ﬂuorescence [11] or mass spectrometry imaging [1]. But until
now, accurately predicting intratumoral nanomedicine distribution remains challenging due to the complex spatial relationship between different tumor microenvironments and
nanomedicine accumulation [42].

30886

