This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GCE-Pose: Global Context Enhancement for Category-level
Object Pose Estimation
Weihang Li1,2* Hongli XU1* Junwen Huang1,2*† Hyunjun Jung1*
Peter KT Yu3 Nassir Navab1,2 Benjamin Busam1,2
1 Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning 3 XYZ Robotics

Abstract

Partial Feature Learning Methods

A key challenge in model-free category-level pose estimation
is the extraction of contextual object features that generalize
across varying instances within a specific category. Recent approaches leverage foundational features to capture
semantic and geometry cues from data. However, these
approaches fail under partial visibility. We overcome this
with a first-complete-then-aggregate strategy for feature extraction utilizing class priors. In this paper, we present
GCE-Pose, a method that enhances pose estimation for
novel instances by integrating category-level global context
prior. GCE-Pose performs semantic shape reconstruction
with a proposed Semantic Shape Reconstruction (SSR) module. Given an unseen partial RGB-D object instance, our
SSR module reconstructs the instance’s global geometry and
semantics by deforming category-specific 3D semantic prototypes through a learned deep Linear Shape Model. We
further introduce a Global Context Enhanced (GCE) feature fusion module that effectively fuses features from partial
RGB-D observations and the reconstructed global context.
Extensive experiments validate the impact of our global context prior and the effectiveness of the GCE fusion module,
demonstrating that GCE-Pose significantly outperforms existing methods on challenging real-world datasets HouseCat6D and NOCS-REAL275. Our project page is available
at https://colin-de.github.io/GCE-Pose/.

NN

NN

NOCS Prediction

Partial Feature

Input RGB-D

Global Context Enhanced Feature Fusion

NN
SSR

Partial Feature

GCE Fusion

Input RGB-D
Global Feature

NOCS Prediction

Figure 1. Overview of the category-level Pose Estimation Pipeline:
(A) Previous methods, i.g. AG-Pose [41] and Second Pose [8], rely
on partial features extracted by a neural network (NN) to regress
object poses. (B) We introduce a novel approach that leverages
a semantic shape reconstruction (SSR) module for global feature
extraction. This global context enhances (GCE) the mapping from
partial features to NOCS features.

1. Introduction

level pose estimation methods [8, 38, 66] aim to generalize
across unseen instances within a defined category that requires only an RGB(-D) image of a new instance during
the inference, making the method model-free that does not
require predefined object models.
Current category-level approaches primarily estimate the
Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS) [66] and employ a pose solver, such as the Umeyama algorithm [62], to
obtain the object pose [38]. To effectively extract categorylevel features from RGB (and/or depth) inputs, researchers
have developed various neural network architectures to capture features from partial RGB(-D) observations. Some
recent methods [2, 47, 49] leverage foundation models like
DINOv2 [48] for improved performance. Additionally, research [4, 8, 25, 26, 40] highlights the importance of combining semantic and geometric information to enhance feature robustness and distinguishability, aiding in better correspondence and pose estimation. However, category-level

The task of object pose estimation varies according to generalization level and input modality. Instance-level pose
estimation methods [24, 58, 65] focus on specific object
instances that does not generalize to other objects, while
fully unseen object pose estimation methods [13, 26, 56] are
designed to handle novel objects, however requires object
model as prior. Unlike aforementioned methods, category* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author: junwen.huang@tum.de

27154

