This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HunyuanPortrait: Implicit Condition Control for Enhanced Portrait Animation
Zunnan Xu1,2 *, Zhentao Yu2 , Zixiang Zhou2 , Jun Zhou3 *, Xiaoyu Jin1 *, Fa-ting Hong4 *,
Xiaozhong Ji2 , Junwei Zhu2 , Chengfei Cai2 , Shiyu Tang2 , Qin Lin2 , Xiu Li1†, Qinglin Lu2†
1
Tsinghua University 2 Hunyuan, Tencent 3 Sun Yat-Sen Univeristy 4 HKUST

Abstract
We introduce HunyuanPortrait, a diffusion-based condition
control method that employs implicit representations for
highly controllable and lifelike portrait animation. Given a
single portrait image as an appearance reference and video
clips as driving templates, HunyuanPortrait can animate
the character in the reference image by the facial expression and head pose of the driving videos. In our framework,
we utilize pre-trained encoders to achieve the decoupling of
portrait motion information and identity in videos. To do so,
implicit representation is adopted to encode motion information and is employed as control signals in the animation
phase. By leveraging the power of stable video diffusion as
the main building block, we carefully design adapter layers to inject control signals into the denoising unet through
attention mechanisms. These bring spatial richness of details and temporal consistency. HunyuanPortrait also exhibits strong generalization performance, which can effectively disentangle appearance and motion under different
image styles. Our framework outperforms existing methods, demonstrating superior temporal consistency and controllability. Our project is available at HunyuanPortrait.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our framework employs implicit condition control to
generate portrait animations, demonstrating robust generalization
performance with high-fidelity facial dynamics and vivid head
poses during cross-reenactment. The animated portraits remain
unaffected by variations in facial shape and the spatial position of
the driving videos, demonstrating strong identity consistency.

In this paper, we aim to animate a single static image into
a lifelike video using control signals in implicit representations derived from driving videos. As shown in Figure 1,
our primary focus is not only on the high controllability of
digital portraits but also on the strong consistency of the
characters and background in the reference image.
Portrait animation has been widely applied in fields such
as human-computer interaction [11, 56], virtual reality, and
the crafting of digital avatars for the gaming and multimedia
industries [28–30]. Previous works [4, 7, 62] develop usable
portrait animation models utilizing Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [10] based on raw video inputs. However, these approaches exhibit limitations in terms of gener* Work done during the internship at Tencent.
† Corresponding author.

alization. Given the variability of facial structures and the
complexities of facial movements, these methods often face
challenges such as artifacts and insufficient control over facial expressions. This is particularly evident when there is
a substantial difference in facial shape between the driving video and the source image, resulting in significant issues with facial artifacts and motion distortion. These early
methods often produce results with background jitter and
blurred portraits during cross-reenactment [36, 41].
The advancement of diffusion models has led to a significant focus in recent methodologies [3, 48] on the fine-tuning

15909

