This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BOE-ViT: Boosting Orientation Estimation with Equivariance in Self-Supervised
3D Subtomogram Alignment
Runmin Jiang1 , Jackson Daggett1 , Shriya Pingulkar4 , Yizhou Zhao1 ,
Priyanshu Dhingra5 , Daniel Brown1 , Qifeng Wu1 , Xiangrui Zeng2,3 , Xingjian Li1,∗ , Min Xu1,∗
1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Harvard Medical School 3 Massachusetts General Hospital
4 K. J. Somaiya College of Engineering, 5 Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology

Abstract
Subtomogram alignment is a critical task in cryo-electron
tomography (cryo-ET) analysis, essential for achieving
high-resolution reconstructions of macromolecular complexes. However, learning effective positional representations remains challenging due to limited labels and high
noise levels inherent in cryo-ET data. In this work, we address this challenge by proposing a self-supervised learning approach that leverages intrinsic geometric transformations as implicit supervisory signals, enabling robust representation learning despite data scarcity. We introduce
BOE-ViT, the first Vision Transformer (ViT) framework for
3D subtomogram alignment. Recognizing that traditional
ViTs lack equivariance and are therefore suboptimal for orientation estimation, we enhance the model with two innovative modules that introduce equivariance include 1) the
Polyshift module for improved shift estimation and 2) MultiAxis Rotation Encoding (MARE) for enhanced rotation estimation. Experimental results demonstrate that BOE-ViT
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Notably,
at SNR 0.01 dataset, our approach achieves a 77.3% reduction in rotation estimation error and a 62.5% reduction
in translation estimation error, effectively overcoming the
challenges in cryo-ET subtomogram alignment.

1. Introduction
In recent years, cryo-ET has emerged as a groundbreaking in situ 3D structural biology imaging technique, enabling the study of macromolecular complexes—nanoscale
machines that drive cellular processes—within single cells
[31]. With the rapid growth in the volume of cryo-ET data
available for structural and biological research, deep learning has become a valuable tool for automated cryo-ET image analysis [8, 39].

In typical cryo-ET image analysis pipelines, subtomogram alignment is a crucial task [26, 51]. 1 This importance arises from the fact that 3D cryo-ET images often
suffer from low quality due to their nature of low signalto-noise ratio (SNR) and the missing wedge issue [53]. To
achieve high-resolution biological structures, it is essential
to first align these identical particles in different orientations, and subsequently denoise them through averaging.
Precise alignment also allows for spatial localization of specific structures within tomograms.
The goal of subtomogram alignment is to determine the
six parameters of a 3D rigid transformation—three rotational and three translational. Despite its straightforward
formulation, this task presents a challenging geometric
matching problem, even more complex than 3D deformable
medical image registration. The difficulties raise from three
main factors: (1) macromolecular structures exhibit random
orientations and displacements, creating high variability;
(2) subtomograms have low signal-to-noise ratios (around
0.01 to 0.1), with complex cytoplasmic backgrounds and
low electron doses [13]; and (3) structural heterogeneity, as
different macromolecular complexes can appear vastly different, unlike the relatively consistent structures in medical
images.
Traditional methods rely on exhaustive searches over
six-dimensional parameter spaces (e.g., Euler angles and
translations)[2, 28, 56, 57]. These geometric approaches are
relatively slow due to the large search space, although several improvements have been proposed. Subsequent work
explores data-driven approaches using deep CNNs [58, 59],
which significantly improve both speed and accuracy. However, the error in parameter prediction is still very high, especially on low SNR data.
To better address the challenging problem of aligning highly complex and noisy 3D subtomograms, we are
inspired to explore Vision Transformers (ViTs), which
1 A subtomogram is defined as a subvolume with a macromolecular
complex.

* Corresponding Authors

29352

