This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuron: Learning Context-Aware Evolving Representations for Zero-Shot
Skeleton Action Recognition
Yang Chen1 , Jingcai Guo1*, Song Guo2 , Dacheng Tao3
1
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR
2
Department of CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
jc-jingcai.guo@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Zero-shot skeleton action recognition is a non-trivial
task that requires robust unseen generalization with prior
knowledge from only seen classes and shared semantics.
Existing methods typically build the skeleton-semantics
interactions by uncontrollable mappings and conspicuous representations, thereby can hardly capture the intricate and fine-grained relationship for effective crossmodal transferability. To address these issues, we propose a novel dyNamically Evolving dUal skeleton-semantic
syneRgistic framework with the guidance of cOntext-aware
side informatioN (dubbed Neuron), to explore more finegrained cross-modal correspondence from micro to macro
perspectives at both spatial and temporal levels, respectively. Concretely, 1) we first construct the spatial-temporal
evolving micro-prototypes and integrate dynamic contextaware side information to capture the intricate and synergistic skeleton-semantic correlations step-by-step, progressively refining cross-model alignment; and 2) we introduce
the spatial compression and temporal memory mechanisms
to guide the growth of spatial-temporal micro-prototypes,
enabling them to absorb structure-related spatial representations and regularity-dependent temporal patterns. Notably, such processes are analogous to the learning and
growth of neurons, equipping the framework with the capacity to generalize to novel unseen action categories. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets demonstrated the superiority of the proposed method 1 .

Text Encoder

Text Encoder

Skeleton-Semantic
Static Interaction

Skeleton-Semantic
Dynamic Interaction
Evolving

GCN

Vectorization

GCN

Skeleton Action:
Drink Water

Spatial-Temporal
Micro-Prototypes

Skeleton Action:
Drink Water

(a) Existing Methods

(b) Our Method

Figure 1. Method sketches: (a) Existing methods employ homogeneous semantics (manual-designed or one-turn LLMs) to align the
skeleton space with one-step (static); (b) Our Neuron introduces
the context-aware side information (multi-turn LLMs) and evolving micro-prototypes to capture cross-modal correspondence from
micro to macro perspectives (dynamic) for controllable alignment.

[29], etc. Benefiting from the excellent privacy-preserving
and data-efficiency properties of skeleton modality, a wealth
of innovative research has sprung up to advance this field.
Among these developments, several challenging and realistic issues have emerged, notably spurring interest in zeroshot skeleton action recognition [6, 32, 41].
Conventional supervised and self-supervised skeletonbased action recognition methods [6, 7] are usually hindered
by their dependence on expensive annotated data and limited generalization to novel unseen categories. These methods generally confine their classification abilities to actions
present in both training and test sets [5, 8, 38, 40]. In contrast, zero-shot skeleton action recognition effectively addresses the above dilemmas by leveraging only limited seen
skeleton samples and a predefined semantic corpus, thus
enabling the recognition of previously unseen action categories [6, 13, 18, 20, 32, 39, 41]. Furthermore, such a zeroshot learning (ZSL) setting can be extended to generalized
zero-shot learning (GZSL), wherein both seen and unseen

1. Introduction
Action recognition has gained considerable attention for
years due to its broad applications, e.g., sports analysis [37],
rehabilitation assessment [15], anomaly action recognition
* Jingcai Guo is the corresponding author.
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/cseeyangchen/

Neuron.

8721

