This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning on Model Weights using Tree Experts
Eliahu Horwitz*

Bar Cavia*

Jonathan Kahana*

Yedid Hoshen

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
https://horwitz.ai/probex

Abstract
The number of publicly available models is rapidly increasing, yet most remain undocumented. Users looking for suitable models for their tasks must first determine what each
model does. Training machine learning models to infer
missing documentation directly from model weights is challenging, as these weights often contain significant variation
unrelated to model functionality (denoted nuisance). Here,
we identify a key property of real-world models: most public models belong to a small set of Model Trees, where all
models within a tree are fine-tuned from a common ancestor
(e.g., a foundation model). Importantly, we find that within
each tree there is less nuisance variation between models.
Concretely, while learning across Model Trees requires complex architectures, even a linear classifier trained on a single
model layer often works within trees. While effective, these
linear classifiers are computationally expensive, especially
when dealing with larger models that have many parameters.
To address this, we introduce Probing Experts (ProbeX), a
theoretically motivated and lightweight method. Notably,
ProbeX is the first probing method specifically designed to
learn from the weights of a single hidden model layer. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of ProbeX by predicting the
categories in a model’s training dataset based only on its
weights. Excitingly, ProbeX can map the weights of Stable
Diffusion into a weight-language embedding space, enabling
model search via text, i.e., zero-shot model classification.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the number of publicly available neural network models has skyrocketed, with over one million models
now hosted on Hugging Face. Ideally, this abundance would
allow users to simply download the most suitable model for
their task, thereby saving resources, reducing training time,
and potentially improving accuracy. However, the lack of adequate documentation for most models makes it challenging
for users to determine a model’s suitability for specific tasks.
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Growth in Hugging Face models: The number of public
models is growing fast, but they are mostly undocumented. Fully
benefiting from them requires effective model search.

This motivates developing machine learning methods that
can infer model functionality and missing documentation
directly from model weights. The emerging field of weightspace learning [30, 33, 39, 49, 51] studies how to design and
train metanetworks, neural networks that take the weights of
other neural networks as inputs (see Fig. 2). Previous works
learned metanetworks that predict training data attributes
[28, 41], model performance [30], and even generate new
model parameters [9, 34]. In this work, we focus on predicting the categories in a model’s training dataset as a proxy
for the concepts it can recognize or generate. As a initial
step towards model search-by-text, we demonstrate that it is
sometimes possible to align weights with language, enabling
zero-shot model classification.
However, extracting meaningful information from model
weights is challenging. While the weights of a neural network are a function of its training data, they are also affected
by the optimization process, which may introduce nuisance
variation unrelated to attributes of interest. Neuron permutation [17] is perhaps the most studied nuisance factor and
has driven research into permutation-invariant architectures
[26, 28, 30, 31] and carefully designed data augmentations
[18, 39–41]. In this paper, we highlight another important
nuisance factor, the weights at the beginning of optimization.
The key insight in this paper is that models within a
Model Tree [20] have reduced nuisance variation. A Model
Tree describes a set of models that share a common ancestor
(root), with each model derived by fine-tuning either from
the root or from one of its descendants. For example, the

20468

