This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Concept Lancet: Image Editing with Compositional Representation Transplant
Jinqi Luo, Tianjiao Ding, Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Hancheng Min, Chris Callison-Burch, René Vidal
University of Pennsylvania
jinqiluo@upenn.edu

Abstract

Adorable [cat] [dog] sits on green grass …

Diffusion models are widely used for image editing tasks.
Existing editing methods often design a representation manipulation procedure by curating an edit direction in the text
embedding or score space. However, such a procedure faces
a key challenge: overestimating the edit strength harms visual consistency while underestimating it fails the editing
task. Notably, each source image may require a different
editing strength, and it is costly to search for an appropriate strength via trial-and-error. To address this challenge,
we propose Concept Lancet (CoLan), a zero-shot plug-andplay framework for principled representation manipulation
in diffusion-based image editing. At inference time, we decompose the source input in the latent (text embedding or
diffusion score) space as a sparse linear combination of
the representations of the collected visual concepts. This
allows us to accurately estimate the presence of concepts in
each image, which informs the edit. Based on the editing
task (replace/add/remove), we perform a customized concept
transplant process to impose the corresponding editing direction. To sufficiently model the concept space, we curate a
conceptual representation dataset, CoLan-150K, which contains diverse descriptions and scenarios of visual terms and
phrases for the latent dictionary. Experiments on multiple
diffusion-based image editing baselines show that methods
equipped with CoLan achieve state-of-the-art performance
in editing effectiveness and consistency preservation.

Concept Lancet for Editing

dog
cat

sitting

grass

0.57

0.25

0.48

…

time
-0.15

Diffusion Model Backbone

Figure 1. Given a source image and the editing task, our proposed
CoLan generates a concept dictionary and performs sparse decomposition in the latent space to precisely transplant the target concept.

1. Introduction

models for image editing that impose desired concepts based
on user prompts. Specifically, given a source image and its
source caption, our task is to modify the content, appearance,
or pattern of the image based on a given target prompt. To
accomplish it with diffusion models, a basic idea is to first
use the score predictor to perform the noising process (e.g.,
DDIM Inversion [49]) and then follow the denoising process
conditioned on the target concept. Such conditioning in the
diffusion-based backbones typically happens in a structured
latent space (score or text embedding space; to be detailed
in §2), where one moves a source latent vector towards an
edit direction (i.e., the shift from the source concept to the
target concept). A fruitful series of works have contributed
to enhancing the inversion process [17, 18, 27, 36, 51], innovating attention controls [4, 11, 40, 65], and tuning the
backbone with conditional instructions [3, 9, 39, 71].
Despite the remarkable progress, an often overlooked
issue is the magnitude of the concept representation to be
imposed, that is, determining how far to move along the edit
direction. Prior works [40, 65] typically assume a certain
amount of editing without adjusting the magnitude based on
the contexts or existing concepts of the given image. Such a
heuristic choice can be problematic as we show in Figure 2:
adding too much of the edit may overwhelm the image with
the target concept (Image (4)), while too little may fail to
fully remove the source concept (Image (2)). Hence, since
the presence of the source concept varies in every image,
proper estimation of the edit magnitude is necessary for
accurate editing.
To address the aforementioned issue, we draw inspiration

How can we edit a given image following a specified conceptual guidance, say Cat→Dog or Sketch→Painting? This
problem was briefly discussed in the early work of Image
Analogies [12] in the 2000s, widely studied in the era of
generative adversarial networks [19, 70], and recently revolutionized by diffusion models [14, 48]. Not only do diffusion
models shine in producing realistic images [42, 46], but they
also allow for conditioning on multimodal guidance such as
text prompts [21, 45] and regional masks [1, 16, 68], making
it handy for image editing.
In this paper, we consider the task of utilizing diffusion

28502

