This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Zero-Shot Classification via Semantics-Free Inter-Class Feature
Generation
Libiao Chen1 Dong Nie2 Junjun Pan1,3 Jing Yan4 Zhenyu Tang1,3,∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
TowerCloud Labs
3
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and System, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
1

∗

tangzhenyu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) addresses the
challenge of classifying unseen classes in the presence of
seen classes by leveraging semantic attributes to bridge
the gap for unseen classes. However, in image based disease classification, such as glioma sub-typing, distinguishing between classes using image semantic attributes can
be challenging. To address this challenge, we introduce a
novel GZSL method that eliminates the dependency on semantic information. Specifically, we propose that the primary of most classification in clinic is risk stratification,
and classes are inherently ordered rather than purely categorical. Based on this insight, we present an inter-class
feature augmentation (IFA) module, where distributions of
different classes are ordered by their risk levels in a learned
feature space using pre-defined joint conditional Gaussian
distribution model. This ordering enables the generation
of unseen class features through feature mixing of adjacent
seen classes, effectively transforming the zero-shot learning
problem into a supervised learning task. Our method eliminates the need for explicit semantic information, avoiding the cross-modal alignment between visual and semantic
features. Moreover, the IFA module for GZSL requires no
structural modifications to the existing classification models. In the experiment, both in-house and public datasets are
used to evaluate our method across different tasks, including glioma subtyping, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) classification and diabetic retinopathy classification. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method outperforms the stateof-the-art GZSL methods with statistical significance.

sion, natural language processing, and medical diagnostics.
To build powerful DL-based classification models, a large
number of labeled data is required in training phase. It
is known that data annotation is usually a labor-intensive
and time-consuming task, especially for the tasks involving medical images. Moreover, because of low incidence
rates, rare diseases or fine-grained subtypes often have very
few samples, hindering the performance of DL-based classification [24]. For classes not presented in training dataset,
i.e., unseen classes, traditional DL-based models fail to provide reliable classification results [20]. Therefore, there is
a pressing need for DL-based methods capable of handling
the classification of unseen classes.
Over the past decade, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has
emerged as a promising solution for recognizing unseen
classes [18]. It enables models to generalize from seen
classes to unseen classes by leveraging auxiliary information. Conventional ZSL methods focus solely on classifying
unseen classes with the assumption that testing data does
not contain any samples of seen classes. However, such assumption does not align with real-world conditions, making
it challenging to be applied in most of practical scenarios.

1. Introduction

Recently, generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) has
been proposed to classify unseen classes in the presence
of seen classes [1]. Due to its close alignment with realworld scenarios, GZSL has been widely studied [6, 11,
14, 19]. Existing GZSL methods can be categorized into
two types: embedding-based methods and generative-based
methods [24]. Specifically, the embedding-based methods
map visual and semantic features into a common space. In
this way, visual information of unseen classes can be inferred by semantic features. The generative-based methods
adopt generative models to synthesize features or images of
unseen classes, transforming the zero-shot problem into a
supervised learning task. To enhance the performance of
generative models, semantic information is usually used as

Deep learning (DL) based classification has achieved significant success in various domains, such as computer vi-

20286

