This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PQPP: A Joint Benchmark for Text-to-Image
Prompt and Query Performance Prediction
Eduard Poesina1,→ , Adriana Valentina Costache1,→ , Adrian-Gabriel Chifu2 ,
Josiane Mothe3 , Radu Tudor Ionescu1, *
1
University of Bucharest, 2 Aix-Marseille Université, 3 Université Toulouse Jean-Jaurès
Abstract
Text-to-image generation has recently emerged as a viable
alternative to text-to-image retrieval, driven by the visually impressive results of generative diffusion models. Although query performance prediction is an active research
topic in information retrieval, to the best of our knowledge, there is no prior study that analyzes the difficulty of
queries (referred to as prompts) in text-to-image generation, based on human judgments. To this end, we introduce
the first dataset of prompts which are manually annotated
in terms of image generation performance. Additionally,
we extend these evaluations to text-to-image retrieval by
collecting manual annotations that represent retrieval performance. We thus establish the first joint benchmark for
prompt and query performance prediction (PQPP) across
both tasks, comprising over 10K queries. Our benchmark
enables (i) the comparative assessment of prompt/query difficulty in both image generation and image retrieval, and
(ii) the evaluation of prompt/query performance predictors
addressing both generation and retrieval. We evaluate several pre- and post-generation/retrieval performance predictors, thus providing competitive baselines for future research. Our benchmark and code are publicly available at
https://github.com/Eduard6421/PQPP.

the context of generative AI for text-to-image generation, if
a prompt is predicted to be difficult, the system could initiate a conversation to refine the prompt in order to overcome the difficulty and improve the final output. Moreover,
the system could indicate to the user its inability to provide
a satisfactory image, or it could give positive feedback to
the user when the prompt is predicted as easy. In general,
when a prompt/query is predicted as difficult for a generation/retrieval system, additional processes can be activated,
such as the automatic reformulation, the allocation of extra resources, or the addition of pre- or post-processing.
We discuss further applications and concrete use cases of
prompt performance prediction in Appendix 8.
With the growing popularity of generative models and
retrieval augmented generation, understanding prompt effectiveness in both generation and retrieval becomes increasingly essential. While text-to-image generation and
retrieval share common elements, they differ fundamentally
in terms of task requirements and success criteria. In textto-image generation, prompts must guide models to produce images that not only capture the specified elements,
but also meet aesthetic and contextual expectations. Conversely, in retrieval, the query role is to retrieve pre-existing
images that match the query as closely as possible within a
given dataset, where success depends on how well the query
aligns with the available data. Studying both tasks together
is critical. Examining prompt/query difficulty across generation and retrieval allows us to determine whether the factors that make a prompt challenging in generation (e.g. complexity, specificity, ambiguity) are the same as those in retrieval. To the best of our knowledge, there is no prior
study that jointly analyzes the difficulty of prompts/queries
in text-to-image generation and retrieval using human relevance judgments. In this study, we introduce the first dataset
of prompts/queries which are manually annotated in terms
of both image generation performance and image retrieval
performance. Additionally, we provide baseline results with
various pre- and post-performance predictors, setting a standard for future multimodal QPP research.
Our new Prompt and Query Performance Prediction

1. Introduction
In recent years, more and more people embraced the use of
large language models (LLMs) instead of traditional search
engines [1, 7, 62]. The advent of generative diffusion models [9, 18, 33, 40] capable of generating high-quality and
realistic images triggered a similar trend in text-to-image
retrieval. This paradigm shift in information retrieval (IR)
calls for an extensive exploration of research topics related
to generative models. One is query performance prediction
(QPP), which refers to the process of estimating the performance level of an IR system for a given query [8], this
being an active research topic in IR [13, 16, 20, 31, 36]. In
* Corresp. author: raducu.ionescu@gmail.com. → Equal contrib.

28651

