This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Referenced Sketch Colorization Based on Animation Creation Workflow

Sketch

Jiaxian Guo2

Reference

Zhuoru Li3

*Dingkun Yan1, 4
*Xinrui Wang2
Suguru Saito1
Yusuke Iwasawa2
Yutaka Matsuo2
1
2
Institute of Science Tokyo
The University of Tokyo
3
4
Project HAT
Tokyo AI research institute, Shanda Group

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Figure 1. Given reference images, our proposed method automatically synthesizes high-quality sketch colorization results that loyally
match the reference color distribution and are free from artifacts.

Abstract
Sketch colorization plays an important role in animation
and digital illustration production tasks. However, existing methods still meet problems in that text-guided methods fail to provide accurate color and style reference, hintguided methods still involve manual operation, and imagereferenced methods are prone to cause artifacts. To address these limitations, we propose a diffusion-based framework inspired by real-world animation production workflows. Our approach leverages the sketch as the spatial
guidance and an RGB image as the color reference, and
separately extracts foreground and background from the reference image with spatial masks. Particularly, we introduce
a split cross-attention mechanism with LoRA (Low-Rank
Adaptation) modules. They are trained separately with fore-

ground and background regions to control the corresponding embeddings for keys and values in cross-attention. This
design allows the diffusion model to integrate information
from foreground and background independently, preventing interference and eliminating the spatial artifacts. During inference, we design switchable inference modes for diverse use scenarios by changing modules activated in the
framework. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments, along with user studies, demonstrate our advantages
over existing methods in generating high-qualigy artifactfree results with geometric mismatched references. Ablation studies further confirm the effectiveness of each component. Codes are available at https://github.com/
tellurion-kanata/colorizeDiffusion.

* Represent equal contribution to this work

23391

