This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conditional Balance:
Improving Multi-Conditioning Trade-Offs in Image Generation
Nadav Z. Cohen1 , Oron Nir1,2 , Ariel Shamir1
1

Reichman University, 2 Microsoft Corporation

https://nadavc220.github.io/conditional-balance.github.io/

Figure 1. Balanced Conditioning Image Generation. We analyze the sensitivity of model layers to various aspects in conditional inputs.
This allows to limit the inputs only to specific layers during inference, thereby balancing the different conditions and preventing content
and style from overshadowing each other. As a result, the generative model reduces artifacts and gains artistic freedom when combining
complex conditional inputs. As can be seen, by selecting only highly sensitive layers of style (λS ) and structure (λT ) we get better color
and texture control and better geometric style control.

Abstract

over style and content, significantly reducing issues arising from over-constrained inputs. Our findings demonstrate
that this method enhances recent stylization techniques by
better aligning style and content, ultimately improving the
quality of generated visual content.

Balancing content fidelity and artistic style is a pivotal challenge in image generation. While traditional style
transfer methods and modern Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) strive to achieve this balance,
they often struggle to do so without sacrificing either style,
content, or sometimes both. This work addresses this challenge by analyzing the ability of DDPMs to maintain content and style equilibrium. We introduce a novel method
to identify sensitivities within the DDPM attention layers,
identifying specific layers that correspond to different stylistic aspects. By directing conditional inputs only to these
sensitive layers, our approach enables fine-grained control

1. Introduction
To master different aspects of paintings such as color and
light, a notable approach practiced by artists involves creating a collection of paintings of the same subject under varying conditions. A well known example of this practice is
Claude Monet’s series of paintings of Rouen Cathedral [40].
Today, modern Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Mod-

2641

