This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Slow Bidirectional to Fast Autoregressive Video Diffusion Models
→

→

Tianwei Yin1
Qiang Zhang2
Richard Zhang2
William T. Freeman1
Frédo Durand1
Eli Shechtman2
Xun Huang2
1

MIT

2

Adobe

https://causvid.github.io/

Latency
(gen. full 128-frame video)
219s
“Macro shot of a man
wearing an antique
diving helmet with dark
glass and a jetpack
walking on the veins of
a leaf. Realistic style”

Bidirectional
teacher

Asymmetric distillation with DMD
Causal
student

Initial Latency
1.3s

…

On-the-fly generation
9.4 FPS

Figure 1. Traditional bidirectional diffusion models (top) deliver high-quality outputs but suffer from significant latency, taking 219
seconds to generate a 128-frame video. Users must wait for the entire sequence to complete before viewing any results. In contrast, we
distill the bidirectional diffusion model into a few-step autoregressive generator (bottom), dramatically reducing computational overhead.
Our model (CausVid) achieves an initial latency of only 1.3 seconds, after which frames are generated continuously in a streaming fashion
at approximately 9.4 FPS, facilitating interactive workflows for video content creation.

Abstract
Current video diffusion models achieve impressive generation quality but struggle in interactive applications due to
bidirectional attention dependencies. The generation of a
single frame requires the model to process the entire sequence, including the future. We address this limitation by
adapting a pretrained bidirectional diffusion transformer to
an autoregressive transformer that generates frames on-thefly. To further reduce latency, we extend distribution matching distillation (DMD) to videos, distilling 50-step diffusion model into a 4-step generator. To enable stable and
high-quality distillation, we introduce a student initialization scheme based on teacher’s ODE trajectories, as well as
an asymmetric distillation strategy that supervises a causal
student model with a bidirectional teacher. This approach
effectively mitigates error accumulation in autoregressive

generation, allowing long-duration video synthesis despite
training on short clips. Our model achieves a total score of
84.27 on the VBench-Long benchmark, surpassing all previous video generation models. It enables fast streaming
generation of high-quality videos at 9.4 FPS on a single
GPU thanks to KV caching. Our approach also enables
streaming video-to-video translation, image-to-video, and
dynamic prompting in a zero-shot manner. We release our
code and pretrained models.

1. Introduction

→ Equal Contribution. Correspondence: tianweiy@mit.edu

The emergence of diffusion models has revolutionized how
we can create videos from text [3, 5, 25, 29, 63, 98, 111].
Many of the state-of-the-art video diffusion models rely
on the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) architecture [2, 61],
which usually employs bidirectional attention across all
video frames. Despite the impressive quality, the bidirec-

22963

