This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Data Curation Effectively Distills Large-Scale Multimodal Models
Vishaal Udandarao* 3,4‡ Nikhil Parthasarathy*2 Muhammad Ferjad Naeem1 Talfan Evans2
Samuel Albanie2 Federico Tombari1 Yongqin Xian1† Alessio Tonioni1† Olivier J. Hénaff2†
1

Google 2 Google DeepMind 3 Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen 4 University of Cambridge

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is the de facto standard for compressing large-scale multimodal models into smaller ones.
Prior works have explored ever more complex KD strategies involving different objectives, teacher-ensembles, and
weight inheritance. In this work, we explore an alternative,
yet simple approach—active data curation as effective distillation for contrastive multimodal pretraining. Our simple
online batch selection method, ACID, outperforms strong
KD baselines across various model-, data- and computeconfigurations. Further, we find such an active curation
strategy to in fact be complementary to standard KD, and can
be effectively combined to train highly performant inferenceefficient models. Our simple and scalable pretraining framework, ACED, achieves state-of-the-art results across 27 zeroshot classification and image-text retrieval tasks with upto
11% less inference FLOPs. We further demonstrate that
ACED yields strong vision-encoders for training generative
multimodal models, outperforming larger vision encoders
on image-captioning and visual question-answering tasks.

1. Introduction
Deploying multimodal foundation models [14] like
CLIP [119] on edge devices is challenging due to their
high inference costs and memory footprints. This motivates the need for smaller, inference-efficient models that
retain the performance of their larger counterparts. Knowledge distillation (KD) [65] is a classic model compression
technique—a method for transferring knowledge from a
large-scale “teacher” model into a smaller “student” model,
via matching student and teacher logits, features or activations. KD has been extensively deployed for creating small,
performant models like Gemma-2 [148], Phi-3 [4], Gemini1.5 Flash [126], and SD3-Turbo [136].
* equal contribution †equal supervision
‡work done while interning at Google
correspondence to: vishaal.udandarao@bethgelab.org or
nikparth@google.com

Figure 1. Performance-Inference Frontier. Our ACED models
(Active Curation with Explicit Distillation, see Sec. 3), achieve a
new pareto frontier for performance (measured by ImageNet top-1
zero-shot validation accuracy) vs. inference GFLOPs.

Here, our primary goal is to downscale contrastive visionlanguage models , without compromising downstream performance. Prior works in this domain focus on complex
KD strategies as the key solution—the current SoTA (TinyCLIP [173] and MobileCLIP [155]) use combinations of
methods such as strong data-augmentation policies, multiteacher ensembles, synthetic captions, weight-inheritance,
weight-pruning, and bespoke model architectures.
In this work, we seek a simplified approach. Specifically,
we propose using active data curation as an effective strategy for distilling large vision-language models (VLMs) into
smaller and more FLOP-efficient multimodal models.
Our method, ACID (Active Curation as Implicit
Distillation), automatically selects samples that reduce the
performance gap between a small student model and a larger
reference model. Under appropriate conditions, we find this
is a surprisingly effective distillation approach. To the best
of our knowledge, this is a novel finding since prior works in

14422

