This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniRestore: Unified Perceptual and Task-Oriented Image Restoration Model
Using Diffusion Prior
I-Hsiang Chen1*
1

Wei-Ting Chen1,2,4* Yu-Wei Liu1 Yuan-Chun Chiang1
Sy-Yen Kuo1,3 Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5

National Taiwan University 2 Microsoft 3 Chang Gung University
4
UC Merced 5 Google Research
70

Image restoration aims to recover content from inputs
degraded by various factors, such as adverse weather, blur,
and noise. Perceptual Image Restoration (PIR) methods improve visual quality but often do not support downstream
tasks effectively. On the other hand, Task-oriented Image
Restoration (TIR) methods focus on enhancing image utility
for high-level vision tasks, sometimes compromising visual
quality. This paper introduces UniRestore, a unified image
restoration model that bridges the gap between PIR and TIR
by using a diffusion prior. The diffusion prior is designed to
generate images that align with human visual quality preferences, but these images are often unsuitable for TIR scenarios. To solve this limitation, UniRestore utilizes encoder
features from an autoencoder to adapt the diffusion prior
to specific tasks. We propose a Complementary Feature
Restoration Module (CFRM) to reconstruct degraded encoder features and a Task Feature Adapter (TFA) module to
facilitate adaptive feature fusion in the decoder. This design
allows UniRestore to optimize images for both human perception and downstream task requirements, addressing discrepancies between visual quality and functional needs. Integrating these modules also enhances UniRestore’s adaptability and efficiency across diverse tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of UniRestore
in both PIR and TIR scenarios.

1. Introduction
Image restoration [42, 55] aims to restore content degraded
by various factors, such as adverse weather, blur, and
noise. These factors often reduce image perceptual visibility [28, 60] and negatively impact the performance of highProject page: https://unirestore.github.io/
* Indicates equal contribution.

Segmentation (mIoU%)

Abstract

UniRestore

67
64
61

NAFNet PromptIR
DIP
URIE

58
55

DiffBIR
DiffUIR

52

PIR
TIR
UniRestore

49
57

PIR

TIR

Perceptual /

63

66

69

72

75

Classification (acc%)

(a) Perceptual IR

<Restoration=

60

UniRestore

(b) Task-oriented IR
Task-oriented Image Restoration

<Classification=

<Segmentation=

<Any Task=

Unified Restoration
Degraded Image

Restored Image

(c) UniRestore

Figure 1. Illustration of UniRestore’s capabilities: (a) PIR
- Comparison with existing methods (e.g., URIE [52], PromptIR [42]) under adverse conditions. (b) TIR - Demonstrating
UniRestore’s robustness for downstream tasks such as classification and segmentation. (c) Unified Restoration - UniRestore’s versatility in addressing PIR and TIR.

level vision applications, such as object detection [66, 73]
and semantic segmentation [43, 49]. Various restoration
methods have been developed and studied over the past
decades to address this wide range of image restoration
challenges. These include methods focused on improving
perceptual quality [44, 72] as well as those designed to enhance the performance of downstream tasks [52, 69].
Perceptual image restoration (PIR) algorithms focus on
improving visual clarity and fidelity of images by removing or reducing visible artifacts that affect their aesthetic
quality. These methods focus on dealing with noise reduction [8, 72], low-light enhancement [70, 75], deblur-

17969

