This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Align3R: Aligned Monocular Depth Estimation for Dynamic Videos
Jiahao Lu1 * Tianyu Huang2∗ Peng Li1 Zhiyang Dou3 Cheng Lin3
Zhiming Cui4 Zhen Dong5 Sai-Kit Yeung1 Wenping Wang6 Yuan Liu1,7†
1
HKUST 2 CUHK 3 HKU 4 ShanghaiTech 5 WHU 6 TAMU 7 NTU
* Equal contribution. Project page: https://igl-hkust.github.io/Align3R.github.io/

Align3R

Align3R

Align3R

Dynamic videos

Video depth

Dynamic point clouds & camera poses

Figure 1. Align3R estimates temporally consistent video depth, dynamic point clouds, and camera poses from monocular videos.

Abstract

video with superior performance than baseline methods.

Recent developments in monocular depth estimation methods enable high-quality depth estimation of single-view images but fail to estimate consistent video depth across different frames. Very recent works address this problem by applying a video diffusion model to generate video depth conditioned on the input video, which is training-expensive and
can only produce scale-invariant depth values without camera poses. In this paper, we propose a novel video-depth estimation method called Align3R to estimate temporally consistent depth maps for a dynamic video. Our key idea is to
utilize the recent DUSt3R model to align estimated monocular depth maps of different timesteps. First, we fine-tune the
DUSt3R model with additional estimated monocular depth
as inputs for the dynamic scenes. Then, we apply optimization to reconstruct both depth maps and camera poses.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that Align3R estimates
consistent video depth and camera poses for a monocular

1. Introduction

† Corresponding Author

Monocular depth estimation for monocular videos or image sequences is a crucial problem in computer vision and
robotics with applications in various downstream tasks, e.g.,
camera localization, scene reconstruction, and so on [3,
15, 35]. Traditional depth estimation methods [37] rely
on strong camera motions with a large baseline to estimate
dense depth maps with stereo matching. Despite its wide
applications, estimating monocular depth is challenging due
to its ill-posed nature.
Recent works [2, 4, 9, 16, 18, 56, 57, 61] address this
ill-posed problem in a data-driven manner, which enables
relative or metric depth estimation on single-view images
after training on large-scale datasets. Though impressive
performance is achieved on the depth estimation for a single image, estimating temporally consistent video depth
for a dynamic video is still challenging. All these singleview depth estimators have difficulty maintaining a consis-

22820

