This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Adversarial Transferability with Checkpoints of a Single Model’s
Training
Shixin Li1 *, Chaoxiang He2 *, Xiaojing Ma1 , Bin Benjamin Zhu3 , Shuo Wang2 , Hongsheng Hu4 ,
Dongmei Zhang3 , Linchen Yu1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Microsoft Corporation 4 University of Newcastle, Australia
{shixinli, lindahust, linchenyu}@hust.edu.cn, {hechaoxiang, wangshuosj}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{binzhu, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com, hongsheng.hu@newcastle.edu.au

Abstract
Adversarial attacks threaten the integrity of deep neural networks (DNNs), particularly in high-stakes applications. In this paper, we present a novel black-box adversarial attack that leverages the diverse checkpoints generated
during a single model’s training trajectory. Unlike conventional ensemble attacks that require multiple surrogate
models with diverse architectures, our approach exploits the
intrinsic diversity captured over different training stages of
a single surrogate model. By decomposing the learned representations into task-intrinsic and task-irrelevant components, we employ an accuracy gap-based selection strategy
to identify checkpoints that predominantly capture transferable, task-intrinsic knowledge. Extensive experiments
on ImageNet and CIFAR-10 demonstrate that our method
consistently outperforms traditional ensemble attacks in
terms of transferability, even under resource-constrained
and practical settings. This work offers a resource-efficient
solution for crafting highly transferable adversarial examples and provides new insights into the dynamics of adversarial vulnerability.

any prior knowledge of their parameters or structures, thus
posing an especially severe threat.
Crafting effective adversarial examples in a black-box
setting is inherently more challenging than in white-box
scenarios. To improve transferability, model ensemble attacks [1, 18, 29] use multiple surrogate models with diverse
architectures to identify common vulnerabilities and generate adversarial examples that generalize to unseen models. However, ensemble attacks have notable limitations.
For novel or specialized datasets, pre-trained models are often scarce, forcing the extensive time and computational resources required to train multiple models from scratch. This
reliance can be impractical under limited resources or significantly drive up the cost of a black-box adversarial attack.
This raises an intriguing research question: Can a single model’s training trajectory capture the diversity of different architectures to match the transferability of ensemble
attacks? At first glance, this seems unlikely since a training process confined to one architecture may not reflect the
structural differences across models, implying that adversarial examples from one model’s checkpoints might not
transfer effectively to models with different architectures.
However, checkpoints within a model’s training trajectory can exhibit the diversity seen in ensemble attacks. The
knowledge learned during training can be split into taskintrinsic knowledge, which is essential for solving the task
and generalizes across models, and task-irrelevant knowledge, which is tied to specific training data or model structure and often fails to transfer. Ensemble attacks leverage task-intrinsic knowledge across different architectures
to craft adversarial examples that target common vulnerabilities, thereby enabling their transferability to new, unseen
architectures.
We hypothesize that task-intrinsic knowledge embedded
in a model’s checkpoints can be harnessed to produce adversarial examples that strongly transfer across architectures.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks pose a serious threat to deep neural network (DNN) models, especially in high-stakes applications
such as autonomous driving, healthcare, and financial systems [5, 6]. These attacks often involve subtle perturbations
that can lead to erroneous predictions [7, 24]. The threat
is exacerbated by the transferability property of adversarial examples: crafted on a surrogate model, these examples
can deceive target models with the same or different architectures. This transferability enables black-box adversarial
attacks, where adversaries can compromise models without
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

20685

