This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Retrieving Semantics from the Deep: an RAG Solution for Gesture Synthesis
M. Hamza Mughal1
Rishabh Dabral1
Merel C.J. Scholman3
Vera Demberg1,2
Christian Theobalt1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC 2 Saarland University 3 Utrecht University

Figure 1. Our RAG-G ESTURE approach produces semantically meaningful gestures by leveraging explicit knowledge to retrieve exemplar gestures from the sparse semantic data [34] and guiding the diffusion-based generation process through Retrieval Augmentation.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human communication is a complex and multifaceted process that involves both verbal and non-verbal elements.
Non-verbal communication comprises co-speech gestures,
which are defined as body and hand movements that are
temporally aligned and semantically integrated with the
speech [38]. Gestures convey information in tandem with
speech and language, and can carry additional meaning that
enhances the semantic construct of the message. Generating
meaningful full-body gestures is therefore important for the
communicative efficacy of virtual humans in telepresence
and content-creation domains.
McNeill [38, 39] categorizes gestures into beat gestures,
which are rhythmic movements driven by prosody, and
semantics-driven gestures, which carry the communicative
intent. Semantic gestures are context-driven and bear a specific meaning that complements the utterance [6, 38]. Rulebased approaches retrieve these semantic gestures and combine them for generation, while neural methods leverage the
data to learn the synthesis process. However, the former
tends to result in an unnatural outcome and the latter struggles to generate semantic gestures because these gestures,
while being a part of the existing datasets, occur rather sporadically compared to the rhythmic beat gestures [47].
In this work, we address this issue by framing the problem as a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) task. We

Non-verbal communication often comprises of semantically
rich gestures that help convey the meaning of an utterance.
Producing such semantic co-speech gestures has been a major challenge for the existing neural systems that can generate rhythmic beat gestures, but struggle to produce semantically meaningful gestures. Therefore, we present RAGG ESTURE, a diffusion-based gesture generation approach
that leverages Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) to
produce natural-looking and semantically rich gestures.
Our neuro-explicit gesture generation approach is designed
to produce semantic gestures grounded in interpretable linguistic knowledge. We achieve this by using explicit domain
knowledge to retrieve exemplar motions from a database of
co-speech gestures. Once retrieved, we then inject these semantic exemplar gestures into our diffusion-based gesture
generation pipeline using DDIM inversion and retrieval
guidance at the inference time without any need of training.
Further, we propose a control paradigm for guidance, that
allows the users to modulate the amount of influence each
retrieval insertion has over the generated sequence. Our
comparative evaluations demonstrate the validity of our approach against recent gesture generation approaches. The
reader is urged to explore the results on our project page.

16578

