This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoDPO: Omni-Preference Alignment for Video Diffusion Generation
Runtao Liu1 * Haoyu Wu2 * Ziqiang Zheng1 Chen Wei3
Yingqing He1 Renjie Pi1 Qifeng Chen1
1
2
HKUST
Renmin University of China 3 Johns Hopkins University
rliuay@connect.ust.hk

haoyuwu556@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract

low-quality data are prevalent. First, regarding the videos
themselves, some samples suffer from low resolution, blurriness, and temporal inconsistencies, which negatively impact the visual quality of generated videos. Second, regarding text-video pairs, mismatches between text descriptions
and video content reduce the model’s ability to be controlled
accurately through text prompts. Similar challenges are also
seen in content generation for other modalities, such as language and image generation, where noisy pre-training data
lowers output quality and reliability.
User preference alignment through Direct Preference
Optimization, or DPO [42], has been proposed and tackles
these issues well for language and image generation [52].
In this paper, we focus on aligning video diffusion models with user preferences with the idea of DPO with crucial
adaption modifications, termed VideoDPO, described next.
First, we introduce a comprehensive preference scoring
system, OmniScore, which assesses both the visual quality and semantic alignment of generated videos. We build
the DPO reward model based on OmniScore. While existing visual reward models [24] typically focus on only one
of these aspects, our experiments (see Fig. 3d) show that
visual quality and semantic alignment, as well as various
facets of visual quality, have low correlation. Addressing a
single aspect does not inherently capture the others. Thus,
a comprehensive scoring system like OmniScore, which integrates both dimensions, is crucial for accurate evaluation
and alignment.
Second, obtaining preference annotations for generated
videos is challenging due to the high cost of human labeling. To address this, we propose a pipeline that automatically generates preference pair data by strategically sampling from multiple videos conditioned on a given prompt,
thereby eliminating the reliance on human annotation.
Third, to further improve the performance and efficiency of alignment training, we introduce a novel data reweighting method, OmniScore-Based Re-Weighting. This
approach is based on the intuition that certain preference
pairs, particularly those with larger quality differences, have
a greater impact on alignment. By analyzing the frequency

Recent progress in generative diffusion models has
greatly advanced text-to-video generation. While text-tovideo models trained on large-scale, diverse datasets can
produce varied outputs, these generations often deviate
from user preferences, highlighting the need for preference
alignment on pre-trained models. Although Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [42] has demonstrated significant
improvements in language and image generation [52], we
pioneer its adaptation to video diffusion models and propose a VideoDPO pipeline by making several key adjustments. Unlike previous image alignment methods that focus solely on either (i) visual quality or (ii) semantic alignment between text and videos, we comprehensively consider both dimensions and construct a preference score accordingly, which we term the OmniScore. We design a
pipeline to automatically collect preference pair data based
on the proposed OmniScore and discover that re-weighting
these pairs based on the score significantly impacts overall
preference alignment. Our experiments demonstrate substantial improvements in both visual quality and semantic
alignment, ensuring that no preference aspect is neglected.
Code and data are available at https://videodpo.
github.io/.

1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement of computing power and the increasing scale of training data, generative diffusion models
have made remarkable progress in generation quality and
diversity for video generation. However, current video diffusion models often fall short of meeting user preferences in
both generation quality and text-video semantic alignment,
ultimately compromising user satisfaction.
These issues often arise from the pre-training data, and
filtering out all low-quality data is challenging given the
vast often of pre-training data. Specifically, two types of
* Equal Contribution.

8009

