This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correcting Deviations from Normality: A Reformulated Diffusion Model for
Multi-Class Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Farzad Beizaee1,2 *
1

Gregory A. Lodygensky2
Christian Desrosiers1
2
ÉTS Montreal
CHU-Sainte-Justine Montreal

Jose Dolz1

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion models have spurred research
into their application for Reconstruction-based unsupervised anomaly detection. However, these methods may
struggle with maintaining structural integrity and recovering the anomaly-free content of abnormal regions, especially in multi-class scenarios. Furthermore, diffusion
models are inherently designed to generate images from
pure noise and struggle to selectively alter anomalous regions of an image while preserving normal ones. This leads
to potential degradation of normal regions during reconstruction, hampering the effectiveness of anomaly detection. This paper introduces a reformulation of the standard diffusion model geared toward selective region alteration, allowing the accurate identification of anomalies. By
modeling anomalies as noise in the latent space, our proposed Deviation correction diffusion (DeCo-Diff) model
preserves the normal regions and encourages transformations exclusively on anomalous areas. This selective approach enhances the reconstruction quality, facilitating effective unsupervised detection and localization of anomaly
regions. Comprehensive evaluations demonstrate the superiority of our method in accurately identifying and localizing anomalies in complex images, with pixel-level AUPRC
improvements of 11-14% over state-of-the-art models on
well-known anomaly detection datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/farzad-bz/DeCo-Diff

Figure 1. Diffusion model reconstruction vs. DeCo-Diff. Fine
details and patterns of a normal image are changed during the
standard forward-backward diffusion process: the “wood” image
becomes a “Tile” sample when T steps are applied. In contrast,
DeCo-Diff does not alter the details of the image using T correction steps, maintaining the appearance of the original input image.

1. Introduction

but compiling a curated set of labeled abnormal images is
costly, due to the complexity of the annotation process as
well as the scarcity and high variability of potential abnormalities.
The prevailing approach to address UAD frames this task
as a cold-start1 anomaly detection problem, which is typically approached through three primary categories of methods: reconstruction [20, 24, 31], synthesizing [13, 25, 34,
35] and embedding [2, 3, 22, 23] based approaches. While
popular, single-class approaches hinder the scalability of
these strategies, as the amount of storage and training time
increases with the number of categories. Thus, there is a real
need for novel methods that can accommodate the multiclass scenario in a robust and efficient manner.
Under the unified scenario, however, the distribution of
normal data becomes more complex. As a result, the success of this task hinges on robust models capable of effectively learning the joint distribution across diverse types of
objects. Diffusion models [27], and more particularly Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [10], have
emerged as strong candidates for this endeavor. Indeed,
diffusion models have demonstrated strong potential in reconstructing the normal counterpart of an image to localize
anomalous regions [4, 38].
Diffusion models, though highly effective at generating
high-quality samples, are designed to generate images from
pure noise. Therefore, their direct application to modify

Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) is paramount to a
wide span of computer vision problems across strategic and
high-impact domains, such as industrial inspection [2, 16],
video surveillance [19, 30], or medical imaging [24, 26].
The main goal of UAD is to identify corrupted images, as
well as anomalous pixels within these images, by leveraging only normal images. This setting naturally arises in
many scenarios, where normal samples are readily available

1 Also commonly known as one-class classification (OCC).

* Corresponding author: farzad.beizaee.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

19088

