This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UMotion: Uncertainty-driven Human Motion Estimation from
Inertial and Ultra-wideband Units
Huakun Liu
Hiroki Ota
Xin Wei
Yutaro Hirao
Monica Perusquı́a-Hernández
Hideaki Uchiyama
Kiyoshi Kiyokawa
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
{liu.huakun.li0, ota.hiroki.oc6, wei.xin.wy0, yutaro.hirao}@is.naist.jp
{m.perusquia, hideaki.uchiyama, kiyo}@is.naist.jp

Abstract
Sparse wearable inertial measurement units (IMUs)
have gained popularity for estimating 3D human motion.
However, challenges such as pose ambiguity, data drift,
and limited adaptability to diverse bodies persist. To address these issues, we propose UMotion, an uncertaintydriven, online fusing-all state estimation framework for 3D
human shape and pose estimation, supported by six integrated, body-worn ultra-wideband (UWB) distance sensors
with IMUs. UWB sensors measure inter-node distances to
infer spatial relationships, aiding in resolving pose ambiguities and body shape variations when combined with anthropometric data. Unfortunately, IMUs are prone to drift,
and UWB sensors are affected by body occlusions. Consequently, we develop a tightly coupled Unscented Kalman
Filter (UKF) framework that fuses uncertainties from sensor data and estimated human motion based on individual body shape. The UKF iteratively refines IMU and
UWB measurements by aligning them with uncertain human motion constraints in real-time, producing optimal estimates for each. Experiments on both synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of UMotion in
stabilizing sensor data and the improvement over state of
the art in pose accuracy. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/kk9six/umotion.

Inter-sensor distances

Uncertainty

Figure 1. UMotion integrates IMU-UWB data inputs and pose outputs uniformly under uncertainty, constrained by individual body
structure. The online state estimation framework iteratively refines sensor data confidence and stabilizes pose estimation, reducing ambiguities and improving robustness.

performance, ergonomics, and emerging areas in humancomputer interaction [3, 8, 14, 31].
One of the widely chosen wearable sensors for 3D human motion estimation is IMU. Commercial systems, such
as Xsens [27], utilize 17 or more IMUs for comprehensive pose coverage. While highly accurate, these densely
placed IMUs are inconvenient and intrusive. Recent studies
have reduced the required number of IMUs to just six—
placed on the forearms, lower legs, pelvis, and head—
while still achieving promising performance through datadriven methods [1, 7, 10, 31, 32, 34, 35, 37, 39]. With
fewer IMUs, pose estimation becomes under-constrained
and prone to ambiguity. Recent work has attempted to
disambiguate poses by incorporating temporal consistency,
physics-based constraints, or additional, easy-to-integrate
sensors [1, 10, 35]. However, these methods still face significant challenges, including noisy sensor data, body shape
variations, and ambiguities arising from under-constrained
setups with sparse sensors.
In this work, we propose UMotion, an uncertainty-driven
human motion estimation framework that combines online
state estimation with an integrated system of six inertial and

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human motion from wearable sensors has
become increasingly popular due to their portability, accessibility, and versatility. Wearable sensors, such as inertial
measurement units (IMUs), enable continuous monitoring
of body motion measurements across unrestricted spaces.
These advances shift motion capture from controlled laboratory environments to everyday settings [13, 19, 32, 41].
This transition benefits fields such as healthcare, sports

7085

