This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniDrive: A Holistic Vision-Language Dataset for Autonomous Driving
with Counterfactual Reasoning
Shihao Wang1,2∗ , Zhiding Yu1† , Xiaohui Jiang3 , Shiyi Lan1 , Min Shi1∗ ,
Nadine Chang1 , Jan Kautz1 , Ying Li3 , Jose M. Alvarez1 ,
1

NVIDIA

2

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 3 Beijing Institute of Technology
https://github.com/NVlabs/OmniDrive

OmniDrive
Rules

3D Perception

‧ Traffic Light

Infos
‧ Ego Condition
‧ 3D Objects
‧ Map Elements
‧ Multi-view Image

Simulated Trajectory

‧ Collision
‧ Drivable Area

Omni-Q
Actual Trajectory

Refer

…

Muti-view Images
QA Generation

Question

Q-Former

√ Decision making & Planning
Multi-view Image
Features

Generate

…

Large
Language
Model

Omni-L

MLP Projector
Scene
Description

General
Traffic Rule

3D
Grounding

Counterfactual
Reasoning

Decision making
& Planning

× Counterfactual & Reasoning

3D Position

Figure 1. OmniDrive is a holistic vision-language dataset for autonomous driving, utilizing counterfactual reasoning to generate high-quality
QA data from simulated and actual trajectories. We explore two baseline models: Omni-Q, which designs vision-language models (VLMs)
from a 3D perception standpoint, and Omni-L, which builds from VLMs to enhance 3D integration.

1. Introduction

Abstract
The advances in vision-language models (VLMs) have led to
a growing interest in autonomous driving to leverage their
strong reasoning capabilities. However, extending these
capabilities from 2D to full 3D understanding is crucial
for real-world applications. To address this challenge, we
propose OmniDrive, a holistic vision-language dataset that
aligns agent models with 3D driving tasks through counterfactual reasoning. This approach enhances decision-making
by evaluating potential scenarios and their outcomes, similar to human drivers considering alternative actions. Our
counterfactual-based synthetic data annotation process generates large-scale, high-quality datasets, providing denser
supervision signals that bridge planning trajectories and
language-based reasoning. Futher, we explore two advanced
OmniDrive-Agent frameworks, namely Omni-L and Omni-Q,
to assess the importance of vision-language alignment versus 3D perception, revealing critical insights into designing
effective LLM-agents. Significant improvements on the DriveLM Q&A benchmark and nuScenes open-loop planning
demonstrate the effectiveness of our dataset and methods.

The recent rapid development of 2D Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [1, 20, 25] and their strong reasoning capabilities have led to a stream of applications in end-to-end autonomous driving [4, 34, 41, 48, 53]. However, extending
capabilities from 2D to 3D understanding is crucial for unlocking potential in real-world applications. Although previous works [33, 42] have shown successful applications
of LLM-agents in autonomous driving (AD), a holistic and
principled framework from dataset to LLM-agent is needed
to fully extend VLMs’ 2D understanding and reasoning capabilities to 3D geometric and spatial understanding.
Recent drive LLM-agent works feature the importance
of datasets [8, 33, 34, 38, 41, 42]. Many are presented as
question-answering (Q&A) datasets to train and benchmark
the LLM-agent for either reasoning or planning. Noteably,
benchmarks that involve planning [8, 41, 42] still resort to using expert trajectories for an open-loop setting on real-world
sessions (e.g. nuScenes). However, recent studies [22, 54]

22442

*Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
† Corresponding author: zhidingy@nvidia.com.

