This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QuartDepth: Post-Training Quantization for
Real-Time Depth Estimation on the Edge
Xuan Shen1 , Weize Ma2 , Jing Liu3 , Changdi Yang1 , Rui Ding2 , Quanyi Wang4 ,
Henghui Ding5 , Wei Niu6 , Yanzhi Wang1 , Pu Zhao1 ,* Jun Lin2 ,* Jiuxiang Gu7 *
1
Northeastern University, 2 Nanjing University, 3 Monash University,
4
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, 5 Fudan University,
6
University of Georgia, 7 Adobe Research
{shen.xu,yanz.wang,p.zhao}@northeastern.edu, weizema@smail.nju.edu.cn,
jlin@nju.edu.cn, jigu@adobe.com

Abstract

1.00
0.95

Accuracy (𝛿1)

Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) has emerged as a
pivotal task in computer vision, supporting numerous realworld applications. However, deploying accurate depth estimation models on resource-limited edge devices, especially
Application-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs), is challenging due to the high computational and memory demands.
Recent advancements in foundational depth estimation deliver impressive results but further amplify the difficulty of
deployment on ASICs. To address this, we propose QuartDepth which adopts post-training quantization to quantize
MDE models with hardware accelerations for ASICs. Our
approach involves quantizing both weights and activations
to 4-bit precision, reducing the model size and computation cost. To mitigate the performance degradation, we
introduce activation polishing and compensation algorithm
applied before and after activation quantization, as well
as a weight reconstruction method for minimizing errors in
weight quantization. Furthermore, we design a flexible and
programmable hardware accelerator by supporting kernel fusion and customized instruction programmability, enhancing
throughput and efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate
that our framework achieves competitive accuracy while enabling fast inference and higher energy efficiency on ASICs,
bridging the gap between high-performance depth estimation and practical edge-device applicability. Code: https:
//github.com/shawnricecake/quart-depth

0.90

Unquantized
ViT-Small
ViT-Large
ViT-Giant
Model Size

0.85
0.80
0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Latency (s)

1.25

1.5

1.75

2

Figure 1. Visualization of accuracy vs. latency on ASIC for monocular depth estimation models with different backbones.

1. Introduction

including robotics [82], autonomous driving [77, 97], virtual
reality [57], and 3D reconstruction [54, 92, 105]. The objective of MDE is to estimate depth information from a single
image, making it particularly valuable for scenarios where
stereo or multi-view depth sensors are impractical. Previously, depth estimation methods have been classified into
three main approaches: learning metric depth [3, 89, 91, 99],
learning relative depth [8, 9, 86, 87], and learning affineinvariant depth [54, 56, 93, 94, 105]. Among these, metric
depth methods have demonstrated remarkable performance
across benchmarks but often show limited generalizability
to diverse, real-world images, which is compounded by variations in camera parameters between training and test sets.
Recently, inspired by the rise of “foundation models” [5, 107], a new wave of MDE models [4, 66, 90, 95] has
been developed. These foundational MDE models exhibit
superior generalization and robustness, effectively extending
their applicability to in-the-wild images and accommodating
a wide array of camera parameters. However, while these
foundational MDE models achieve impressive performance,

Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) is a critical task in
computer vision, essential for a wide range of applications
* Corresponding Author

11448

