This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Updates for Language Adaptation in Visual-Language Tracking
Xiaohai Li1 , Bineng Zhong1 ,* Qihua Liang1†, Zhiyi Mo2 , Jian Nong2 , Shuxiang Song1
1
Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology,
Ministry of Education,Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
2
Guangxi Colleges and Universities Key Laboratory of Intelligent Software,
Wuzhou University, Wuzhou 543002, China
bruc 0619@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn
zhiyim@gxuwz.edu.cn, nongjian@gxuwz.edu.cn,songshuxiang@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn

Abstract

VL
Model

Results

Template
&
Language
Dynamic

Search
Frame

Yes

VL
Model

Results

Search
Frame

（a）Method based on static
reference

（b）Ours method based on dynamic
reference

white bear playing in the swimming pool.
#001

a polar bear on
the rocks.
#001

Update

The consistency between the semantic information provided
by the multi-modal reference and the tracked object is crucial for visual-language (VL) tracking. However, existing
VL tracking frameworks rely on static multi-modal references to locate dynamic objects, which can lead to semantic discrepancies and reduce the robustness of the tracker.
To address this issue, we propose a novel vision-language
tracking framework, named DUTrack, which captures the
latest state of the target by dynamically updating multimodal references to maintain consistency. Specifically,
we introduce a Dynamic Language Update Module, which
leverages a large language model to generate dynamic language descriptions for the object based on visual features
and object category information. Then, we design a Dynamic Template Capture Module, which captures the regions in the image that highly match the dynamic language
descriptions. Furthermore, to ensure the efficiency of description generation, we design an update strategy that assesses changes in target displacement, scale, and other factors to decide on updates. Finally, the dynamic template and
language descriptions that record the latest state of the target are used to update the multi-modal references, providing
more accurate reference information for subsequent inference and enhancing the robustness of the tracker. DUTrack
achieves new state-of-the-art performance on five mainstream vision-language and two vision-only tracking benchmarks, including LaSOT, LaSOText , TNL2K, OTB99-Lang,
MGIT, GOT-10K, and UAV123. Code and models are available at https://github.com/GXNU-ZhongLab/DUTrack.

Template
&
Language
Static

LaSOT:bear-9

#078

#607

the bear is white.

a polar bear
a polar bear is by
swimming in water.
the pool.

#078

#607

Init language annotations

#931

#931

Language annotations of our method

（c）The Biased between language description and tracking objects

Figure 1. Comparison of different VL Tracking. (a) This visionlanguage tracking framework [16, 36] relies on static multi-modal
references. (b) Our proposes VL framework with dynamically updating multi-modal references. (c) Compare the semantic bias between static annotations and those generated by our method.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding Author
† Corresponding Author

Visual-language (VL) tracking aims to effectively track
objects in video sequences based on multi-modal reference information provided by natural language descriptions and template frames. In real-world scenarios, objects may undergo appearance changes. These changes can
cause discrepancies between the multi-modal reference information and the target, making the tracking task more
complex. Therefore, maintaining the consistency between
multi-modal target reference information and the target’s

19165

