This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A New Statistical Model of Star Speckles for Learning to Detect and
Characterize Exoplanets in Direct Imaging Observations
Théo Bodrito * 1 , Olivier Flasseur2 , Julien Mairal3 , Jean Ponce1, 4 ,
Maud Langlois2 , Anne-Marie Lagrange5, 6
1

Département d’Informatique de l’École normale supérieure (ENS-PSL, CNRS, Inria)
Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Centre de Recherche Astrophysique de Lyon UMR 5574,
ENS de Lyon, CNRS, Villeurbanne, F-69622, France
3
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
4
Courant Institute and Center for Data Science, New York University
5
Laboratoire d’Études Spatiales et d’Instrumentation en Astrophysique, Observatoire de Paris,
Université PSL, Sorbonne Université, Université Paris Diderot
6
Université Grenoble Alpes, Institut de Planétologie et d’Astrophysique de Grenoble
2

observations y

Abstract

speckles

The search for exoplanets is an active ﬁeld in astronomy,
with direct imaging as one of the most challenging methods due to faint exoplanet signals buried within stronger
residual starlight. Successful detection requires advanced
image processing to separate the exoplanet signal from this
nuisance component. This paper presents a novel statistical model that captures nuisance ﬂuctuations using a multiscale approach, leveraging problem symmetries and a joint
spectral channel representation grounded in physical principles. Our model integrates into an interpretable, end-toend learnable framework for simultaneous exoplanet detection and ﬂux estimation. The proposed algorithm is evaluated against the state of the art using datasets from the
SPHERE instrument operating at the Very Large Telescope
(VLT). It signiﬁcantly improves the precision-recall tradeoff, notably on challenging datasets that are otherwise unusable by astronomers. The proposed approach is computationally efﬁcient, robust to varying data quality, and well
suited for large-scale observational surveys. 1

speckles

spectral diversity:
homothety

star
real
exoplanet

synthetic
exoplanet
temporal diversity:
rotation

PSF h
speckles

speckles

t

t

Figure A. Left: typical observations y and PSF h from the
SPHERE instrument in ASDI mode. The synthetic exoplanet is
very bright for illustration purposes. Right: temporal slice along
the vertical line.

effects like gravitational wobbles or transit dimming, direct
imaging captures visual evidence of exoplanets and circumstellar disks by recording a direct image of their emitted
ﬂux. Analyzing this light across spectral bands provides
insights into exoplanet properties (e.g., temperature, gravity), atmospheric compositions, molecular abundances, and
formation processes [2, 9, 66]. While existing technology
has enabled imaging of young, giant, gaseous exoplanets,
next-generation ground- and space-based telescopes may
soon image rocky exoplanets in habitable zones, advancing the search for life beyond our Solar System [10, 14].

1. Introduction
Direct imaging [30, 65] is an astronomical technique to
probe the vicinity of young, nearby stars, where exoplanets and circumstellar disks—structures of dust and gas from
which exoplanets can form—are found [36, 37]. Unlike indirect methods [57], which detect exoplanets via secondary
* Corresponding author: theo.bodrito@inria.fr
1 Code is available at https : / / github . com / theobdt /

exomild

1230

