This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIIF: Hierarchical Encoding based Implicit Image Function for Continuous
Super-resolution
Yuxuan Jiang1 , Ho Man Kwan1 , Tianhao Peng1 , Ge Gao1 , Fan Zhang1 ,
Xiaoqing Zhu2 , Joel Sole2 , and David Bull1
1
Visual Information Laboratory, University of Bristol, UK
{yuxuan.jiang, hm.kwan, tianhao.peng, ge1.gao, fan.zhang, dave.bull}@bristol.ac.uk
2
Netflix Inc., USA, {xzhu, jsole}@netflix.com

Abstract
Recent advances in implicit neural representations (INRs)
have shown significant promise in modeling visual signals for various low-vision tasks including image superresolution (ISR). INR-based ISR methods typically learn
continuous representations, providing flexibility for generating high-resolution images at any desired scale from their
low-resolution counterparts. However, existing INR-based
ISR methods utilize multi-layer perceptrons for parameterization in the network; this does not take account of the
hierarchical structure existing in local sampling points and
hence constrains the representation capability. In this paper, we propose a new Hierarchical encoding based Implicit
Image Function for continuous image super-resolution,
HIIF, which leverages a novel hierarchical positional encoding that enhances the local implicit representation, enabling it to capture fine details at multiple scales. Our
approach also embeds a multi-head linear attention mechanism within the implicit attention network by taking additional non-local information into account. Our experiments show that, when integrated with different backbone
encoders, HIIF outperforms the state-of-the-art continuous
image super-resolution methods by up to 0.17dB in PSNR.
The source code of HIIF will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/YuxuanJJ/HIIF.

EDSR only
35.4

PSNR (dB)

35.2
35.0
34.8
34.6

EDSR +HIIF

x2

RDN only
31.6

RDN +HIIF

x3

SwinIR only
SwinIR +HIIF
x4
29.7

31.4

29.5

31.2

29.3

31.0

29.1

34.4 EDSR RDN SwinIR 30.8 EDSR RDN SwinIR 28.9 EDSR RDN SwinIR

Figure 1. (Top) Radar plots illustrating the performance of proposed HIIF and five other INR-based continuous ISR methods.
(Bottom) HIIF versus ISR methods (based on the same architectures) with fixed in-distribution up-sampling scales. All results are
based on the DIV2K validation set.

significantly advanced the state of the art in recent years
[14, 15, 24, 27, 34–36, 38, 54, 59, 60, 62]. Most of these
approaches perform up-sampling through sub-pixel convolution and train a static model for a single scaling factor;
this constrains use cases, especially when the target resolution is unknown. To address this issue, arbitrary and continuous scale ISR methods have been proposed which enable
a single model to achieve up-sampling with multiple and/or
continuous scales [20, 52]. This enhances model generalization and flexibility and has attracted significant attention
in recent years.
Recent work on arbitrary-scale ISR methods has often
exploited implicit neural representations (INRs) [10, 32,
57]. INRs were first proposed to build a bridge between dis-

1. Introduction
Image Super-Resolution (ISR) is an important research
area in computer vision and graphics, focusing on the reconstruction of high-resolution images from their downsampled low-resolution versions. The challenging nature
of ISR, which arises from the need to recover fine details
based on limited information, makes it an enduring problem
in the field of low-level vision. Recent ISR research contributions leverage deep learning techniques, which have

2289

