This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Spectrum Learning for Remote Sensing Change Detection
Qi Zang1∗ , Dong Zhao1∗ , Shuang Wang1B , Dou Quan1 , Zhun Zhong2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China
2
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
shwang@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Change detection (CD) holds significant implications for
Earth observation, in which pseudo-changes between
bitemporal images induced by imaging environmental factors are key challenges. Existing methods mainly regard
pseudo-changes as a kind of style shift and alleviate it
by transforming bitemporal images into the same style using generative adversarial networks (GANs). Nevertheless, their efforts are limited by the complexity of optimizing GANs and the absence of guidance from physical properties. This paper finds that the spectrum transformation
(ST) has the potential to mitigate pseudo-changes by aligning in the frequency domain carrying the style. However,
the benefit of ST is largely constrained by two drawbacks:
1) limited transformation space and 2) inefficient parameter search. To address these limitations, we propose a
Feature Spectrum learning (FeaSpect) that adaptively eliminate pseudo-changes in the latent space. For the drawback 1), FeaSpect directs the transformation towards stylealigned discriminative features via feature spectrum transformation (FST). For the drawback 2), FeaSpect allows FST
to be trainable, efficiently discovering optimal parameters
via extraction box with adaptive attention and extraction
box with learnable strides. Extensive experiments on challenging datasets demonstrate that our method remarkably
outperforms existing methods and achieves a commendable
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. Importantly,
our method can be easily injected into other frameworks,
achieving consistent improvements.

itoring [4, 17, 25–27, 42, 43, 49, 55–58]. Driven by deep
learning (DL) and dominated by the siamese structure [3],
change detection has gained tremendous progress in recent
years [1, 31].

1. Introduction

Nevertheless, challenges persist in handling pseudochanges between bitemporal images induced by variations
in the imaging environment (sun elevations or seasons)
[8, 23, 48, 60], as shown in Fig. 1(a). This issue significantly hampers the network’s ability to accurately recognize actually changed pixels. The fundamental cause
of pseudo-changes is the disagreement between sensormeasured values and the object’s spectral reflectance and radiance [13, 41], i.e., spectral shift. Existing transformationbased methods regard this spectral shift as essentially analogous to a visual appearance or style shift. These methods alleviate this issue mainly by leveraging generative adversarial networks (GANs) to transform bitemporal image
styles into the same one [14, 15, 32]. However, these efforts are limited by the complexity of optimizing GANs and
the absence of guidance from physical properties, leading
to transformed images susceptible to distortion from artifacts (See the orange rectangles in Fig. 1(b)). Inspired by
the recently proven effective spectrum transformation (ST),
a frequency-domain carrying style-oriented style alignment
method [46], we explore its potential application for the first
time in the CD task to mitigate pseudo-changes. We deploy the ST to the CD task by replacing the low-frequency
(cropped with fixed extraction box) Fourier amplitude spectrum of an image with that of its paired image. Compared
with GANs, ST attains better visual consistency with targeted low-level statistics (See Fig. 1(c)) and yields more
accurate detection performance (See Table 3).

As one of the fundamental Earth observation tasks, change
detection (CD) utilizes bitemporal remote sensing data to
achieve dynamic understanding of the Earth’s surface and
provides pixel-wise ground object change maps for land use
survey, urban expansion, and ecological environment mon-

However, as shown in Fig. 1(d), there have two drawbacks: 1) Limited Transformation Space. The transformation space of ST aims for visual consistency of images, while the optimization space for high-level perception
tasks focuses on extracting discriminative features of images. This mismatched learning goal causes the feature to
lose essential semantic information (See the pink rectangles
in Fig. 1(a)-(c)), consequently diminishing discriminabil-

* Equal contribution. B Co-corresponding author.

12647

