This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Virtual Try-On with Synthetic Pairs and Error-Aware Noise
Scheduling
Nannan Li
Boston University

Kevin J. Shih
NVIDIA

nnli@bu.edu

Bryan A. Plummer
Boston University
bplum@bu.edu

Abstract
Given an isolated garment image in a canonical product
view and a separate image of a person, the virtual try-on
task aims to generate a new image of the person wearing the target garment. Prior virtual try-on works face
two major challenges in achieving this goal: a) the paired
(human, garment) training data has limited availability;
b) generating textures on the human that perfectly match
that of the prompted garment is difficult, often resulting
in distorted text and faded textures. Our work explores
ways to tackle these issues through both synthetic data as
well as model refinement. We introduce a garment extraction model that generates (human, synthetic garment) pairs
from a single image of a clothed individual. The synthetic
pairs can then be used to augment the training of virtual
try-on. We also propose an Error-Aware Refinement-based
Schrödinger Bridge (EARSB) that surgically targets localized generation errors for correcting the output of a base
virtual try-on model. To identify likely errors, we propose
a weakly-supervised error classifier that localizes regions
for refinement, subsequently augmenting the Schrödinger
Bridge’s noise schedule with its confidence heatmap. Experiments on VITON-HD and DressCode-Upper demonstrate that our synthetic data augmentation enhances the
performance of prior work, while EARSB improves the
overall image quality. In user studies, our model is preferred by the users in an average of 59% of cases. Code is
available at this link.

Figure 1. Example of our proposed Error-Aware Refinement
Schrödinger Bridge (EARSB). EARSB can refine the artifacts
(marked by bounding boxes) in an initial image generated by an
existing try-on model. The initial image is generated by [18] in the
top row and by [29] in the bottom row. + Syn. Data in the last column strengthens the refinement with the proposed synthetic data
augmentation in training.

1. Introduction

ated images. For example, as illustrated in the second row
of Fig. 1, the logo and the text on the t-shirt noticeably
fade away in the initial image generated by a prior try-on
model [29]. These imperfections stem from two primary
challenges in virtual try-on: limited data availability and
the complexity of accurate garment texture deformation. To
address these issues, we propose a two-pronged approach:
augmenting training data through cost-effective synthetic
data generation, and surgically targeting known generation
artifacts using our proposed Error-Aware Refinement-based
Schrödinger Bridge (EARSB).

Virtual try-on aims to generate a photorealistic image of
a target person wearing a prompted product-view garment
[22, 36, 39]. It allows users to visualize how garments
would fit and appear on their bodies without the need for
physical trials. While recent methods have made significant strides in this field [18, 29, 35, 36], noticeable artifacts
such as text distortion and faded textures persist in gener-

21238

At a minimum, the training data of virtual try-on requires paired (human, product-view garment) images. The
product-view garment image is a canonical, front-facing
view of the clothing with a clean background. A substantial
amount of data is needed to capture the combinatorial space
comprising all possible human poses, skin tones, viewing

