This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoGe: Unlocking Accurate Monocular Geometry Estimation for Open-Domain
Images with Optimal Training Supervision
Ruicheng Wang1 Sicheng Xu2 Cassie Dai3 Jianfeng Xiang4 Yu Deng2 Xin Tong2 Jiaolong Yang2
1
USTC 2 Microsoft Research 3 Harvard 4 Tsinghua University
{t-ruiwang,sichengxu,t-jxiang,dengyu,jiaoyan}@microsoft.com {cccassied,xtong.gfx}@gmail.com

Figure 1. Given any image, our method reconstructs an affine-invariant 3D point map of the scene and can also produce a depth map and
the camera focal length. The model yields high-quality shapes and generalizes well to open-domain images. (Best view with zoom)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D geometry of general scenes is a fundamental task in computer vision. While 3D reconstruction from a set of images has been extensively studied
with Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [1, 43] and Multi-View
Stereo (MVS) [44, 59] techniques, recovering the 3D geometry from a single image in an arbitrary domain remains
a significant challenge due to its highly ill-posed nature.

We present MoGe, a powerful model for recovering 3D geometry from monocular open-domain images. Given a single image, our model directly predicts a 3D point map of
the captured scene with an affine-invariant representation,
which is agnostic to true global scale and shift. This new
representation precludes ambiguous supervision in training and facilitates effective geometry learning. Furthermore, we propose a set of novel global and local geometry supervision techniques that empower the model to learn
high-quality geometry. These include a robust, optimal, and
efficient point cloud alignment solver for accurate global
shape learning, and a multi-scale local geometry loss promoting precise local geometry supervision. We train our
model on a large, mixed dataset and demonstrate its strong
generalizability and high accuracy. In our comprehensive evaluation on diverse unseen datasets, our model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods across all
tasks, including monocular estimation of 3D point map,
depth map, and camera field of view.

For monocular geometry estimation (MGE), a common
approach involves first estimating a depth map, subject to an
unknown scale (and shift), and then combining it with camera intrinsics to recover the 3D shape via unprojection [38,
64]. For the former, significant advancements in monocular
depth estimation (MDE) have been achieved in recent years
by training on large-scale data [24, 39, 60, 61, 66] or leveraging powerful pretrained models [18, 21, 27]. However,
inferring camera intrinsics (e.g., focal length) from single
images remains challenging due to the high degree of ambiguity when strong geometric cues are absent. Inaccurate
camera parameters can lead to significant geometry distortions even when used with ground truth depth maps. Recently, DUSt3R [52] proposed predicting a 3D point map

5261

