This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VidSeg: Training-free Video Semantic Segmentation based on Diffusion Models

Ours

EmerDiff

Ours

EmerDiff

Qian Wang1 Abdelrahman Eldesokey1 Mohit Mendiratta2 Fangneng Zhan2
Adam Kortylewski2 Christian Theobalt2 Peter Wonka1
1
KAUST
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Figure 1. We propose the first training-free diffusion-based approach for Video Semantic Segmentation (VSS). Our approach produces
temporally consistent predictions compared to the diffusion-based image segmentation method EmerDiff [15].

Abstract
We introduce the first training-free approach for Video
Semantic Segmentation (VSS) based on pre-trained diffusion
models, termed VidSeg. A growing research direction attempts to employ diffusion models to perform downstream vision tasks by exploiting their deep understanding of image semantics. Yet, the majority of these approaches have focused
on image-related tasks like semantic segmentation, with less
emphasis on video tasks such as VSS. Ideally, diffusion-based
image semantic segmentation approaches can be applied to
videos in a frame-by-frame manner. However, we find their
performance on videos to be subpar due to the absence of
any modeling of temporal information inherent in the video
data. To this end, we tackle this problem and introduce a
framework tailored for VSS based on pre-trained image and
video diffusion models. We propose building a scene context
model based on the diffusion features, where the model is
autoregressively updated to adapt to scene changes. This
context model predicts per-frame coarse segmentation maps
that are temporally consistent. To refine these maps further,
we propose a correspondence-based refinement strategy that
aggregates predictions temporally, resulting in more confi-

dent predictions. Finally, we introduce a masked modulation
approach to upsample the coarse maps to a high-quality full
resolution. Experiments show that our proposed approach
significantly outperforms existing training-free image semantic segmentation approaches on various VSS benchmarks
without any training or fine-tuning. Moreover, it rivals supervised VSS approaches on the VSPW dataset despite not
being explicitly trained for VSS.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [2, 9, 17, 20, 21] have showcased remarkable capabilities in learning complex data distributions effectively. This was achieved by exploiting their scalability to
train on large-scale datasets [1, 22], allowing them to generate high-quality images and videos with soaring diversity
and fidelity. Interestingly, those models could learn a profound understanding of images and their semantics as an
indirect consequence of their large-scale training. This entitled them to be considered as Foundation Models with high
degrees of generalizability and comprehension of images.
As a result, a growing research direction attempts to use
the internal representations of diffusion models to perform

22985

