This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified, Resilient, and Explainable Adversarial Patch Detector
Vishesh Kumar, Akshay Agarwal
Trustworthy BiometraVision Lab, IISER Bhopal, India
{vishesh22,akagarwal}@iiserb.ac.in

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), backbone architecture in
‘almost’ every computer vision task, are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, particularly physical out-of-distribution
(OOD) adversarial patches. Existing defense models often
struggle with interpreting these attacks in ways that align
with human visual perception. Our proposed AdvPatchXAI
approach introduces a generalized, robust, and explainable defense algorithm designed to defend DNNs against
physical adversarial threats. AdvPatchXAI employs a novel
patch decorrelation loss that reduces feature redundancy
and enhances the distinctiveness of patch representations,
enabling better generalization across unseen adversarial
scenarios. It learns prototypical parts self-supervised, enhancing interpretability and correlation with human vision.
The model utilizes a sparse linear layer for classification,
making the decision process globally interpretable through
a set of learned prototypes and locally explainable by pinpointing relevant prototypes within an image. Our comprehensive evaluation shows that AdvPatchXAI closes the
“semantic” gap between latent space and pixel space and
effectively handles unseen adversarial patches even perturbed with unseen corruptions, thereby significantly advancing DNN robustness in practical settings1 .

several unconstrained environmental factors, including rotation and translation properties of the objects. This led
to the development of adversarial patch attacks, where a
patterned sub-image is placed over the input image to deceive the model [8]. Due to expectation over transformation (EoT) constraints while learning the patches, they
are highly effective in real-world scenarios. They can fool
any possible deep networks, including vision transformers
[5, 12, 20, 37, 53, 64].

1. Introduction

Therefore, securing DNN-based systems against stealthy
and practical attacks is vital, especially in safety-critical
domains such as autonomous driving, robotics, smart
homes/cities, smart industries, video surveillance, and
healthcare. Researchers are constantly developing new
defenses or protection strategies [17, 21, 24, 39, 57] to
tackle the limitations of DNNs against physical adversarial
patches, but understanding their decision-making processes
and evaluating the resiliency of the defense algorithms is increasingly important [42, 47]. It is to be noted that physical
adversarial patches are visible to the human eye; however,
they need extra precautions since the added patch can also
be a real-world object. Due to this, automated detection of
patches is challenging and leads to several false rejections.
It is essential to align human and machine vision to address
this issue. One way can be to align the functional properties of human and machine vision [16]. This alignment will
help improve the machine’s ability to detect and respond to
out-of-distribution (OOD) adversarial patches more effectively in several generalized settings, such as unseen patches
and unseen perturbation, ensuring better security and performance. “To the best of our knowledge, no existing defense provides both high generalizability and explainability
against adversarial patch attacks.”

Besides being dominant in computer vision over the years,
deep neural networks (DNNs) have been found vulnerable
to adversarial attacks [1, 19]. Early adversarial attacks on
DNNs tricked models using slight, barely noticeable noise
[18, 52]. While the above attack perturbs an entire image,
a few attacks often target the main object in the scene naturally [29, 63]. Another type of adversaries are poisoning
attacks, misled models during training by introducing incorrect patterns, such as in poison frogs and backdoor attacks [3, 9, 50]. Surprisingly, many of these minute adversarial attacks are ineffective in the physical world due to
1 https : / / github . com / tbvl22 / Unified - resilient and-Explainable-Adversarial-Patch-detector

For the first time, we propose a generalized, robust,
and explainable adversarial patch detector, namely AdvPatchXAI, by adding the model explainability since the beginning of the development of the network in contrast to the
traditional methods, which plug in the explainability module once the model is thoroughly trained. Proposed AdvPatchXAI uses a sparse linear layer that connects learned
prototypical parts to classes. This setup allows a user to

30387

