This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CamPoint: Boosting Point Cloud Segmentation with Virtual Camera
Jianhui Zhang1 * Yizhi Luo1∗
1

Zicheng Zhang2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

2

Xuecheng Nie3

JD Retail

3

Bonan Li1†

MT Lab, Meitu Inc.

~ 5X faster

Ground Truth

PCM
PTv3
OneFormer
POINT MAMBA
Mamba3D
CamPoint (Ours)

Euclidean Distance

Parameters
10M

Euclidean Distance + Camera Perspective Slice Distance (Ours)
(b)

(a)

Figure 1. Our CamPoint achieves accurate neighbor selection and provides high-level information to facilitate global perception. (a) For
each target point, camera perspective slice distance is introduced to focus on identifying semantically related neighbors that belong to the
same part, while ignoring semantically unrelated neighbors. (b) Compared with state-of-the-art methods [15, 17, 24, 57, 72] on S3DIS [1],
ScanNetV2 [7] and ShapeNetPart [65], our method is implemented with lower parameters and offers higher inference speed.

Abstract
Local features aggregation and global information perception are the fundamental to point cloud segmentation. However, existing works often fall short in effectively identifying
semantic relevant neighbors and face challenges in endowing each point with high-level information. Here, we propose CamPoint, an innovative method that employs virtual
cameras to solve the above problems. The core of CamPoint lies in introducing the novel camera visibility feature for points, where each dimension encodes the visibility
of that point from a specific camera. Leveraging this feature, we propose the camera perspective slice distance for
accurate relevant neighbor searching and design the camera parameter embedding to deliver rich feature representations for global interaction. Specifically, the camera perspective slice distance between two points is defined as a
similarity metric derived from their camera visibility fea-

tures, whereby an increased number of shared cameras observing both points corresponds to a reduced distance between them. To effectively facilitate global semantic perception, we assign each camera an optimizable embedding
and then integrate these embeddings into the original spatial features based on visibility attributes, thereby obtaining
high-level features enriched with camera priors. Additionally, the state space model characterized by linear computational complexity is employed as the operator to achieve
global learning with efficiency. Comprehensive experiments
on multiple datasets show that our CamPoint surpasses the
current state-of-the-art in multiple datasets, achieving low
training cost and fast inference speed.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author and Project leader (libonan@ucas.ac.cn)

With the rising demand for remote sensing [60], autonomous driving [20], virtual reality [2], and robotic navigation [6], point cloud segmentation has become a critical
technique for achieving accurate 3D environmental percep-

11822

