This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid Reciprocal Transformer with Triplet Feature
Alignment for Scene Graph Generation
Jiawei Fu, Tiantian Zhang, Kai Chen, and Qi Dou
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
jwfu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Scene graph generation is a pivotal task in computer vision, focusing on comprehensive identification of visual relation tuples embedded within images. The advancement of
methods involving triplets has sought to enhance task performance by integrating triplets as contextual features for
more precise predicate identification from component level.
However, challenges remain due to interference from multirole objects in overlapping tuples within complex environments, which impairs the model’s ability to distinguish and
align specific triplet features for reasoning diverse semantics of multi-role objects. To address these issues, we introduce a novel framework that incorporates a triplet alignment model into a hybrid reciprocal transformer architecture, starting from using triplet mask features to guide the
learning of component-level relation graphs. To effectively
distinguish multi-role objects characterized by overlapping
visual relation tuples, we introduce a triplet alignment
loss, which provides multi-role objects with aligned features from triplet and helps customize them. Additionally,
we explore the inherent connectivity between hybrid aligned
triplet and component features through a bidirectional refinement module, which enhances feature interaction and
reciprocal reinforcement. Experimental results demonstrate
that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the Visual Genome and Action Genome datasets, underscoring its effectiveness and adaptability. Project page:
hq-sg.github.io.

{man-using-computer}

{cup-near-man}

{computer-near-cup}

Figure 1. Complex scenarios often involve overlapping visual relationships, where a single object can assume multiple roles across
different triplets. Identifying these multi-role objects is challenging without knowing their aligned triplet features. Moreover,
aligned triplets (top) and component (bottom) representations correspond to the same visual relation tuple, offering an opportunity
to leverage their inherent relevance for reciprocal refinement.

lem by organizing regressed component-level subject, object, and predicate with post-precessing. However, accurate
predicate recognition remains challenging in scene graph
generation, as many images incorporate extraneous visual
elements. Directly regressing the predicate often introduces
noise from features of unaligned visual relation tuples, owing to the lack of definite corresponding subject-object pair
features for the visual relation. Accordingly, recent researches [4, 14, 22, 57] have utilized triplet features as prototypes for contextual semantics, combining detailed cues
with broader triplet features to enhance predicate recognition accuracy from the triplet level.
Despite advancements, accurately matching predicates
to corresponding visual tuples and identifying all potential
visual relations in complex environments remains challenging, even with triplet features. As illustrated in Figure 1, a
single scene can contain multiple visual relations, with one
object assuming multiple roles (either as subject or object)
across different tuples. The analogous component-level features of multi-role objects increase overlap and misalignment among visual relation triplets, thereby hindering the
model’s ability to differentiate among triplets and to further reason diverse semantics of multi-role objects with-

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation [2, 4, 18] aims to find all possible
visual relation tuples {subject-predicate-object} given an
image. It has wide applications in various fields, including
image retrieval [37, 40, 49], visual grounding [13, 32, 47],
and visual question answering [31, 33, 55]. Typically, diverse two-stage [20, 22, 41, 56, 57] and one-stage [4, 16,
18, 25, 46] methods have been developed to solve this prob-

8953

