This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoEdit: On Learning Quantity Perception for Multi-object Image Editing

Ten koalas

“...with smilling faces”

“→bears, in a natural field”

“→corgis, by the sea”

“→foxes, in a natural field”

“...vibrant portrait painting of
Salvador Dalı́”

“...with blanket”

“→mice, by the sea”

“→foxes, futuristic metropolis style”

“...dark horror style”
“...steampunck style”

MoEdit (Ours)

Reference

TurboEdit

Three rabbits and two foxes

MoEdit (Ours)

Reference

TurboEdit

Yanfeng Li1 Kahou Chan1 Yue Sun1 Chantong Lam1 Tong Tong2
Zitong Yu3 Keren Fu4 Xiaohong Liu5∗ Tao Tan1 *
1
Macao Polytechnic University 2 Fuzhou University 3 Great Bay University
4
Sichuan University 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Figure 1. Visual comparisons of our MoEdit with TurboEdit [52]. Reference represents input images. Five different images edited by each
method are based on five distinct text prompts.

Abstract

style transfer, object reinvention, and background regeneration, while ensuring consistent quantity perception between
inputs and outputs, even with a large number of objects.
To achieve this, we introduce the Feature Compensation
(FeCom) module, which ensures the distinction and separability of each object attribute by minimizing the inbetween interlacing. Additionally, we present the Quantity
Attention (QTTN) module, which perceives and preserves
quantity consistency by effective control in editing, without relying on auxiliary tools. By leveraging the SD model,
MoEdit enables customized preservation and modification
of specific concepts in inputs with high quality. Experimental results demonstrate that our MoEdit achieves StateOf-The-Art (SOTA) performance in multi-object image editing. Data and codes are available at https://github.
com/Tear-kitty/MoEdit.

Multi-object images are prevalent in various real-world
scenarios, including augmented reality, advertisement design, and medical imaging. Efficient and precise editing
of these images is critical for these applications. With the
advent of Stable Diffusion (SD), high-quality image generation and editing have entered a new era. However, existing methods often struggle to consider each object both
individually and part of the whole image editing, both of
which are crucial for ensuring consistent quantity perception, resulting in suboptimal perceptual performance. To
address these challenges, we propose MoEdit, an auxiliaryfree multi-object image editing framework. MoEdit facilitates high-quality multi-object image editing in terms of
* Corresponding author.

2683

