This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Domain Prompt Tuning and Generation for Single Domain
Generalization

1

Zhipeng Xu1 *, De Cheng1†, Xinyang Jiang2 *, Nannan Wang1 , Dongsheng Li2 , Xinbo Gao3
Xidian University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia, 3 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
xu zhipeng@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {dcheng,nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn
{xinyangjiang, dongsli}@microsoft.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract

Source domain 𝓓𝑆

Source domain 𝓓𝑆

Source domain 𝓓𝑆

A photo
of a horse

Single domain generalization (SDG) aims to learn a robust
model, which could perform well on many unseen domains
while there is only one single domain available for training. One of the promising directions for achieving singledomain generalization is to generate out-of-domain (OOD)
training data through data augmentation or image generation. Given the rapid advancements in AI-generated content
(AIGC), this paper is the first to propose leveraging powerful pre-trained text-to-image (T2I) foundation models to
create the training data. However, manually designing textual prompts to generate images for all possible domains is
often impractical, and some domain characteristics may be
too abstract to describe with words. To address these challenges, we propose a novel Progressive Adversarial Prompt
Tuning (PAPT) framework for pre-trained diffusion models.
Instead of relying on static textual domains, our approach
learns two sets of abstract prompts as conditions for the diffusion model: one that captures domain-invariant category
information and another that models domain-specific styles.
This adversarial learning mechanism enables the T2I model
to generate images in various domain styles while preserving key categorical features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, achieving superior performances to state-of-the-art single-domain
generalization approaches.

Continuous Generation
Existing domain
augmentation method

Generate

T2I foundation model

Generate

T2I foundation
model
Generate

A photo of a horse
in the style of
Domain-specific
prompt

Add into
Adversarial
training
Domain prompt

pool (𝑃)

Generate domain 𝓓𝐺

Generate domain 𝓓𝐺

Generate domain 𝓓𝐺

Figure 1. Comparison between our method with existing single
domain generalization approaches: Left: the traditional domain
augmentation-based method; Middle: the simple T2I foundation
model with text description as prompt for domain augmentation;
Right: our proposed method, which learns two sets of abstract
prompts (i.e., category and domain) instead of the static textual
domains, to instruct the diffusion-based T2I foundation model for
generating images of a wide range of domain styles.

1. Introduction

testing on out-of-distribution (OOD) or previously unseen
datasets. To mitigate the issue of domain shift, various approaches have been proposed, including domain adaptation
(DA) [9, 10, 20, 39, 44, 48, 50] and domain generalization
(DG) methods [11, 24, 37, 38, 66, 68, 69, 73, 76]. These
methods typically involve incorporating data from multiple
training domains (e.g., multi-domain generalization), or the
target domain data. Despite showing encouraging performances on the OOD data, it may not always be applicable
due to data acquiring budget or privacy issue. Therefore, we
aim to address the more challenging but more useful task,
i.e., single domain generalization (SDG).
SDG aims to train a model on a labeled source domain
and perform well on multiplied unseen target domains. This
learning paradigm presents significant challenges because
only one source domain is given and the target domains
are usually unseen/out-of-distribution and unavailable during training. Existing works have made considerable suc-

Recent machine learning models (e.g., deep neural network) have achieved remarkable performances on various
tasks, under the key assumption that the training and testing
data are independently and identically distributed (i.e., iid).
However, this assumption often does not hold in many realworld scenarios due to the domain shift, especially when
1 † Corresponding author: De Cheng (dcheng@xidian.edu.cn)
2 ∗ Equal contribution.

18584

