This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Personalized Aesthetics Assessment:
Employing Physique Aesthetics Assessment as An Exemplification
Haobin Zhong† Shuai He† Anlong Ming†,∗ Huadong Ma
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zhonghaobin2023, hs19951021, mal, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

While the Generic Aesthetics Assessment (GAA) partially
captures subjectivity, it primarily reflects collective aesthetic
judgments. The Personalized Aesthetics Assessment (PAA)
aims to accurately predict an individual’s unique perception
of aesthetics, thereby catering to the increasing demand for
customization. PAA enables applications such as recommendations or enhancements to generate personalized outcomes
that align with individual aesthetic preferences.
The prevailing PAA paradigm [1] typically consists of two
stages, namely pre-training and fine-tuning (Fig. 2 (a)). In
the pre-training stage, GAA datasets are used for supervised
training to build a foundational backbone that imparts prior
knowledge to the PAA model. In the fine-tuning stage, the
user’s PAA dataset is employed to fine-tune the PAA model
by incorporating individual aesthetic experiences. However,
the practical application of the prevailing paradigm gradually
reveals three inherent questions:
Q1: Is a GAA Model a Superior Choice for PAA Pretraining? The GAA model possesses an inherent characteristic: the collective preferences of GAA cannot satisfy
the transitivity conditions as rational individual preferences
do. This limitation can be proved by the voting paradox [2],
which highlights issues of non-transitivity or obstacles in
translating individual choices to collective decisions based
on the “majority rule.”

The Personalized Aesthetics Assessment (PAA) aims to accurately predict an individual’s unique perception of aesthetics.
With the surging demand for customization, PAA enables
applications to generate personalized outcomes by aligning
with individual aesthetic preferences. The prevailing PAA
paradigm involves two stages: pre-training and fine-tuning,
but it faces three inherent challenges: 1) The model is pretrained using datasets of the Generic Aesthetics Assessment
(GAA), but the collective preferences of GAA lead to conflicts
in individualized aesthetic predictions. 2) The scope and
stage of personalized surveys are related to both the user and
the assessed object; however, the prevailing personalized
surveys fail to adequately address assessed objects’ characteristics. 3) During application usage, the cumulative multimodal feedback from an individual holds great value that
should be considered for improving the PAA model but unfortunately attracts insufficient attention. To address the aforementioned challenges, we introduce a new PAA paradigm
called PAA+, which is structured into three distinct stages:
pre-training, fine-tuning, and continual learning. Furthermore, to better reflect individual differences, we employ a
familiar and intuitive application, physique aesthetics assessment (PhysiqueAA), to validate the PAA+ paradigm. We
propose a dataset called PhysiqueAA50K, consisting of over
50,000 annotated physique images. Furthermore, we develop
a PhysiqueAA framework (PhysiqueFrame) and conduct a
large-scale benchmark, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance. Our research is expected to provide an innovative roadmap and application for the PAA community. The
code and dataset are available in here.

Individual Preferences
Annotator ①: A > B > C
Annotator ②: B > C > A
Annotator ③: C > A > B

Collective Preferences
A vs. B: (①, ③) A > B (②)
B vs. C: (①, ②) B > C (③)
A vs. C: (②, ③) C > A (①)

A>B>C>A?

Figure 1. Simple example of the voting paradox in GAA, where
three annotators do aesthetic assessments for images A, B, and C.
If A > B, it implies A’s aesthetic score is higher than B’s.

In GAA, as shown in Fig. 1, collective preferences create
a preference order of A > B > C > A, resulting in an
inevitable cyclical majority when the number of assessed
images reaches a certain large quantity (where the likelihood
of a cyclical majority occurring is 100% [3, 4]), regardless
of the number of annotators. This example demonstrates
that, in GAA datasets, collective preferences fail to satisfy
the transitivity conditions as rational individual preferences

1. Introduction
The saying “beauty is in the eye of the beholder” implies that
each individual possesses a distinct perception of aesthetics.
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

2935

