This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-HOLD: Video Hand Object Interaction Reenactment via adaptive
Layout-instructed Diffusion Model
Yingying Fan1†
Quanwei Yang2
Kaisiyuan Wang3∗
Hang Zhou3
Yingying Li3
3
3
1∗
Haocheng Feng
Errui Ding
Yu Wu
Jingdong Wang3
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
3
University of Science and Technology of China
Baidu Inc.

Driving Video
Original
Object

Layout Guidance

Target
Object

Generated Video

Figure 1. Cross-Reenactment Results by our Re-HOLD framework. Given a driving video and a target object, Re-HOLD can
synthesize high-fidelity Human-Object Interaction (HOI) videos, even when the sizes of the target and original object differ significantly.

Abstract
Current digital human studies focusing on lip-syncing and
body movement are no longer sufficient to meet the growing industrial demand, while human video generation techniques that support interacting with real-world environments (e.g., objects) have not been well investigated. Despite human hand synthesis already being an intricate problem, generating objects in contact with hands and their interactions presents an even more challenging task, especially when the objects exhibit obvious variations in size
and shape. To tackle these issues, we present a novel video
reenactment framework focusing on Human-Object Inter-

action (HOI) via an adaptive Layout-instructed Diffusion
model (Re-HOLD). Our key insight is to employ specialized
layout representation for hands and objects, respectively.
Such representations enable effective disentanglement of
hand modeling and object adaptation to diverse motion sequences. To further improve the quality of the HOI generation, we design an interactive textural enhancement module
for both hands and objects by introducing two independent
memory banks. We also propose a layout adjustment strategy for the cross-object reenactment scenario to adaptively
adjust unreasonable layouts caused by diverse object sizes
during inference. Comprehensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that our proposed framework
significantly outperforms existing methods. Project page:

† Work done during an internship at Baidu Inc.
* Corresponding author

17550

