This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-Equalized Dense Video Captioning
Kangyi Wu*

Pengna Li* Jingwen Fu Yizhe Li Yang Wu Yuhan Liu
Jinjun Wang
Sanping Zhou†
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University

{wukangyi747600, sauerfisch, fu1371252069, lyz0515, wuyang_cc, liuyuhan200095}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
jinjun@mail.xjtu.edu.cn spzhou@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Dense video captioning aims to localize and caption all
events in arbitrary untrimmed videos. Although previous
methods have achieved appealing results, they still face the
issue of temporal bias, i.e, models tend to focus more on
events with certain temporal characteristics. Specifically, 1)
the temporal distribution of events in training datasets is uneven. Models trained on these datasets will pay less attention to out-of-distribution events. 2) long-duration events
have more frame features than short ones and will attract
more attention. To address this, we argue that events, with
varying temporal characteristics, should be treated equally
when it comes to dense video captioning. Intuitively, different events tend to have distinct visual differences due to
varied camera views, backgrounds, or subjects. Inspired by
that, we intend to utilize visual features to have an approximate perception of possible events and pay equal attention
to them. In this paper, we introduce a simple but effective
framework, called Event-Equalized Dense Video Captioning (E2 DVC) to overcome the temporal bias and treat all
possible events equally. Experimental results on ActivityNet
Captions and YouCook2 dataset validate the effectiveness
of the proposed methods and show State-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance on dense video captioning.

Figure 1. Temporal distribution of ground truth and predicted
events on ActivityNet Captions training set. The prediction is from
PDVC [48]. (a) The distribution of all events in time dimensions.
Horizontal and vertical axes represent the normalized center time
position and duration respectively. It’s obvious that events are distributed unevenly in these two temporal dimensions. (b) The proportion of the number of events in different duration intervals. It’s
clear that the predicted short-duration events are much fewer than
the ground truth.

1. Introduction
In recent years, an increasing number of works have begun
to focus on video understanding[21, 22, 28, 38, 44, 50, 57]
where video captioning is a challenging branch. Conventional video captioning [5, 12, 33, 34, 42] aims to generate a
natural sentence to describe the main event of a short video
clip. However, they face considerable challenges when ap-

plied to realistic videos which are usually long, untrimmed,
and contain a variety of events. To address the challenge,
dense video captioning (DVC) [19] is proposed to automatically localize and caption all events in an untrimmed video.
Existing DVC methods [6, 17, 18, 30, 60] follow a common pipeline to first extract image features from downsampled video frames with pre-trained image encoder [15,
35, 39, 46] and then delicately design a framework to ex-

∗ These authors contributed equally.

† Corresponding author.

8417

