This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G EN 3C: 3D-Informed World-Consistent Video Generation
with Precise Camera Control
Xuanchi Ren* 1,2,3 Tianchang Shen* 1,2,3 Jiahui Huang1 Huan Ling1,2,3 Yifan Lu1
Merlin Nimier-David1 Thomas Müller1 Alexander Keller1 Sanja Fidler1,2,3 Jun Gao1,2,3
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute
Inputs

Cameras

Dynamic video

Sparse views

Single view

Generated video

Frame number

Input

Dolly zoom

Driving simulation

Cinematic effect

N

26

39

106

118

12

22

42

69

0

4

8

12

0

4

8

12

Original

Lane change (4m)

Original

Editing

Figure 1. G EN 3C can generate long and temporally consistent videos with precise camera control. We apply it to various applications, including single-view
and sparse-views novel view synthesis, monocular dynamic video novel view synthesis, and driving simulation. With an explicit 3D cache, G EN 3C further
supports generating videos with cinematic effects, such as Dolly Zoom which simultaneously changes poses and intrinsics, and 3D editing.

Abstract

structure from the camera pose. The model, instead, can
focus all its generative power on previously unobserved
regions, as well as advancing the scene state to the next
frame. Our results demonstrate more precise camera control
than prior work, as well as state-of-the-art results in sparseview novel view synthesis, even in challenging settings such
as driving scenes and monocular dynamic video. Results are
best viewed in videos. Check out our webpage! 1

We present G EN 3C, a generative video model with precise
Camera Control and temporal 3D Consistency. Prior video
models already generate realistic videos, but they tend to
leverage little 3D information, leading to inconsistencies,
such as objects popping in and out of existence. Camera
control, if implemented at all, is imprecise, because camera
parameters are mere inputs to the neural network which must
then infer how the video depends on the camera. In contrast,
G EN 3C is guided by a 3D cache: point clouds obtained by
predicting the pixel-wise depth of seed images or previously
generated frames. When generating the next frames, G EN 3C
is conditioned on the 2D renderings of the 3D cache with
the new camera trajectory provided by the user. Crucially,
this means that G EN 3C neither has to remember what it
previously generated nor does it have to infer the image

1. Introduction
Creating immersive visual renderings that convey real-world
scenery while enabling flexible viewing, manipulation and
simulation thereof, is a longstanding aspiration in computer
graphics, supporting industries including movie production,
VR/AR, robotics and social platforms. However, traditional
1 https : / / research . nvidia . com / labs / toronto - ai /
GEN3C/

6121

