This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object-Centric Prompt-Driven Vision-Language-Action Model
for Robotic Manipulation
Xiaoqi Li1,2 , Jingyun Xu1 , Mingxu Zhang1 , Jiaming Liu1 , Yan Shen1,2 , Iaroslav Ponomarenko1,2 ,
Jiahui Xu1 , Liang Heng1,2 , Siyuan Huang1 , Shanghang Zhang1 , Hao Dong1,2∗
1 School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 PKU-Agibot Lab

Abstract
In robotic, task goals can be conveyed through various
modalities, such as language, goal images, and goal videos.
However, natural language can be ambiguous, while images
or videos may offer overly detailed specifications. To tackle
these challenges, we introduce CrayonRobo that leverages
comprehensive multi-modal prompts that explicitly convey
both low-level actions and high-level planning in a simple manner. Specifically, for each key-frame in the task
sequence, our method allows for manual or automatic generation of simple and expressive 2D visual prompts overlaid
on RGB images. These prompts represent the required task
goals, such as the end-effector pose and the desired movement direction after contact. We develop a training strategy
that enables the model to interpret these visual-language
prompts and predict the corresponding contact poses and
movement directions in SE(3) space. Furthermore, by sequentially executing all key-frame steps, the model can complete long-horizon tasks. This approach not only helps the
model explicitly understand the task objectives but also enhances its robustness on unseen tasks by providing easily
interpretable prompts. We evaluate our method in both
simulated and real-world environments, demonstrating its
robust manipulation capabilities.

1. Introduction
As thoughtful helpers for humans, it is crucial for robots
to understand and successfully execute their assigned tasks.
Various approaches exist to convey the goals that robots
should achieve, such as language descriptions, goal images,
or goal videos. Language instructions [2, 23, 24, 31, 33,
38, 41, 45, 46, 56] can be ambiguous and brief, making it
challenging for the robot to understand the tasks, or they can
be overly detailed, increasing the difficulty for the model
to follow. Goal images [6, 7, 25, 39, 61], while providing an accurate target, often contain extraneous informa∗ Corresponding author. First author’s email: xl3062@columbia.edu.

tion irrelevant to the task, such as background elements and
non-interactive objects. Some methods use human demonstration videos [10] or generated videos [6, 13, 14, 57] to
outline tasks step-by-step. However, human demonstration
videos are burdensome to encode, and generated videos depend heavily on their quality. To address these challenges,
several works propose using visual prompts as a convenient
yet expressive modality for goal specification. These visual prompts are easy for users to create and can effectively
convey the precise goals that the policy model should focus
on.
Among visual prompt-conditioned approaches, methods
[20, 32, 42, 47, 59] have attempted to convey task goals
more effectively. The RT-Sketch [49] method emphasizes
drawing the target state of the most relevant object to represent the goal. However, it only depicts the final state and
overlooks the intermediate key frames that are crucial for
successful task execution. In contrast, RT-Trajectory [20]
(Figure1.(c)) illustrates the entire movement path of the endeffector, which helps bridge the gap between task components and enhances generalization. Despite its advantages,
they provide only positional information and neglect the
action directional information, which is also critical for accurate task completion. Additionally, as trajectories become
longer and overlap between key-frames, they can create confusion for the model regarding overall task planning.
This leads us to consider: is there any way to precisely
and non-redundantly convey the goal while also clearly communicating the end-effector’s action? Since key-frames represent important or bottleneck steps of the gripper during the
task execution [18, 19, 26, 46, 58], we propose CrayonRobo,
an approach that automatically generates or draws crayonstyle visual prompts on images to effectively represent both
low-level actions and high-level planning within key-frame
sequences. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), these prompts can
include contact point, end-effector z-axis direction, endeffector y-axis direction, and next moving direction after
contact, conveying the objective of where and how to interact with the object. We further develop a training strategy
and supervision objectives aimed at progressively enhancing

27638

