This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Extreme Rotation Estimation in the Wild
Hana Bezalel1

Dotan Ankri1
1

Ruojin Cai2

Tel Aviv University

2

Hadar Averbach-Elor1,2

Cornell University

https://tau-vailab.github.io/ExtremeRotationsInTheWild/

Abstract
We present a technique and benchmark dataset for estimating the relative 3D orientation between a pair of Internet
images captured in an extreme setting, where the images
have limited or non-overlapping field of views. Prior work
targeting extreme rotation estimation assume constrained
3D environments and emulate perspective images by cropping regions from panoramic views. However, real images captured in the wild are highly diverse, exhibiting
variation in both appearance and camera intrinsics. In
this work, we propose a Transformer-based method for estimating relative rotations in extreme real-world settings,
and contribute the ExtremeLandmarkPairs dataset, assembled from scene-level Internet photo collections. Our
evaluation demonstrates that our approach succeeds in estimating the relative rotations in a wide variety of extremeview Internet image pairs, outperforming various baselines,
including dedicated rotation estimation techniques and contemporary 3D reconstruction methods.

Figure 1. Given a pair of (possibly) non-overlapping images captured in the wild—e.g., under arbitrary illumination and intrinsic
camera parameters—such as the images of the Dam Square in Amsterdam depicted in red and blue boxes above∗ , our technique estimates the relative 3D rotation between the images. ∗ The background panorama is illustrated for visualization purposes only.

such as vanishing points or the directions of cast shadows, can implicitly guide the model for inferring the relative orientation between the images. To facilitate learning
and evaluation, datasets constructed from panoramic views
were adopted. These datasets emulate perspective views by
cropping sub-areas from these panoramas, enabling generation of image pairs with various degrees of overlap. However, while such emulated views perhaps capture some of
the challenges associated with extreme-view imagery, are
they sufficient for representing real images—particularly,
images captured in the wild?
In this paper, we present a new approach that tackles the
problem of extreme rotation estimation in the wild. Consider the boxed images in Figure 1. Internet (i.e., in the
wild) images may vary due to a wide range of factors, including transient objects, weather conditions, time of day,
and the cameras’ intrinsic parameters. To explore this problem, we introduce a new dataset, ExtremeLandmarkPairs
(ELP), assembled from publicly-available scene-level Internet image collections. We observe that the set of real
extreme-view image pairs is limited, as Internet datasets
are typically scene-centric, with nearby cameras commonly

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating the relative 3D orientation between a pair of images is embodied in fundamental computer vision tasks, such as camera localization [6, 34, 35]
and 3D reconstruction [29, 36, 42]. Establishing pixel correspondences (either explicitly or implicitly) is typically a
prerequisite for computing the relative rotation between the
images. Correspondences, however, cannot be extracted in
extreme settings where the images have little to no overlap.
As dense imagery may not necessarily be available for many
practical applications, a natural question arises: How can
we estimate the relative rotation between non-overlapping
RGB images, without the use of additional data (such as
depth or temporal information)?
We have recently seen pioneering efforts addressing the
task of relative rotation estimation in such extreme nonoverlapping settings [8, 12]. Prior work has proposed endto-end neural architectures, demonstrating that hidden cues,

1061

