This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionStone: Decoupled Motion Intensity Modulation with Diffusion
Transformer for Image-to-Video Generation
Shuwei Shi1 * , Biao Gong2† , Xi Chen3 , Dandan Zheng2 , Shuai Tan2 , Zizheng Yang2 ,
Yuyuan Li4 , Jingwen He5 , Kecheng Zheng2 , Jingdong Chen2 , Ming Yang2 , Yinqiang Zheng1‡
The University of Tokyo 2 Ant Group 3 Tongyi Lab
Zhejiang University 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1

4

Reference Image

Reference Image

Reference Image

This man gives a thumbs-up.

Reference Image

The flower is blooming.

Reference Image

Snowflakes falling, Christmas tree is shining.

Reference Image

The white lion opens its mouth and roars.

Reference Image

A ship is moving on the sea. Object Motion Intensity:2

Reference Image

A ship is moving on the sea. Object Motion Intensity:8

Camera zooms out. Scenery of the castle on a cliff by the ocean.
Camera Motion Intensity:2

Camera zooms out. Scenery of the castle on a cliff by the ocean.
Camera Motion Intensity:8

Figure 1. Samples generated by MotionStone. Our model achieves accurate motion instruction following (rows-1 and rows-2), and is
controllable, easily adapting to specified object motion intensities (row-3) and camera motion intensities (row-4). The motion intensity is
set to a default value of 5 unless otherwise specified.

Abstract
The image-to-video (I2V) generation is conditioned on
the static image, which has been enhanced recently by the
motion intensity as an additional control signal. These
motion-aware models are appealing to generate diverse
motion patterns, yet there lacks a reliable motion estimator
for training such models on large-scale video set in the
wild. Traditional metrics, e.g., SSIM or optical flow, are
hard to generalize to arbitrary videos, while, it is very tough
for human annotators to label the abstract motion intensity
neither. Furthermore, the motion intensity shall reveal

both local object motion and global camera movement,
which has not been studied before. This paper addresses
the challenge with a new motion estimator, capable of
measuring the decoupled motion intensities of objects and
cameras in video. We leverage the contrastive learning
on randomly paired videos and distinguish the video with
greater motion intensity. Such a paradigm is friendly
for annotation and easy to scale up to achieve stable
performance on motion estimation. We then present a
new I2V model, named MotionStone, developed with
the decoupled motion estimator. Experimental results
demonstrate the stability of the proposed motion estimator
and the state-of-the-art performance of MotionStone on
I2V generation. These advantages warrant the decoupled

* Work done during internship at Ant Group. † Project lead.
‡ Corresponding author.

22864

