This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReDiffDet: Rotation-equivariant Diffusion Model for Oriented Object Detection
Jiaqi Zhao1,2 Zeyu Ding1,2 Yong Zhou 1,2 * Hancheng Zhu1,2 Wen-Liang Du1,2 Rui Yao1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology
2
Mine Digitization Engineering Research Center of the Ministry of Education
{jiaqizhao,dingzeyu,yzhou,zhuhancheng,wldu,ruiyao}@cumt.edu.cn

Abstract

(a)

The diffusion model has been successfully applied to various detection tasks. However, it still faces several challenges when used for oriented object detection: objects
that are arbitrarily rotated require the diffusion model to
encode their orientation information; uncontrollable random boxes inaccurately locate objects with dense arrangements and extreme aspect ratios; oriented boxes result in
the misalignment between them and image features. To
overcome these limitations, we propose ReDiffDet, a framework that formulates oriented object detection as a rotationequivariant denoising diffusion process. First, we represent an oriented box as a 2D Gaussian distribution, forming the basis of the denoising paradigm. The reverse process can be proven to be rotation-equivariant within this
representation and model framework. Second, we design
a conditional encoder with conditional boxes to prevent
boxes from being randomly placed across the entire image. Third, we propose an aligned decoder for alignment
between oriented boxes and image features. The extensive experiments demonstrate ReDiffDet achieves promising
performance and significantly outperforms the diffusionbased baseline detector. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/wokaikaixinxin/ReDiffDet.

𝑧𝑧𝑇𝑇

𝑧𝑧𝑡𝑡

(b)
𝒩𝒩(0,1)

(c)

𝒩𝒩(0,1)

Denoise

𝑝𝑝𝜃𝜃 (𝑧𝑧𝑡𝑡−1 |𝑧𝑧𝑡𝑡 )
𝑞𝑞(𝑧𝑧𝑡𝑡 |𝑧𝑧𝑡𝑡−1 )

𝒩𝒩(𝜇𝜇1 , Σ1 )

Diffuse
𝑅𝑅

𝒩𝒩(0,1)

Denoise
Diffuse

𝑅𝑅

𝒩𝒩(𝜇𝜇2 , Σ2 )

𝑧𝑧𝑡𝑡−1

MLE
𝜇𝜇 = 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐, 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐
Σ = 𝑅𝑅Λ𝑅𝑅 T

MLE

(𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐, 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐,
𝑤𝑤, ℎ, 𝑎𝑎)

𝑧𝑧0

𝒩𝒩(𝜇𝜇, Σ)

(𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐1 , 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐1 , 𝑤𝑤1 , ℎ1 , 𝑎𝑎1 )

(𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐2 , 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐2 , 𝑤𝑤2 , ℎ2 , 𝑎𝑎2 )

𝜇𝜇 = 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐, 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐
Σ = 𝑅𝑅Λ𝑅𝑅 T

Figure 1. (a) q(·) is the diffusion process and pθ (·) is the reverse process. (b) ReDiffDet formulate oriented object detection
as a denoising diffusion process from standard normal distribution to gaussian distribution of oriented boxes. (c) The rotationequivariant diffusion model in ReDiffDet.

1. Introduction

ence points [21, 22]. End-to-end transformers [19, 49, 52]
have attracted great attention by using a fixed set of learnable queries to eliminate the hand-designed components [2].
To void the surrogate of queries, DiffusionDet [4] first
adopts a diffusion model [34] for horizontal object detection [24] and directly detects objects from a set of random
boxes. It treats detection as a generative task [17] over the
space of sizes and positions of boxes. In training, DiffusionDet [4] adds noise to ground truth boxes to obtain noisy
boxes and learns to predict boxes without noise. In inference, it denoises random boxes to get targets. We further
analyze the potential limitations of diffusion-based detectors through two sets of studies in the following sections.
We analyzed the distribution of box characteristics, including center coordinates, widths, heights, angles, and aspect ratios, as shown in Fig. 2. We observe that fitting the
distribution of positions and sizes with Gaussian distributions may not be optimal. Only the distribution of center
coordinates is more bell-shaped. Different datasets exhibit
significant variations in data characteristics. DiffusionDet [4] considers the distribution of coordinates, widths,
and heights separately, as multiple 1D distribution. But ori-

Oriented object detection aims to locate targeted objects
by a set of oriented boxes and categorize them [37]. Oriented objects are usually exhibited in arbitrary directions,
densely arranged, and with extreme aspect ratios, which
make it difficult to accurately predict locations and categories. To predict objects accurately, oriented object detectors based on convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
emerged and made considerable progress, mainly including
two-stage [14, 39] and one-stage [21, 40] method. These
methods rely on empirically designed candidates, such as
region proposals [14, 39], anchor boxes [18, 40], and refer* Corresponding author

24429

