This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Human Image Generation with Personalized Multi-Garments
Yisol Choi1

Sangkyung Kwak1,3 Sihyun Yu1 Hyungwon Choi2
1
KAIST 2 OMNIOUS.AI 3 Scaled Foundations

Jinwoo Shin1

{yisol.choi, skkwak9806, sihyun.yu, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr, hyungwon.choi@omnious.com

(a) Human image generation with multi-garments

(b) Virtual try-on

Reference

Reference

Reference

Reference

Reference

Reference

(c) With pose control

(d) With stylization

(e) With text control

+

“… in front of the
blackboard”

Reference

Reference

Reference

Figure 1. Generated images by BootComp. (a) BootComp generates high-quality human images wearing multiple reference garments,
with support for extended categories such as bag, shoes, even in unusual garment combinations (e.g., swimming suit with soccer cleats).
We show BootComp’s generalization capability through various conditional image generations, such as (b) virtual try-on, (c) pose guided
generation, (d) stylization, and (e) text guided generation, even though BootComp is not directly trained or fine-tuned for each task.

Abstract
We present BootComp, a novel framework based on text-toimage diffusion models for controllable human image generation with multiple reference garments. Here, the main
bottleneck is data acquisition for training: collecting a
large-scale dataset of high-quality reference garment images per human subject is quite challenging, i.e., ideally,
one needs to manually gather every single garment photograph worn by each human. To address this, we propose a data generation pipeline to construct a large synthetic dataset, consisting of human and multiple-garment

pairs, by introducing a model to extract any reference garment images from each human image. To ensure data quality, we also propose a filtering strategy to remove undesirable generated data based on measuring perceptual similarities between the garment presented in human image
and extracted garment. Finally, by utilizing the constructed
synthetic dataset, we train a diffusion model having two
parallel denoising paths that use multiple garment images
as conditions to generate human images while preserving their fine-grained details. We further show the wideapplicability of our framework by adapting it to different types of reference-based generation in the fashion domain, including virtual try-on, and controllable human image generation with other conditions, e.g., pose, face, etc.

Project page: https://omnious.github.io/BootComp

28736

