This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prof. Robot: Differentiable Robot Rendering Without Static and Self-Collisions
Quanyuan Ruan1†

Jiabao Lei2†
Wenhao Yuan1
Yanglin Zhang2
Dekun Lu1
Guiliang Liu2 *
Kui Jia2 *
1
South China University of Technology
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

SELF COLLISION

STATIC COLLISION

DR. ROBOT

PROF. ROBOT (OURS)

DR. ROBOT

PROF. ROBOT (OURS)

Figure 1. Our method improves upon Dr.Robot [32] by additionally enabling differentiable avoidance of static and self-collisions.
By learning and integrating a gradient-consistent pose classifier into a differentiable rendering pipeline, the generated pose trajectories are
free from physical collisions. The objective is to penalize high collision probabilities during optimization. On the left, our method can
push robotic arms away from intersecting objects. On the right, it can also avoid self-collisions. Images are rendered using Blender with
meshes.

Abstract
Differentiable rendering has gained significant attention in
the field of robotics, with differentiable robot rendering
emerging as an effective paradigm for learning robotic actions from image-space supervision. However, the lack of
physical world perception in this approach may lead to potential collisions during action optimization. In this work,
we introduce a novel improvement on previous efforts by
incorporating physical awareness of collisions through the
learning of a neural robotic collision classifier. This enables
the optimization of actions that avoid collisions with static,
non-interactable environments as well as the robot itself.
To facilitate effective gradient optimization with the classifier, we identify the underlying issue and propose leveraging Eikonal regularization to ensure consistent gradients
for optimization. Our solution can be seamlessly integrated
into existing differentiable robot rendering frameworks, utilizing gradients for optimization and providing a foundation for future applications of differentiable rendering in
robotics with improved reliability of interactions with the

physical world. Both qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate the necessity and effectiveness of our
method compared to previous solutions.

1. Introduction

† Equal contribution.

Conventional methods for representing a robot involve partitioning it into many rigid body parts and then articulating them according to structural kinematic constraints.
However, they only model the robots geometrically and do
not possess a realistic appearance for rendering; therefore,
they are less applicable for integration into a differentiable
pipeline involving images, which is currently a popular approach in computer vision. A recent approach [32] has been
proposed to model robots’ appearance in a differentiable
manner, facilitating the integration of robots into a differentiable rendering solution. It allows for backpropagating the
appearance supervision from images to the control space,
thereby enabling the learning of plausible robot movements.
Their method is straightforward. They leverage Gaussian
splatting [24] for efficient differentiable rendering, where
each Gaussian point is associated with the robotic arms using implicit LBS [32, 34], and the arms are generated by the
control parameters through forward kinematics.

* Corresponding authors.

Project: https://qrcat.github.io/prof-robot/

22562

