This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMILE: Infusing Spatial and Motion Semantics in Masked Video Learning
Fida Mohammad Thoker, Letian Jiang, Chen Zhao† , Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
{fida.thoker,letian.jiang,chen.zhao,Bernard.Ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

UCF-101
(LP)

Masked video modeling, such as VideoMAE, is an effective
paradigm for video self-supervised learning (SSL). However, they are primarily based on reconstructing pixellevel details on natural videos which have substantial temporal redundancy, limiting their capability for semantic
representation and sufficient encoding of motion dynamics. To address these issues, this paper introduces a novel
SSL approach for video representation learning, dubbed
as SMILE, by infusing both spatial and motion semantics.
In SMILE, we leverage image-language pretrained models, such as CLIP, to guide the learning process with their
high-level spatial semantics. We enhance the representation
of motion by introducing synthetic motion patterns in the
training data, allowing the model to capture more complex
and dynamic content. Furthermore, using SMILE, we establish a new self-supervised video learning paradigm capable
of learning strong video representations without requiring
any natural video data. We have carried out extensive experiments on 7 datasets with various downstream scenarios. SMILE surpasses current state-of-the-art SSL methods,
showcasing its effectiveness in learning more discriminative
and generalizable video representations. Code is available:
https://github.com/fmthoker/SMILE

SomethingSomething V2
(LP)

73

17

Kinetics-400
(LP)

42

13
13
20

27
24
27

GYM
(LP)

VideoMAE

76

51 71

33 21

40
47

SomethingSomething V2
(FT)

81

62

20

FT: Full Finetuning
LP: Linear Probing
LS: Low-Shot

UCF-101
(LS)

70
68

66
78
84

80

82

Kinetics-400
(FT)

86

26

88

31

HMDB-51
GYM
(LP)
(LS)
MME
MGMAE
MGM

GYM
(FT)

SMILE (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison with SOTA masked video modeling
methods. Our method significantly outperforms prior masked
video modeling methods across diverse downstream settings.

ity to learn meaningful high-level semantics essential for
discriminative representations, as shown by the suboptimal
linear probing performance of current masked video modeling methods [12, 21, 53, 57] in Figure 1. The second key
issue in masked video modeling is the substantial temporal redundancy of video data with most videos having little foreground motion, human or object. Consequently, the
reconstruction objective can be solved using the temporal
correlations between co-located patches or by spatial correlations in tube masking [57], resulting in inadequate motion awareness in the learned representations. This inturn
leads to poor generalization on downstream tasks, requiring
a finer motion understanding as shown in [55].
In this work, we address these limitations by proposing
a novel framework for masked video modeling, dubbed as
SMILE (Spatial and Motion semantIcs in masked video
LEarning), to capture high-level spatial and motion semantics leading to generalizable video representations. To
improve the spatial semantics in masked video modeling, we propose to explicitly infuse high-level spatial semantics from pretrained image foundation models such as

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) [43, 44, 57, 59] plays a crucial role for many video understanding tasks, such as action
recognition [18, 26, 51, 52, 55] and detection [28, 32], significantly reducing the reliance on extensive human annotation. The goal of video SSL is to learn video representations
that capture both spatial and temporal semantics effectively.
Masked video modeling has emerged as a promising approach with state-of-the-art performance [12, 21, 53, 57]. It
involves masking a large portion of video frames and reconstructing the masked regions using the unmasked parts.
However, this approach has some limitations. First, it
relies heavily on pixel reconstruction, which can lead to
overfitting low-level details. This limits the model’s abil-

8438

