This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoSca: Dynamic Gaussian Fusion from Casual Videos via 4D Motion Scaffolds
Jiahui Lei1 Yijia Weng2 Adam W. Harley2 Leonidas Guibas2 Kostas Daniilidis1,3
1
2
3
University of Pennsylvania
Stanford University
Archimedes, Athena RC
{leijh, kostas}@cis.upenn.edu, {yijiaw, aharley, guibas}@cs.stanford.edu

Figure 1. MoSca reconstructs renderable dynamic scenes from monocular casual videos. Project page and code: https://www.cis.
upenn.edu/˜leijh/projects/mosca

Abstract
We introduce 4D Motion Scaffolds (MoSca), a modern 4D reconstruction system designed to reconstruct and
synthesize novel views of dynamic scenes from monocular videos captured casually in the wild. To address such
a challenging and ill-posed inverse problem, we leverage
prior knowledge from foundational vision models and lift
the video data to a novel Motion Scaffold (MoSca) representation, which compactly and smoothly encodes the underlying motions/deformations. The scene geometry and appearance are then disentangled from the deformation field
and are encoded by globally fusing the Gaussians anchored
onto the MoSca and optimized via Gaussian Splatting. Additionally, camera focal length and poses can be solved using bundle adjustment without the need of any other pose
estimation tools. Experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance on dynamic rendering benchmarks and its effectiveness on real videos.

1. Introduction
This paper presents 4D Motion Scaffolds (MoSca), a fully
automated system for reconstructing and rendering dynamic
scenes from casual monocular video inputs with unknown
camera parameters—the most typical data format for such
a system in the wild. Robust 4D scene reconstruction from
such input is increasingly vital for constructing datasets for

future AGI models, content creation for spatial computing
and VR/MR/AR, and building embodied agents to perceive
and learn from real video data. However, this task is known
to be highly challenging and inherently ill-posed [30, 51,
66] due to the limited availability of multi-view stereo cues
in casual video footage.
To tackle this challenging task, our first insight is to
leverage the recent advances of pretrained vision models
(Sec. 3.2.1), which today are very effective at fundamental computer vision tasks such as tracking and depth estimation. While this knowledge provides a critical boost
to understanding the complete dynamic scene, it is inherently insufficient, as it fails to capture occluded parts of
the scene and it is usually noisy, local, and partial. Our
second insight is to design a deformation representation,
MoSca, derived from the above foundational priors, exploiting a physical deformation prior. Although the real-world
geometry and appearance are complex and include highfrequency details, the underlying deformation that drives
these geometries is usually compact and smooth. MoSca
leverages this property by disentangling the 3D geometry
and motion, representing the deformation with sparse graph
nodes that can be smoothly interpolated (Sec. 3.1). Another
physical prior we exploit is the as-rigid-as-possible (ARAP)
deformation [86], which can be efficiently applied via the
trajectory topology of MoSca. Two important benefits arise

6165

