This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

See Further When Clear: Curriculum Consistency Model
Yunpeng Liu1,2 Boxiao Liu3 Yi Zhang3 Xingzhong Hou1,2 Guanglu Song3 Yu Liu3 Haihang You1,*
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
SenseTime Research
{liuyunpeng22b, houxingzhong, youhaihang}@ict.ac.cn
{liuboxiao, zhangyi17, songguanglu}@sensetime.com
liuyuisanai@gmail.com

Abstract
Significant advances have been made in the sampling efficiency of diffusion and flow matching models, driven by
Consistency Distillation (CD), which trains a student model
to mimic the output of a teacher model at a later timestep.
However, we found that the knowledge discrepancy between student and teacher varies significantly across different timesteps, leading to suboptimal performance in CD. To
address this issue, we propose the Curriculum Consistency
Model (CCM), which stabilizes and balances the knowledge
discrepancy across timesteps. Specifically, we regard the
distillation process at each timestep as a curriculum and
introduce a metric based on the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) to quantify the knowledge discrepancy of this
curriculum, then ensure that the curriculum maintains consistent knowledge discrepancy across different timesteps by
having the teacher model iterate more steps when the noise
intensity is low. Our method achieves competitive singlestep sampling Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) scores of
1.64 on CIFAR-10 and 2.18 on ImageNet 64x64. Moreover, we have extended our method to large-scale text-toimage models and confirmed that it generalizes well to
both diffusion models (Stable Diffusion XL) and flow matching models (Stable Diffusion 3). The generated samples
demonstrate improved image-text alignment and semantic
structure since CCM enlarges the distillation step at large
timesteps and reduces the accumulated error.

ity paths, known as Probability Flow Ordinary Differential
Equations (PF-ODE), between noise and data, incorporating the reversed diffusion process as a special case. Despite
the ability to produce high-quality images of DM and FM,
their performances in sampling efficiency are not satisfactory and often require a lot of function evaluations. With the
introduction of Consistency Models (CM) [38], the Number
of Function Evaluations (NFEs) required for sampling has
been significantly reduced by enforcing self-consistency. In
common, as shown in Figure 1, CM encourages the student
model at timestep t (where t ∈ [0, 1)) to mimic the output
of the teacher model at timestep u (where u ∈ (t, 1]). Latent
consistency models (LCM) [26] employ self-consistency in
the latent space, significantly reducing computational costs
and extending CM to high-resolution text-to-image syntheses, thereby promoting the widespread application of CM.
We found a critical problem in CM that differences between student and teacher outputs are highly unstable across
different timesteps, resulting in inefficient training. Specifically, we regard the distillation process that student learn
from teacher as a curriculum and use knowledge discrepancy to evaluate the curriculum difficulty. Easy curriculum
leads to unsatisfactory generation of details (t → 1) and
high-level features such as semantic and structural features
(t → 0). We visualize the issue in Figure 2, where we quantify the knowledge discrepancy based on the Peak Signal-toNoise Ratio (PSNR) between the student and teacher outputs at different timesteps. The results indicate that the
knowledge discrepancy of curriculums decreases gradually
as t progresses from smaller values (corresponding to nearpure noise) to larger values (closer to the final image). However, most studies [38], [26] suffer from the instability of
knowledge discrepancy, as they sample uniformly along the
timesteps and use a fixed distillation step l = u − t for the
CM. As a result, the student model struggles to learn effectively from easy curriculums, which affects the semantic
structure and details in the diffusion process. Recent works,

1. Introduction
Diffusion Models (DM) and Flow Matching (FM) are two
leading methods for generative image synthesis. DM
[9],[35],[37] generates samples by iteratively reversing a
diffusion process, i.e., Stochastic Differential Equation
(SDE), whereas FM [19],[39] constructs explicit probabil-

18103

