This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoomPainter: View-Integrated Diffusion for Consistent Indoor Scene Texturing
Zhipeng Huang1

Wangbo Yu1,2

Xinhua Cheng1 Chengshu Zhao1
Li Yuan1,2† Yonghong Tian1,2†

Yunyang Ge1

Mingyi Guo1

1

2

Scene mesh

Peking University
Pengcheng Laboratory

“A rainbow style master bedroom”

“A mid-century style master bedroom”

Figure 1. RoomPainter is capable of generating high-fidelity and consistent texture for a given room mesh.

Abstract

within the room, thereby further enhancing local consistency and addressing the occlusion problem. Experiments
demonstrate that RoomPainter achieves superior performance for indoor scene texture synthesis in visual quality,
global consistency and generation efficiency.

Indoor scene texture synthesis has garnered significant interest due to its important potential applications in virtual
reality, digital media and creative arts. Existing diffusionmodel-based researches either rely on per-view inpainting
techniques, which are plagued by severe cross-view inconsistencies and conspicuous seams, or adopt optimizationbased approaches that involve substantial computational
overhead. In this work, we present RoomPainter, a framework that seamlessly integrates efficiency and consistency
to achieve high-fidelity texturing of indoor scenes. The core
of RoomPainter features a zero-shot technique that effectively adapts a 2D diffusion model for 3D-consistent texture synthesis, along with a two-stage generation strategy
that ensures both global and local consistency. Specifically,
we introduce Attention-Guided Multi-View Integrated Sampling (MVIS) combined with a neighbor-integrated attention mechanism for zero-shot texture map generation. Using the MVIS, we firstly generate texture map for the entire room to ensure global consistency, then adopt its variant, namely Attention-Guided Multi-View Integrated Repaint Sampling (MVRS) to repaint individual instances

1. Introduction
High-quality 3D content synthesis is in great demand, owing to its diverse applications across the entertainment industry, robotic simulation and mixed-reality environments.
The design of indoor scene typically requires professionals
to spend dozens of hours to complete. Generating texture
for indoor scene through automated methods can significantly reduce labor costs and save time. With the advancement of text-to-image diffusion models [28, 30, 33, 34],
large-scale indoor scene texture synthesis has made significant progress. Although existing indoor texture synthesis methods produce high-quality results, they face several significant challenges. Specifically, these methods can
be categorized into two groups: inpainting-based methods [6, 32] and optimization-based methods [7, 24, 48].

574

