This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fancy123: One Image to High-Quality 3D Mesh Generation via
Plug-and-Play Deformation
Qiao Yu1 Xianzhi Li1,2 Yuan Tang1 Xu Han1 Long Hu1† Yixue Hao1 Min Chen3,4
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Guangdong Intelligent Robotics Institute
3
South China University of Technology 4 Pazhou Laboratory † Corresponding author
{qiaoyu epic, xzli, yuan tang, xhanxu, hulong, yixuehao}@hust.edu.cn

(a) Input Image

minchen@ieee.org

(b) Our Fancy123

(c) SF-3D

(d) InstantMesh

(e) Unique3D

(f) TripoSR

(g) LGM

Figure 1. Given a single image, our Fancy123 generates a high-quality 3D mesh in terms of visual appeal, color clarity, and input fidelity.

Abstract

Project page: https://github.com/YuQiao0303/Fancy123.

Generating 3D meshes from a single image is an important but ill-posed task. Existing methods mainly adopt 2D
multiview diffusion models to generate intermediate multiview images, and use the Large Reconstruction Model
(LRM) to create the final meshes. However, the multiview
images exhibit local inconsistencies, and the meshes often
lack fidelity to the input image or look blurry. We propose Fancy123, featuring two enhancement modules and
an unprojection operation to address the above three issues, respectively. The appearance enhancement module
deforms the 2D multiview images to realign misaligned pixels for better multiview consistency. The fidelity enhancement module deforms the 3D mesh to match the input image.
The unprojection of the input image and deformed multiview images onto LRM’s generated mesh ensures high clarity, discarding LRM’s predicted blurry-looking mesh colors. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments verify Fancy123’s SoTA performance with significant improvement. Also, the two enhancement modules are plug-andplay and work at inference time, allowing seamless integration into various existing single-image-to-3D methods.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D mesh models with a faithful color appearance from a single RGB image (one-image-to-3D, or “123”)
is crucial for applications such as metaverse [41], digital
twin [36], and virtual reality, as it reduces the expenses of
manual 3D modeling. However, a single image provides
only a limited perspective of the entire object, making it a
non-trivial task to infer the 3D shape in a way that is both
visually appealing and physically accurate.
In recent years, the “123” task has witnessed significant
progress. The milestone work DreamFusion [29] proposed
to leverage the strong prior of 2D diffusion models. To improve plausibility in novel views, multiview diffusion models [32, 39] are developed to generate multiview images of
an object, which are then used to generate 3D geometry
and associated color by NeuS [22, 40], normal fusion [23],
Large Reconstruction Model (LRM), etc. LRM [11, 34, 43]
is a feed-forward network trained with extensive 3D data to
create 3D content from a single input or diffusion-generated
multiview images within seconds.

595

