This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-Visual Semantic Graph Network for Audio-Visual Event Localization
Liang Liu† , Shuaiyong Li§ ,* Yongqiang Zhu†
†
School of Computer Science and Technology and § School of Automation,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, P. R. China
laulliam@outlook.com, lishuaiyong@cqupt.edu.cn, lnpuzyq@163.com

Abstract
Audio-visual event localization (AVEL) aims to identify both the categories and temporal boundaries of events
that are both audible and visible in unconstrained videos.
However, the inherent semantic gap between heterogeneous
modalities often leads to audio-visual semantic inconsistency. In this paper, we propose a novel Audio-Visual Semantic Graph Network (AVSGN) to facilitate cross-modal
alignment and cross-temporal interaction. Unlike previous approaches (e.g., audio-guided, visual-guided, or
both), we introduce shared semantic textual labels to bridge
the semantic gap between audio and visual modalities.
Specifically, we present a cross-modal semantic alignment
(CMSA) module to explore the complementary relationships across heterogeneous modalities (i.e., visual, audio
and text), promoting the convergence of multimodal distributions into a common semantic space. Additionally, in
order to capture cross-temporal dependencies sufficiently,
we devise a cross-modal graph interaction (CMGI) module,
which disentangles complicated interactions across modalities into three complementary subgraphs. Extensive experiments on the AVE dataset comprehensively demonstrate the
superiority and effectiveness of the proposed model in both
fully- and weakly-supervised AVE settings.

1. Introduction
Humans naturally integrate multiple senses (e.g., vision,
hearing, and smell) to interpret their surroundings, with vision and hearing being particularly crucial [27]. To enable
intelligent machines to emulate human perception, reasoning, and decision-making, audio-visual learning [36,51] has
emerged as a hot area in recent decades. Audio-Visual
Event Localization (AVEL) [30], a prominent area within
audio-visual learning, challenges models to identify events
that are both audible and visible in videos, such as a car
driving or a dog barking. This task involves not only classi* Corresponding author.

Visual Input:
Visible Event:

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

1

Train horn

BG

Baby cry

Audio Input:
Audible Event:

AVE Category:
Train horn

AVE Boundary:

BG

Train horn

Baby cry
Baby cry

Figure 1. An example illustrating the AVEL task: a segment is
marked as an “AV Event” only when an event is both visible and
audible simultaneously; otherwise, it is considered background.

fying event categories but also accurately determining their
temporal boundaries, as shown in Figure 1. As research
in AVEL continues to advance, it holds substantial potential for applications in intelligent surveillance [37], humancomputer interaction [2], and multimedia retrieval [17].
Since visual and audio signals often originate from the
same event, the consistencies (i.e., semantic, spatial, and
temporal aspects) [36] enable audio to provide valuable
complementary information for AVEL tasks alongside visual data and vice versa. Since Tian et al. [30] introduced
the AVEL task, extensive research have emerged to improve
localization accuracy and robustness, focusing on techniques such as cross-modal attention [40, 41], multimodal
adaptive fusion [4,9,16,47], and semantic consistency modeling [16, 33, 50]. While cross-modal attention mechanisms
establish correspondences between the modalities, existing
methods that rely primarily on unimodal-guided attention
(e.g., AGVA [30], AGSCA [41], and CMGA [40]) often
overlook the potential of visual cues to guide audio processing. As a consequence, researchers have increasingly
explored the paradigm of mutual guidance [5, 7, 19, 47].
However, audio-guided and/or visual-guided attention may
introduce redundant or event-irrelevant information from
the other modality. Alternatively, multimodal adaptive fu-

23957

