This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LP-Diff: Towards Improved Restoration of Real-World Degraded License Plate
Haoyan Gong1 , Zhenrong Zhang1 , Yuzheng Feng1 , Anh Nguyen2 , Hongbin Liu1 *
1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, 2 University of Liverpool
{haoyan.gong21, zhenrong.zhang21, yuzheng.feng21}@student.xjtlu.edu.cn
anh.nguyen@liverpool.ac.uk, hongbin.liu@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract

-JS16A-

苏US1680

苏U576A0

苏U51680

苏U516W3

苏U516W3

License plate (LP) recognition is crucial in intelligent traffic management systems. However, factors such as long
distances and poor camera quality often lead to severe
degradation of captured LP images, posing challenges to
accurate recognition. The design of License Plate Image
Restoration (LPIR) methods frequently relies on synthetic
degraded data, which limits their effectiveness on realworld severely degraded LP images. To address this issue,
we introduce the first paired LPIR dataset collected in realworld scenarios, named MDLP, including 10,245 pairs of
multi-frame severely degraded LP images and their corresponding clear images. To better restore severely degraded
LP, we propose a novel Diffusion-based network, called
LP-Diff, to tackle real-world LPIR tasks. Our approach
incorporates (1) an Inter-frame Cross Attention Module
to fuse temporal information across multiple frames, (2)
a Texture Enhancement Module to restore texture information in degraded images, and (3) a Dual-Pathway Fusion Module to select effective features from both channel and spatial dimensions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the reliability of our dataset for model training and
evaluation. Our proposed LP-Diff consistently outperforms
other state-of-the-art image restoration methods on realworld LPIR tasks. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/haoyGONG/LP-Diff.

-AT-----

苏EFJ3808

苏EFJ3836

苏E1A0386

苏EF33030

苏EF33030

-3C--40

苏G09580

鲁50V50D

苏E09580

皖S0V580

皖S0V580

Real-world
degraded LP

RealESRGAN

ResDiff

ResShift

LP-Diff
(ours)

Ground
Truth

1. Introduction
License plate (LP) recognition has emerged as a significant
research area in recent years. However, in real-world scenarios such as traffic crime investigations, security surveillance, and intelligent transportation systems, captured LP
images often suffer from severe degradation due to environmental factors, distance, and camera quality. These degradations result in low resolution, distortion, and poor contrast, which can lead to substantial errors in existing auto* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Visual comparison of our model LP-Diff with other
state-of-the-art models on real-world LPIR tasks. The text sequence above each image is the identification result from the LP
recognition model. Red characters indicate recognition errors at
those positions, while a red ‘-’ indicates an unrecognizable character at this position.

mated recognition systems. Consequently, restoring lowresolution LP images is a practical and challenging task,
aimed at mitigating degradation, enhancing resolution, and
ultimately restoring the images to a recognizable state.
In the general domain, various deep-learning methods
have been proposed to address image restoration problems [10, 13, 14, 37, 45, 48]. Based on these methods,
the first LPIR work [42] was proposed, followed by MSRCNN [41], which used an architecture similar to Inception [28] to capture various features of low-resolution LP
images. DP-GAN [21] utilized complementary information
to restore LP images, leveraging the Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) [8]. However, these methods perform well
in restoring synthetic degradations but fail to achieve satisfactory accuracy when handling real-world complex degradations. To justify it, we evaluate the performance of several state-of-the-art (SOTA) image restoration algorithms.
As shown in Figure 1, we can conclude that all these SOTA
methods fail to perform well in real-world tasks.
Along with the development of LPIR models, several
LP datasets [12, 17, 19, 22, 40] have been introduced.
Nonetheless, these datasets primarily consist of unpaired
high-resolution single-frame images, which need to be artificially degraded using synthetic degradation models [22]

17831

