This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Circumventing shortcuts in audio-visual deepfake detection datasets with
unsupervised learning
Stefan Smeu*1

Dragos-Alexandru Boldisor*1 Dan Oneata2 Elisabeta Oneata1
1
2
Bitdefender
P OLITEHNICA Bucharest

{ssmeu, dboldisor, eoneata}@bitdefender.com

dan.oneata@gmail.com

Abstract
Good datasets are essential for developing and benchmarking any machine learning system. Their importance is even
more extreme for safety critical applications such as deepfake detection—the focus of this paper. Here we reveal that
two of the most widely used audio-video deepfake datasets
suffer from a previously unidentified spurious feature: the
leading silence. Fake videos start with a very brief moment of silence and, on the basis of this feature alone, we
can separate the real and fake samples almost perfectly.
As such, previous audio-only and audio-video models exploit the presence of silence in the fake videos and consequently perform worse when the leading silence is removed. To circumvent latching on such an unwanted artifact and possibly other unrevealed ones, we propose a shift
from supervised to unsupervised learning by training models exclusively on real data. We show that by aligning selfsupervised audio-video representations we remove the risk
of relying on dataset-specific biases and improve robustness
in deepfake detection.

Figure 1. Audio-visual deepfake detection datasets have a silence
bias: fake samples start with a brief moment of silence, which is
not the case for real samples. Here we show the first 62.5 ms of
the audio waveform for a real and the corresponding fake sample
from the AV-Deepfake1M dataset [6].

1. Introduction

full-video [23] or only local [4, 6] manipulations.
However, care has to be taken to ensure a good deepfake detection dataset. Any asymmetry in the preparation
of fakes and reals can result in biases that correlate spuriously with the groundtruth label. For example, in the image
domain, different preprocessing pipelines [8] or types of resizing [43] between real and fake samples paint an overly
optimistic picture. In the audio domain, the very popular
ASVSpoof19 dataset [56] has been shown to leak information about labels in the form of silence duration [35] or bitrate information [3]. Since many of the deepfake detection
models are high capacity, they can easily use such artifacts
as shortcuts for learning, consequently greatly impacting
their ability to generalize in a real case scenario.
In this work, we first expose a bias present in two
widely-adopted audio-video deepfake detection datasets,
FakeAVCeleb [23] and AV-Deepfake1M [6]: a short moment of silence present at the beginning of manipulated
videos (see Figure 1). Based on this information, a
very simple silence classifier can reach a near-perfect performance of over 98% on both FakeAVCeleb and AVDeepfake1M. Moreover, we observe that the silence distribution is similar across datasets, implying that prior methods may have potentially over estimated the generalization

Manipulated videos represent a threat to society as they
have the potential of misleading people into believing actors
with malicious intents. By spreading misinformation on social media platforms, people may be exposed to scams (e.g.,
identity theft operations), conspiracy theories and political
misinformation. Therefore, deepfake detection methods are
essential tools on a global scale.
The progress in automated deepfake detection is fueled
by the datasets developed by the research community. Good
quality data is essential for both training and benchmarking
the progress of these methods. In recent years, numerous
datasets have been proposed. Among the audio-video deepfake datasets, there have been released datasets that alter
both streams [6, 23] or only one [36, 46, 56] ; datasets with
* Equal contribution.

18815

