This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-Rank Adaptation in Multilinear Operator Networks for
Security-Preserving Incremental Learning
Huu Binh Ta
Qualcomm AI Research+

Duc Nguyen
Qualcomm AI Research+

Quyen Tran
Qualcomm AI Research+

binhta@qti.qualcomm.com

ducanguy@qti.qualcomm.com

quyetran@qti.qualcomm.com

Toan Tran
Qualcomm AI Research+

Tung Pham
Qualcomm AI Research+

ttran@qti.qualcomm.com

tungp@qti.qualcomm.com

significant limitation of LFHE is that it only supports addition and multiplication, thus restricting its ability compared
to traditional neural networks like vision transformer (ViT),
convolutional neural network (CNN) [5, 42] that rely on
non-linear activation functions. The Polynomial Networks,
introduced by Chrysos et al. [6], has been one of the attempts to overcome this obstacle. Moreover, Cheng et al.
[5] showed that in image recognition, polynomial networks
could perform on par with modern architectures by introducing Multilinear Operator Network (MONet), currently,
the state-of-the-art model of this family.
However, similar to other types of network architectures
such as ViT and CNN, when learning a sequence of tasks,
MONet also struggles with keeping previous knowledge as
it acquires new information, known as catastrophic forgetting [10]. In this work, we aim to enable MONet to learn
multiple tasks over time while maintaining its performance
on both old and new tasks. Achieving this requires balancing two fundamental abilities: stability, retention of knowledge from prior tasks, and plasticity, the adaptability to
learn new tasks effectively; and the problem is known as incremental learning [12]. Additionally, we seek to empower
the model to perform well even without task identity information, allowing for greater flexibility in real-world applications. The final requirement is that the proposed method
must align with all LFHE constraints, ensuring that the
model will produce the same conclusions from encrypted
data as it does with the original data.
To achieve these goals, we first develop the pioneering Polynomial Low-Rank Adaptation (PoLoRA) specifically tailored for MONet, which facilitates efficient adaptation to new tasks by adding lightweight low-rank modules.
PoLoRA updates pixel-wise vectors of input tensors and
is integrated into Channel Projection components in MuLayers or the Mu-Layers. Building on this, we introduce
a novel framework that leverages this Low-Rank Adapta-

Abstract
In security-sensitive fields, data should be encrypted to
protect against unauthorized access and maintain confidentiality throughout processing. However, traditional networks like ViTs and CNNs return different results when processing original data versus its encrypted form, meaning
that they require data to be decrypted, posing a security
risk by exposing sensitive information. One solution for this
issue is using polynomial networks, including state-of-theart Multilinear Operator Networks, which return the same
outputs given the real data and their encrypted forms under Leveled Fully Homomorphic Encryption. Nevertheless,
these models are susceptible to catastrophic forgetting in
incremental learning settings. Thus, this paper will present
a new low-rank adaptation method combined with the Gradient Projection Memory mechanism to minimize the issue.
Our proposal is compatible with Leveled Fully Homomorphic Encryption while achieving a sharp improvement in
performance compared to existing models.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved incredible success in
image recognition problems due to their impressive accuracy and efficiency [28]. This advancement has led to
widespread real-world applications, such as healthcare and
finance, where data security is increasingly critical. In
security-sensitive fields, encryption plays a fundamental
role in safeguarding information. Methods like Leveled
Fully Homomorphic Encryption (LFHE) proposed by Brakerski et al. [3], Shin and Ghosh [33], offer robust protection
by allowing computations on encrypted data. However, a
+ Qualcomm Vietnam Company Limited

24341

