This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoManipVLA: Transferring Vision-language-action Models for General Mobile
Manipulation

1

Zhenyu Wu1 Yuheng Zhou2 Xiuwei Xu3 Ziwei Wang2 Haibin Yan1∗
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, School of Intelligent Engineering and Automation
2
Nanyang Technological University, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
3
Tsinghua University, Department of Automation
{wuzhenyu, eyanhaibin}@bupt.edu.cn
xxw21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zhou0484@e.ntu.edu.sg

ziwei.wang@ntu.edu.sg

Task 3

Task 2

Task 1

Task 1
Pick up the sponge

Task 2
Place in the bowl

Task 3
Open the drawer

Figure 1. Transferring pre-trained VLA models to mobile manipulation significantly enhances the generalization ability of the policy
across tasks and environments. Our MoManipVLA can complete diverse household tasks such as object picking, object delivery and
drawer opening in large working area. Guided by the waypoints from VLA models, the motions of the mobile base and the robot arm are
jointly generated with physical feasibility constraints.

Abstract

we utilize pre-trained VLA models to generate waypoints
of the end-effector with high generalization ability. We design motion planning objectives for the mobile base and
the robot arm, which aim at maximizing the physical feasibility of the trajectory. Finally, we present an efficient bilevel objective optimization framework for trajectory generation, where the upper-level optimization predicts waypoints for base movement to enhance the manipulator policy space, and the lower-level optimization selects the optimal end-effector trajectory to complete the manipulation
task. Extensive experimental results on OVMM and the
real world demonstrate that MoManipVLA achieves a 4.2%
higher success rate than the state-of-the-art mobile manipulation, and only requires 50 training cost for real world
deployment due to the strong generalization ability in the
pre-trained VLA models. Our project page can be found
here.

Mobile manipulation is the fundamental challenge for
robotics to assist humans with diverse tasks and environments in everyday life. However, conventional mobile manipulation approaches often struggle to generalize across
different tasks and environments because of the lack of
large-scale training. In contrast, recent advances in visionlanguage-action (VLA) models have shown impressive generalization capabilities, but these foundation models are developed for fixed-base manipulation tasks. Therefore, we
propose an efficient policy adaptation framework named
MoManipVLA to transfer pre-trained VLA models of fixbase manipulation to mobile manipulation, so that high
generalization ability across tasks and environments can
be achieved in mobile manipulation policy. Specifically,
*

Corresponding author

1714

