This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contextual AD Narration with Interleaved Multimodal Sequence
Hanlin Wang1,3
1

Zhan Tong2

Kecheng Zheng3

Yujun Shen3

Limin Wang1†

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
3
ESAT, KU Leuven
Ant Group

Current Video Clip

Context Video Clip

Character Information

Target AD

Possible characters: Lisa played by Reese Witherspoon, Annie
played by Kathryn Hahn, Terry played by Shelley Conn.

As the three
women chat, Lisa
lifts her gaze
from the watch.

ADNarrator

Context AD
... Inside, Lisa strolls past three chatting women. Lisa shows
them.

Figure 1. Taking video clip, text, character bank and context information as the inputs, the narrator generates corresponding audio
description (AD) for video comprehension. Rather than describe all characters appearing in the video, the narrator should focus on
characters that truly contribute to the storyline.

Abstract

to provide more precise information by identifying the main
characters who play more significant roles in the video
context. With these unique designs, we further incorporate
contextual information and a contrastive loss into our
architecture to generate smoother and more contextually
appropriate ADs. Experiments on multiple AD datasets
show that Uni-AD performs well on AD generation, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach. Our code
is available at: https://github.com/ant-research/UniAD.

The Audio Description (AD) task aims to generate
descriptions of visual elements for visually impaired individuals to help them access long-form video content, like
movies. With video feature, text, character bank and context
information as inputs, the generated ADs are able to correspond to the characters by name and provide reasonable,
contextual descriptions to help audience understand the storyline of movie. To achieve this goal, we propose to leverage
pre-trained foundation models through a simple and unified
framework to generate ADs with interleaved multimodal
sequence as input, termed as Uni-AD. To enhance the
alignment of features across various modalities with finer
granularity, we introduce a simple and lightweight module
that maps video features into the textual feature space.
Moreover, we also propose a character-refinement module

1. Introduction
Audio Description (AD) [1, 14, 39, 46] provides descriptive
narration of visual content in videos. Unlike subtitle or
transcription, AD focuses more on describing the scene,
characters, actions and storyline of the input video. As
a rich visual description, AD can effectively supplement
the dialogue and provide viewers with a comprehensive

† Corresponding author.

8372

