This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeepCompress-ViT: Rethinking Model Compression to Enhance
Efficiency of Vision Transformers at the Edge
Sabbir Ahmed1∗ , Abdullah Al Arafat2∗ , Deniz Najafi3∗ , Akhlak Mahmood4 , Mamshad Nayeem Rizve5 ,
Mohaiminul Al Nahian1 , Ranyang Zhou3 , Shaahin Angizi3 , Adnan Siraj Rakin1
1
Binghamton University (SUNY), 2 North Carolina State University,
3
New Jersey Institute of Technology, 4 Georgia Institute of Technology, 5 Adobe Inc.
Performance Comparison with SOTA ViT Compression Methods

Abstract

80.0

DeepCompress-ViT (14.9x)

DeiT-S (1x)

77.5

Vision Transformers (ViTs) excel in tackling complex vision tasks, yet their substantial size poses significant challenges for applications on resource-constrained edge devices. The increased size of these models leads to higher
overhead (e.g., energy, latency) when transmitting model
weights between the edge device and the server. Hence,
ViTs are not ideal for edge devices where the entire model
may not fit on the device. Current model compression techniques often achieve high compression ratios at the expense
of performance degradation, particularly for ViTs. To overcome the limitations of existing works, we rethink model
compression strategy for ViTs from first principle approach
and develop an orthogonal strategy called DeepCompressViT. The objective of the DeepCompress-ViT is to encode
the model weights to a highly compressed encoded representation using a novel training method, denoted as Unified Compression Training (UCT). Proposed UCT is accompanied by a decoding mechanism during inference, which
helps to gain any loss of accuracy due to high compression ratio. We further optimize this decoding step by reordering the decoding operation using associative property of matrix multiplication, ensuring that the compressed
weights can be decoded during inference without incurring
any computational overhead. Our extensive experiments
across multiple ViT models on modern edge devices show
that DeepCompress-ViT can successfully compress ViTs at
high compression ratios (> 14×). DeepCompress-ViT enables the entire model to be stored on edge device, resulting in unprecedented reductions in energy consumption
(> 1470×) and latency (> 68×) for edge ViT inference.
Our code is available at https://github.com/ML-SecurityResearch-LAB/DeepCompress-ViT.

Accuracy (%)

75.0
72.5
70.0

Q-ViT (13.6x)

Uncompressed Model
LSQ (13.6x)

Pruned Model

67.5

Quantized Model
65.0

DeepCompress-ViT
WDPruning (2.5x)

62.5
60.0
10

20

30

40

50

Model Size (MB)

60

70

80

Figure 1. Comparison of DeepCompress-ViT with SOTA ViT compression methods [8, 11, 31] for compressing DeiT-S [27] trained
on Imagenet-1k [22]. Existing compression methods achieve a
large compression ratio at the expense of large performance loss,
whereas the DeepCompress-ViT achieves the highest compression
ratio with the best accuracy among the competition.

1. Introduction

vices has revolutionized data processing, analysis, and action in these systems [3]. By deploying advanced models, such as Vision Transformers (ViTs), on resourceconstrained devices, IIoT systems can directly manage
complex tasks, including object detection, anomaly detection, and facial recognition on the device. This local processing capability on edge minimizes data transmission to
centralized servers, reducing latency and enhancing data
privacy by keeping information closer to its source [35].
In recent years, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [7] have
gained significant attention among deep neural network
(DNN) models for their remarkable performance [20].
Their potential to tackle various real-world vision problems,
such as object detection [4] and segmentation [26], makes
them especially appealing for edge applications. However,
the challenge of achieving reliable, real-time inference on
resource-constrained devices cannot be underestimated, primarily due to the large model sizes of ViTs in comparison
to models like Convolutional Neural Networks [23].
The architectural design of ViTs often exceeds the onchip memory limits of edge devices (e.g., Espressif ESP32-

The integration of computer vision and deep learning (DL)
into the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) and edge de∗ These authors contributed equally

30147

