This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V ID H ALLUC: Evaluating Temporal Hallucinations
in Multimodal Large Language Models for Video Understanding
Chaoyu Li

Eun Woo Im
Arizona State University

Pooyan Fazli

{chaoyuli, eunwooim, pooyan}@asu.edu

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have recently
shown significant advancements in video understanding,
excelling in content reasoning and instruction-following
tasks. However, hallucination, where models generate inaccurate or misleading content, remains underexplored in
the video domain. Building on the observation that MLLM
visual encoders often fail to distinguish visually different
yet semantically similar video pairs, we introduce V ID H AL LUC , the largest benchmark designed to examine hallucinations in MLLMs for video understanding. It consists of
5,002 videos, paired to highlight cases prone to hallucinations. V ID H ALLUC assesses hallucinations across three
critical dimensions: (1) action, (2) temporal sequence, and
(3) scene transition. Comprehensive testing shows that most
MLLMs are vulnerable to hallucinations across these dimensions. Furthermore, we propose DINO-HEAL, a trainingfree method that reduces hallucinations by incorporating
spatial saliency from DINOv2 to reweight visual features
during inference. Our results show that DINO-HEAL consistently improves performance on V ID H ALLUC, achieving
an average improvement of 3.02% in mitigating hallucinations across all tasks. Both the V ID H ALLUC benchmark and
DINO-HEAL code are available at https://peoplerobots.github.io/vidhalluc.

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) [30, 33, 50] has led to significant improvements
in video understanding, particularly in semantic reasoning
and instruction-following [48]. Despite these improvements,
MLLMs tend to generate hallucinations, producing plausible
but factually incorrect information [24], raising concerns
about their reliability in practical applications. To better
understand and quantify these limitations, several benchmarks [17, 28, 54] and mitigation strategies [61, 67] have
been developed to systematically evaluate hallucinations in
MLLMs. These benchmarks curate fine-grained question-

Q1) Is the prominent action in the video

Q2) Is the prominent action in the video

playing the piano?

playing drums?

Chat-UniVi: Yes, the prominent action

Chat-UniVi: Yes, the prominent action in

in the video is playing the piano.

the video is the person playing the drums. ✘

Video-ChatGPT: No. ✘

Video-ChatGPT: Yes, playing drums is
the prominent action in the video. ✘

Video-LLaMA2: Yes.

Video-LLaMA2: Yes. ✘

GT: Yes.

GT: No.

Video Pair
Q1) Is the prominent action in the video

Q2) Is the prominent action in the video

playing the piano?

playing drums?

Chat-UniVi: Yes, the prominent action

Chat-UniVi: Yes, the prominent action in

in the video is playing the piano. ✘

the video is the man playing the drums.

Video-ChatGPT: Yes. ✘

Video-ChatGPT: Yes, playing drums is
the prominent action in the video.

Video-LLaMA2: Yes. ✘

Video-LLaMA2: Yes.

GT: No.

GT: Yes.

Figure 1. An example of a video pair showing action hallucination
in V ID H ALLUC. Adversarial questions, which refer to actions
in the other video of the pair, show that MLLMs are prone to
hallucinations when input videos have high semantic but low visual
similarity. None of the models accurately identify the prominent
actions in this pair.

answer (QA) pairs designed to trigger hallucinations, often created using either GPT-4V [6, 59] or human annotators [38]. However, these benchmarks come with several
limitations. First, the datasets are typically small in scale,
containing fewer than 1,000 videos and 2,000 QA pairs. This
limited scale is due to the time and cost involved in generating high-quality QA pairs, making the process inefficient.
Second, the primary focus of the existing benchmarks is
on hallucinations in static elements of videos [8, 35], such
as objects [28, 45], their attributes [47, 53], and spatial relationships [18]. This limits the benchmark’s efficacy in
evaluating dynamic and temporal content in videos. Third,
the benchmarks are constructed with limited question types
(e.g., binary QA only), constraining the assessment of the
model’s understanding of dynamic aspects, such as temporal
scene transitions, inherent to video content.

13723

