This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAMT: Temporal-Aware Model Tuning for Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Action Recognition

1

Yilong Wang1, * Zilin Gao2,∗ Qilong Wang1,† Zhaofeng Chen3 Peihua Li2 Qinghua Hu1
Tianjin University 2 Dalian University of Technology 3 Yancheng Institute of Technology

Abstract

limited annotated samples, which has achieved remarkable
progress with the rapid development of deep models and pretraining techniques [6, 17, 27, 45–48, 50, 52, 54, 55]. Going
beyond FSAR, cross-domain FSAR (CDFSAR) has been
attracting recent research interests [38, 49], which focuses
on transferring knowledge from the well-annotated source
domain to target one with few annotated samples. Intuitively,
the domain gap between source and target data will clearly
impact the performance of transfer learning [1, 15, 29].
As a seminal work, SEEN [49] proposes a joint training
paradigm to alleviate side effect of domain gap, where a
parameter-shared model is trained on source data and target
one with supervision learning and self-supervised contrastive
learning objectives, respectively. After the joint training, a
simple nearest neighbor classifier is straightforwardly used
for inference in target domain. As a parallel work, CDFSLV [38] proposes a two-stage joint training paradigm, where
the model is first pre-trained on source and target data in a
self-supervised manner, and then a curriculum learning is
developed to further tune the model on source and target
data. Subsequently, a few-shot classifier is fine-tuned on the
annotated target data for inference.
Although some advanced efforts are made [38, 49], they
generally suffer from two limitations. First, both SEEN [49]
and CDFSL-V [38] involve joint training paradigms. As
illustrated in Fig. 1a (1) and (2), they require to retrain the
models B times, given a single source data SCD and B
1
B
target data {TCD
, · · · , TCD
} (a commonly used setting [38,
49]). It potentially incurs heavy computation cost due to
frequent retraining on source data SCD , especially for large
b
SCD and small TCD
. Second, during the inference stage,
pre-trained models are generally adopted to target domain
in a straightforward manner, i.e., simple nearest neighbor
classifier [49] or a fine-tuned classifier [38]. They hardly
take full advantage of pre-trained models to dynamically fit
target data with the frozen backbone, and so potentially limit
the final recognition performance.
To address the above limitations, this paper proposes
a simple yet effective baseline, namely Temporal-Aware
Model Tuning (TAMT). Particularly, as shown in Fig. 1a (3),
our TAMT involves a decoupled paradigm by pre-training

Going beyond few-shot action recognition (FSAR), crossdomain FSAR (CDFSAR) has attracted recent research interests by solving the domain gap lying in source-to-target
transfer learning. Existing CDFSAR methods mainly focus
on joint training of source and target data to mitigate the
side effect of domain gap. However, such kind of methods
suffer from two limitations: First, pair-wise joint training
requires retraining deep models in case of one source data
and multiple target ones, which incurs heavy computation
cost, especially for large source and small target data. Second, pre-trained models after joint training are adopted
to target domain in a straightforward manner, hardly taking full potential of pre-trained models and then limiting
recognition performance. To overcome above limitations,
this paper proposes a simple yet effective baseline, namely
Temporal-Aware Model Tuning (TAMT) for CDFSAR. Specifically, our TAMT involves a decoupled paradigm by performing pre-training on source data and fine-tuning target data,
which avoids retraining for multiple target data with single
source. To effectively and efficiently explore the potential
of pre-trained models in transferring to target domain, our
TAMT proposes a Hierarchical Temporal Tuning Network
(HTTN), whose core involves local temporal-aware adapters
(TAA) and a global temporal-aware moment tuning (GTMT).
Particularly, TAA learns few parameters to recalibrate the
intermediate features of frozen pre-trained models, enabling
efficient adaptation to target domains. Furthermore, GTMT
helps to generate powerful video representations, improving
match performance on the target domain. Experiments on
several widely used video benchmarks show our TAMT outperforms the recently proposed counterparts by 13%∼31%,
achieving new state-of-the-art CDFSAR results.

1. Introduction
Few-shot action recognition (FSAR) aims to develop video
recognition models with high generalization ability by using
* Equal contribution. †Corresponding author: qlwang@tju.edu.cn.

3449

