This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lifting the Veil on Visual Information Flow in MLLMs: Unlocking Pathways to
Faster Inference
Hao Yin Gunagzong Si Zilei Wang*
University of Science and Technology of China
{yinhnavi, guangzongsi}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

With respect to the first question, we developed three
metrics based on saliency scores to quantify the impact of
system tokens, image tokens, and instruction tokens on prediction outcomes. Experimental results indicated that the
importance of image tokens was minimal, only equivalent
to 0.03% of that of instruction tokens, despite image tokens
comprising a significant portion of the model input.
With respect to the second question, saliency analysis of
the attention matrices reveals strong interactions between
image tokens and instruction tokens in shallow layers, while
interactions among image tokens become more significant in
deeper layers. This result intuitively reveals that as the model
depth increases, the dominant flow of visual information
within MLLMs undergoes a shift. Based on this, we propose
the following hypothesis.

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) improve performance on vision-language tasks by integrating visual
features from pre-trained vision encoders into large language models (LLMs). However, how MLLMs process and
utilize visual information remains unclear. In this paper, a
shift in the dominant flow of visual information is uncovered: (1) in shallow layers, strong interactions are observed
between image tokens and instruction tokens, where most
visual information is injected into instruction tokens to form
cross-modal semantic representations; (2) in deeper layers,
image tokens primarily interact with each other, aggregating
the remaining visual information to optimize semantic representations within visual modality. Based on these insights,
we propose Hierarchical Modality-Aware Pruning (HiMAP),
a plug-and-play inference acceleration method that dynamically prunes image tokens at specific layers, reducing computational costs by approximately 65% without sacrificing performance. Our findings offer a new understanding of visual
information processing in MLLMs and provide a state-ofthe-art solution for efficient inference. The code is available
at https://github.com/ustc-hyin/HiMAP.

Phased Processing of Visual Information
H1 : In shallow layers, image tokens primarily interact with instruction tokens, injecting most visual
information into instruction tokens to establish a
cross-modal semantic representation for subsequent
computations.
H2 : In deeper layers, interactions among image tokens are enhanced, consolidating the residual visual
information, thereby refining the semantic representation within visual modality.

1. Introduction
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [3, 4, 16, 22,
45] have emerged as an advanced architecture that integrates
visual and textual information, demonstrating exceptional
performance across various tasks. Compared to traditional
multimodal models [14, 15, 17], MLLMs achieve superior
information fusion and complex semantic understanding by
utilizing large language models (LLMs) [1, 37, 44] to process visual features. However, the mechanisms of information interaction within these models remain underexplored.
This study poses two critical questions: (1) To what extent
do image tokens influence model predictions? (2) How is
visual information processed within the model?

Fig. 1 provides a detailed elaboration of our hypothesis.
Two experiments were conducted to validate the aforementioned hypothesis. (1) By blocking the information interaction between image and instruction tokens in specific layers,
we observed that perturbations in shallow layers significantly
degraded model performance, confirming that image tokens
inject most visual information into instruction tokens. (2) We
compared the significance of visual-textual and intra-visual
information flows at various model depths, discovering that
perturbations to intra-visual information flow in deeper layers led to more pronounced prediction deviations, thereby

* Corresponding Author

9382

