This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PatchDPO: Patch-level DPO for Finetuning-free Personalized Image Generation
Qihan Huang1 , Long Chan2 , Jinlong Liu2 , Wanggui He2 , Hao Jiang2 , Mingli Song1 , Jie Song1,†
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group
{qh.huang,sjie,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
{chenlong0104.chen,aoshu.jh}@alibaba-inc.com,
LJLwykqh@126.com,wanggui.hwg@taobao.com

Abstract
Finetuning-free personalized image generation can synthesize customized images without test-time finetuning, attracting wide research interest owing to its high efficiency. Current finetuning-free methods simply adopt a single training stage with a simple image reconstruction task, and they
typically generate low-quality images inconsistent with the
reference images during test-time. To mitigate this problem, inspired by the recent DPO (i.e., direct preference
optimization) technique, this work proposes an additional
training stage to improve the pre-trained personalized generation models. However, traditional DPO only determines
the overall superiority or inferiority of two samples, which
is not suitable for personalized image generation because
the generated images are commonly inconsistent with the
reference images only in some local image patches. To
tackle this problem, this work proposes PatchDPO that estimates the quality of image patches within each generated image and accordingly trains the model. To this end,
PatchDPO first leverages the pre-trained vision model with
a proposed self-supervised training method to estimate the
patch quality. Next, PatchDPO adopts a weighted training approach to train the model with the estimated patch
quality, which rewards the image patches with high quality
while penalizing the image patches with low quality. Experiment results demonstrate that PatchDPO significantly
improves the performance of multiple pre-trained personalized generation models, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on both single-object and multi-object personalized image generation. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/hqhQAQ/PatchDPO.

Reference Image

Image 1

Image 2

Image 3

Figure 1. The generated images (Images 1 & 2 & 3) are commonly
inconsistent with the reference image only in some local image
patches (marked in the red boxes).

1. Introduction

reference images that define specific details of the desired output. The methodology in this domain is progressively evolving from a finetuning-based approach (e.g.,
DreamBooth [35], Custom Diffusion [22]) towards a
finetuning-free approach (e.g., IP-Adapter [45], SubjectDiffusion [26], JeDi [46]), as finetuning-free methods eliminate the need for finetuning during test-time, significantly
reducing usage costs.
Current finetuning-free methods typically employ only a
single training stage on a large-scale image dataset. During
this stage, the model is trained with a simple image reconstruction task (i.e., taking each image as reference image
to reconstruct itself). When generating images in different
scenes from the reference images in test-time, existing models often generate images of lower quality (i.e., inconsistent
with the reference images in local details).
Inspired by the recent DPO technique (i.e., direct preference optimization [32]) that leverages human feedback to
optimize the pre-trained model, in this work we strive to
devise an additional training stage for improving the pretrained personalized generation models. Specifically, the
DPO technique assigns human preference to each sample,
and trains the model to generate outputs that align more
closely with human preferences. However, traditional DPO
only judges the overall superiority or inferiority of two samples, which is not suitable for personalized image generation because generated images are usually inconsistent with
the reference images only in some local areas, leading to
inaccuracies when comparing the overall quality of two im-

Personalized image generation methods have garnered significant research interest, which generate images based on
† Corresponding author.

18369

