This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Star with Bilinear Mapping
Zelin Peng1,† , Yu Huang1,† , Zhengqin Xu1 , Feilong Tang2,3 , Ming Hu3 ,
Xiaokang Yang1 , and Wei Shen1()
1
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong University
2
MBZUAI, 3 Monash University.
{zelin.peng, yellowfish, fate311, changsong, xkyang, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn
{Feilong.Tang, Ming.Hu}@monash.edu

Abstract
Contextual modeling is crucial for robust visual representation learning, especially in computer vision. Although
Transformers have become a leading architecture for vision tasks due to their attention mechanism, the quadratic
complexity of full attention operations presents substantial
computational challenges. To address this, we introduce
Star with Bilinear Mapping (SBM), a Transformer-like architecture that achieves global contextual modeling with
linear complexity. SBM employs a bilinear mapping module
(BM) with low-rank decomposition strategy and star operations (element-wise multiplication) to efﬁciently capture
global contextual information. Our model demonstrates competitive performance on image classiﬁcation and semantic
segmentation tasks, delivering signiﬁcant computational efﬁciency gains compared to traditional attention-based models.
Code is available at https://github.com/SJTUDeepVisionLab/SBM .

1. Introduction
Contextual modeling capabilities are fundamental for learning robust visual representations, serving as a cornerstone
for advancements in the ﬁeld of computer vision. Compared to classical CNNs, which have limited capacity
for contextual understanding [18, 21, 25, 45, 63], Transformers [10, 11, 32, 33, 39, 47, 52] leverage a multihead attention mechanism [50] to enable global interactions among tokens. This capability positions Transformers as a critical backbone for numerous foundational models [2, 11, 42, 43, 48], thus driving the ongoing AI revolution.
However, as shown in Fig.1, a critical challenge in de Corresponding Author: wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn
† Indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1. Left: Full attention architecture. Right: Architecture
with star operation. The full attention mechanism computes a matrix multiplication between the query-key similarity matrix and the
value matrix to capture global contextual information, resulting in a
computational complexity of O(n2 d). Our objective is to leverage
the star operation, as shown on the right, to achieve efﬁcient global
receptive ﬁeld coverage with linear complexity, thereby unlocking
its potential for scalable contextual modeling.

ploying Transformers in these advancements is the quadratic
complexity between matrix multiplications in the full attention mechanism [50], which signiﬁcantly increases the computation cost as the token length grows. To address this issue,
a promising direction is to achieve global contextual modeling with linear complexity, as demonstrated by the popular
Mamba [12] and its variants [8, 31, 58, 60]. Despite their
competitive performance, recent studies [14, 61] indicate
that the core state space model may be somewhat redundant
for certain vision tasks and still limits the training and inference efﬁciency unless equipped with a well-designed CUDA
acceleration algorithm.
In this paper, we aim to explore an alternative approach
that not only achieves global contextual modeling with linear
complexity but also facilitates fast training and inference.
Existing research has theoretically demonstrated [37, 44, 59]
that element-wise multiplication (i.e., star operation), as a
linear complexity operation, can effectively capture highdimensional contextual information when stacked across

25292

