This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaIR: A Locality- and Continuity-Preserving Mamba for Image Restoration
Boyun Li1 , Haiyu Zhao1 , Wenxin Wang1 , Peng Hu1 , Yuanbiao Gou1∗ , Xi Peng1,2 *
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China.
2
National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Algorithms and Models for Engineering
Numerical Simulation, Sichuan University, China.
{liboyun.gm, haiyuzhao.gm, wangwenxin.gm, penghu.ml, gouyuanbiao, pengx.gm}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in Mamba have shown promising results in image restoration. These methods typically flatten
2D images into multiple distinct 1D sequences along rows
and columns, process each sequence independently using
selective scan operation, and recombine them to form the
outputs. However, such a paradigm overlooks two vital aspects: i) the local relationships and spatial continuity inherent in natural images, and ii) the discrepancies among
sequences unfolded through totally different ways. To overcome the drawbacks, we explore two problems in Mambabased restoration methods: i) how to design a scanning
strategy preserving both locality and continuity while facilitating restoration, and ii) how to aggregate the distinct sequences unfolded in totally different ways. To address these problems, we propose a novel Mamba-based
Image Restoration model (MaIR), which consists of Nested
S-shaped Scanning strategy (NSS) and Sequence Shuffle
Attention block (SSA). Specifically, NSS preserves locality
and continuity of the input images through the stripe-based
scanning region and the S-shaped scanning path, respectively. SSA aggregates sequences through calculating attention weights within the corresponding channels of different sequences. Thanks to NSS and SSA, MaIR surpasses
40 baselines across 14 challenging datasets, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on the tasks of image superresolution, denoising, deblurring and dehazing. The code
is available at https://github.com/XLearningSCU/2025-CVPR-MaIR.

(a) Vmamba/Vim

(b) Zigma

(c) LocalMamba

(d) MaIR (Ours)

Figure 1. The scanning strategies in existing Mamba-based methods and our proposed method. (a) Vmamba/Vim uses Z-shaped
scan path to flatten 2D image into 1D sequences, in which both
the locality and continuity of 2D image are disrupted. (b) Zigma
utilizes S-shaped path to maintain spatial continuity, while ignores
the locality. (c) LocalMamba leverages window-based scanning
region to preserve locality. However, the Z-shaped scanning path
within and across the windows disrupts the spatial continuity. In
contrast, (d) MaIR divides images into multiple non-overlapping
stripes, and adopts S-shaped scanning path within and across the
stripes, thus simultaneously preserves both locality and continuity.

Transformers have significantly advanced image restoration by effectively capturing locality (i.e., fine-grained patterns and correlations in small regions) and continuity (i.e.,
smooth, gradual transitions across larger areas) inherent in
2D natural images. To be specific, CNNs capture locality
and continuity through the elaborately designed small kernels and sliding strides, respectively. Transformers capture
them through local window partitions and adjacent window
communications (e.g., window shifts and window expansions). However, like a coin with two sides, the success of
CNNs and Transformers in preserving locality and continu-

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to recover visually appealing highquality images from given degraded correspondences, e.g.,
noisy, blurry, and hazy images. In recent years, the methods based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
* Corresponding author

7491

