This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RSAR: Restricted State Angle Resolver and Rotated SAR Benchmark
Xin Zhang1 , Xue Yang2 , Yuxuan Li1 , Jian Yang1 , Ming-Ming Cheng1,3 , Xiang Li1,3
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
zhasion@mail.nankai.edu.cn, yangxue@pjlab.org.cn, yuxuan.li.17@ucl.ac.uk
{csjyang,cmm,xiang.li.implus}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract

aircraft

Rotated object detection has made significant progress in
the optical remote sensing. However, advancements in the
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) field are laggard behind,
primarily due to the absence of a large-scale dataset. Annotating such a dataset is inefficient and costly. A promising solution is to employ a weakly supervised model (e.g.,
trained with available horizontal boxes only) to generate
pseudo-rotated boxes for reference before manual calibration. Unfortunately, the existing weakly supervised models exhibit limited accuracy in predicting the object’s angle. Previous works attempt to enhance angle prediction
by using angle resolvers that decouple angles into cosine
and sine encodings. In this work, we first reevaluate these
resolvers from a unified perspective of dimension mapping
and expose that they share the same shortcomings: these
methods overlook the unit cycle constraint inherent in these
encodings, easily leading to prediction biases. To address
this issue, we propose the Unit Cycle Resolver (UCR),
which incorporates a unit circle constraint loss to improve
angle prediction accuracy. Our approach can effectively
improve the performance of existing state-of-the-art weakly
supervised methods and even surpasses fully supervised
models on existing optical benchmarks (i.e., DOTA-v1.0).
With the aid of UCR, we further annotate and introduce
RSAR, the largest multi-class rotated SAR object detection
dataset to date. Extensive experiments on both RSAR and
optical datasets demonstrate that our UCR enhances angle
prediction accuracy. Our dataset and code can be found
at: https://github.com/zhasion/RSAR.

Prediction

ship

GT

Prediction

GT

Figure 1. A comparison between prediction results from a weakly
supervised model and the ground truth (GT). The weakly supervised model’s accuracy in predicting the object angle requires fur-

in the field of remote sensing, the increased accessibility
of optical satellite imagery [37, 45] facilitates numerous
contributions to rotated object detection. Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) [36], a prominent remote sensing technology with all-weather imaging capabilities, attracts considerable attention in recent years. With the introduction
of SAR datasets [39, 44, 64], a growing number of studies [4, 14, 20, 69] are focusing on SAR object detection.
Current research on SAR image interpretation primarily
focuses on horizontal object detection, where performance
tends to saturation [13, 14]. In contrast, progress in rotated
SAR object detection is much slower. This is mainly due
to the lack of a large-scale dataset specifically designed for
rotated SAR object detection. Annotating such a dataset
is both costly and inefficient, and a potential solution is
to leverage a weakly supervised model. This weakly supervised model is trained with horizontal bounding boxes
and generates pseudo-rotated detection boxes, which are
then manually refined for efficient calibration. However, as
shown in Fig. 1, accurately predicting the detected object’s
angle remains challenging for existing weakly supervised
models. Therefore, improving angle prediction accuracy is
crucial for enhancing the applicability of weakly supervised
methods in SAR datasets.
The main challenge in accurate angle prediction lies in
the angle boundary discontinuity problem [53]. To address
this issue radically, previous related works [48, 58] utilize

1. Introduction
Rotated object detection [66], which provides more precise
localization than horizontal object detection, is widely utilized in remote sensing [5, 17, 45, 46], 3D detection [27,
67], and scene text detection [21, 25, 30, 68]. Particularly
Corresponding Author.

7416

