This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DepthCrafter: Generating Consistent Long Depth Sequences
for Open-world Videos
Wenbo Hu1* † Xiangjun Gao2* Xiaoyu Li1* † Sijie Zhao1
Xiaodong Cun1 Yong Zhang1 Long Quan2 Ying Shan3, 1
1

Tencent AI Lab

2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

3

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

https://depthcrafter.github.io

Ours

Depth-Anything-V2

Input video

Time

Figure 1. We innovate DepthCrafter, a novel video depth estimation approach, that can generate temporally consistent long depth sequences
with fine-grained details for open-world videos, without requiring additional information such as camera poses or optical flow.

Abstract

long videos through segment-wise estimation and seamless
stitching. Comprehensive evaluations on multiple datasets
reveal that DepthCrafter achieves state-of-the-art performance in open-world video depth estimation under zeroshot settings. Furthermore, DepthCrafter facilitates various downstream applications, including depth-based visual
effects and conditional video generation.

Estimating video depth in open-world scenarios is challenging due to the diversity of videos in appearance, content motion, camera movement, and length. We present
DepthCrafter, an innovative method for generating temporally consistent long depth sequences with intricate details for open-world videos, without requiring any supplementary information such as camera poses or optical
flow. The generalization ability to open-world videos is
achieved by training the video-to-depth model from a pretrained image-to-video diffusion model, through our meticulously designed three-stage training strategy. Our training approach enables the model to generate depth sequences with variable lengths at one time, up to 110 frames,
and harvest both precise depth details and rich content
diversity from realistic and synthetic datasets. We also
propose an inference strategy that can process extremely
* Joint first authors.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation, serving as the bridge linking
2D observations and the 3D world, has been a long-standing
fundamental problem in computer vision. It plays a crucial role in a wide range of downstream applications, e.g.,
mixed reality, AI-generated content, autonomous driving,
and robotics [14, 24, 27, 28, 40, 57, 72, 73]. The inherent
ambiguity makes it challenging, as the observed information from a single view is insufficient to determine the depth
of a scene uniquely.

† Corresponding authors.

2005

