This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NN-Former: Rethinking Graph Structure in Neural Architecture Representation
Ruihan Xu1 , Haokui Zhang2 , Yaowei Wang3 , Wei Zeng1 , Shiliang Zhang†1
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China

Abstract
The growing use of deep learning necessitates efficient network design and deployment, making neural predictors vital
for estimating attributes such as accuracy and latency. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and transformers
have shown promising performance in representing neural
architectures. However, each of both methods has its disadvantages. GNNs lack the capabilities to represent complicated features, while transformers face poor generalization
when the depth of architecture grows. To mitigate the above
issues, we rethink neural architecture topology and show
that sibling nodes are pivotal while overlooked in previous
research. We thus propose a novel predictor leveraging the
strengths of GNNs and transformers to learn the enhanced
topology. We introduce a novel token mixer that considers siblings, and a new channel mixer named bidirectional
graph isomorphism feed-forward network. Our approach
consistently achieves promising performance in both accuracy and latency prediction, providing valuable insights for
learning Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) topology. The code
is available at https://github.com/XuRuihan/NNFormer.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable success across various applications, highlighting the significance of neural architecture design. Designing neural architectures can be quite resource-intensive. Evaluating the performance of a model necessitates training on large datasets.
Measuring its inference latency and throughput involves
multiple steps such as compilation, deployment, and latency evaluation on various hardware platforms, incurring
substantial human effort and resources. One strategy to
mitigate these challenges is to predict network attributes
with machine learning predictors. By feeding the network
structure and hyperparameters into these predictors, valuable characteristics of the network can be estimated with a
single feedforward pass, e.g., accuracy on a validation set

10004

or inference times on specific hardware. This predictive approach has been successfully applied in various tasks including neural architecture search [30, 32, 44, 50, 52, 53]
and hardware deployment [11, 21, 27, 52, 53, 58], yielding
promising outcomes in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of network architecture design.
Previous neural predictors model the neural architecture
as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) [9, 11, 25, 27, 34, 39,
44] and utilize Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) or Transformers to extract neural architecture representation. GNNs
have emerged as an intuitive solution for learning graph representations [11, 25, 27, 39, 44], which leverage the graph
Laplacian and integrate adjacency information to learn the
graph topology. GNN-based predictors show strong generalization ability, yet their performance may not be optimal. This is attributed to the structural bias in the messagepassing mechanism, which relies solely on adjacency information. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a) and (b), GCNs [22] aggregate the forward and backward adjacent nodes without discrimination, and GATs [43] aggregate them with dynamic
weights. Both of them are limited to adjacent information.
With the recent development of transformers, various
transformer-based frameworks have been introduced [30,
52, 53]. Transformers have strengths in global modeling and dynamic weight adjustments, hence could extract
strong features. Despite the promising performance, they
still exhibit several shortcomings. One particular challenge
of transformer is related to the long-range receptive field, as
depicted in Fig. 1(c) and (d), which can lead to poor generalization performance on deep architectures [52, 53]. The
vanilla transformer [30, 42, 52] have a global receptive field,
and recent studies proposed transformers on directed transitive closure [9, 34]. Both methods conduct long-range attention that could mix up the information from operations
far away, especially when the depth of the input architecture increases to hundreds of layers. For example, NARFormer [52, 53] has illustrated that transformer predictors
with global attention struggle in deep network latency prediction, leading to worse performance than GNNs [27, 53].

