This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Directional Label Diffusion Model for Learning from Noisy Labels
Senyu Hou1 , Gaoxia Jiang1 , Jia Zhang1 , Shangrong Yang1 , Husheng Guo1 ,
Yaqing Guo1 , Wenjian Wang2 *
1
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing
Ministry of Education, Shanxi University, China
{202312407005, 202412407035}@email.sxu.edu.cn
{jianggaoxia, sryang, guohusheng, yqguo, wjwang}@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract
In image classification, the label quality of training data
critically influences model generalization, especially for
deep neural networks (DNNs). Traditionally, learning from
noisy labels (LNL) can improve the generalization of DNNs
through complex architectures or a series of robust techniques, but its performance improvement is limited by the
discriminative paradigm. Unlike traditional ways, we resolve the LNL problems from the perspective of robust label
generation, based on diffusion models within the generative paradigm. To expand the diffusion model into a robust
classifier that explicitly accommodates more noise knowledge, we propose a Directional Label Diffusion (DLD)
model. It disentangles the diffusion process into two paths,
i.e., directional diffusion and random diffusion. Specifically, directional diffusion simulates the corruption of true
labels into a directed noise distribution, prioritizing the
removal of likely noise, whereas random diffusion introduces inherent randomness to support label recovery. This
architecture enable DLD to gradually infer labels from
an initial random state, interpretably diverging from the
specified noise distribution. To adapt the model to diverse noisy environments, we design a low-cost label precorrection method that automatically supplies more accurate label information to the diffusion model, without requiring manual intervention or additional iterations. Our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on both simulated and real-world noisy datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/SenyuHou/DLD.

These models are primarily trained using supervised learning, which relies heavily on large volumes of labeled data
[5]. However, real-world data often suffer from low-quality
labels due to subjective errors like indistinguishable samples or objective errors such as incorrect label recording,
making noisy labels a widespread issue [13, 55]. Studies
have shown that the generalization capability of deep neural networks is adversely affected when trained with noisy
labels [1, 59]. Consequently, it is crucial to develop methods for learning from noisy labels (LNL) on large-scale but
low-quality datasets.
Due to the varied distribution of label noise, historical research has classified it into class-conditional noise
(CCN) and instance-dependent noise (IDN) [57]. Recent
studies indicate that label noise in real datasets predominantly aligns with the IDN assumption, wherein noise is
unevenly distributed and more likely in samples with similar features [2, 6, 10–12, 51]. To tackle these complex
noise patterns, mainstream LNL methods employ strategies
combining filtering and training approaches. Some studies
demonstrate a phenomenon known as the memorization effect [1, 3, 29, 56], i.e., DNNs first learn from simple data
before fitting to noisy samples. Based on this observation,
sample selection strategies utilize confidence levels or prediction loss during training intervals to identify noisy samples [17, 24, 28, 58]. However, this strategy is inherently
risky, as the timing of noise memorization varies across
datasets and noise distributions, complicating the selection criteria [6, 39]. Consequently, mainline LNL methods
can often be integrated with training strategies to enhance
model robustness, employing techniques like label filtering
[17, 36, 50, 58], label correction [47, 60, 64], robust loss
[16, 48, 61], and semi-supervised learning [28]. Among
these techniques, semi-supervised learning, by combining
multiple approaches [34, 37, 49], often outperforms other
LNL methods but is still constrained by the discriminative
framework. Although some researches attempt to combine

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved notable success across key areas of machine learning, driven by the
growth of datasets and the increase in model parameters.
* Corresponding author.

25738

