This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConText-CIR: Learning from Concepts in Text for Composed Image Retrieval
Eric Xing1

Pranavi Kolouju2
Robert Pless3
Abby Stylianou2
1
Washington University in St. Louis
2
Saint Louis University
3
The George Washington University

Nathan Jacobs1

{e.xing,jacobsn}@wustl.edu, {pranavi.kolouju,abby.stylianou}@slu.edu, pless@gwu.edu

Abstract
Composed image retrieval (CIR) is the task of retrieving a
target image specified by a query image and a relative text that
describes a semantic modification to the query image. Existing
methods in CIR struggle to accurately represent the image
and the text modification, resulting in subpar performance.
To address this limitation, we introduce a CIR framework,
ConText-CIR, trained with a Text Concept-Consistency loss that
encourages the representations of noun phrases in the text modification to better attend to the relevant parts of the query image.
To support training with this loss function, we also propose a
synthetic data generation pipeline that creates training data
from existing CIR datasets or unlabeled images. We show that
these components together enable stronger performance on CIR
tasks, setting a new state-of-the-art in composed image retrieval
in both the supervised and zero-shot settings on multiple
benchmark datasets, including CIRR and CIRCO. Source code,
model checkpoints, and our new datasets are available at
https://github.com/mvrl/ConText-CIR .

1. Introduction
Traditional image retrieval is a longstanding problem in computer vision [8] with a diverse set of applications, including
visual search [48], image geolocalization [71], medical imaging [53], etc. There are two standard approaches to the image
retrieval task: image-based [67, 73], where the input is an image and the task is finding images that are visually similar, and
text-based [39, 56], where the input is natural language, and the
task is finding images that match the text. Image embedding
models make the image-based approach possible, and visionlanguage models such as CLIP [44], which have aligned image
and text representations, have facilitated the text-based approach.
However, both approaches have limitations: images are typically complex and contain a wide variety of objects, making it
difficult to encode specific retrieval criteria in an image alone;
conversely, it is difficult to specify complex visual information in

Figure 1. A failure case of current composed image retrieval methods.
Previous methods do not accurately capture the two conditions
specified by the text.

text alone, as describing details of color patterns and the shapes
of interest objects is often difficult and imprecise with text.
Recent work in multi-modal image retrieval aims to mitigate
these inherent limitations of uni-modal queries by introducing
the composed image retrieval (CIR) problem [24, 32, 61, 65].
CIR involves retrieving a target image specified by a reference
image and a text modification to the reference image. Incorporating open-ended text as an additional search criterion allows
the inclusion of diverse natural language concepts, modifiers,
and search specifications with images to produce a flexible
retrieval formulation. Current work in CIR, however, fails
to model the interaction of longer, richer texts with images.
Existing approaches and datasets focus on simple text modifiers,
with a straightforward modification, most often to foreground
objects. Real-world queries, however, are often complex,
multi-attribute, and may express modifications to background
objects. Figure 1 demonstrates the limitations of current CIR
methods, where the query includes an image of a “rainbow
lorikeet” and text saying to “add another lorikeet on the branch
and to remove the greenery in the background”. Current
methods tend to retrieve results that are correlated with the
concepts specified in the text modifier (adding a second lorikeet,

19638

