This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AVQACL: A Novel Benchmark for Audio-Visual Question Answering Continual
Learning
Kaixuan Wu1,4 , Xinde Li1,2,3,4,* , Xinling Li1,4 , Chuanfei Hu1,2,4 , Guoliang Wu1,4
1
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing,China
2
Nanjing Center for Applied Mathematics, Nanjing, China
3
Southeast University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
4
Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering,
Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China
{kaixuanwu, xindeli, xinlingli, chuanfeihu, guoliangwu}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Task 1

In this paper, a novel benchmark for audio-visual question answering continual learning (AVQACL) is introduced, aiming to study fine-grained scene understanding
and spatial-temporal reasoning in videos under a continual learning setting. To facilitate this multimodal continual leaning task, we create two audio-visual question
answering continual learning datasets, named Split-AVQA
and Split-MUSIC-AVQA based on the AVQA and MUSICAVQA datasets, respectively. The experimental results suggest that the model exhibits limited cognitive and reasoning abilities and experiences catastrophic forgetting when
processing three modalities simultaneously in a continuous data stream. To address above challenges, we propose a novel continual learning method that incorporates
question-guided cross-modal information fusion (QCIF) to
focus on question-relevant details for improved feature representation and task-specific knowledge distillation with
spatial-temporal feature constraints (TKD-STFC) to preserve the spatial-temporal reasoning knowledge acquired
from previous dynamic scenarios. Furthermore, a question
semantic consistency constraint (QSCC) is employed to ensure that the model maintains a consistent understanding
of question semantics across tasks throughout the continual
learning process. Extensive experimental results on SplitAVQA and Split-MUSIC-AVQA datasets illustrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art audio-visual question answering continual learning performance. The code is available at https://github.com/kx-wu/AVQACL.

…

Task 2

AV

Q

A

Continual Learning

Origin Model

…

trumpet

flute

…

ukulele

…
Q:"Where is the first
sounding instrument?"

Q:"Is the left instrument
more rhythmic than the
right instrument?"

Q:"Which ukulele
makes the sound first?"

A:“left"

A: " no"

A:"simultaneously"

Figure 1. The illustration of an AVQA system under a continual
learning setting.

[20, 39]. Unlike single-modality tasks [7, 13], AVQA integrates both auditory and visual cues, facilitating a more
comprehensive understanding of scenes. This capability
makes AVQA particularly crucial for applications such as
intelligent assistants, autonomous driving, and embodied
intelligence, where seamless multimodal integration is essential [10, 24, 38, 44].
However, most AVQA methods [21, 26, 40, 41] assume a
static learning environment, training on fixed datasets without the capacity to adapt to new tasks or data over time.
This limitation is problematic in dynamic real-world scenarios, where data is constantly evolving. Without adaptability,
models risk becoming outdated and impractical to retrain
from scratch due to high computational costs and overfitting
risks. To address these issues, multi-modal continual learning (MCL) has emerged as a key approach. MCL combines

1. Introduction
Audio-Visual Question Answering (AVQA) is a complex
AI task requiring systems to interpret and answer questions
based on both audio and visual information from videos
*Corresponding author

3252

