This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExpertAF: Expert Actionable Feedback from Video
Kumar Ashutosh1,2 , Tushar Nagarajan2 , Georgios Pavlakos1 , Kris Kitani2,3 , Kristen Grauman1,2
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 FAIR Meta, 3 Carnegie Mellon University
Learner demonstration (input)

Abstract
Feedback is essential for learning a new skill or improving one’s current skill-level. However, current methods for
skill-assessment from video only provide scores or compare demonstrations, leaving the burden of knowing what
to do differently on the user. We introduce a novel method
to generate actionable feedback (AF) from video of a person doing a physical activity, such as basketball or soccer.
Our method takes a video demonstration and its accompanying 3D body pose and generates (1) free-form expert
commentary describing what the person is doing well and
what they could improve, and (2) a visual expert demonstration that incorporates the required corrections. We show
how to leverage Ego-Exo4D’s [29] videos of skilled activity and expert commentary together with a strong language
model to create a weakly-supervised training dataset for
this task, and we devise a multimodal video-language model
to infer coaching feedback. Our method is able to reason across multi-modal input combinations to output fullspectrum, actionable coaching—expert commentary, expert
video retrieval, and expert pose generation—outperforming
strong vision-language models on both established metrics
and human preference studies.

Expert demonstration (output)

Expert commentary (output)
The player is taking big steps to control the ball, but lacks body
control, and needs to slow down to maintain a better control.

Figure 1. An example of expert feedback. When a player is
dribbling the ball fast, they tend to lose control (top left). Our
proposed method provides an expert commentary to the learner
suggesting improvements (bottom). The method also provides an
expert demonstration that shows the desired correction, where the
player is maintaining smaller steps and body control (top right).

1. Introduction

three components: finding mistakes, providing verbal corrections and finally, showing visual demonstrations. For example, suppose a person learning to dribble a soccer ball
takes big steps that decrease body control. The coach should
identify this mistake, provide verbal feedback, and show the
correct dribbling technique. See Figure 1.
At present, a person watching a how-to video has to
identify mistakes themselves and attempt to correct them.
Pinpointing the exact mistake is itself challenging for
beginners—particularly when learning physical skills, like
sports and dance, where subtle movements and positioning
of the body are critical to success.
What role could AI play in overcoming this gap? Current work on proficiency understanding from video focuses
on scoring a demonstration [9, 28, 29, 78], thus addressing only one component of coaching. There is no method
that can provide actionable verbal and visual feedback on a
learner’s demonstration. Doing so is technically challenging since it requires the method to (a) understand the user’s
activity, (b) detect mistakes in the execution by comparing

An abundance of instructional “how-to” videos on the internet enables skill-learning by observing expert demonstrations. Instructional videos cover many skills one might want
to learn—cooking, DIY, sports, crafts, and hobbies. Recent
work leverages such videos to assist human [5, 6, 53] and
robot [56] skill learning. Acquiring skills from video is especially appealing for equitable learning: access to video is
generally less costly and more widely available than faceto-face access to an expert coach.
Despite the myriad of videos and tutorials, people prefer
to learn in a feedback loop: getting to know their mistakes,
finding the improvements they need to do and correcting
those. For that reason, coaching-based iterative training is
more effective than self-learning [48]. A good coach has
Project page: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/ExpertAF/

13582

