This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOT: Hadamard-based Optimized Training
Seonggon Kim1 , Juncheol Shin2 , Seung-taek Woo2 , and Eunhyeok Park1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
{sungonuni, jchshin, wst9909, eh.park}@postech.ac.kr

It has become increasingly important to optimize backpropagation to reduce memory usage and computational overhead. Achieving this goal is highly challenging, as multiple objectives must be considered jointly while maintaining
training quality. In this paper, we focus on matrix multiplication, which accounts for the largest portion of training
costs, and analyze its backpropagation in detail to identify lightweight techniques that offer the best benefits. Based
on this analysis, we introduce a novel method, Hadamardbased Optimized Training (HOT). In this approach, we
apply Hadamard-based optimizations, such as Hadamard
quantization and Hadamard low-rank approximation, selectively and with awareness of the suitability of each optimization for different backward paths. Additionally, we introduce two enhancements: activation buffer compression
and layer-wise quantizer selection. Our extensive analysis
shows that HOT achieves up to 75% memory savings and a
2.6× acceleration on real GPUs, with negligible accuracy
loss compared to FP32 precision. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sungonuni/HOT.

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

FP
LoRA
LBP-WHT
LUQ

Memory Consumption(GB)

Abstract

HOT
HOT + LoRA

RTX 3090
64

128

256
Batch Size

512

1024

Figure 1. Memory requirements for training ViT-B [12] on
ImageNet-1k dataset [9] with varying batch sizes. While FP and
other efficienct BP methods fail to train with batch sizes of 256
and above on a single GPU having 24 GB memory, HOT enables
training with batch sizes up to 1024.

Weight &
Optimizer Memory
LoRA [18]
LBP-WHT [42]
LUQ [7]
HOT
HOT + LoRA

✓
✗
✗
✗
✓

Objectives
Intermediate Backpropagation
Activation
Speed
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓

▲
✓
▲
✓
✓

Trained Model
Quality
✓
▲
✓
✓
✓

Table 1. Comparison with previous works. HOT is the only method
which achieves activation memory reduction and actual speedup
altogether without compromising model quality.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in combining large-scale foundation models with transfer learning have enabled superior performance on new tasks with limited data. However, with the
rise of resource-intensive tasks such as high-resolution image generation [26, 29, 43], video synthesis [3, 31, 35],
and long-context language processing [5, 11, 15, 21], finetuning now requires even more resources, making it nearly
unaffordable for most companies or academic institutions.
However, designing an efficient training pipeline is
highly challenging, as it involves numerous considerations
and multiple tensors with diverse characteristics. Training
optimization faces three key challenges: (1) memory usage
for model parameters and optimizer states, (2) memory usage for intermediate activations needed for backpropagation

(BP), and (3) accelerating BP. While the first challenge is
well-addressed by recent advances like Parameter-efficient
Fine-tuning (PEFT), such as LoRA [18], the other two challenges remain unsatisfactorily resolved. Approaches like
LUQ [7] and LBP-WHT [42] focus on BP acceleration but
fail to tackle all these objectives jointly.
In this work, we propose a novel method called
Hadamard-based Optimized Training (HOT), which focuses on optimizing matrix multiplication—a major contributor to training overhead. First, We thoroughly analyze
the backward characteristics of activations and weights.

4787

