This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Vision-Language Model in Face Forensics:
Multi-Modal Interpretable Forged Face Detector
Xiao Guo1 , Xiufeng Song2 , Yue Zhang1 , Xiaohong Liu2 , Xiaoming Liu1
1
Michigan State University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{guoxia11, zhan1624, liuxm}@msu.edu, {akikaze,xiaohongliu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deepfake
Detector

Deepfake detection is a long-established research topic vital for mitigating the spread of malicious misinformation.
Unlike prior methods that provide either binary classification results or textual explanations separately, we introduce a novel method capable of generating both simultaneously. Our method harnesses the multi-modal learning
capability of the pre-trained CLIP and the unprecedented
interpretability of large language models (LLMs) to enhance both the generalization and explainability of deepfake detection. Specifically, we introduce a multi-modal
face forgery detector (M2F2-Det) that employs tailored
face forgery prompt learning, incorporating the pre-trained
CLIP to improve generalization to unseen forgeries. Also,
M2F2-Det incorporates an LLM to provide detailed textual explanations of its detection decisions, enhancing interpretability by bridging the gap between natural language
and subtle cues of facial forgeries. Empirically, we evaluate M2F2-Det on both detection and explanation generation tasks, where it achieves state-of-the-art performance,
demonstrating its effectiveness in identifying and explaining diverse forgeries. Source code is available at link.

DDVQA
-BLIP

0.60

Fake
Score

It is a fake
image with
unrealistic
lighting.
Explanation

Image

Image

(a)

(b)
0.99 Fake Score

Deepfake
Detector

LLM
Image

M2F2-Det

It is a fake image with
stains and flaws on a
person’s face. Some areas
look unnaturally darker.
Explanation

(c)
Figure 1. (a) and (b) represent conventional deepfake detectors
and DDVQA-BLIP [85], which take an image as the input and output the fake probability (e.g., score) and textual explanations, respectively. (c) In this work, we propose a multi-modal face forgery
detector (M2F2-Det) that produces both fake probability and textual explanations.

Recently, the powerful capability of vision-language
models, e.g., CLIP [56], also inspired efforts in detecting
deepfakes. For example, DDVQA-BLIP [85] reformulates
deepfake detection as an explanation generation task using a vision-language model [37], which enhances interpretability through natural language descriptions (Fig. 1b).
In addition, several binary detectors [10, 52, 60] leverage
CLIP’s robust recognition capabilities to achieve impressive performance. However, three key limitations remain
in these works. First, DDVQA-BLIP relies on a general
text-generation model without dedicated mechanisms for
deepfake detection, resulting in lower detection accuracy
compared to conventional binary detectors. Secondly, prior
CLIP-based detectors often lack effective input text prompts
to describe diverse forgeries, restricting the adaptation of
CLIP’s multi-modal learning ability in the detection task.
Third, while CLIP’s open-set recognition capability — enabling it to identify diverse visual semantics — is successfully combined with LLMs in domains like document parsing [25, 48, 79] and medical diagnosis [34, 50, 83], its integration with LLMs for deepfake detection remains largely
unexplored.

1. Introduction
Generative Models (GMs) [9, 18, 23, 30, 57] have demonstrated impressive capabilities in synthesizing highly realistic and visually compelling images. However, they also
facilitate the proliferation of AI-generated content (AIGC),
like deepfakes, raising serious concerns over the spread
of deceptive or manipulated facial imagery. To counter
these threats, substantial efforts have been made to develop deepfake detection techniques, including subtle artifacts indentification [6, 22, 40, 41, 61, 91], frequency analysis [19, 45, 49, 55, 72], disentangling forgery traces via
specialized neural networks [15, 20, 26, 44, 47, 76, 77, 90],
modeling temporal inconsistencies [24, 62, 73, 92], among
others.

105

