This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Generalizable Trajectory Prediction using Dual-Level Representation
Learning and Adaptive Prompting
Kaouther Messaoud*
EPFL, Switzerland

Matthieu Cord
Valeo.ai, France

Alexandre Alahi
EPFL, Switzerland

kaouther.messaoudbenamor@epfl.ch

matthieu.cord@valeo.com

alexandre.alahi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Existing vehicle trajectory prediction models struggle with
generalizability, prediction uncertainties, and handling
complex interactions. It is often due to limitations like
complex architectures customized for a specific dataset and
inefficient multimodal handling. We propose Perceiver
with Register queries (PerReg+), a novel trajectory prediction framework that introduces: (1) Dual-Level Representation Learning via Self-Distillation (SD) and Masked
Reconstruction (MR), capturing global context and finegrained details. Additionally, our approach of reconstructing segment-level trajectories and lane segments from
masked inputs with query drop, enables effective use of contextual information and improves generalization; (2) Enhanced Multimodality using register-based queries and pretraining, eliminating the need for clustering and suppression; and (3) Adaptive Prompt Tuning during fine-tuning,
freezing the main architecture and optimizing a small number of prompts for efficient adaptation. PerReg+ sets a
state-of-the-art performance on nuScenes [5], Argoverse
2 [42], and Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) [13].
Remarkably, our model reduces the error by 6.8% on
smaller datasets, and multi-dataset training enhances generalization. In cross-domain tests, PerReg+ reduces B-FDE
by 11.8% compared to its non-pretrained variant.

MAE

Q

MR & SD
KV

Masking

Masking

Prior work

Our Work

Input Features

Guiding Queries

Dropped Features

Predicted Trajectory

Reconstructed Vectors

Aligned Scene Vector

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison between Masked Autoencoder (MAE)
and our pretraining strategy with PerReg+. Our approach
incorporates dual-level representation learning through SelfDistillation (SD) and Masked Reconstruction (MR). Unlike MAE,
which reconstructs each masked point independently, our method
uses segment-level queries to reconstruct entire trajectories (past
or future) and lane segments, enabling the decoder to infer complete paths from fine-grained masked inputs. Additionally, we enable multimodal prediction during pretraining, allowing the model
to leverage additional insights from the reconstruction process.

Accurate trajectory prediction is essential for intelligent
agents, such as autonomous vehicles, to safely and efficiently navigate dynamic, multi-agent environments, directly impacting road safety and traffic flow. However,
modeling complex interactions, adapting to diverse scenes,
and managing prediction uncertainties remain challenging
due to the dynamic nature of real-world driving. Recent
studies [4, 8, 24, 34, 43, 47] have introduced self-supervised
* Corresponding author

learning (SSL) in trajectory prediction to improve generalization and performance, using techniques like Contrastive
Learning (CL) [27, 43, 47] and Masked Reconstruction
(MR) [8, 24, 34, 47] to capture meaningful representations.
Additionally, the Perceiver architecture [20, 21], with its
efficient processing of multimodal data, has been adapted
for trajectory prediction to handle the complexities of realworld inputs.
Despite recent advancements, trajectory prediction

27564

