This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MuTri: Multi-view Tri-alignment for OCT to OCTA 3D Image Translation
Zhuangzhuang Chen1 Hualiang Wang1 Chubin Ou2 Xiaomeng Li1 *
1
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Radiology, Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital, Southern Medical University
eezzchen@ust.hk, hwangfd@ust.hk, cou@connect.ust.hk, eexmli@ust.hk

Abstract
Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA)
shows its great importance in imaging microvascular networks by providing accurate 3D imaging of blood vessels,
but it relies upon specialized sensors and expensive devices.
For this reason, previous works show the potential to translate the readily available 3D Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) images into 3D OCTA images. However, existing
OCTA translation methods directly learn the mapping from
the OCT domain to the OCTA domain in continuous and
infinite space with guidance from only a single view, i.e.,
the OCTA project map, resulting in suboptimal results. To
this end, we propose the multi-view Tri-alignment framework for OCT to OCTA 3D image translation in discrete
and finite space, named MuTri. In the first stage, we pretrain two vector-quantized variational auto-encoder (VQVAE) by reconstructing 3D OCT and 3D OCTA data, providing semantic prior for subsequent multi-view guidances.
In the second stage, our multi-view tri-alignment facilitates
another VQVAE model to learn the mapping from the OCT
domain to the OCTA domain in discrete and finite space.
Specifically, a contrastive-inspired semantic alignment is
proposed to maximize the mutual information with the pretrained models from OCT and OCTA views, to facilitate
codebook learning. Meanwhile, a vessel structure alignment is proposed to minimize the structure discrepancy with
the pre-trained models from the OCTA project map view,
benefiting from learning the detailed vessel structure information. We also collect the first large-scale dataset, namely,
OCTA2024, which contains a pair of OCT and OCTA volumes from 846 subjects. Our codes and datasets are available at: https://github.com/xmed-lab/MuTri.

1. Introduction
Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) acts as a noninvasive imaging technology for providing highly detailed
* Corresponding author.

Continuous and Infinite Space
2D OCT B-scan

2D OCTA B-scan
2D GAN

(a)
2D OCT PM

2D OCTA PM
3D GAN

(b)
3D OCTVolume

3D OCTA Volume

Discrete and Finite Space
(c)

Quantize

Encoder

Decoder

Codebook

3D OCTA Volume

3D OCT Volume
Codebook Utilization Rate

80
60

MuTri-VQVAE

40

Vanilla-VQVAE

20

OCTA-3M

OCTA-6M

OCTA2024

Figure 1. (a) The existing OCTA translation methods learn the
mapping in the infinite and continuous space: (a) 2D OCT projection map (PM) or B-scan images as input, (b) 3D OCT volume
as input with only single view guidance from 2D OCT PM. (c)
A vanilla VQVAE involves a lower codebook utilization rate for
OCT to OCTA 3D image translation tasks, resulting in a less informative codebook. Note that, the codebook utilization rate is
computed by using training samples from three datasets.

in-depth retinal pathologies [3]. Thus, it has been widely
adopted in ophthalmic clinical care. However, as a nondynamic solution, OCT cannot visualize blood flow information such as blood vessel caliber or density and remains
limited to capturing structural information [9]. For this
cause, OCT angiography (OCTA) is developed to produce
Quantize
volumetric data Encoder
from choroidal and retinalDecoder
layers and fill the
Codebookhas shown its great
above
information
gap
[5,
19].
OCTA
3D OCT Volume
3D OCT Volume
Codebook
(c)
potential in detecting diabetic retinopathy [2], age-related
macular degeneration [4], Glaucoma
[14] and several other
Quantize
Decoder
retinal diseases Encoder
[1, 15]. Despite these advantages, OCTA
3D OCTA Volume

(d)

20885

Encoder

View1:
View2:
3D OCT
3D OCTA
Aligment
Aligment
Quantize

3D OCTA Volume
View3:
2D OCTA
PM Aligment
Decoder

Codebook

3D OCT Volume

3D OCTA Volume

