This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeqAfford: Sequential 3D Affordance Reasoning via
Multimodal Large Language Model
Chunlin Yu1,†

Hanqing Wang1,† Ye Shi1 Haoyang Luo1 Sibei Yang1
1
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China

Jingyi Yu1

Jingya Wang1, *

{yuchl,wanghq2024,shiye,luohy2024, yangsb,yujingyi,wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

I want to eat dinner. To expertly
cut thin slices of roast beef with
precision and control, where
should I properly position my
hand on the knife?

After enjoying dinner, what are the
best practices for carefully using
the dishwasher to ensure all
dishware is thoroughly cleaned?

First, carefully open the dishwasher
<SEG> door to prepare it for loading.

What are the best practices for storing
drinks on a hot summer day to ensure
they stay cool and refreshing?

First, Make sure you securely grasp bottle
<SEG> to prevent it from slipping.

Second, carefully open the refrigerator

You should grasp the
handle of the knife <SEG>.

<SEG> door gently to access to the

interior space.
Secondly, use the dishwasher
<SEG> to contain the dirty dishes,
ensuring they are properly
positioned thorough cleaning.
Finally, contain the bottle inside the
refrigerator <SEG>.

1) Single Affordance Reasoning

2) Sequential Affordance Reasoning

3) Sequential Affordance Reasoning with Multiple Objects

Figure 1. Sequential 3D affordance reasoning task with different types of interactions. We introduce SeqAfford, a Multi-Modal
Language Model (MLLM) capable of serialized affordance inference implied in human instructions: 1) Single Affordance Reasoning; 2)
Sequential Affordance Reasoning; 3) Sequential Affordance Reasoning with Multiple Objects

Abstract

construct the first instruction-based affordance segmentation benchmark that includes reasoning over both single
and sequential affordances, comprising 180K instructionpoint cloud pairs. Based on the benchmark, we propose
our model, SeqAfford, to unlock the 3D multi-modal large
language model with additional affordance segmentation
abilities, which ensures reasoning with world knowledge
and fine-grained affordance grounding in a cohesive framework. We further introduce a multi-granular language-point
integration module to endow 3D dense prediction. Extensive
experimental evaluations show that our model excels over
well-established methods and exhibits open-world generalization with sequential reasoning abilities. Project page:
https://seq-afford.github.io/.

3D affordance segmentation aims to link human instructions
to touchable regions of 3D objects for embodied manipulations. Existing efforts typically adhere to single-object,
single-affordance paradigms, where each affordance type or
explicit instruction strictly corresponds to a specific affordance region and are unable to handle long-horizon tasks.
Such a paradigm cannot actively reason about complex user
intentions that often imply sequential affordances. In this
paper, we introduce the Sequential 3D Affordance Reasoning
task, which extends the traditional paradigm by reasoning
from cumbersome user intentions and then decomposing
them into a series of segmentation maps. Toward this, we
† Equal contributions.
* Corresponding author.

1691

