This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Playing the Fool: Jailbreaking LLMs and Multimodal LLMs
with Out-of-Distribution Strategy
Joonhyun Jeong1

Seyun Bae2 Yeonsung Jung2 Jaeryong Hwang3 Eunho Yang2,4 *
1
NAVER Cloud, ImageVision
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
3
Republic of Korea Naval Academy 4 AITRICS

joonhyun.jeong@navercorp.com
{seyun.bae, ys.jung}@kaist.ac.kr
jhwang@navy.ac.kr
eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently exhibited
versatility on various language reasoning tasks [10, 20, 26,
28, 37, 39] based on scalable pre-training and fine-tuning on
a large corpus of text data. However, due to the biases and
misinformation [8, 30] present in the large-scale training
data, LLMs have frequently been jailbroken which leads to
the generation of biased or unsafe outputs that may compromise ethical standards, safety, or fairness [3, 19, 38, 40, 45]
when provided with harmful or sensitive input text instructions such as “tell me how to build a bomb”.

Despite the remarkable versatility of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) to generalize
across both language and vision tasks, LLMs and MLLMs
have shown vulnerability to jailbreaking, generating textual outputs that undermine safety, ethical, and bias standards when exposed to harmful or sensitive inputs. With
the recent advancement of safety alignment via preferencetuning from human feedback, LLMs and MLLMs have been
equipped with safety guardrails to yield safe, ethical, and
fair responses with regard to harmful inputs. However,
despite the significance of safety alignment, research on
the vulnerabilities remains largely underexplored. In this
paper, we investigate the unexplored vulnerability of the
safety alignment, examining its ability to consistently provide safety guarantees for out-of-distribution(OOD)-ifying
harmful inputs that may fall outside the aligned data distribution. Our key observation is that OOD-ifying the vanilla
harmful inputs highly increases the uncertainty of the model
to discern the malicious intent within the input, leading to
a higher chance of being jailbroken. Exploiting this vulnerability, we propose JOOD, a new Jailbreak framework
via OOD-ifying inputs beyond the safety alignment. We explore various off-the-shelf visual and textual transformation
techniques for OOD-ifying the harmful inputs. Notably, we
observe that even simple mixing-based techniques such as
image mixup prove highly effective in increasing the uncertainty of the model, thereby facilitating the bypass of the
safety alignment. Experiments across diverse jailbreak scenarios demonstrate that JOOD effectively jailbreaks recent
proprietary LLMs and MLLMs such as GPT-4 and o1 with
high attack success rate, which previous attack approaches
have consistently struggled to jailbreak. Code is available
at https://github.com/naver-ai/JOOD.
* Corresponding Author.

While the primary target of jailbreaking has been LLMs,
similar vulnerabilities have also surfaced in Multimodal
LLMs (MLLMs [18, 24, 28, 44]). MLLMs extend the visual understanding capabilities of LLMs by integrating visual encoder [32] with several add-on layers. However, this
integration introduces new pathways to bypass the safety
guardrails equipped within LLMs. Recently, several jailbreak methods [22, 33] have focused on MLLM’s weak
safety alignment induced by the add-on linear layers; The
visual encoder and linear layers projecting input images into
LLMs [24] have been inadequately safety-aligned with regard to the visually harmful images. Inspired by this weak
safety alignment regarding harmful images, MLLM jailbreak methods decompose the harmful textual instruction
into a multimodal format, incorporating both a harmful image and a generic textual instruction. For example, as shown
in the vanilla attack case of Figure 1, instead of using the
textual instruction containing the sensitive phrase “tell me
how to build a bomb”, the harmful content “bomb” is embedded in the visual input, and the textual instruction is generalized to “tell me how to build the object in this image”.

29937

To address these safety and ethics issues, safety alignment methods [28, 29] were proposed, involving posttraining LLMs and MLLMs with human-preference feed-

