This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R-SCoRe: Revisiting Scene Coordinate Regression for Robust Large-Scale
Visual Localization
Xudong Jiang1

Fangjinhua Wang1 * Silvano Galliani2 Christoph Vogel2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
2
Microsoft Spatial AI Lab, Zurich

Marc Pollefeys1,2

Aachen Night (0.25m, 2°)

80

Accuracy %

60

Neumap
HSCNet
HSCNet++
ESAC (50)
ACE (50)
GLACE
R-SCoRe

HLoc+SPSG
AS
Cascaded
QP+R.Sift
Squeezer
PixLoc

40

20

0
102

Map Size (MB)

103

104

Figure 1. Robust Visual Localization with R-SCoRe. Left: Point cloud of Aachen reconstructed by R-SCoRe. Right: On the large-scale
Aachen Day-Night dataset [53, 56] using only daytime training images, R-SCoRe achieves 64.3% accuracy under the (0.25m, 2°) threshold
for nighttime query images. It outperforms all previous SCR methods (circles) by a large margin. With a small map size of only 47MB at
a comparable accuracy, R-SCoRe is an attractive alternative to traditional methods (triangles).

1. Introduction

Abstract

Visual localization is the task of estimating the 6-DoF pose
of a camera in a known scene with a query image. It is a
fundamental problem in computer vision, with applications
in augmented reality, autonomous driving, and robotics.

Learning-based visual localization methods that use
scene coordinate regression (SCR) offer the advantage of
smaller map sizes. However, on datasets with complex illumination changes or image-level ambiguities, it remains a
less robust alternative to feature matching methods. This
work aims to close the gap. We introduce a covisibility
graph-based global encoding learning and data augmentation strategy, along with a depth-adjusted reprojection loss
to facilitate implicit triangulation. Additionally, we revisit
the network architecture and local feature extraction module. Our method achieves state-of-the-art on challenging
large-scale datasets without relying on network ensembles
or 3D supervision. On Aachen Day-Night, we are 10×
more accurate than previous SCR methods with similar map
sizes and require at least 5× smaller map sizes than any
other SCR method while still delivering superior accuracy.
Code is available at: https://github.com/cvg/
scrstudio.

Classical feature matching methods [19, 50, 51, 55] have
matured through years of research and now provide robust
and accurate localization results. However, these methods
typically require explicit 3D scene representations, where a
large number of descriptors are stored, leading to substantial map sizes, especially for large-scale scenes. In contrast,
pose regression [11, 30, 31, 44, 59, 65, 71, 73] and scene
coordinate regression (SCR) [4–6, 8, 9, 21, 36, 68] aim to
implicitly encode scene information in neural networks.

* Corresponding author (fangjinhua.wang@inf.ethz.ch).

SCR methods follow a structure-based paradigm similar
to feature matching, i.e., estimating pose from 2D-3D correspondences but replacing explicit matching with regressing the correspondences directly. They are usually limited
to small scenes [9] and have yet to match feature matching
methods in terms of accuracy and robustness. Recent ad-

11536

