This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene Map-based Prompt Tuning for Navigation Instruction Generation
Sheng Fan, Rui Liu, Wenguan Wang, Yi Yang†
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/FanScy/MAPInstructor

Abstract
dinner table

Navigation instruction generation (NIG), which provides
interactive feedback and guidance to humans along a trajectory, is vital for developing embodied agents capable of
human-machine communication and collaboration through
natural language. Early data-driven methods directly map
sequences of past observations to trajectory descriptions on
limited datasets, lacking the necessary spatial understanding in complex 3D environments. While recent approaches
leverage Large Language Models (LLMs) to improve NIG,
they often overlook the global spatial context in navigation,
such as the inherent space discretization in maps. Instead
of straightforwardly feeding textual descriptions of the map
into LLMs, we propose a scene map-based prompt tuning
framework for NIG, MAPI NSTRUCTOR, which incorporates map context for parameter-efficient updating of LLMs.
MAPI NSTRUCTOR comprises three key components: (i)
scene representation encoding, where egocentric observations are projected into 3D voxels for fine-grained scene
understanding; (ii) map prompt tuning, which integrates a
topological map representation of the entire trajectory into
an LLM-based decoder; and (iii) landmark uncertainty assessment, which mitigates hallucinations in landmark predictions, thereby enhancing the reliability and coherence
of instruction generation. Extensive experiments on three
navigation datasets (i.e., R2R, REVERIE, RxR) confirm the
generalization and effectiveness of our algorithm.

Spatial Reasoning

couch

rug

chair

...Continuing forward, a set of couches is on your
left, and stop at the living room.
... dinner table is on your left. Walk pass the rug,
and the couch is on your right. Stop by the chair.

Figure 1. MAPI NSTRUCTOR verbalizes concise instructions.
General LLM-based models fail to capture all scene details through
text alone. By encoding a comprehensive scene understanding for
map prompt tuning in LLM, MAPI NSTRUCTOR enables accurate
descriptions of directions and landmarks.

semantic accuracy and descriptive diversity. The majority
of NIG methods [20, 61, 70, 75] leverage vision-language
alignment pre-trained on extensive unsupervised corpus,
e.g., CLIP [55] and LXMERT [60]. However, these studies are typically limited to 2D images, fundamentally lacking explicit 3D spatial reasoning capabilities. Recent advancements in scene representation learning [17, 45] for
NIG establish projective geometry mapping between 3D environments and unified 2D parameterized planes. Concurrently, numerous studies [17, 34, 48, 81, 82, 88] harness
the advanced linguistic capabilities of LLMs to improve the
agent’s generalization through prompt engineering.
Although existing NIG solutions have achieved remarkable progress, several key challenges remain unresolved.
First, previous methods [2, 17, 42, 45] compress heightaware features onto the BEV plane, which compromises the
holistic structure of the 3D environment, leading to a loss
of critical spatial information. Thorough 3D scene understanding can offer a more detailed and context-aware representation of the environment, thereby enhancing spatial

1. Introduction
Navigation instruction generation (NIG), a critical task
in embodied intelligence, has garnered significant interest
across various domains, such as robotics [8, 23, 69, 85, 87],
psychology [65, 71, 72], and cognitive science [16, 37].
It requires an embodied agent to provide detailed descriptions of the navigation trajectory using natural language.
Over the past decade, the rapid development of multimodal
learning [39, 55, 60] has substantially boosted NIG in both
† Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

6898

