This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhD: A ChatGPT-Prompted Visual hallucination Evaluation Dataset
Jiazhen Liu1 * , Yuhan Fu1,2 , Ruobing Xie2 , Runquan Xie2 , Xingwu Sun2 , Fengzong Lian2 ,
Zhanhui Kang2 , and Xirong Li1†
1

2

Renmin University of China
Machine Learning Platform Department, Tencent
https://github.com/jiazhen-code/PhD

Abstract

Are there five people in the image?
Yes, there are five people in the image.
They are standing near a bunch of bananas.

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) hallucinate,
resulting in an emerging topic of visual hallucination evaluation (VHE). This paper contributes a ChatGPT-Prompted
visual hallucination evaluation Dataset (PhD) for objective
VHE at a large scale. The essence of VHE is to ask an
MLLM questions about specific images to assess its susceptibility to hallucination. Depending on what to ask (objects, attributes, sentiment, etc.) and how the questions are
asked, we structure PhD along two dimensions, i.e. task and
mode. Five visual recognition tasks, ranging from low-level
(object / attribute recognition) to middle-level (sentiment
/ position recognition and counting), are considered. Besides a normal visual QA mode, which we term PhD-base,
PhD also asks questions with specious context (PhD-sec)
or with incorrect context (PhD-icc), or with AI-generated
counter common sense images (PhD-ccs). We construct
PhD by a ChatGPT-assisted semi-automated pipeline, encompassing four pivotal modules: task-specific hallucinatory item (hitem) selection, hitem-embedded question
generation, specious / incorrect context generation, and
counter-common-sense (CCS) image generation. With over
14k daily images, 750 CCS images and 102k VQA triplets
in total, PhD reveals considerable variability in MLLMs’
performance across various modes and tasks, offering valuable insights into the nature of hallucination. As such, PhD
stands as a potent tool not only for VHE but may also play
a significant role in the refinement of MLLMs.

(a) Hallucination cause I: Visual ambiguity (MLLM: LLaVA-1.5) [25]
After a long playtime with
its toy ball, the kitten, feeling
thoroughly exhausted from
all the fun, has finally found
its resting place. It has curled up on the table,
seeking comfort and rest after its energetic
adventures.

Is there a toy in the image?
Yes, the kitten is playing
with a toy ball.

(b) Hallucination cause II: Inconsistency in multi-modal input

Is the mouse in the image
smaller than the cat?
Yes, the mouse is smaller than the cat.
(c) Hallucination cause III: Counter-common-sense content
0.8

0.6

POPE
AMBER
PhD
PhD­base
PhD­sec
PhD­icc
PhD­ccs

0.4

0.2

0.0
LLaVA­1.1
(2023.5)

LLaVA­1.5
(2023.9)

LLaVA­1.5­L
(2023.9)

LLaVA­1.6
(2024.1)

LLaVA­1.6­L
(2024.1)

(d) Performance curves of the LLaVA
1 series on two public VHE datasets
(POPE [21]) and AMBER [34]) and the proposed PhD dataset.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustrations of three major causes of an MLLM’s
visual hallucination and its evaluation. This paper contributes
PhD, a binary VQA-based VHE benchmark, much larger and more
challenging than its predecessors. In particular, it has four evaluation modes that explicitly measure an MLLM’s performance w.r.t.
the three causes, i.e. PhD-base for cause I, PhD-sec and PhD-icc
for cause II and PhD-ccs for cause III.

Using a specific large language model (LLM) as its kernel,
a multi-modal LLM (MLLM), exemplified by LLaVA [25],
Qwen-VL [2] and MiniGPT-v2 [4] can now tackle a wide
* J. Liu is currently pursuing his PhD at HKUST.
† Corresponding author (xirong@ruc.edu.cn)

19857

