This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nonisotropic Gaussian Diffusion for Realistic 3D Human Motion Prediction
Cecilia Curreli1,2
Zhenzhang Ye1
1

Dominik Muhle1,2
Riccardo Marin1,2

Technical University of Munich

2

Munich Center for Machine Learning

Past

Predicted
futures

Abhishek Saroha1,2
Daniel Cremers1,2

GT Future



Closest

Diverse

Diverse
Diverse

#1

#2

#3

Figure 1. SkeletonDiffusion generates futures that are simultaneously diverse and realistic. With a nonisotropic diffusion formulation
reflecting the skeleton structure, we predict motions that are plausible and semantically coherent with the input past while being highly
diverse. Here, we show the most diverse ensemble of three motions including the prediction closest to the ground truth among 50
generated futures.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Probabilistic human motion prediction aims to forecast
multiple possible future movements from past observations.
While current approaches report high diversity and realism,
they often generate motions with undetected limb stretching
and jitter. To address this, we introduce SkeletonDiffusion,
a latent diffusion model that embeds an explicit inductive
bias on the human body within its architecture and training. We present a new nonisotropic Gaussian diffusion formulation that aligns with the natural kinematic structure
of the human skeleton and models relationships between
body parts. Results show that our approach outperforms
isotropic alternatives, consistently generating realistic predictions while avoiding artifacts such as limb distortion.
Additionally, we identify a limitation in commonly used diversity metrics, which may favor models that produce inconsistent limb lengths within the same sequence. SkeletonDiffusion sets a new benchmark on three real-world datasets,
outperforming various baselines across multiple evaluation
metrics. We release the code on our project page.

In this work, we address the problem of predicting human motion based on observed past movements, known
as Human Motion Prediction (HMP). Specifically, from
a temporal sequence of human joint positions, we aim
to forecast their evolution in subsequent frames. HMP
is a relevant problem for various real-world applications
[9, 37, 46, 72, 85, 86, 88, 90, 93] and the key enabler of
various downstream tasks [3, 65]: autonomous driving [60],
healthcare [70], assistive robotics [42, 71], human-robot interaction [11, 14, 27, 42], and virtual reality or animation
creation [74]. The task can be formulated as a deterministic regression by predicting the most likely future motion [2, 12, 18, 23, 26, 28, 36, 43, 47, 52, 54, 56–58, 61].
However, many applications [11, 14, 27, 42, 60, 65] require
considering the inherent uncertainty of future movements.
Stochastic Human Motion Prediction (SHMP) methods aim
to learn a probability distribution over possible future motions. Once models are capable of representing multiple
futures, the challenge lies in generating diverse yet realistic

1871

