This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L O C O R E: Image Re-ranking with Long-Context Sequence Modeling
Zilin Xiao1 , Pavel Suma2 , Ayush Sachdeva1 , Hao-Jen Wang1 ,
Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos2 , Giorgos Tolias2 , Vicente Ordonez1
1

Rice University

2

VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract

provide benefits such as robustness to background clutter
and partial visibility due to occlusions. During re-ranking,
the common practice is to estimate the improved similarity
in a pair-wise manner by comparing the two local descriptor
sets of the query and each image in the shortlist. Geometric
verification is a common re-ranking method where point correspondences are processed with a RANSAC-like process,
and a high number of inliers is expected for images depicting
the same object under different viewpoints [9, 35]. Recent
methods train a model while optimizing the image-to-image
similarity using either dense [24] or sparse [53, 54, 63, 65]
local representation as its input. Transformers are becoming
a dominant component of such models [53, 54, 63, 65].

We introduce L O C O R E, Long-Context Re-ranker, a model
that takes as input local descriptors corresponding to an
image query and a list of gallery images and outputs similarity scores between the query and each gallery image. This
model is used for image retrieval, where typically a first
ranking is performed with an efficient similarity measure,
and then a shortlist of top-ranked images is re-ranked based
on a more fine-grained similarity model. Compared to existing methods that perform pair-wise similarity estimation
with local descriptors or list-wise re-ranking with global
descriptors, L O C O R E is the first method to perform listwise re-ranking with local descriptors. To achieve this, we
leverage efficient long-context sequence models to effectively
capture the dependencies between query and gallery images
at the local-descriptor level. During testing, we process long
shortlists with a sliding window strategy that is tailored to
overcome the context size limitations of sequence models.
Our approach achieves superior performance compared with
other re-rankers on established image retrieval benchmarks
of landmarks (ROxf and RPar), products (SOP), fashion
items (In-Shop), and bird species (CUB-200) while having comparable latency to the pair-wise local descriptor
re-rankers.

Most existing image re-ranking methods perform in a
pair-wise way, i.e., the query is separately compared to each
of the gallery images. This strategy does not capture interactions between the gallery images, such as objects or object
parts that tend to appear more than once. In this work, we
introduce L O C O R E, a model that performs image re-ranking
by jointly processing the input query and an entire shortlist
of gallery images at the local descriptor level. To take into
account interactions within the shortlist, we rely on sequence
models, in particular transformers, that capture contextual
relationships. Processing within a long context comes with
computational challenges. We overcome those in two ways.
First, we leverage a model design from existing architectures in Natural Language Processing (NLP) that efficiently
extends the maximum context length of a standard transformer. Second, we propose a sliding window strategy that
reuses L O C O R E multiple times during inference. Figure 1
shows an overview of how the proposed list-wise re-ranker
compares to pair-wise re-rankers.

1. Introduction
Instance-level image retrieval is an important problem in
computer vision with many applications. It is usually cast as
a problem of metric learning where a model is trained to optimize a distance metric while comparing pairs of examples.
Retrieval in large image collections (gallery) is typically performed in two stages. First, images are mapped to a compact
global image descriptor that is used for efficient retrieval of a
shortlist of candidate images from the gallery. Subsequently,
a more powerful but computationally demanding model is
used to re-rank the shortlisted images. Local features and
their descriptors are typically employed at this stage to enable a more detailed image-to-image comparison and to

L O C O R E takes inspiration from NLP tasks such as
sequence tagging [19, 33, 42] and extractive questionanswering [14, 41, 46, 62]. Modern solutions to these problems often involve a sequence model that predicts tokenlevel scores to extract task-specific text spans [6, 18]. In
contrast to the current design choice of image re-ranking
models, we adopt the common strategy in NLP and optimize all output tokens, i.e. many per gallery image, in-

9580

