This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Common3D: Self-Supervised Learning of 3D Morphable Models
for Common Objects in Neural Feature Space
Leonhard Sommer 1
1

Olaf Dünkel 2

University of Freiburg

Christian Theobalt 2
2

Adam Kortylewski 1,2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Figure 1. Common3D learns category-specific 3D morphable models from few casually captured videos completely self-supervised, and
can estimate the 3D object shape (visualized from two viewpoints), 2D-3D correspondences, and the 3D object pose via inverse rendering.

Abstract

objective by exploiting the correspondences defined through
the deformable template mesh. This leads to higher quality
correspondence features compared to related works and a
significantly improved model performance at estimating 3D
object pose and semantic correspondence. Common3D is
the first completely self-supervised method that can solve
various vision tasks in a zero-shot manner. We release all
code at github.com/GenIntel/common3d.

3D morphable models (3DMMs) are a powerful tool to represent the possible shapes and appearances of an object
category. Given a single test image, 3DMMs can be used
to solve various tasks, such as predicting the 3D shape,
pose, semantic correspondence, and instance segmentation
of an object. Unfortunately, 3DMMs are only available
for very few object categories that are of particular interest, like faces or human bodies, as they require a demanding 3D data acquisition and category-specific training process. In contrast, we introduce a new method, Common3D, that learns 3DMMs of common objects in a fully
self-supervised manner from a collection of object-centric
videos. For this purpose, our model represents objects as
a learned 3D template mesh and a deformation field that
is parameterized as an image-conditioned neural network.
Different from prior works, Common3D represents the object appearance with neural features instead of RGB colors,
which enables the learning of more generalizable representations through an abstraction from pixel intensities. Importantly, we train the appearance features using a contrastive

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D shape and pose of an object from a single
image requires prior knowledge about the possible shapes
and appearances of an object category. Learning such prior
models is a long-standing problem in computer vision, with
3D morphable models (3DMMs) [5] emerging as a very
successful approach to address this problem. A popular application of 3DMMs is to perform single image 3D reconstruction via inverse rendering [1, 5, 55], also referred to
as analysis-by-synthesis approach [77]. This enables solving under-constrained vision tasks, for example predicting
an object’s shape behind an occluder [11] or estimating the

6468

