This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpectroMotion: Dynamic 3D Reconstruction of Specular Scenes
Cheng-De Fan1 Chen-Wei Chang1 Yi-Ruei Liu1,2 Jie-Ying Lee1
Jiun-Long Huang1 Yu-Chee Tseng1 Yu-Lun Liu1
1

2

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

1. Introduction
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [16] has emerged as a groundbreaking technique in 3D scene reconstruction, offering fast
training and real-time rendering capabilities. By representing
3D scene using a collection of 3D Gaussians and employing
a point-based rendering approach, 3DGS has significantly
improved efficiency in novel view synthesis. However, extending 3DGS to model dynamic scenes, especially those
containing specular surfaces accurately, has remained a significant challenge.
Existing extensions of 3DGS have made progress in either
dynamic scene reconstruction or specular object rendering,
but none have successfully combined both aspects. Methods
tackling dynamic scenes often struggle with accurately representing specular surfaces, while those focusing on specular
rendering are limited to static scenes. This capability gap has
hindered the application of 3DGS to real-world scenarios
where both motion and specular reflections are present.
We present SpectroMotion, a novel approach that ad-

Deformable 3DGS
Ours
Ground truth

We present SpectroMotion, a novel approach that combines 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) with physically-based
rendering (PBR) and deformation fields to reconstruct dynamic specular scenes. Previous methods extending 3DGS to
model dynamic scenes have struggled to represent specular
surfaces accurately. Our method addresses this limitation
by introducing a residual correction technique for accurate
surface normal computation during deformation, complemented by a deformable environment map that adapts to
time-varying lighting conditions. We implement a coarseto-fine training strategy significantly enhancing scene geometry and specular color prediction. It is the only existing 3DGS method capable of synthesizing photorealistic real-world dynamic specular scenes, outperforming
state-of-the-art methods in rendering complex, dynamic,
and specular scenes. Please see our project page at cdfan0627.github.io/spectromotion.

NeRF-DS

Abstract

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Test image

Normal map

Figure 1. Our method, SpectroMotion, recovers and renders
dynamic scenes with higher-quality reflections compared to
prior work. It introduces physical normal estimation, deformable
environment maps, and a coarse-to-fine training strategy to achieve
superior results in rendering dynamic scenes with reflections. Here,
we present a rendered test image, corresponding normal maps, and
a ground-truth image, where the ground-truth normal map (used as
a reference) is generated using a pre-trained normal estimator [6].
For Deformable 3DGS, we use the shortest axes of the deformed
3D Gaussians as the normals. We have highlighted the specular
regions to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

dresses these limitations by combining 3D Gaussian Splatting with physically based rendering (PBR) and deformation fields. Our method introduces three key innovations: a
residual correction technique for accurate surface normal
computation during deformation, a deformable environment
map that adapts to time-varying lighting conditions, and a
coarse-to-fine training strategy that significantly enhances
scene geometry and specular color prediction.

21328

Our evaluations demonstrate that SpectroMotion outperforms prior methods in view synthesis of scenes containing
dynamic specular objects, as illustrated in Fig. 1. It is the
only 3DGS method capable of synthesizing photorealistic
real-world dynamic specular scenes, surpassing state-of-the-

