This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attribute-formed Class-specific Concept Space: Endowing Language Bottleneck
Model with Better Interpretability and Scalability
Jianyang Zhang1* , Qianli Luo2* , Guowu Yang1,3 , Wenjing Yang4 ,
Weide Liu5 , Guosheng Lin6 , Fengmao Lv2,7,†
1

2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Southwest Jiaotong University
3
4
Institute of Electronics and Information Industry Technology of Kash
University of Minnesota
5
6
Harvard University
Nanyang Technological University
7
Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Urban Intelligent Transportation, Ministry of Education
zhang jy.1@qq.com, qianlil@my.swjtu.edu.cn, guowu@uestc.edu.cn, wjyang2987@gmail.com,
weide001@e.ntu.edu.sg, gslin@ntu.edu.sg, fengmaolv@126.com

Abstract

1. Introduction

Language Bottleneck Models (LBMs) are proposed to
achieve interpretable image recognition by classifying images based on textual concept bottlenecks. However, current LBMs simply list all concepts together as the bottleneck layer, leading to the spurious cue inference problem and cannot generalized to unseen classes. To address
these limitations, we propose the Attribute-formed Language Bottleneck Model (ALBM). ALBM organizes concepts in the attribute-formed class-specific space, where
concepts are descriptions of specific attributes for specific
classes. In this way, ALBM can avoid the spurious cue inference problem by classifying solely based on the essential
concepts of each class. In addition, the cross-class unified attribute set also ensures that the concept spaces of
different classes have strong correlations, as a result, the
learned concept classifier can be easily generalized to unseen classes. Moreover, to further improve interpretability, we propose Visual Attribute Prompt Learning (VAPL)
to extract visual features on fine-grained attributes. Furthermore, to avoid labor-intensive concept annotation, we
propose the Description, Summary, and Supplement (DSS)
strategy to automatically generate high-quality concept sets
with a complete and precise attribute. Extensive experiments on 9 widely used few-shot benchmarks demonstrate
the interpretability, transferability, and performance of our
approach. The code and collected concept sets are available at https://github.com/tiggers23/ALBM .

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Recently, Visual-Language Models (VLMs) [9, 25] have
shown great performance in visual representation via contrastive pre-training on large-scale internet data. To improve
the interpretability of VLMs, recent works [24, 32] propose
the Training-free Language Bottleneck (TfLB) paradigm,
which uses Large Language Model (LLM) [3, 11, 29] to
generate class descriptions in order to construct the concept
space, and further achieves interpretable classification by
matching images with class concepts. On this basis, the
Language Bottleneck Models (LBMs) [12, 27, 32–34] integrate all collected concepts into a unified class-shared concept space and train a concept classifier based on this space,
achieving both interpretability and discriminability. However, in the class-shared concept space, the concept classifier may learn the relationship between class labels and nonessential concepts co-occurring with the class or concepts
from the background (e.g., recognizing a tiger via jungle or
recognizing a kind of food via its smell) [28, 35], leading to
the problem of inference based on spurious cues. Moreover, when generalizing existing models to unseen classes,
the concept space may need to be expanded to accommodate the new concepts introduced by these unseen classes.
As a result, the concept classifier trained with seen classes
cannot transfer to unseen classles. The illustration of the
aforementioned two limitations is shown in Fig. 1 (a).
To address both the interpretability and scalability limitations of existing LBM works, we propose the Attributeformed Language Bottleneck Model (ALBM). Compared
with existing works, which organize the concept space in a
class-shared manner by simply listing all concepts together,
we propose to construct the Attribute-formed Class-specific

30291

