This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disco4D: Disentangled 4D Human Generation and Animation from a Single Image
Hui En Pang1 ,

Shuai Liu3 , Zhongang Cai1,2,3 , Lei Yang2,3 ,
Tianwei Zhang1 , Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
Clothing GS
Body GS

Pose-driven
Animation

Editing

Generation

Betas

Colorization

4D reconstruction
Composition

Input Image

Canonical Space Disentangled
Human Gaussians (GS)

4D Gaussians

4D Edited Gaussians

Figure 1. Disco4D is a novel Gaussian Splatting framework for 4D disentangled human generation from a single image. Clothing and
assets are modeled as Gaussians on top of the SMPL-X body, enabling dynamic animation and flexible editing.

Abstract
We present Disco4D, a novel Gaussian Splatting framework for 4D human generation and animation from a single
image. Different from existing methods, Disco4D distinctively disentangles clothings (with Gaussian models) from
the human body (with SMPL-X model), significantly enhancing the generation details and flexibility. Specifically, 1)
Disco4D learns to efficiently fit the clothing Gaussians over
the SMPL-X Gaussians. 2) Next, Disco4D adopts diffusion
models to enhance the 3D generation process, e.g., modeling occluded parts not visible in the input image. 3) Finally, Disco4D learns an identity encoding for each clothing
Gaussian to facilitate the separation and extraction of clothing assets. Furthermore, Disco4D naturally supports 4D
human animation with vivid dynamics. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of Disco4D on 4D human
generation and animation tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/disco-4d/Disco4D.

1. Introduction
The development of high-fidelity 3D digital humans is increasingly important across a variety of augmented and virtual reality applications. To streamline the creation of these
digital avatars from easily accessible in-the-wild images,
a multitude of research efforts have been made on reconstructing 3D clothed human models from a single image
[2, 33, 40–42, 81, 82, 103, 104, 104, 117]. These works
predominantly focus on the simultaneous reconstruction of

the human body and clothing. Unfortunately, these works
have inherent limitations, and integrating them into applications that require virtual try-on or avatar customization
poses significant challenges. This is primarily because the
models are rendered as single-layer, non-animatable meshes
where distinct attributes (e.g., hair, clothing, accessories) are
merged into one continuous surface, with underlying layers
completely obscured and self-contact areas inseparably connected. Such limitation complicates the re-animation and
dynamic customization tasks. Existing works that perform
layered reconstruction [25, 26] rely on self-rotating video
inputs with extensive frames and viewpoints and involve
substantial processing times.
To address these issues, we propose Disco4D, a novel 4D
clothed human reconstruction method that distinctly separates the human body from clothing elements from a single
image. It supports human animation as the 4th dimension,
which cannot be realized by prior static 3D reconstruction
works [2, 33, 42, 81, 82, 103, 104, 117]. To achieve this, it
employs the SMPL-X [71] parametric model to represent the
human body, capitalizing on its efficacy in capturing body
structure and kinematics. Conversely, clothing, along with
dynamic and variable elements such as hair and accessories,
is represented using Gaussian models, which are able to
model the large variability in clothing. By binding Gaussians to a SMPL-X model and fixing it during the training
phase, Disco4D ensures the integrity of the body while focusing the learning process on the appearance aspects. To
model occluded portions not visible in the input image, diffusion models are used to enhance the 3D generation process.
Moreover, Disco4D includes an identity grouping mecha-

26331

