This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data Synthesis with Diverse Styles for Face Recognition
via 3DMM-Guided Diffusion
Yuxi Mi1

Zhizhou Zhong1 Yuge Huang2† Qiuyang Yuan1 Xuan Zhao1 Jianqing Xu2
Shouhong Ding2 Shaoming Wang3 Rizen Guo3 Shuigeng Zhou1†
1
Fudan University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 WeChat Pay Lab33, Tencent

{yxmi20, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn, {zzzhong22, qyyuan23, xzhao23}@m.fudan.edu.cn
{yugehuang, joejqxu, ericshding}@tencent.com
{mangosmwang, rizenguo}@tencent.com

Abstract
Identity-preserving face synthesis aims to generate synthetic face images of virtual subjects that can substitute
real-world data for training face recognition models. While
prior arts strive to create images with consistent identities
and diverse styles, they face a trade-off between them. Identifying their limitation of treating style variation as subjectagnostic and observing that real-world persons actually
have distinct, subject-specific styles, this paper introduces
MorphFace, a diffusion-based face generator. The generator learns fine-grained facial styles, e.g., shape, pose
and expression, from the renderings of a 3D morphable
model (3DMM). It also learns identities from an off-theshelf recognition model. To create virtual faces, the generator is conditioned on novel identities of unlabeled synthetic faces, and novel styles that are statistically sampled
from a real-world prior distribution. The sampling especially accounts for both intra-subject variation and subject
distinctiveness. A context blending strategy is employed to
enhance the generator’s responsiveness to identity and style
conditions. Extensive experiments show that MorphFace
outperforms the best prior arts in face recognition efficacy* .

Figure 1. Analyses for identity consistency and style variation
across prior arts and our proposed MorphFace. Identity consistency is measured by pairwise cosine similarity and style variation
by variances of DECA attributes. Intra-class and inter-class results
are represented in red and blue, respectively. Separated curves and
a larger shaded area indicate better consistency and variation. Prior
arts bear inadequacies in either (a) style variation or (b) identity retention, while (c) MorphFace achieves both goals simultaneously.

1. Introduction

ing from the web. The images are potentially enrolled without the informed consent of individuals, which yields serious legal and ethical issues regarding data privacy.
Identity-preserving face synthesis (IPFS) offers a remedy to the privacy issue. Its objective is to generate face images of virtual subjects and replicate the distribution of real
face images so that FR models can be trained on these synthetic faces to effectively recognize real persons. Among
previous efforts, early works [5, 8, 10, 43, 63] are mainly
based on generative adversarial networks (GAN) that yet
produce face images with limited quality. Recent studies [7, 42, 58] employ diffusion models (DM) to generate
faces of massive unique subjects with fine-grained details.
The primary challenge of IPFS was to generate multiple
faces for the same person. It is recently realized by conditioning a DM’s denoising on the person’s identity context.

Face recognition (FR) is among the most successful computer vision applications, where persons are identified by
model-extracted facial features. FR models are well known
for being data-hungry. Their efficacy is built upon largescale face image training datasets [11, 26, 92] that contain rich identities and diverse styles, e.g., appearance variations in age, expression and pose. Contemporarily, opensource face image datasets are primarily collected by crawl† Corresponding authors.
* Code will be available at https://github.com/Tencent/TFace/.

21203

