This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiMorph: On-demand Atlas Construction
S. Mazdak Abulnaga1,2
Andrew Hoopes1,2
Bruce Fischl2
John Guttag1
1

2

MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Neel Dey1
Malte Hoffmann2
Adrian Dalca1,2

Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School

abulnaga@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We present MultiMorph, a fast and efficient method for constructing anatomical atlases on the fly. Atlases capture the
canonical structure of a collection of images and are essential for quantifying anatomical variability across populations. However, current atlas construction methods often
require days to weeks of computation, thereby discouraging
rapid experimentation. As a result, many scientific studies
rely on suboptimal, precomputed atlases from mismatched
populations, negatively impacting downstream analyses.
MultiMorph addresses these challenges with a feedforward model that rapidly produces high-quality, populationspecific atlases in a single forward pass for any 3D brain
dataset, without any fine-tuning or optimization. MultiMorph is based on a linear group-interaction layer that aggregates and shares features within the group of input images. Further, by leveraging auxiliary synthetic data, MultiMorph generalizes to new imaging modalities and population groups at test-time. Experimentally, MultiMorph outperforms state-of-the-art optimization-based and learningbased atlas construction methods in both small and large
population settings, with a 100-fold reduction in time. This
makes MultiMorph an accessible framework for biomedical
researchers without machine learning expertise, enabling
rapid, high-quality atlas generation for diverse studies.

mization problem that often requires several days or weeks
of computation. The optimization alternates between aligning (registering) all images to the estimated atlas and updating the atlas in both shape and appearance by averaging the
images mapped to the intermediate atlas space [7, 48]. Recent learning-based methods employ a target dataset to explicitly learn an atlas jointly with a registration model [18,
22], yet still require days of training. This necessitates
computational infrastructure and machine learning expertise that is unavailable to many biomedical researchers.
Regardless of strategy, an atlas produced from one population of images may not be appropriate for populations that
differ from the group used to build the atlas. Re-estimating
the atlas is often required for each new experiment. These
computational challenges are further compounded by the
need to construct atlases for specific image types as many
biomedical studies acquire several imaging modalities to
highlight different biomedical properties of interest. The
repeated, prohibitive computational cost of producing a
new atlas leads most scientists to use existing atlases that
might not be appropriate for their population group or
modality, thereby negatively impacting the analyses in
these studies [56].

1. Introduction

To meet these challenges, we introduce MultiMorph, a
machine learning model that constructs atlases in a single forward pass, requiring only seconds to minutes of
computation on a CPU, and no machine learning expertise to use. MultiMorph efficiently generates populationand subgroup-specific atlases, enabling accurate and finegrained anatomical analyses. We employ a convolutional
architecture that processes an arbitrary number of images
and computes a set of regularized deformation fields that
align the group of images to an atlas space central to that
group. The proposed method uses a nonparametric convolutional operation that interacts the intermediate representations of the input images with each other, summarizing
and aggregating shared features. Further, by training on
diverse imaging modalities alongside supplementary synthetic neuroimaging volumes [28], MultiMorph generalizes
to arbitrary imaging modalities at test time. We also intro-

We present MultiMorph, a rapid and flexible method for
constructing anatomical atlases. An atlas, or deformable
template, is a reference image that represents the typical
structure within a collection of related images. In biomedical imaging studies, atlases facilitate studying anatomical
variability within and across population groups by serving
as as a common coordinate system for key image analysis tasks such as segmentation [5, 26, 30, 82], shape analysis [1, 25, 52, 62], and longitudinal modeling [36, 66, 67].
Traditional unbiased atlas construction for a population
involves solving a computationally intensive iterative opti-

30906

