This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperPose: Hypernetwork-Infused Camera Pose Localization and an Extended
Cambridge Landmarks Dataset
Ron Ferens
Yosi Keller
Faculty of Engineering, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
{ronferens, yosi.keller}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose HyperPose, which utilizes hypernetworks in absolute camera pose regressors. The inherent
appearance variations in natural scenes, attributable to environmental conditions, perspective, and lighting, induce a
significant domain disparity between the training and test
datasets. This disparity degrades the precision of contemporary localization networks. To mitigate this, we advocate
for incorporating hypernetworks into single-scene and multiscene camera pose regression models. During inference,
the hypernetwork dynamically computes adaptive weights
for the localization regression heads based on the particular
input image, effectively narrowing the domain gap. Using
indoor and outdoor datasets, we evaluate the HyperPose
methodology across multiple established absolute pose regression architectures. We also introduce and share the Extended Cambridge Landmarks (ECL), a novel localization
dataset, based on the Cambridge Landmarks dataset, showing it in multiple seasons with significantly varying appearance conditions. Our empirical experiments demonstrate
that HyperPose yields notable performance enhancements
for single- and multi-scene architectures. We have made
our source code, pre-trained models 1 , and the ECL dataset
openly available 2 .

1. Introduction
In many computer vision applications, such as indoor navigation, augmented reality, and autonomous driving, it is
essential to determine the position and orientation of a camera using an image taken by that camera. Current camera localization techniques show various trade-offs between
accuracy, runtime, and memory usage. Feature Matching
(FM) and Scene Coordinate Regression (SCR) are considered the most accurate localization methods. FM-based
methods [15, 27, 37–41, 51, 54] involve hierarchical localization pipelines, which commonly use a coarse-to-fine pro1 https://ronferens.github.io/hyperpose/
2 https://ronferens.github.io/extcambridgelandmarks/

CNN

MLP

[1x3]

MLP

[1x4]

𝑥

𝑞

Query Image

(a) Baseline architecture.
MLP

𝜃ℎ

+

[1x3]

𝑥

MLP

CNN

MLP

+
Query Image
MLP

[1x4]

𝑞

𝜃ℎ

(b) Baseline architecture with a hypernetwork.

Figure 1. Figure 1a illustrates a baseline APR architecture. It
consists of a CNN backbone that generates a feature vector encoding the input query image, followed by regression heads that estimate the translation and orientation. Figure 1b shows the extension of this baseline architecture with a hypernetwork that outputs
the weights for the regression heads (translation and orientation)
during inference.

cessing pipeline that begins with image retrieval to perform
an initial localization based on images similar to the query
image. The initial estimate is refined by local feature extraction and matching. To estimate the camera’s 6-Degrees-OfFreedom (6DoF) accurately, the resulting 2D-2D matches
are mapped to 3D correspondences in the scene’s point
cloud and then used to determine the camera pose through
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) and RANSAC. SCR-based methods [4–8, 47] directly regress correspondences between 2D
pixels and 3D coordinates in the scene. Relative pose regression (RPR) schemes [2, 14, 17, 20, 26, 57, 62] directly
estimate the relative pose between a query image and a set
of reference images with well-defined ground truth poses,
eliminating the need for conventional pipelines. However,
an image retrieval scheme is essential to retrieve a set of
nearest-neighbor images. Another approach, absolute pose

11547

