This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Textured Gaussians for Enhanced 3D Scene Appearance Modeling
Brian Chao 1,2
Ayush Saraf 2
1

Hung-Yu Tseng 2
Jia-Bin Huang 2,3

Stanford University

Lorenzo Porzi 2 Chen Gao 2 Tuotuo Li 2 Qinbo Li 2
Johannes Kopf 2 Gordon Wetzstein 1 Changil Kim 2
2

Meta

3

University of Maryland College Park

https://textured-gaussians.github.io

3DGS

3DGS

3DGS

3DGS

Ours

Ours

Ours

Ours

Figure 1. Textured Gaussians compared to 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). Our RGBA Textured Gaussians enhance 3D scene appearance modeling, leading to improved rendering quality while using the same number of Gaussians compared to 3DGS [29]. Above, we
show that Textured Gaussians faithfully reconstruct the fine details of scenes.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural rendering [58] achieves unprecedented novel-view
synthesis and 3D reconstruction quality, offering solutions
to a myriad of applications ranging from surface reconstruction [34, 59], SLAM [46, 70], material estimation
and relighting [54, 69], to virtual teleportation and human avatar animation [55, 60]. Recently, 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [29] emerged as a state-of-the-art novelview synthesis technique, with desirable properties such as
high image quality results, fast training and rendering time,
and an explicit primitives-based representation. Subsequent
works in Gaussian Splatting have focused on topics such
as improving surface reconstruction quality [16, 23], scene
editing [10, 17], dynamic scene reconstruction [50, 64], and
3D generation [44, 57]. Despite the success, 3DGS sometimes fails to model detailed appearances, as demonstrated
in Figure 1.

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has emerged as the state-ofthe-art 3D reconstruction technique, offering high-quality
results with fast training and rendering. However, its expressivity is limited as pixels covered by the same Gaussian
share identical colors aside from a Gaussian falloff scaling
factor, and individual Gaussians can only represent simple
ellipsoids geometrically. To overcome these limitations, we
integrate texture and alpha mapping from traditional graphics with 3DGS. Our approach augments each Gaussian with
alpha, RGB, or RGBA texture maps to model spatially varying color and opacity across each Gaussian’s extent. This
allows Gaussians to represent richer texture patterns and
geometric structures beyond single-color ellipsoids. Notably, alpha-only texture maps significantly improve Gaussian expressivity, while further augmenting with RGB texture maps achieve maximum expressivity. We validate our
method on a wide variety of standard benchmark datasets
and our own custom captures at both the object and scene
levels, and demonstrate image quality improvements over
existing methods while using a similar or lower number of
Gaussians.

In 3DGS, each Gaussian can only represent a single color
and the shape of an ellipsoid given a camera viewpoint. This
dramatically limits the set of appearances and shapes a single Gaussian can represent. To address the issue, Huang
and Gong [25] modified the viewing direction calculation

8964

