This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrossOver: 3D Scene Cross-Modal Alignment
Sayan Deb Sarkar1
1

Ondrej Miksik2

Stanford University

2

Marc Pollefeys2, 3

Daniel Barath3, 4

Microsoft Spatial AI Lab 3 ETH Zurich
sayands.github.io/crossover

4

Iro Armeni1

HUN-REN SZTAKI

Abstract
Multi-modal 3D object understanding has gained significant attention, yet current approaches often assume complete data availability and rigid alignment across all modalities. We present CrossOver, a novel framework for crossmodal 3D scene understanding via flexible, scene-level
modality alignment. Unlike traditional methods that require
aligned modality data for every object instance, CrossOver
learns a unified, modality-agnostic embedding space for
scenes by aligning modalities – RGB images, point clouds,
CAD models, floorplans, and text descriptions – with relaxed constraints and without explicit object semantics.
Leveraging dimensionality-specific encoders, a multi-stage
training pipeline, and emergent cross-modal behaviors,
CrossOver supports robust scene retrieval and object localization, even with missing modalities. Evaluations on ScanNet and 3RScan datasets show its superior performance
across diverse metrics, highlighting CrossOver’s adaptability for real-world applications in 3D scene understanding.

Figure 1. CrossOver is a cross-modal alignment method for
3D scenes that learns a unified, modality-agnostic embedding
space, enabling a range of tasks. For example, given the 3D
CAD model of a query scene and a database of reconstructed point
clouds, CrossOver can retrieve the closest matching point cloud
and, if object instances are known, it can identify the individual
locations of furniture CAD models with matched instances in the
retrieved point cloud, using brute-force alignment. This capability
has direct applications in virtual and augmented reality.

data characteristics and object instances (hereby referred to
as instances) represented in the data (e.g., some instances
could be missing in one modality, which is common between real-world scenes and their CAD models). Also,
achieving consistent instance segmentation across modalities is nearly impossible in practice. Thus, these approaches
struggle when certain modalities are missing or incomplete,
limiting their flexibility in practical applications [5].
We address the inherent limitations of strict object-level
modality alignment by introducing a flexible scene-level
modality alignment approach that operates without prior information during inference (e.g., semantic instance segmentation), unlike the current methods [34, 41]. Our method,
namely CrossOver (Fig. 1), enables the learning of crossmodal behaviors and relationships, such as identifying similar objects or scenes across different modalities, like the
virtual CAD scene based on a video of a real room. This
capability extends beyond instance-level matching towards
a unified, modality-agnostic understanding that supports
seamless cross-modal interactions at the scene level.
CrossOver focuses on aligning five key scene
modalities—RGB images, real-world point clouds,

1. Introduction
In recent years, the need to align and transfer information across modalities has grown substantially, especially
for tasks involving complex 3D environments. Such a capability enables knowledge and experience transfer across
modalities. For example, knowing the layout of kitchens
in computer-aided design (CAD) format will provide guidance on how to build a new kitchen, such that it follows the
layout of the most similar CAD floorplan.
Current multi-modal approaches tackle 3D data alignment of individual objects across modalities [18, 42, 43,
45], without including and considering scene context, making them challenging to extend effectively for scene-level
understanding. These methods typically assume fully
aligned, consistent datasets, where each modality is perfectly corresponding to all others for each object. However,
real-world scenarios rarely provide such complete modality pairings. For example, a video of a room and its CAD
model might share some spatial alignment but differ in

8985

