This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAV-MAE Sync: Improving Contrastive Audio-Visual Mask Autoencoders via
Fine-Grained Alignment
Edson Araujo1 Andrew Rouditchenko2 Yuan Gong2 Saurabhchand Bhati2
Samuel Thomas3 Brian Kingsbury3 Leonid Karlinsky3 Rogerio Feris3,4
James R. Glass2 Hilde Kuehne1,4,5
1

Goethe University of Frankfurt, 2 MIT, 3 IBM Research, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 5 Tuebingen AI Center/University of Tuebingen

Abstract
Recent advances in audio-visual learning have shown
promising results in learning representations across modalities. However, most approaches rely on global audio
representations that fail to capture fine-grained temporal
correspondences with visual frames. Additionally, existing methods often struggle with conflicting optimization
objectives when trying to jointly learn reconstruction and
cross-modal alignment. In this work, we propose CAVMAE Sync as a simple yet effective extension of the original CAV-MAE [14] framework for self-supervised audiovisual learning. We address three key challenges: First,
we tackle the granularity mismatch between modalities by
treating audio as a temporal sequence aligned with video
frames, rather than using global representations. Second,
we resolve conflicting optimization goals by separating contrastive and reconstruction objectives through dedicated
global tokens. Third, we improve spatial localization by
introducing learnable register tokens that reduce the semantic load on patch tokens. We evaluate the proposed approach on AudioSet, VGG Sound, and the ADE20K Sound
dataset on zero-shot retrieval, classification, and localization tasks demonstrating state-of-the-art performance and
outperforming more complex architectures. Code is available at https://github.com/edsonroteia/cav-mae-sync.

Figure 1. By representing audio with multiple finer-grained representations aligned with individual video frames, CAV-MAE Sync
improves the precision of audio-visual alignment, in contrast to
the original CAV-MAE, which uses a global audio representation
that struggles with fine-grained temporal correspondence.

1. Introduction

bine multiple learning objectives and have emerged as a
promising direction for audio-visual representation learning. In particular, CAV-MAE [14] introduced a framework
that jointly optimizes contrastive alignment between modalities and masked reconstruction within each modality. By
leveraging both cross-modal and intra-modal learning signals, this approach has emerged as a foundational architecture that has inspired several follow-up works [15, 20, 24].
We argue that while these methods have achieved impressive results, they show two significant limitations. First,
most of them align the video and audio information based
on a global audio representation, thus matching, for example, 10 seconds of audio to a single video frame. Second,

Humans perceive the world in a multimodal way where
especially auditory and visual perception are very closely
connected. As a result, jointly learning the representations
of both modalities has been a longstanding active research
topic in multimodal learning [1, 2, 4, 9, 25, 34, 42]. Specifically audio-visual alignment has been tackled from multiple perspectives, with major works focusing on contrastive
learning [8, 27, 38], but also exploring fusion-based methods [18, 23, 36, 40]. Recently, multitask formulations com-

18794

