This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEVDiffuser: Plug-and-Play Diffusion Model for BEV Denoising
with Ground-Truth Guidance
Xin Ye, Burhaneddin Yaman*, Sheng Cheng, Feng Tao, Abhirup Mallik, Liu Ren
Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{xin.ye3, burhaneddin.yaman, sheng.cheng, feng.tao2, abhirup.mallik, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com
https://xin-ye-1.github.io/BEVDiffuser

Abstract
Bird’s-eye-view (BEV) representations play a crucial role
in autonomous driving tasks. Despite recent advancements
in BEV generation, inherent noise, stemming from sensor
limitations and the learning process, remains largely unaddressed, resulting in suboptimal BEV representations that
adversely impact the performance of downstream tasks. To
address this, we propose BEVDiffuser, a novel diffusion
model that effectively denoises BEV feature maps using
the ground-truth object layout as guidance. BEVDiffuser
can be operated in a plug-and-play manner during training
time to enhance existing BEV models without requiring any
architectural modifications. Extensive experiments on the
challenging nuScenes dataset demonstrate BEVDiffuser’s
exceptional denoising and generation capabilities, which
enable significant enhancement to existing BEV models, as
evidenced by notable improvements of 12.3% in mAP and
10.1% in NDS achieved for 3D object detection without introducing additional computational complexity. Moreover,
substantial improvements in long-tail object detection and
under challenging weather and lighting conditions further
validate BEVDiffuser’s effectiveness in denoising and enhancing BEV representations.

(a) BEVFormer [15]

(b) BEVDiffuser

(c) LiDAR Top View

Figure 1. Comparisons of BEV feature maps: (a) generated by
BEVFormer (tiny) [15], (b) denoised by BEVDiffuser in 5 steps.
Channel-wise features are averaged for visualization. BEVDiffuser denoises and substantially enhances the BEV feature maps.

set of approaches for learning BEV representations from
single-modal [15, 36] or multi-modal [18, 19] sensors, using geometry-based [22] or transformer-based [15] methods. These advanced BEV generation techniques have
emerged as state-of-the-art solutions for a variety of benchmark tasks, including 3D object detection [8, 19], map segmentation [21, 22] and autonomous planning [7, 10].
Despite recent advancements in BEV generation, the issue of noise in these BEV representations remains largely
unresolved. Generated BEV representations are inherently
noisy (see Fig. 1a) due to the imperfections of acquisition
sensors such as camera and LiDAR, as well as the limitations in the learning process [12, 41]. The noise from
acquisition sensors introduces inaccuracies, including imprecise localization of object boundaries in BEV feature
maps, which degrades performance in downstream tasks.
Additionally, in the absence of direct supervision, BEV representations are typically optimized only for downstream
task performance, leading to potential biases within the
BEV feature maps. Generative models, particularly diffusion models, are well-suited to address this challenge due
to their powerful denoising capabilities [24, 27, 28]. Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable success in image and video generation [1, 23, 24], and recent studies have
extended their applicability to tasks such as image classification and object detection [3, 13, 20]. Leveraging diffusion

1. Introduction
Bird’s-eye-view (BEV) representations have become crucial in advancing autonomous driving tasks, including perception, prediction, and planning, by providing a comprehensive top-down understanding of the surrounding environment [7, 10, 15, 19]. By integrating data from various sensors, such as multi-view cameras and LiDAR, BEV
generates a unified scene representation that empowers autonomous systems to make more accurate and informed
decisions. The effectiveness of the BEV representations
has sparked considerable interest, resulting in a diverse
* Corresponding author.

1495

