This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S CENE TAP: Scene-Coherent Typographic Adversarial Planner against
Vision-Language Models in Real-World Environments
Yue Cao1,2 Yun Xing1,3 Jie Zhang1 Di Lin4 Tianwei Zhang2 Ivor Tsang1,2 Yang Liu2 Qing Guo1,5 *
1
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
University of Alberta, Canada 4 Tianjin University, China 5 CS, Nankai University, China

Question: What action
should be taken for the car?

Answer: Slow Down

Question: How many black
chairs are there in the image?

Shared Query Inputs

Response from ChatGPT4o

Inference on the Original Image
Vision-Language Model

Answer to Original Image:
There are three black chairs.

Inference on Attacked Images

Answer to Digital SceneTAP:
There are two black chairs.
Original Image

Original Image

Answer to Physical SceneTAP:
There are two black chairs.

Gen

era

Proceed

tion

Locations of Targetted Answer

Answer: Proceed

Typographic Attack

Proceed

Print & Paste

Putting the targetted
answer “Proceed” in the image.
Center Attack (ECCV 2024)

Margin Attack (Arxiv 2024)

SceneTAP (Ours)

Digital SceneTAP

Physical SceneTAP

Figure 1. Left: Typographic attack and Difference of our method SceneTAP to SOTA methods,i.e., Center Attack (ECCV 2024) [1] and Margin Attack [2].
Right: Physical implementation of our method and ChatGPT4o’s responses on the original image, generation of SceneTAP, and physical version of SceneTAP.

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in interpreting visual content. While existing works demonstrate these models’ vulnerability to deliberately placed adversarial texts, such texts are often easily
identifiable as anomalous. In this paper, we present the first
approach to generate scene-coherent typographic adversarial attacks that mislead advanced LVLMs while maintaining
visual naturalness through the capability of the LLM-based
agent. Our approach addresses three critical questions:
what adversarial text to generate, where to place it within
the scene, and how to integrate it seamlessly. We propose
a training-free, multi-modal LLM-driven scene-coherent typographic adversarial planning (SceneTAP) that employs
a three-stage process: scene understanding, adversarial
planning, and seamless integration. The SceneTAP utilizes
chain-of-thought reasoning to comprehend the scene, formulate effective adversarial text, strategically plan its placement, and provide detailed instructions for natural integration within the image. This is followed by a scene-coherent
TextDiffuser that executes the attack using a local diffusion

mechanism. We extend our method to real-world scenarios
by printing and placing generated patches in physical environments, demonstrating its practical implications. Extensive experiments show that our scene-coherent adversarial
text successfully misleads state-of-the-art LVLMs, including
ChatGPT-4o, even after capturing new images of physical
setups. Our evaluations demonstrate a significant increase
in attack success rates while maintaining visual naturalness
and contextual appropriateness. This work highlights vulnerabilities in current vision-language models to sophisticated,
scene-coherent adversarial attacks and provides insights
into potential defense mechanisms. We release our code at
https://github.com/tsingqguo/scenetap.

1. Introduction

* Qing Guo is the corresponding author (tsingqguo@ieee.org)

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities across various multimodal tasks, including image captioning, visual question answering, and
complex scene understanding [3–5]. These models effectively leverage the intricate relationships between visual and
textual information, allowing them to interpret and respond

25050

