This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BASKET

: A Large-Scale Video Dataset for Fine-Grained Skill Estimation
Yulu Pan
UNC Chapel Hill

Ce Zhang
UNC Chapel Hill

Gedas Bertasius
UNC Chapel Hill

yulupan@cs.unc.edu

cezhang@cs.unc.edu

gedas@cs.unc.edu

https://sites.google.com/cs.unc.edu/basket

Abstract
We present BASKET, a large-scale basketball video
dataset for fine-grained skill estimation. BASKET contains
4,477 hours of video capturing 32,232 basketball players
from all over the world. Compared to prior skill estimation datasets, our dataset includes a massive number of
skilled participants with unprecedented diversity in terms
of gender, age, skill level, geographical location, etc. BAS KET includes 20 fine-grained basketball skills, challenging modern video recognition models to capture the intricate nuances of player skill through in-depth video analysis. Given a long highlight video (8-10 minutes) of a particular player, the model needs to predict the skill level (e.g.,
excellent, good, average, fair, poor) for each of the 20 basketball skills. Our empirical analysis reveals that the current state-of-the-art video models struggle with this task,
significantly lagging behind the human baseline. We believe that BASKET could be a useful resource for developing new video models with advanced long-range, finegrained recognition capabilities. In addition, we hope that
our dataset will be useful for domain-specific applications
such as fair basketball scouting, personalized player development, and many others. Dataset and code are available
at https://github.com/yulupan00/BASKET.

Figure 1. An illustration of our fine-grained skill estimation task.
Given a long highlight video (8-10 minutes in length) that captures
many plays of a particular player, the model needs to predict the
skill level for 20 fine-grained basketball skills (e.g., three-point
shooting, rebounding, passing, etc.). Each skill is rated on a 5level scale, from “Poor” to “Excellent.”

1. Introduction

from the development of personalized coaching tools to enhancing a fan’s watching experience with an expert-level
commentary and skill analysis.
Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress in
video models for recognizing human activities with greater
precision and finer detail [4, 12, 17, 18, 24, 36–38, 49]. The
video recognition field has evolved from recognizing basic
actions in short clips, like those in the Kinetics [5] dataset,
to identifying more complex and subtle motions in longer
contexts, such as those in EgoSchema [26]. However, despite progress in general action recognition, the fine-grained
skill estimation task, which requires recognizing how well
the actions are performed, has received limited attention and
is still highly underexplored.
One of the main limiting factors in skill estimation is
the lack of large-scale video training datasets, which have
effectively fueled the progress in many other video recognition domains [2, 5, 28]. As shown in Table 1, the existing
skill estimation datasets [1, 8, 30, 32, 34, 39, 41, 47] are
typically very small and lack significant participant diver-

From art painting with creativity to scoring a three-point
shot with precision, we observe and admire human skills
in many domains. People in various fields strive to master skills to continuously push the boundaries of our bodies,
minds, and the world. Subsequently, others are drawn to
watch these people demonstrate their exceptional skills for
entertainment and also as a source of inspiration to improve
themselves. For example, a sport like basketball, which requires many different skills, attracts 400 million fans worldwide. AI tools enabling a deeper comprehension of such
fine-grained skills could lead to many practical applications,

28952

