This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DART: Disease-aware Image-Text Alignment and Self-correcting Re-alignment
for Trustworthy Radiology Report Generation
Sang-Jun Park* Keun-Soo Heo* Dong-Hee Shin Young-Han Son Ji-Hye Oh
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University

Tae-Eui Kam†

{wedm2401, gjrmstn1440, dongheeshin, yhson135, meeeo , kamte}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
The automatic generation of radiology reports has emerged
as a promising solution to reduce a time-consuming task
and accurately capture critical disease-relevant findings
in X-ray images. Previous approaches for radiology report generation have shown impressive performance. However, there remains significant potential to improve accuracy by ensuring that retrieved reports contain diseaserelevant findings similar to those in the X-ray images and
by refining generated reports. In this study, we propose
a Disease-aware image-text Alignment and self-correcting
Re-alignment for Trustworthy radiology report generation
(DART) framework. In the first stage, we generate initial reports based on image-to-text retrieval with diseasematching, embedding both images and texts in a shared embedding space through contrastive learning. This approach
ensures the retrieval of reports with similar disease-relevant
findings that closely align with the input X-ray images. In
the second stage, we further enhance the initial reports by
introducing a self-correction module that re-aligns them
with the X-ray images. Our proposed framework achieves
state-of-the-art results on two widely used benchmarks, surpassing previous approaches in both report generation and
clinical efficacy metrics, thereby enhancing the trustworthiness of radiology reports.

cent years as a promising solution to alleviate the task of
radiologists [17, 21]. However, radiology report generation
is inherently challenging, as it involves capturing critical
medical findings, particularly disease-relevant findings, to
accurately describe key descriptions in X-ray images.
Previous approaches to radiology report generation [15,
17, 22, 35, 38, 42, 43, 45, 47, 48] have utilized encoderdecoder models inspired by image captioning methods [6,
12, 29, 37, 41]. Since there are significant parallels between
the two tasks—both involving the generation of descriptive text from visual data—these approaches commonly use
an image encoder, such as Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [10] or Vision Transformer (ViT) [9], to encode Xray images and a text decoder, such as Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) [11] or Transformer [36]. To enrich report generation, previous approaches incorporate prior medical knowledge, such as disease tags, entity graphs, and retrieved reports [22, 38, 49].
Previous approaches have demonstrated impressive performance in radiology report generation, yet there remains
significant potential for improvement in two key areas: ensuring the trustworthiness of retrieved reports and refining
generated outputs. First, many previous approaches incorporate retrieved reports as prior medical knowledge, often
by selecting similar reports from data sources like public
datasets [17, 22]. However, it remains challenging to ensure
that these retrieved reports contain disease-relevant findings
that are closely aligned with those in the input X-ray images. For trustworthy report generation, it is essential to
align disease-relevant findings in the retrieved reports with
those observed in the X-ray images. Second, self-correction
mechanisms have recently emerged as an effective strategy for improving the quality of generated texts by reducing errors through self-feedback [26, 40]. Beyond previous
approaches, self-correction mechanisms hold great potential for enhancing radiology report generation, especially in
capturing disease-relevant findings in X-ray images.
In this study, we propose a Disease-aware image-text
Alignment and self-correcting Re-alignment for Trustworthy radiology report generation (DART), a novel frame-

1. Introduction
Radiology reports play a critical role in patient care by interpreting complex X-ray images into clear medical findings
that guide diagnosis and treatment decisions. Hand-crafting
radiology reports is a time-consuming task for radiologists
and requires medical expertise to accurately interpret Xray images and document findings in a clinically coherent
manner [18, 23]. Consequently, the automatic generation
of radiology reports has gained increasing attention in re* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

15580

