This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StreetCrafter: Street View Synthesis with Controllable Video Diffusion Models
∗

∗

Haotong Lin1 Haian Jin3 Haoyu Guo1
Zhen Xu1
Yunzhi Yan1,2
Yida Wang2 Kun Zhan2 Xianpeng Lang2 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1 Sida Peng1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Li Auto Inc. 3 Cornell University
(a) Video Generation

...

StreetCrafter
Images

Novel Trajectory

LiDAR
(b) Scene Reconstruction

Street Gaussians

(c) Scene Editing

Ours-G

Object Removal

Object Replacement

Figure 1. StreetCrafter is a novel controllable video diffusion model, which enables precise pose controllability for novel view synthesis in
street scenes, using calibrated images and LiDAR as input. StreetCrafter can also serve as data prior to improve the scene reconstruction
quality and support scene editing operations without per-scene optimization, such as object removal and replacement.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modeling dynamic street scenes is a crucial step in developing autonomous driving simulators. Models capable of
generating high-quality views can enable closed-loop evaluations of autonomous systems and create corner-case data
at a low cost. The primary challenge is to achieve real-time
and high-quality view synthesis across diverse trajectories
using vehicle RGB and LiDAR data of a single trajectory.
Recent methods [26, 39] have achieved great success in
novel view synthesis for static scene reconstruction, providing valuable insights for dynamic street modeling. Based on
this, recent works [71, 82] extend 3DGS [26] to dynamic
street scenes by modeling moving vehicles through a scene
graph. While these methods enable high-quality, real-time
view synthesis, significant artifacts appear in viewpoints
that are far from the training trajectory, as shown in Figure 1. This issue arises from the insufficient observation in
the training input for these regions and the limited ability of
view extrapolation for reconstruction-based methods.
Meanwhile, video diffusion models [2, 12] have demonstrated the ability to generate photorealistic views for novel
camera trajectories from just a few input images, leveraging
training on large-scale video datasets. However, these models typically rely on text prompts as control signals, which

This paper aims to tackle the problem of photorealistic view
synthesis from vehicle sensor data. Recent advancements
in neural scene representation have achieved notable success in rendering high-quality autonomous driving scenes,
but the performance significantly degrades as the viewpoint
deviates from the training trajectory. To mitigate this problem, we introduce StreetCrafter, a novel controllable video
diffusion model that utilizes LiDAR point cloud renderings
as pixel-level conditions, which fully exploits the generative prior for novel view synthesis, while preserving precise camera control. Moreover, the utilization of pixel-level
LiDAR conditions allows us to make accurate pixel-level
edits to target scenes. In addition, the generative prior of
StreetCrafter can be effectively incorporated into dynamic
scene representations to achieve real-time rendering. Experiments on Waymo Open Dataset and PandaSet demonstrate that our model enables flexible control over viewpoint
changes, enlarging the view synthesis regions for satisfying
rendering, which outperforms existing methods. The code
is available at https://zju3dv.github.io/street crafter.
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

822

