This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-Grained Image-Text Correspondence with Cost Aggregation
for Open-Vocabulary Part Segmentation
Jiho Choi1 *, Seonho Lee1 *, Minhyun Lee2 , Seungho Lee2 , Hyunjung Shim1†
1
KAIST, Republic of Korea
2
Samsung Electronics, Republic of Korea
{jihochoi, glanceyes, kateshim}@kaist.ac.kr, {mh315.lee, sh622.lee}@samsung.com
Object
Correspondence

Novel Class

Source

bird

Object s Part
Correspondence

bird’s head

bird’s torso

Prediction

bird’s neck

Object aware Part
Image Text Correspondence

Compositional Guidance

Base Class

Structural
Guidance

cat

cat’s head

cat’s torso

cat’s neck

airplane

airplane’s wing

airplane’s body

airplane’s stern

Structural
Understanding

Figure 1. The proposed PartCATSeg exploits part-level and object-level image-text correspondence using cost aggregation, enhancing
object-aware part image-text matching. Additionally, it utilizes structural guidance to achieve successful part segmentation even for classes
not encountered during training.

Abstract

on Pascal-Part-116, ADE20K-Part-234, and PartImageNet
datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches, setting a new baseline
for robust generalization to unseen part categories.

Open-Vocabulary Part Segmentation (OVPS) is an emerging field for recognizing fine-grained parts in unseen categories. We identify two primary challenges in OVPS: (1) the
difficulty in aligning part-level image-text correspondence,
and (2) the lack of structural understanding in segmenting object parts. To address these issues, we propose PartCATSeg, a novel framework that integrates object-aware
part-level cost aggregation, compositional loss, and structural guidance from DINO. Our approach employs a disentangled cost aggregation strategy that handles object and
part-level costs separately, enhancing the precision of partlevel segmentation. We also introduce a compositional loss
to better capture part-object relationships, compensating
for the limited part annotations. Additionally, structural
guidance from DINO features improves boundary delineation and inter-part understanding. Extensive experiments

1. Introduction
The rapid advancements in model architectures and improved training techniques have allowed cutting-edge models to achieve exceptional performance on closed-set
datasets and object-level segmentation [6, 9, 10, 26, 34, 46,
55]. However, they still exhibit suboptimal performance in
zero-shot scenarios [1, 2, 4, 20] and open-vocabulary setups [22, 38, 69, 74, 76]. Moreover, part-level fine-grained
segmentation [3, 8, 24] remains challenging, highlighting
the ongoing difficulties in these research areas.
Recently, Open-Vocabulary Part Segmentation (OVPS)
has emerged as a novel approach aimed at recognizing novel
objects at a fine-grained, part level [14, 36, 57, 65]. OVPS
enables the segmentation of detailed object parts, even for

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

9782

