This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskGWM: A Generalizable Driving World Model with Video Mask
Reconstruction
Jingcheng Ni, Yuxin Guo, Yichen Liu, Rui Chen, Lewei Lu, Zehuan Wu
SenseTime Research

Abstract
World models that forecast environmental changes from actions are vital for autonomous driving models with strong
generalization. The prevailing driving world model mainly
build on video prediction model. Although these models
can produce high-fidelity video sequences with advanced
diffusion-based generator, they are constrained by their predictive duration and overall generalization capabilities. In
this paper, we explore to solve this problem by combining
generation loss with MAE-style feature-level context learning. In particular, we instantiate this target with three key
design: (1) A more scalable Diffusion Transformer (DiT)
structure trained with extra mask construction task. (2)
we devise diffusion-related mask tokens to deal with the
fuzzy relations between mask reconstruction and generative diffusion process. (3) we extend mask construction
task to spatial-temporal domain by utilizing row-wise mask
for shifted self-attention rather than masked self-attention
in MAE. Then, we adopt a row-wise cross-view module to
align with this mask design. Based on above improvement,
we propose MaskGWM: a Generalizable driving World
Model embodied with Video Mask reconstruction. Our
model contains two variants: MaskGWM-long, focusing on
long-horizon prediction, and MaskGWM-mview, dedicated
to multi-view generation. Comprehensive experiments on
standard benchmarks validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, which contain normal validation of Nuscene
dataset, long-horizon rollout of OpenDV-2K dataset and
zero-shot validation of Waymo dataset. Quantitative metrics on these datasets show our method notably improving
state-of-the-art driving world model. Our project page is
https://github.com/SenseTime-FVG/OpenDWM.

1. Introduction
As an pivotal application of artificial intelligence, autonomous driving technologies, which require comprehending the surrounding environment and executing correct actions, have achieved significant advancements following the
emergence of various learning models [19, 24] with scal-

ability. However, the challenge of limited generalization
to complex and varied scenarios remains unresolved for
state-of-the-art methods [25]. For example, perception may
encounter performance drops [44] in cases like weather
changes, scene variations and motion blur. A promising solution for this problem is the use of world models, which directly predict environment changes under different actions.
These models facilitate unraveling the complexities of data
distributions and craft intricate regular patterns like human
perception system [22].
Recently, advanced methods [12, 18, 39, 40, 42, 43] developed world models through diffusion-based generation
task, capitalizing on the rapid development of advanced image generation systems [1, 7, 33]. Despite generating highfidelity results, these approaches still struggle with longhorizon prediction and zero-shot generalization. To address
this, GenAD [46] attempts to conduct training on largescale OpenDV-2K [46] dataset with carefully-designed temporal modules, while VISTA [12] further introduces explicit re-weighted generation loss on structural and moving areas. However, two problems still exist in building a generalizable world model for autonomous driving.
First, the combination of large-scale training dataset with
more scalable transformer architectures is still under exploration. Second, one fundamental question remains unanswered: Is diffusion-based generation sufficient to build a
generalizable world model? Since diffusion loss targets at
iterative de-noising, the learning of visual semantics may
not be straightforward. For example, MaskDiT [50] has
shown diffusion models are complementary to well-known
self-supervised methods [14], benefiting both convergence
speed and generation quality.
Based on these insights into the diffusion pipeline and
data for our driving world model, we design a new model,
dubbed as MaskGWM, aiming at improving the fidelity,
generalizability and long-time series prediction of the existing methods. Additionally, our model can also generate multi-view cases, by incorporating a multi-view module. We adopt Diffusion Transformer (DiT) as our backbone, which is more scalable and could take the information
from a variety of datasets. Moreover, we introduce the mask

22381

