This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do Your Best and Get Enough Rest for Continual Learning
Gregor Seifer1

Jongbin Ryu1 *

Ajou University 2 KAIST
recall

According to the forgetting curve theory, we can enhance
memory retention by learning extensive data and taking
adequate rest. This means that in order to effectively retain new knowledge, it is essential to learn it thoroughly
and ensure sufficient rest so that our brain can memorize
without forgetting. The main takeaway from this theory is
that learning extensive data at once necessitates sufficient
rest before learning the same data again. This aspect of
human long-term memory retention can be effectively utilized to address the continual learning of neural networks.
Retaining new knowledge for a long period of time without catastrophic forgetting is the critical problem of continual learning. Therefore, based on Ebbinghaus’ theory,
we introduce the view-batch model that adjusts the learning
schedules to optimize the recall interval between retraining
the same samples. The proposed view-batch model allows
the network to get enough rest to learn extensive knowledge from the same samples with a recall interval of sufficient length. To this end, we specifically present two approaches: 1) a replay method that guarantees the optimal
recall interval, and 2) a self-supervised learning that acquires extensive knowledge from a single training sample
at a time. We empirically show that these approaches of
our method are aligned with the forgetting curve theory,
which can enhance long-term memory. In our experiments,
we also demonstrate that our method significantly improves
many state-of-the-art continual learning methods in various protocols and scenarios. We open-source this project
at https:// github.com/ hankyul2/ ViewBatchModel.

Memory retention

Abstract

low

degree of

forgetting

fast


memory

retention

decay

Memory retention

1

Donghyun Lee2

Elapsed time

Memory retention

high

degree of

forgetting
Elapsed time

slow

memory

retention

decay

middle

degree of

forgetting

Elapsed time

(a) Short-term recall interval

fast


memory

retention

decay

(c) Long-term recall interval

(b) Optimal recall interval
Degree of forgetting

Hankyul Kang1

optimal

interval

Recall interval

(d) Degree of forgetting

Figure 1. Conceptual graph of the forgetting curve. We show
(a) short-term recall interval, (b) optimal recall interval, (c) longterm recall interval, and (d) degree of forgetting. (a-b) Expanding
the recall interval improves long-term memory retention of neural
networks by repeatedly recalling memory with moderate difficulty,
whereas (c) an excessive recall interval decreases it. The depicted
forgetting curve regarding recall interval is based on the spacing
effect formula [6, 7] provided in the supplementary material.

1. Introduction

optimal recall interval enhances long-term memory retention in the human brain. This phenomenon is known as the
spacing effect [7], where the optimal recall interval for repeated learning is crucial to maintain an acceptable level of
forgetting knowledge. Several studies [7, 21, 36] have made
significant progress on the spacing effect, shedding light on
its effectiveness. There have also been studies [28, 30, 31]
highlighting the importance of the recall interval of repeated
learning.
Although this theory has been widely recognized in human brain research, it is currently very little known in the
field of machine learning. Only a few works [1, 4, 48] show
this theory’s potential in neural networks by utilizing it as an
analysis toolkit or dynamic learning strategy. So, we investigate the impact of the forgetting curve theory on long-term
memory retention in neural networks for continual learning.

The forgetting curve theory [18] suggests that human memory tends to fade as time goes on; however, memory retention can be improved by repeated learning in an optimal
recall interval. Motivated by this theory, many subsequent
studies [6, 19, 27] have shown that spaced repetition with
* Corresponding author.

10077

