This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

No Thing, Nothing: Highlighting Safety-Critical Classes
for Robust LiDAR Semantic Segmentation in Adverse Weather
Junsung Park

Hwijeong Lee
Inha Kang
Hyunjung Shim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
108, Taebong-ro, Seocho-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

{jshackist, hjlee0612, rkswlsj13, kateshim}@kaist.ac.kr

50
45

mIoU for things & stuff

Existing domain generalization methods for LiDAR semantic segmentation under adverse weather struggle to accurately predict “things” categories compared to “stuff”
categories. In typical driving scenes, “things” categories
can be dynamic and associated with higher collision risks,
making them crucial for safe navigation and planning. Recognizing the importance of “things” categories, we identify their performance drop as a serious bottleneck in existing approaches. We observed that adverse weather induces degradation of semantic-level features and both corruption of local features, leading to a misprediction of
“things” as “stuff”. To mitigate these corruptions, we suggests our method, NTN - segmeNt Things for No-accident.
To address semantic-level feature corruption, we bind each
point feature to its superclass, preventing the misprediction
of things classes into visually dissimilar categories. Additionally, to enhance robustness against local corruption
caused by adverse weather, we define each LiDAR beam
as a local region and propose a regularization term that
aligns the clean data with its corrupted counterpart in feature space. NTN achieves state-of-the-art performance with
a +2.6 mIoU gain on the SemanticKITTI-to-SemanticSTF
benchmark and +7.9 mIoU on the SemanticPOSS-toSemanticSTF benchmark. Notably, NTN achieves a +4.8
and +7.9 mIoU improvement on “things” classes, respectively, highlighting its effectiveness.

40
35
30
25
20
15

things
stuff
20.5 20.7

25.9 26.4 26.3

Gap between things&stuff

23.5

30

Gap between things & stuff (mIoU)

Abstract

25

19.3

20

15.6 15.7 15.0

15

11.8

6.3

t
only pou tion Mix MD PCLointDR niMix GUIL GLSSJ+LPD NTNrs)
U D D S
rce­ Dro rturba Polar M
P
u
o
(Ou
e
S
P

10

5

Figure 1. Previous methods struggle to accurately predict the
things category in adverse weather. Our approach overcomes this
limitation with improved performance for things category.

driving, it is essential to develop robust models that can
maintain high accuracy regardless of weather conditions.
To mitigate this issue, existing research on improving robustness under adverse weather conditions can be broadly
categorized into domain generalization and domain adaptation methods. Domain adaptation methods [28] utilize
real weather training data to train LSS models to be robust against weather corruption. In contrast, domain generalization methods aim to create models robust to weather
corruption only using training data under clean weather.
Typically, these studies either improve training mechanisms [8, 25] or generate LiDAR data through weather
simulations [6, 7, 17]. Domain generalization in adverse
weather is particularly important, as real weather varies in
type and severity and occurs infrequently, making data collection challenging. In this paper, we focus on the domain
generalization problem.
However, existing Domain Generalization methods for
LiDAR Segmentation under Adverse Weather (DGLS-AW)
show significant performance variations across semantic

1. Introduction
LiDAR Semantic Segmentation (LSS) involves predicting
semantic labels directly for each 3D point, an important
building block for autonomous driving. However, LSS models exhibit a significant performance drop under adverse
weather conditions such as fog, rain, and snow [8, 12, 17,
25, 28]. Since safety is the highest priority in autonomous

6690

