This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Natural Language-Based Document Image Retrieval:
New Dataset and Benchmark
Hao Guo1,3,4, *, Xugong Qin2,∗,† , Jun Jie Ou Yang5 , Peng Zhang2,6,† , Gangyan Zeng2 ,
Yubo Li1,3,4 , Hailun Lin1,3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
State Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security Defense
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
University of Southern California, 6 Laboratory for Advanced Computing and Intelligence Engineering
guohao2022@iie.ac.cn, qinxugong@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

Image Retrieval

Document image retrieval (DIR) aims to retrieve document
images from a gallery according to a given query. Existing DIR methods are primarily based on image queries that
retrieve documents within the same coarse semantic category, e.g., newspapers or receipts. However, these methods struggle to effectively retrieve document images in realworld scenarios where textual queries with fine-grained semantics are usually provided. To bridge this gap, we introduce a new Natural Language-based Document Image
Retrieval (NL-DIR) benchmark with corresponding evaluation metrics. In this work, natural language descriptions serve as semantically rich queries for the DIR task.
The NL-DIR dataset contains 41K authentic document images, each paired with five high-quality, fine-grained semantic queries generated and evaluated through large language models in conjunction with manual verification. We
perform zero-shot and fine-tuning evaluations of existing
mainstream contrastive vision-language models and OCRfree visual document understanding (VDU) models. A twostage retrieval method is further investigated for performance improvement while achieving both time and space
efficiency. We hope the proposed NL-DIR benchmark can
bring new opportunities and facilitate research for the VDU
community. Datasets and codes will be publicly available at
huggingface.co/datasets/nianbing/NL-DIR.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of mobile cameras and smartphones, document images become one of the most con* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding authors.

Document
images

Image
Query

Text Retrieval
OCR

Text
Query

Cross-Modal Retrieval
Text
Query

Document
images

Document
images
(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of different paradigms for DIR tasks. (a):
Query-by-image. (b): Query-by-text. (c): Our approach directly
retrieves document images using natural language queries.

venient ways to record and disseminate information. As
an important part of information retrieval (IR), document
image retrieval (DIR) aims to accurately and efficiently
retrieve relevant document images from large repositories
based on user queries.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, considering the type of
queries, existing DIR methods can be categorized into two
paradigms: query-by-image and query-by-text. Specifically, query-by-image methods [2, 3, 11, 16, 37, 38, 40] directly extract features from query and document images for
matching. The extraction of image features primarily considers visual information, which limits DIR within the same
coarse semantic class, e.g., newspaper or receipt. Comparatively, query-by-text [25, 63, 73] resorts to Optical Character Recognition (OCR) engines [48–51, 71] to extract words
from document images. The retrieval models mainly focus
on enhancing the textual representations of queries and documents, while commonly struggling to capture the extensive
and comprehensive visual features presented in documents,
such as visual elements, display styles, content layout, etc.
To summarize, the current retrieval methods are restricted to single-modality matching, which inevitably results in information loss and noise for the original text or
image domain. Consequently, it is necessary to design a
cross-modal retrieval model for DIR that can handle text
queries and visual documents simultaneously (see Fig. 1

29722

