This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-MVP: 3D Multiview Pretraining for Manipulation
∗

Shengyi Qian1,2 , Kaichun Mo1 , Valts Blukis1 , David F. Fouhey3 , Dieter Fox1 , Ankit Goyal1
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Michigan 3 New York University
https://jasonqsy.github.io/3DMVP

Abstract
Recent works have shown that visual pretraining on egocentric datasets using masked autoencoders (MAE) can improve generalization for downstream robotics tasks. However, these approaches pretrain only on 2D images, while
many robotics applications require 3D scene understanding. In this work, we propose 3D-MVP, a novel approach
for 3D Multi-View Pretraining using masked autoencoders.
We leverage Robotic View Transformer (RVT), which uses a
multi-view transformer to understand the 3D scene and predict gripper pose actions. We split RVT’s multi-view transformer into visual encoder and action decoder, and pretrain
its visual encoder using masked autoencoding on largescale 3D datasets such as Objaverse. We evaluate 3D-MVP
on a suite of virtual robot manipulation tasks and demonstrate improved performance over baselines. Our results
suggest that 3D-aware pretraining is a promising approach
to improve generalization of vision-based robotic manipulation policies.

Mask

Decoder

Render &
Mask

Decoder

Encoder

Multiview RGB-D
Encoder

(a) 2D Pretraining

(b) 3D Multiview Pretraining (Ours)

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of 2D vs. 3D pretraining for manipulation. (Left): In 2D pretraining [42], the model is trained
to do MAE reconstruction from a single image from Interaction
videos [17, 39]. The encoder is then used for downstream manipulation tasks. However, the input can only be a single 2D image due to the pretraining. (Right): We propose 3D Multi-View
Pretraining (3D-MVP), which uses multiple orthogonal RGB-D
views of a 3D model. The model is tasked with reconstructing the
masked views by leveraging information across different perspectives, enabling it to learn more robust 3D spatial representations.
This multi-view approach improves downstream performance in
robot manipulation tasks by capturing richer scene understanding
compared to 2D-only pretraining. And it is compatible with stateof-the-art 3D manipulation method such as RVT [16] which takes
3D inputs.

Building learning-based manipulation systems is challenging due to the unavailability of diverse large-scale robotics
data. To address this, there has been significant interest in
using computer vision techniques to learn generalizable visual representations without robotics focused data, for example by self-supervised pre-training on image datasets. In
particular, inspired by the success of masked language modeling in Natural Language Processing (NLP), several recent
works have explored masked autoencoding (MAE) for visual representation learning [3, 13, 22]. MAE learns to reconstruct randomly masked patches in an input image, encouraging the model to learn high-level semantic features.
When applied to egocentric videos from human demonstrations, MAE has been shown to learn representations that
generalize well to downstream robotics tasks such as object
manipulation [9, 33, 42].
* The work was done during internship at NVIDIA.

However, current MAE approaches for robotics pretrain
only on 2D images, ignoring the 3D structure of the scene.
Prior works in robotics have shown that methods that build
an explicit 3D visual representation of the environment are
more sample efficient and generalize better than those with
only 2D visual representations [16, 32, 40]. Hence, in this
work, we explore how we can bring the benefits of visual
pretraining to robot manipulation methods that reason with
explicit 3D representations.
We propose 3D-MVP, a method for 3D Multi-View Pretraining for robot manipulation. Our approach builds upon
recent advances in robot manipulation. Specifically, we use
the Robotic View Transformer (RVT), a state-of-the-art 3D
manipulation method [16]. RVT takes as input a point cloud
of the scene and builds a 3D representation of the scene, us-

22530

