This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S2D-LFE: Sparse-to-Dense Light Field Event Generation
Yutong Liu Wenming Weng Yueyi Zhang Zhiwei Xiong*
University of Science and Technology of China
{ustclyt, wmweng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

{zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

In this paper, we present S2D-LFE, an innovative approach for sparse-to-dense light field event generation. For
the first time to our knowledge, S2D-LFE enables controllable novel view synthesis only from sparse-view light field
event (LFE) data, and addresses three critical challenges
for the LFE generation task: simplicity, controllability, and
consistency. The simplicity aspect eliminates the dependency on frame-based modality, which often suffers from
motion blur and low frame-rate limitations. The controllability aspect enables precise view synthesis under sparse
LFE conditions with view-related constraints. The consistency aspect ensures both cross-view and temporal coherence in the generated results. To realize S2D-LFE, we develop a novel diffusion-based generation network with two
key components. First, we design an LFE-customized variational auto-encoder that effectively compresses and reconstructs LFE by integrating cross-view information. Second,
we design an LFE-aware injection adaptor to extract comprehensive geometric and texture priors. Furthermore, we
construct a large-scale synthetic LFE dataset containing
162 one-minute sequences using simulator, and capture a
real-world testset using our custom-built sparse LFE acquisition system, covering diverse indoor and outdoor scenes.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that S2D-LFE successfully generates up to 9 × 9 dense LFE from 2 × 2 sparse
inputs and outperforms existing methods on both synthetic
and real-world data. The datasets and code are available
at https://github.com/Yutong2022/S2D-LFE.

of high-quality spatial depth information and dynamic motion data with exceptional temporal resolution. Such capabilities demonstrate significant potential for various applications, including 6-degree-of-freedom virtual reality [23]
and real-time dynamic depth estimation [40]. The rich
spatio-temporal information provided by LFE data enables
effective capture of structural information in high-speed dynamic scenes.
In this paper, we aim to address a largely unexplored
task of LFE generation. To date, the only relevant work
is Ev-LFV [29], which combines an RGB LF camera with
an event camera aligned to the LF center-view for LFE synthesis. However, this approach faces several critical challenges: (1) Simplicity. Ev-LFV’s reliance on multi-view LF
frame data as auxiliary information introduces complications. The RGB data is vulnerable to motion blur and exposure issues, potentially compromising LFE generation quality. Moreover, achieving precise spatial-temporal alignment
between the LF and event cameras presents substantial technical challenges. (2) Controllability. The fixed view synthesis constraint of Ev-LFV prevents the generation of free
viewpoints under sparse LFE conditions with view-related
constraints. (3) Consistency. Due to the limitations of low
frame-rate RGB data and insufficient structural modeling,
Ev-LFV struggles to maintain both angular and temporal
continuity in the generated LFE sequences.

1. Introduction

To address these challenges, we propose S2D-LFE for
Sparse-to-Dense Light Field Event generation, which is
a novel approach for LFE generation. S2D-LFE demonstrates the capability to generate temporally consistent LFE
from free viewpoints using only sparse LFE input, making it
particularly suitable for real-world applications without the
need for frame cameras. Our approach comprises two key
components: an LFE-customized variational auto-encoder
for efficient LFE compression and reconstruction, and a
LFE-aware injection adapter integrated into a diffusionbased generation network that learns to generate the latent
representation of LFE.

Event cameras capture per-pixel brightness changes asynchronously with microsecond temporal resolution [1], while
Light Field (LF) cameras record both the accumulated intensity and direction of light rays, thereby revealing scene
geometric structure [48]. The integration of these technologies leads to Light Field Event (LFE) cameras, which capture multi-view event streams arranged in a fixed baseline
array. This combination enables simultaneous recording
* Corresponding author

The first key component, LFE-VAE, is designed to effectively compress high-resolution LFE while preserving spatial and structural information. Specifically, we introduce

11207

