This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scenario Dreamer:
Vectorized Latent Diffusion for Generating Driving Simulation Environments
Luke Rowe 1,2,6 , Roger Girgis1,3,6 , Anthony Gosselin1,3 ,
Liam Paull1,2,5 , Christopher Pal1,2,3,5 , Felix Heide4,6
1
Mila, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 Polytechnique Montréal,
4
Princeton University, 5 CIFAR AI Chair, 6 Torc Robotics
https://princeton-computational-imaging.github.io/scenario-dreamer

Abstract
We introduce Scenario Dreamer, a fully data-driven generative simulator for autonomous vehicle planning that
generates both the initial traffic scene—comprising a lane
graph and agent bounding boxes—and closed-loop agent
behaviours. Existing methods for generating driving simulation environments encode the initial traffic scene as a rasterized image and, as such, require parameter-heavy networks that perform unnecessary computation due to many
empty pixels in the rasterized scene. Moreover, we find that
existing methods that employ rule-based agent behaviours
lack diversity and realism. Scenario Dreamer instead employs a novel vectorized latent diffusion model for initial scene generation that directly operates on the vectorized scene elements and an autoregressive Transformer for
data-driven agent behaviour simulation. Scenario Dreamer
additionally supports scene extrapolation via diffusion inpainting, enabling the generation of unbounded simulation
environments. Extensive experiments show that Scenario
Dreamer outperforms existing generative simulators in realism and efficiency: the vectorized scene-generation base
model achieves superior generation quality with around 2×
fewer parameters, 6× lower generation latency, and 10×
fewer GPU training hours compared to the strongest baseline. We confirm its practical utility by showing that reinforcement learning planning agents are more challenged
in Scenario Dreamer environments than traditional nongenerative simulation environments, especially on long and
adversarial driving environments.

1. Introduction
Simulators are invaluable tools for the safe and scalable development of autonomous vehicles (AVs) [6, 38, 54, 75].
They reduce costs and accelerate development, while offering a safe way to evaluate the performance of autonomous

17207

vehicle systems under diverse, rare, and potentially dangerous real-world conditions. Despite significant advancements in enhancing the speed and realism of autononous
driving simulators [19, 30, 31], current simulators remain
constrained by their reliance on prerecorded driving logs.
Specifically, current data-driven simulators either replay or
modify existing driving logs, limiting scalability due to the
finite size and diversity of the available data. For instance,
public driving simulators like GPUDrive [31] and Waymax
[19], which are based on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset
[13], cover only 1,750 km of unique roadway—a fraction
of the nearly 22,000 km of roadway that an average human
drives annually [15]. Simulations are also bounded by the
length of the driving logs, which are typically less than 30
seconds. Given the billions of miles of diverse driving experience needed to validate the safety of autonomous vehicles in simulation, existing simulation environments derived
from traffic logs have struggled to enable scalable training
and evaluation of autonomous vehicles.
To address the limitations of current driving simulators, recent work has shown that diffusion generative models can be used to synthesize driving environments in an
abstract representation comprising bird’s eye view (BEV)
agent bounding boxes and a lane graph [10, 56]. However,
these methods are either not fully data-driven as the agent
behaviours are governed by unrealistic rule-based models
[10], or can only generate short driving scenarios with nonreactive agents [56]. Prior methods also encode driving
scenes as rasterized BEV images, which require costly and
unnecessary computation due to many empty pixels in the
rasterized scenes [10, 56]. While existing generative simulators from sensor data have been proposed [74], these
methods fail to meet the strict latency demands of simulators due to their reliance on large video diffusion models.
We propose Scenario Dreamer, a fully data-driven generative simulator for autonomous driving planning. Scenario Dreamer decomposes environment generation into

