This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unity in Diversity: Video Editing via Gradient-Latent Puriﬁcation
Junyu Gao2 , Kunlin Yang1 , Xuan Yao2 , and Yufan Hu1 *
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
{gaojunyu2015,yaoxuan2022}@ia.ac.cn; yangkunlin@xs.ustb.edu.cn; huyufanqaixuan@gmail.com

“squirrel瀢

Abstract
Recently, text-driven video editing methods that optimize
target latent representations have garnered signiﬁcant attention and demonstrated promising results. However, these
methods rely on self-supervised objectives to compute the
gradients needed for updating latent representations, which
inevitably introduces gradient noise, compromising content
generation quality. Additionally, it is challenging to determine the optimal stopping point for the editing process,
making it difﬁcult to achieve an optimal solution for the latent representation. To address these issues, we propose a
uniﬁed gradient-latent puriﬁcation framework that collects
gradient and latent information across different stages to
identify effective and concordant update directions. We design a local coordinate system construction method based
on feature decomposition, enabling short-term gradients
and ﬁnal-stage latents to be reprojected onto new axes.
Then, we employ tailored coefﬁcient regularization terms
to effectively aggregate the decomposed information. Additionally, a temporal smoothing axis extension strategy is developed to enhance the temporal coherence of the generated
content. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods across
various editing tasks, delivering superior editing performance. Project page is available in https://unityin-diversity-editing.github.io.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid advancements in AIGC [5],
image and video generation [4, 24, 25, 43], as well as editing capabilities [21, 38, 39, 56], have signiﬁcantly evolved,
opening up new possibilities for both creative and professional applications [9, 13, 18, 30, 45]. Different from the
“from-scratch generation paradigm”, visual content editing enables precise, text-guided context-aware modiﬁcations to existing content, allowing for targeted adjustments
* Corresponding authors

“robot squirrel”

Single Step
Edited videos for (i-1)-th to i-th Iteration

Noisy gradient makes
the squirrel vague.

“silver jeep瀢

Source

“Porsche car瀢

Optimization
Step

“Porsche car瀢

“Porsche car瀢

Last Few Steps

Edited videos for (L-2)-th to L-th Iteration

Uncontrollable iterations lead to
insufficient or excessive editing of the car.

Figure 1. Two issues in the ﬁeld of video editing using latent-based
ﬁne-tuning strategies: (a) Gradient Noise. (b) Uncontrollability of
the Optimization Process. We utilize two examples to illustrate.

with greater efﬁciency and realism. Due to the complex
spatiotemporal nature of video data [14, 15, 17, 26], which
is more susceptible to noise interference during editing and
requires maintaining temporal smoothness, video editing is
inherently more challenging compared to static image editing [36, 38, 65].
Current text-driven video editing methods can be broadly
categorized into two types: forward-based [8, 9, 18, 34, 38,
42, 45] and backward-based ones [27, 28, 36, 50, 62, 70].
The former modiﬁes and updates the target video’s latent representation during the forward propagation of the
model, utilizing techniques such as attention feature injection [9, 18, 38, 45, 64] or atlas editing [8, 34, 42]. In
contrast, backward-based editing methods [27, 28, 50, 62]
guide the editing process by deﬁning an optimization objective, thereby generating desired effects through direct
ﬁne-tuning of the network or latent representation. Methods that ﬁne-tune the network typically adjust the attention
layers [28, 62] or adapters [40, 50] within the model, or
incorporate the capabilities of large language models, using an instruction-based ﬁne-tuning strategy [46] to conduct supervised adjustments. Nevertheless, such ﬁne-tuning
inevitably introduces modiﬁcations to the original model
or relies on additional supervised information. As a result, directly ﬁne-tuning the target latent representation has
recently emerged as a prominent research focus [27, 65,

23401

