This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point-to-Region Loss for Semi-Supervised Point-Based Crowd Counting
Wei Lin, Chenyang Zhao, and Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
elonlin24@gmail.com, chenyzhao9-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
> 𝟎. 𝟓

Point detection has been developed to locate pedestrians
in crowded scenes by training a counter through a pointto-point (P2P) supervision scheme. Despite its excellent
localization and counting performance, training a pointbased counter still faces challenges concerning annotation labor: hundreds to thousands of points are required
to annotate a single sample capturing a dense crowd. In
this paper, we integrate point-based methods into a semisupervised counting framework based on pseudo-labeling,
enabling the training of a counter with only a few annotated samples supplemented by a large volume of pseudolabeled data. However, during implementation, the training encounters issues as the confidence for pseudo-labels
fails to be propagated to background pixels via the P2P.
To tackle this challenge, we devise a point-specific activation map (PSAM) to visually interpret the phenomena occurring during the ill-posed training. Observations from
the PSAM suggest that the feature map is excessively activated by the loss for unlabeled data, causing the decoder to
misinterpret these over-activations as pedestrians. To mitigate this issue, we propose a point-to-region (P2R) scheme
to substitute P2P, which segments out local regions rather
than detects a point corresponding to a pedestrian for supervision. Consequently, pixels in the local region can
share the same confidence with the corresponding pseudo
points. Experimental results in both semi-supervised counting and unsupervised domain adaptation highlight the advantages of our method, illustrating P2R can resolve issues identified in PSAM. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Elin24/P2RLoss.

Teacher
strong
augmentation

Prediction

𝑥1 , 𝑦1
𝑥2 , 𝑦2
⋮
(𝑥𝑛 , 𝑦𝑛 )
Pseudo Label

w/o gradient

EMA

P2R
Matching

Student

Prediction

Weighted
Cross Entropy

w/ gradient

Figure 1. The workflow of semi-supervised point-based counting methods. The teacher model generates pseudo labels by extracting the foreground pixels, while the student model takes the
corresponding strongly augmented image as input to construct the
computation graph. The training loss between the pseudo label
and the student’s prediction involves two steps: the proposed P2R
matching and the weighted cross-entropy computation.

low the scheme of density regression [10, 24, 38, 61, 73],
there are also relevant studies implementing point detection for crowd localization and counting [21, 31, 57], due
to its straightforwardness in indicating pedestrians’ positions. These approaches use the Hungarian algorithm to
perform point-to-point (P2P) matching between predicted
point maps and ground-truth (GT) pedestrian annotations
during training. Therefore, these matched pixels are considered as pedestrians’ positions, while the others are designated as background for loss computation. This scheme
successfully trains a point detector for crowd analysis,
yielding both good localization and counting performance.

1. Introduction

Great progress has been made in supervised counting,
but the labor-intensive nature of annotating data has hindered the development of crowd understanding for a long
time [26, 66]. Addressing this issue, semi-supervised counting is gradually being developed, aiming to train a model
using large amounts of unlabeled data alongside only a few
annotated samples. Similar to supervised counting, most
semi-supervised methods also follow the procedure of density regression. Notably, the method proposed in OT-M [26]
stands out by employing a simple self-training scheme
based on mean-teacher [59] and FixMatch [56]. However,
there is no study exploring semi-supervised counting and

Crowd scene analysis has been investigated for many years
due to its significant applications in smart cities and urban
safety [2, 7, 29, 41, 46, 62, 75]. Crowd counting and localization in extremely dense crowd scenes, as the fundamental task in this field, have attracted considerable attention
from researchers in computer vision [4, 5, 37, 61, 66, 68].
Although most supervised crowd counting methods fol-

29363

