This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Protecting Your Video Content: Disrupting Automated Video-based LLM
Annotations
Haitong Liu1 *, Kuofeng Gao1 * , Yang Bai2†, Jinmin Li1 , Jinxiao Shan3 , Tao Dai4† , Shu-Tao Xia1,5
1
Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance 3 Digital Center, China Merchants Group Limited
4
Shenzhen University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{liuhaito24,gkf21,ljm22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, baiyang0522@gmail.com
shanjinxiao@cmhk.com, daitao.edu@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

perturbation

Recently, video-based large language models (video-based
LLMs) have achieved impressive performance across various video comprehension tasks. However, this rapid advancement raises significant privacy and security concerns,
particularly regarding the unauthorized use of personal
video data in automated annotation by video-based LLMs.
These unauthorized annotated video-text pairs can then be
used to improve the performance of downstream tasks, such
as text-to-video generation. To safeguard personal videos
from unauthorized use, we propose two series of protective
video watermarks with imperceptible adversarial perturbations, named Ramblings and Mutes. Concretely, Ramblings aim to mislead video-based LLMs into generating
inaccurate captions for the videos, thereby degrading the
quality of video annotations through inconsistencies between video content and captions. Mutes, on the other
hand, are designed to prompt video-based LLMs to produce exceptionally brief captions, lacking descriptive detail. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our video watermarking methods effectively protect video data by significantly reducing video annotation performance across
various video-based LLMs, showcasing both stealthiness
and robustness in protecting personal video content. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ttthhl/
Protecting_Your_Video_Content.

original video

watermarked
video
Mute-N
What is this video about?
Ramblings
baby baby baby baby...

Mute-S
This video is a

Figure 1. We propose two strategies to protect the video content:
Ramblings and Mutes. The Ramblings approach misleads videobased large language models into generating inaccurate captions.
Besides, Mutes prompt these models to produce shorter and even
NULL captions, lacking descriptive detail. The answers in the
figure are excerpts.

1. Introduction

rely heavily on high-quality video-text pairs for fine-tuning,
while video-based LLMs can enhance video-text pairs quality through advanced annotation capabilities. By leveraging the power of large language models [4, 14, 15, 36, 41],
video-based LLMs have revolutionized video content interpretation and annotation. This advancement directly contributes to the improvement of video data annotation quality. However, alongside these technological advances, concerns about data safety and privacy [2, 8, 19–22, 40] have
emerged. Given the vast amount of personal video content
available on multimedia platforms, protecting this data from
unauthorized annotation has become an urgent challenge
that requires immediate attention. In this paper, we aim to
protect personal videos from being unauthorizedly and automatedly annotated by video-based LLMs. To tackle this
significant and challenging issue, we propose two series of
protective and imperceptible watermarks added to videos.
In each scenario, we propose two methods in order to add

Recent years have witnessed significant advancements
in both video-based large language models (video-based
LLMs) [18, 27, 35, 44–46] and text-to-video generation
models [6, 16, 23, 26, 37]. These two types of models demonstrate a close relationship: text-to-video models
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

24056

