This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-modal Information Flow in Multimodal Large Language Models
Zhi Zhang* , Srishti Yadav*† , Fengze Han‡ , Ekaterina Shutova*
*
ILLC, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
†
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
‡
Dept. of Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Germany
zhangzhizz2626@gmail.com, srya@di.ku.dk, fengze.han@tum.de, e.shutova@uva.nl

Abstract

Up

The recent advancements in auto-regressive multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) have demonstrated
promising progress for vision-language tasks. While there
exists a variety of studies investigating the processing of
linguistic information within large language models, little is currently known about the inner working mechanism
of MLLMs and how linguistic and visual information interact within these models. In this study, we aim to fill
this gap by examining the information flow between different modalities—language and vision—in MLLMs, focusing on visual question answering. Specifically, given an
image-question pair as input, we investigate where in the
model and how the visual and linguistic information are
combined to generate the final prediction. Conducting experiments with a series of models from the LLaVA series,
we find that there are two distinct stages in the process
of integration of the two modalities. In the lower layers,
the model first transfers the more general visual features
of the whole image into the representations of (linguistic)
question tokens. In the middle layers, it once again transfers visual information about specific objects relevant to
the question to the respective token positions of the question. Finally, in the higher layers, the resulting multimodal
representation is propagated to the last position of the input sequence for the final prediction. Overall, our findings provide a new and comprehensive perspective on the
spatial and functional aspects of image and language processing in the MLLMs, thereby facilitating future research
into multimodal information localization and editing. Our
code and collected dataset are released here: https:
/ / github . com / FightingFighting / cross modal-information-flow-in-MLLM.git.

up

Are the blinds
up or down?

Assistant:

Figure 1. Illustration of the internal mechanism of MLLMs when
solving multimodal tasks. From bottom to top layers, the model
first propagates general visual information from the whole image
into the linguistic hidden representation; next, selected visual information relevant to answering the question is transferred to the
linguistic representation; finally, the integrated multimodal information within the hidden representation of the question flows to
last position facilitating the final prediction. In addition, the answers are initially generated in lowercase form and then converted
to uppercase for the first letter.

1. Introduction

range of vision-language tasks, which is largely attributed to
the combination of powerful auto-regressive large language
models [42, 43, 47, 50] and visual encoders [14, 17, 37].
Specifically, LLMs generate responses based on both visual
and linguistic inputs where visual representations extracted
from an image encoder precede the word embeddings in

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [5, 11, 25, 28,
29] have demonstrated notable performance across a wide

19781

