This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Decoupled Feature 3D Gaussian Splatting via Hierarchical
Compression

1

Zhenqi Dai1 Ting Liu1,2 * Yanning Zhang1
ASGO, School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University
daizq@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, liuting@nwpu.edu.cn, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Efficient 3D scene representation has become a key challenge with the rise of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), particularly when incorporating semantic information into the
scene representation. Existing 3DGS-based methods embed both color and high-dimensional semantic features into
a single field, leading to significant storage and computational overhead. To mitigate this, we propose Decoupled
Feature 3D Gaussian Splatting (DF-3DGS), a novel method
that decouples the color and semantic fields, thereby reducing the number of 3D Gaussians required for semantic representation. We then introduce a hierarchical compression
strategy that first employs our novel quantization approach
with dynamic codebook evolution to reduce data size, followed by a scene-specific autoencoder for further compression of the semantic feature dimensions. This multi-stage
approach results in a compact representation that enhances
both storage efficiency and reconstruction speed. Experimental results demonstrate that DF-3DGS outperforms previous 3DGS-based methods, achieving faster training and
rendering times while requiring less storage, without sacrificing performance—in fact, it improves performance in
the novel view semantic segmentation task. Specifically,
DF-3DGS achieves remarkable improvements over Feature
3DGS, reducing training time by 10× and storage by 20×,
while improving the mIoU of novel view semantic segmentation by 4%. Code is available at https://github.
com/dai647/DF_3DGS.

Figure 1. Illustation of 3D Gauissian point cloud. By decoupling the semantic field from the color field, the number of Gaussians is significantly reduced, leading to a reduction in the storage
of the semantic field from 1.79 GB (semantic features only) to just
75 MB. Each 3D Gaussian is parameterized by its position p, scale
s, rotation quaternion q, opacity o, color c, and semantic feature f
(dimension=512).

1. Introduction

niques for achieving high-quality 3D scene novel view synthesis from multi-view images. However, both methods encapsulate only appearance and geometric details, lacking
additional semantic information for the 3D scene, which is
essential for downstream tasks such as semantic segmentation and language-guided editing.
In recent years, NeRF-based 3D semantic understanding methods have attempted to use the neural radiance
fields to store additional semantic features for the 3D
scene [17, 19, 38]. However, NeRF-based methods are
inherently slow in both training and rendering due to the
computational complexity of NeRF’s ray-marching volume
rendering technique. 3DGS as an alternative to implicit radiance field representations, explicitly represents the field

With the rapid advancement of 3D vision technology, efficiently and accurately representing and processing 3D
scenes has become a critical research topic [1, 2, 5, 29, 41,
46]. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24] and 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [16] have emerged as promising tech* Ting Liu is the corresponding author.

11156

