This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Bias Injection Attacks against Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Huayang Huang1
Xiangye Jin2
Jiaxu Miao3∗
Yu Wu1∗
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University
{hyhuang, xiangyejin, wuyucs}@whu.edu.cn

For developing countries
A doctor

A professor

miaojx@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Text-to-Image
A city park

For developed countries

A doctor

A professor

A city park

Figure 1. Implicit bias injection causes the model to generate subtly negative content (left) and positive content (right) for different users.
Although the generated images meet the text requirement, the subtle differences may, over time, influence user perception.

Abstract
The proliferation of text-to-image diffusion models (T2I
DMs) has led to an increased presence of AI-generated images in daily life. However, biased T2I models can generate content with specific tendencies, potentially influencing
people’s perceptions. Intentional exploitation of these biases risks conveying misleading information to the public.
Current research on bias primarily addresses explicit biases
with recognizable visual patterns, such as skin color and
gender. This paper introduces a novel form of implicit bias
that lacks explicit visual features but can manifest in diverse
ways across various semantic contexts. This subtle and versatile nature makes this bias challenging to detect, easy to
propagate, and adaptable to a wide range of scenarios. We
further propose an implicit bias injection attack framework
(IBI-Attacks) against T2I diffusion models by precomputing

a general bias direction in the prompt embedding space and
adaptively adjusting it based on different inputs. Our attack
module can be seamlessly integrated into pre-trained diffusion models in a plug-and-play manner without direct manipulation of user input or model retraining. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our scheme in introducing bias through subtle and diverse modifications while
preserving the original semantics. The strong concealment
and transferability of our attack across various scenarios
further underscore the significance of our approach.

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [19, 34, 47–49, 65]
have emerged as a powerful tool for generating highly realistic images that closely adhere to textual descriptions. The
widespread adoption of these models, facilitated by public
APIs [40, 54] and open-source implementations [32, 33],

28779

