This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

INFP: Audio-Driven Interactive Head Generation in Dyadic Conversations
Yongming Zhu* Longhao Zhang* Zhengkun Rong* Tianshu Hu*† Shuang Liang
Bytedance

Zhipeng Ge

{zhuyongming, zhanglonghao.zlh, rongzhengkun, tianshu.hu,
liangshuang.echo, zhipengge}@bytedance.com

Figure 1. We present INFP, an audio-driven interactive head generation framework for dyadic conversations. Given the dual-track audio
in dyadic conversations and a single portrait image of arbitrary agent, our framework can dynamically synthesize verbal, non-verbal and
interactive agent videos with lifelike facial expressions and rhythmic head pose movements. Additionally, our framework is lightweight yet
powerful, making it practical in instant communication scenarios with acceptable latency, such as the video conferencing. INFP denotes
our method is Interactive, Natural, Flash and Person-generic.

Abstract
Imagine having a conversation with a socially intelligent
agent. It can attentively listen to your words and offer visual
and linguistic feedback promptly. This seamless interaction
allows for multiple rounds of conversation to flow smoothly
and naturally. In pursuit of actualizing it, we propose INFP,
a novel audio-driven head generation framework for dyadic
interaction. Unlike previous head generation works that
only focus on single-sided communication, or require manual role assignment and explicit role switching, our model
drives the agent portrait dynamically alternates between
speaking and listening state, guided by the input dyadic audio. Specifically, INFP comprises a Motion-Based Head
Imitation stage and an Audio-Guided Motion Generation
stage. The first stage learns to project facial communicative behaviors from real-life conversation videos into a low-

dimensional motion latent space, and use the motion latent
codes to animate a static image. The second stage learns
the mapping from the input dyadic audio to motion latent
codes through denoising, leading to the audio-driven head
generation in interactive scenarios. To facilitate this line of
research, we introduce DyConv, a large scale dataset of rich
dyadic conversations collected from the Internet. Extensive
experiments and visualizations demonstrate superior performance and effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

In recent years, researchers have dedicated considerable attention to audio-driven head generation [9, 18, 23, 24, 31,
37, 39, 42, 46, 56, 59], in order to build the conversational
agent. However, most studies only focus on single-sided
communication, such as talking or listening, ignoring the
dyadic properties in human-human interaction. Talkinghead generation [2, 17, 27, 36, 37, 41, 45, 46, 48, 49, 52, 56,

10667

