This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RestorGS: Depth-aware Gaussian Splatting for Efficient 3D Scene Restoration
Yuanjian Qiao
Mingwen Shao*
Lingzhuang Meng
Kai Xu
Shandong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Oil & Gas Industrial Software, Qingdao Institute of Software,
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)
yjqiao@s.upc.edu.cn, smw278@126.com, lzhmeng1688@163.com, s23070014@s.upc.edu.cn
Underwater

PSNR

3DGS

29.19
28.74

WaterSplatting
Gaussian-DK

26.71

0.847

0.806 0.257

0.147
0.265
19.89
0.672
25.25

0.120
0.112

Gaussian-DK

WaterSplatting

0.064

Hazy

Input

Ours

0.897

Nighttime

0.810

Ours

(a) Visual Results

(b) Quantitative Scores

Figure 1. We present RestorGS, a unified framework for 3D scene restoration that can handle multiple degraded scenes, including underwater, nighttime, and hazy situations. (a) and (b) show the visual results and quantitative scores of different methods, respectively. For a
3D degraded scene, RestorGS can produce high-quality restoration results.

Abstract

1. Introduction

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has recently achieved remarkable progress in novel view synthesis. However, existing methods rely heavily on high-quality data for rendering and struggle to handle degraded scenes with multiview inconsistency, leading to inferior rendering quality. To
address this challenge, we propose a novel Depth-aware
Gaussian Splatting for efficient 3D scene Restoration,
called RestorGS, which flexibly restores multiple degraded
scenes using a unified framework. Specifically, RestorGS
consists of two core designs: Appearance Decoupling and
Depth-Guided Modeling. The former exploits appearance
learning over spherical harmonics to decouple clear and
degraded Gaussian, thus separating the clear views from
the degraded ones. Collaboratively, the latter leverages
the depth information to guide the degradation modeling, thereby facilitating the decoupling process. Benefiting
from the above optimization strategy, our method achieves
high-quality restoration while enabling real-time rendering speed. Extensive experiments show that our RestorGS
outperforms existing methods significantly in underwater,
nighttime, and hazy scenes.
*Corresponding author.

Novel view synthesis has been a crucial task in the field
of 3D vision, holding significant potential in various practical applications, such as virtual reality and robotic exploration [13, 42]. Over the past few years, Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) [30] has emerged as a promising technique for
novel view synthesis through implicit scene representation.
Despite the impressive results, original NeRF requires evaluating massive samples from a per-pixel field, which poses
challenges to rendering speed and memory usage. To mitigate this issue, some NeRF variants attempt to speed up the
rendering process by reducing sampling points or per-point
computation cost [6, 17, 23, 33]. However, these solutions
usually sacrifice rendering fidelity inevitably, particularly in
handling large-scale scenes.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [16] has attracted considerable attention by offering higher training efficiency while delivering pleasing rendering quality. Compared to the tedious volume rendering in NeRF, 3DGS explicitly projects 3D Gaussians onto 2D planes using efficient differentiable splatting for real-time rendering [7, 22,
29, 46]. Nevertheless, existing methods are heavily dependent on high-quality images and struggle to effectively process degraded scenes with inconsistent views, leading to un-

11177

