This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Faces to Voices: Learning Hierarchical Representations
for High-quality Video-to-Speech
Ji-Hoon Kim

Jeongsoo Choi Jaehun Kim Chaeyoung Jung Joon Son Chung
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{jihoon, joon}@mm.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The objective of this study is to generate high-quality speech
from silent talking face videos, a task also known as videoto-speech synthesis. A significant challenge in video-tospeech synthesis lies in the substantial modality gap between silent video and multi-faceted speech. In this paper,
we propose a novel video-to-speech system that effectively
bridges this modality gap, significantly enhancing the quality of synthesized speech. This is achieved by learning of
hierarchical representations from video to speech. Specifically, we gradually transform silent video into acoustic feature spaces through three sequential stages – content, timbre, and prosody modeling. In each stage, we align visual factors – lip movements, face identity, and facial expressions – with corresponding acoustic counterparts to
ensure the seamless transformation. Additionally, to generate realistic and coherent speech from the visual representations, we employ a flow matching model that estimates direct trajectories from a simple prior distribution
to the target speech distribution. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method achieves exceptional generation quality comparable to real utterances, outperforming
existing methods by a significant margin.

Silent Video

Lips

Content
Modeling

Face IDs

Timbre
Modeling

Facial
Expressions Prosody

Flow
Matching
Decoder

Neural
Vocoder
Melspectrogram

Waveform

Modeling
Hierarchical Visual Encoder

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed system. Our method
learns hierarchical representations from video to speech, focusing
on three key factors: lips, face IDs, and facial expressions. The visual encoding is converted into the corresponding speech through
an effective flow matching decoder and neural vocoder.

1. Introduction

VTS systems lies in the significant information gap between
silent video and spoken audio. Specifically, silent video primarily contains visual features such as lip motion and facial
expressions, while spoken audio includes acoustic characteristics such as tone and pronunciation. As a result, the
VTS systems require capturing the complex relations between the two modalities, making it difficult to establish an
accurate mapping from visual to acoustic spaces.
Numerous works have been made to enhance the quality
of VTS system while addressing the information gap between the two modalities. To mitigate the complexity posed
by the inherent variability of speech, some approaches incorporate self-supervised speech units [5, 24] or a dedicated lip-reading network [75]. Other studies have focused
on clarifying multiple speaker characteristics by utilizing
speaker embeddings extracted from either the reference audio [52, 59] or the input video [5, 75]. Meanwhile, several
approaches adopt advanced modeling techniques, such as
diffusion models [5, 75, 78], to capture the intricate relationships between visual and acoustic modalities. Despite
these efforts, current VTS systems still struggle to close the
modality gap, leaving their generation quality significantly
behind that of real human utterances. This underscores the
need for a more effective training pipeline and refined net-

Video-to-Speech (VTS) systems have recently attracted significant attention for their capability to convert silent videos
of talking faces into human speech. These systems have a
broad spectrum of applications, such as re-dubbing silent
archival films, providing assistive technologies for individuals with speech disabilities, and enabling natural communications in loud settings [5, 31, 75]. Recent advancements
in deep learning have propelled this field forward by utilizing the natural alignment of video and speech as a mode
of training supervision, eliminating the need of additional
annotations such as text transcriptions.
The ultimate goal of VTS systems is to synthesize realistic human speech. A key challenge in building high-quality

15874

