This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient-Guided Annealing for Domain Generalization
Aristotelis Ballas
Dpt of Informatics and Telematics
Harokopio University of Athens
Omirou 9, Tavros, Athens, Greece

Christos Diou
Dpt of Informatics and Telematics
Harokopio Univesity of Athens
Omirou 9, Tavros, Athens, Greece

aballas@hua.gr

cdiou@hua.gr

Figure 1. (left) Decision boundaries of a 4th -degree polynomial logistic regression model with 2D input. In this example, feature x1 is
class-specific and x2 is domain-specific, while color represents classes and shapes represent domains. The samples with solid red and
green colors are included in the training data, whereas the fainted samples are part of the hidden held-out test set. As a result, domain shift
is represented by a change in x2 . Although the classifier should only infer based on x1 , traditional gradient descent leads to overfitting
(top-left). The proposed method, GGA (bottom-left), introduces an annealing process that depends on gradient agreement, leading to
models that generalize well to new, unobserved target domains. (right) Schematics of the parameter updates of ERM (top-right) and GGA
(bottom-right). Parameters updated via ERM are driven by gradient conflict, whereas GGA searches for a point where gradients align
before continuing descending towards a minima.

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) research has gained considerable traction as of late, since the ability to generalize to
unseen data distributions is a requirement that eludes even
state-of-the-art training algorithms. In this paper we observe that the initial iterations of model training play a key
role in domain generalization effectiveness, since the loss
landscape may be significantly different across the training
and test distributions, contrary to the case of i.i.d. data.

20558

Conflicts between gradients of the loss components of each
domain lead the optimization procedure to undesirable local minima that do not capture the domain-invariant features of the target classes. We propose alleviating domain conflicts in model optimization, by iteratively annealing the parameters of a model in the early stages of training and searching for points where gradients align between
domains. By discovering a set of parameter values where
gradients are updated towards the same direction for each
data distribution present in the training set, the proposed

