This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OnlineAnySeg: Online Zero-Shot 3D Segmentation by Visual Foundation Model
Guided 2D Mask Merging
Yijie Tang1∗ Jiazhao Zhang3∗ Yuqing Lan1 Yulan Guo4 Dezun Dong1 Chenyang Zhu1† Kai Xu1,2†
1
National University of Defense Technology 2 Xiangjiang Laboratory
3
CFCS, School of CS, Peking University 4 Sun Yat-sen University

+

Abstract

+

Cabinet

Online zero-shot 3D instance segmentation of a progressively reconstructed scene is both a critical and challenging
task for embodied applications. With the success of visual
foundation models (VFMs) in the image domain, leveraging 2D priors to address 3D online segmentation has become a prominent research focus. Since segmentation results provided by 2D priors often require spatial consistency
to be lifted into final 3D segmentation, an efficient method
for identifying spatial overlap among 2D masks is essential—yet existing methods rarely achieve this in real time,
mainly limiting its use to offline approaches. To address
this, we propose an efficient method that lifts 2D masks generated by VFMs into a unified 3D instance using a hashing technique. By employing voxel hashing for efficient 3D
scene querying, our approach reduces the time complexity of costly spatial overlap queries from O(n2 ) to O(n).
Accurate spatial associations further enable 3D merging
of 2D masks through simple similarity-based filtering in
a zero-shot manner, making our approach more robust to
incomplete and noisy data. Evaluated on the ScanNet200
and SceneNN benchmarks, our approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance in online, zero-shot 3D instance segmentation with leading efficiency. The project page is at
https://yjtang249.github.io/OnlineAnySeg.

VFM

VFM

……

……

Table

+

+

Figure 1. We propose an online zero-shot 3D segmentation
method that establishes precise spatial associations between VFMgenerated 2D masks from sequentially captured frames. We
demonstrate an efficient merging process for masks detected from
various viewpoints, enabling robust and consistent 3D instance
segmentation in real time.

ing methods have achieved accurate online segmentation
through supervised training over a closed set of object categories [4, 8, 10, 22, 46]. The recent embodied applications, however, call for online 3D segmentation in the openvocabulary setting, making the problem more challenging.
The recent advances in visual foundation models
(VFMs), such as SAM [13] and OpenSEED [45], have
demonstrated strong zero-shot ability in 2D image segmentation. Leveraging the 2D priors of VFMs to address openvocabulary 3D instance segmentation is a promising direction. Specifically, one can merge the 2D instance masks
of several viewpoints based on multi-view consistency to
form a unified 3D segmentation result. The two key challenges here are (1) how to find 3D spatial associations of
2D masks from different views and (2) how to determine
merges of the associated masks. The former is computationally costly and has been the main bottleneck of real-time

1. Introduction
3D instance segmentation of an online reconstructed scene
is a difficult yet important task for robotic scene exploration and understanding. In contrast to offline segmentation, online segmentation must deal with the incompleteness and ambiguity of an incrementally reconstructed scene
under real-time constraints. With the availability of labeled 3D scene datasets such as ScanNet200 [33], exist∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors:

zhuchenyang07@nudt.edu.cn, kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

3676

