This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Label Prototype Visual Spatial Search for Weakly Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
Songsong Duan, Xi Yang*, Nannan Wang
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University
duanss@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yangx@xidian.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS)
relies on the CNN-based Class Activation Map (CAM) and
Transformer-based self-attention map to generate classspecific masks for semantic segmentation. However, CAM
and self-attention maps usually cause incomplete segmentation due to classification bias issue. To address this issue,
we propose a Multi-Label Prototype Visual Spatial Search
(MuP-VSS) method with a spatial query mechanism. Specifically, MuP-VSS consists of two key components: multilabel prototype representation and multi-label prototype
optimization. The former designs a global embedding to
learn the global tokens from the images, and then proposes a Prototype Embedding Module (PEM) to interact
with patch tokens to understand the local semantic information. The latter utilizes the exclusivity and consistency principles of the multi-label prototypes to design three prototype
losses to optimize them, which contain cross-class prototype (CCP) contrastive loss, cross-image prototype (CIP)
contrastive loss, and patch-to-prototype (P2P) consistency
loss. CCP loss models exclusivity of multi-label prototypes
learned from a single image to enhance the discriminative
properties of each class better. CCP loss learns the consistency of the same class-specific prototypes extracted from
multiple images to enhance the semantic consistency. P2P
loss is proposed to control the semantic response of the prototype to the image patches. Experimental results on Pascal
VOC 2012 and MS COCO show that MuP-VSS significantly
outperforms recent methods and achieves state-of-the-art
performance.

Channel
Aggregation

Encoder

Class Weight
𝓦𝓦 ∈ ℝ𝑫𝑫×𝑪𝑪

𝓕𝓕 ∈ ℝ𝑫𝑫×𝑯𝑯×𝑾𝑾

(a) CNN-based Methods

Patch Attention Maps

𝓕𝓕 ∈ ℝ𝑫𝑫×𝑯𝑯×𝑾𝑾

Class-aware
Feature

(b) Transformer-based Methods
𝓕𝓕 ∈ ℝ𝑯𝑯𝑯𝑯×𝑫𝑫

Encoder
Multi-label
Tokens

Refine

Conv

Encoder

𝓕𝓕

𝓟𝓟𝒊𝒊

Search
𝑪𝑪×𝑫𝑫

𝓟𝓟 ∈ ℝ

Similarity
Scores

(c) Our Query-based MuP-VSS

Figure 1. Comparisons between our MuP-VSS and existing WSSS
methods. (a) CNN-based methods employ CAM to focuses on the
most discriminative object regions. (b) Transformer-based methods leverage the self-attention maps to cover most of the object regions. (c) Our MuP-VSS proposes multi-label prototypes to search
image patch tokens. Compared with (a) and (b), our method generate more complete objects.

1. Introduction

in autonomous driving, embodied AI, and robot perception. While fully supervised paradigms have achieved remarkable advances, they are limited by time-consuming
and laborious pixel-level annotations, which hinder further
progress of semantic segmentation, such as the Foundation
Model (FM) and Vision-Language Model (VLM). Weakly
supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) [8, 23, 49] alternatively alleviates the cost of pixel-level annotation via
weak supervisory signals, e.g., image-level labels [8], scribbles [4], and point labels [3].

Semantic segmentation aims to recognize the class and
its object regions. It continues to be a fundamental
task in computer vision with comprehensive applications
* Corresponding author

30241

