This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Novel View Synthesis with Pixel-Space Diffusion Models
Noam Elata∗
Technion

Bahjat Kawar
Apple

Yaron Ostrovsky-Berman
Apple

noamelata@campus.technion.ac.il

b kawar@apple.com

yostrovskyberman@apple.com

Miriam Farber
Apple

Ron Sokolovsky
Apple

m farber@apple.com

ronus@apple.com

Abstract
Synthesizing a novel view from a single input image is a
challenging task. Traditionally, this task was approached
by estimating scene depth, warping, and inpainting, with
machine learning models enabling parts of the pipeline.
More recently, generative models are being increasingly
employed in novel view synthesis (NVS), often encompassing the entire end-to-end system. In this work, we adapt a
modern diffusion model architecture for end-to-end NVS in
the pixel space, substantially outperforming previous stateof-the-art (SOTA) techniques. We explore different ways to
encode geometric information into the network. Our experiments show that while these methods may enhance performance, their impact is minor compared to utilizing improved generative models. Moreover, we introduce a novel
NVS training scheme that utilizes single-view datasets, capitalizing on their relative abundance compared to their
multi-view counterparts. This leads to improved generalization capabilities to scenes with out-of-domain content.1

1. Introduction
In novel view synthesis (NVS), we aim to recreate a snapshot of a given scene from an unseen perspective. A successful algorithm must consider both the 3D geometry of
the given scene and the underlying distribution of realworld images. NVS algorithms have been researched for
many years, covering several tasks which differ in the expected number of input and output views and the relative
distance between inputs and outputs, among other things.
In this work, we focus on the simplest form of NVS: singleimage to single-image, hoping that it will serve as a founda∗ Work done as part of an internship at Apple.
1 Code available at https://github.com/apple/ml-vivid.

tion for more general NVS settings. In previous works, this
task has been decomposed into a pipeline of several computer vision components, namely depth estimation, warping, and inpainting [3, 21, 38, 50]. However, modern advances in generative modeling offer a simpler and more robust end-to-end approach [29, 37, 44, 54].
Generative diffusion models [12, 39, 40] have emerged
as a top class of image generators, excelling at many conditional generation tasks [18, 32], including NVS [37, 44, 54].
In diffusion modeling, we train a neural network for removing Gaussian noise, and iteratively apply it in several
steps to generate an image. These models are relatively simple to train, owing their stability to a simple denoising regression loss. Modern diffusion architectures notably rely
on transformer layers [46] with self- and cross- attention
blocks. These attention mechanisms are highly effective for
the conditional generation task. For instance, in the widely
used text-to-image generators [30, 32], cross-attention is
used to condition the denoising network’s features on the
textual tokens. In our work, we effectively harness crossattention in diffusion models for the NVS task.
Some existing diffusion-based NVS works [7, 37] operate in the latent space of an auto-encoder, following [30].
This can result in an unnecessary loss of high-frequency
details due to the auto-encoder’s reconstruction error, leading to texture mismatches between source and target views.
Therefore, we opt to apply our method directly in the pixel
space using a cascaded diffusion model design [13], avoiding this issue altogether. We demonstrate the improved texture transfer capabilities of our model compared to latent
space NVS models.
Furthermore, many recent generative model-based NVS
works involve conditional diffusion training with some
form of intricate 3D geometry encoding [37, 44, 54]. However, in many cases, the benefit of such complex encoding
methods is unclear, with some researchers claiming they
may not be needed at all [29]. Inspired by previous work,

26756

