This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynRefer: Delving into Region-level Multimodal Tasks via Dynamic Resolution
Yuzhong Zhao1 * Feng Liu1 * Yue Liu1 Mingxiang Liao1 Chen Gong2
Qixiang Ye1 Fang Wan1†
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 University of Virginia
zhaoyuzhong20@mails.ucas.ac.cn
liuyue171@mails.ucas.ac.cn
chengong@virginia.edu

liufeng20@mails.ucas.ac.cn

liaomingxiang20@mails.ucas.ac.cn

qxye@ucas.ac.cn

wanfang@ucas.ac.cn

Figure 1. Left: Illustration of our DynRefer approach, which dynamically determines proper region views for each task through stochastic
vision-language alignment and selectively multimodal referring. Right: Performance comparison on region-level multimodal tasks.

Abstract
One fundamental task of multimodal models is to translate referred image regions to human preferred language
descriptions. Existing methods, however, ignore the resolution adaptability needs of different tasks, which hinders
them to find out precise language descriptions. In this
study, we propose a DynRefer approach, to pursue highaccuracy region-level referring through mimicking the resolution adaptability of human visual cognition. During
training, DynRefer stochastically aligns language descriptions of multimodal tasks with images of multiple resolutions, which are constructed by nesting a set of random
views around the referred region. During inference, DynRefer performs selectively multimodal referring by sampling
proper region representations for tasks from the nested views
based on image and task priors. This allows the visual
information for referring to better match human prefer* Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author.

ences, thereby improving the representational adaptability of region-level multimodal models. Experiments show
that DynRefer brings mutual improvement upon broad tasks
including region-level captioning, open-vocabulary region
recognition and attribute detection. Furthermore, DynRefer achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple region-level
multimodal tasks using a single model. Code is available at
https://github.com/callsys/DynRefer.

1. Introduction
Region-level multimodal tasks, as a means of communicating referred information with computer, constitute an
important branch of artificial intelligence [4, 15, 22, 62].
These tasks involve translating specific image regions to
language descriptions based on task requirements such as
open-vocabulary region recognition [39], attribute detection [4, 6], region-level captioning [7, 15, 37, 62]. Existing
methods [4, 6, 22, 52, 72] using image regions under fixed

24742

