This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporally Consistent Object-Centric Learning by Contrasting Slots
Anna Manasyan1 Maximilian Seitzer1 Filip Radovic1 Georg Martius1,3 Andrii Zadaianchuk2
1
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
anna.manasyan@student.uni-tuebingen.de

a.zadaianchuk@uva.nl

Figure 1. S LOT C ONTRAST: Our method introduces a temporal contrastive loss that enhances temporal consistency in unsupervised video
object-centric models. It stabilizes representations across frames, achieving state-of-the-art object discovery on complex real-world videos.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object-centric learning (OCL) [4, 14, 32, 44] is a rapidly
advancing area of visual representation learning that enables
autonomous systems to represent, understand, and model
high-dimensional data directly in terms of its constituent
entities. Structured object-centric representations (often referred to as slots [32]) facilitate generalization and robustness [7, 9] of scene representations across diverse downstream tasks, from visual question answering [1, 8, 34, 58]
to control [10, 18, 61, 63]. Of particular interest are videobased object-centric methods [2, 11, 20, 28, 45, 57, 64]
that learn to represent objects that evolve and interact over
time. These representations make the methods powerful
tools for applications such as unsupervised online object
tracking [35, 53] and structured world modeling [27, 52, 56].
Unsupervised object-centric learning on videos has seen significant progress in recent years [2, 57, 64], mainly due to
the use of pre-trained representations from self-supervised
foundational models [5, 38] coupled with diverse training
datasets like YouTube-VIS [59, 60]. Nevertheless, these
methods still face significant challenges, especially maintaining consistent object-centric representations across time
and uniquely representing each object—critical factors for

Unsupervised object-centric learning from videos is a
promising approach to extract structured representations
from large, unlabeled collections of videos. To support downstream tasks like autonomous control, these representations
must be both compositional and temporally consistent. Existing approaches based on recurrent processing often lack
long-term stability across frames because their training objective does not enforce temporal consistency. In this work,
we introduce a novel object-level temporal contrastive loss
for video object-centric models that explicitly promotes temporal consistency. Our method significantly improves the
temporal consistency of the learned object-centric representations, yielding more reliable video decompositions that
facilitate challenging downstream tasks such as unsupervised object dynamics prediction. Furthermore, the inductive bias added by our loss strongly improves object discovery, leading to state-of-the-art results on both synthetic and
real-world datasets, outperforming even weakly-supervised
methods that leverage motion masks as additional cues.
Visit slotcontrast.github.io for videos and further details.

5401

