This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-time augmentation improves efficiency in conformal prediction
Divya Shanmugam, Helen Lu, Swami Sankaranarayanan, John Guttag
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, CSAIL
{divyas, helenlu, swamiviv, guttag}@mit.edu

Abstract
A conformal classifier produces a set of predicted classes
and provides a probabilistic guarantee that the set includes
the true class. Unfortunately, it is often the case that conformal classifiers produce uninformatively large sets. In this
work, we show that test-time augmentation (TTA)–a technique that introduces inductive biases during inference–
reduces the size of the sets produced by conformal classifiers. Our approach is flexible, computationally efficient,
and effective. It can be combined with any conformal score,
requires no model retraining, and reduces prediction set
sizes by 10%-14% on average. We conduct an evaluation
of the approach spanning three datasets, three models, two
established conformal scoring methods, different guarantee
strengths, and several distribution shifts to show when and
why test-time augmentation is a useful addition to the conformal pipeline.

(TTA), a widely-used technique in computer vision, has the
potential to address both limitations. TTA involves generating an ensemble of predictions by perturbing the input with
label-preserving transformations. It has previously been
shown that TTA can be used to make non-conformal classifiers more robust to small input perturbations [7], more
accurate [37], and better calibrated [18]. However, previous
work has not explored the utility of TTA in the context of
conformal prediction.
We propose test-time-augmented conformal prediction,
which transforms a classifier’s predictions using a learned
test-time augmentation policy prior to conformal classification. By using distinct sets of labeled data to learn the testtime augmentation policy and the conformal classifier, we
preserve the assumption of exchangeability, and thereby the
coverage guarantee associated with the conformal predictor.

1. Introduction

In experiments testing the performance of conformal
predictors subject to distribution shift, we see that test-time
augmentation reduces prediction set sizes by 14% on average, with no loss of coverage. And even when there is
no distribution shift, we see a reduction of 10% on average. Moreover, we find that classes with the largest average
prediction set sizes benefit most from the introduction of
test-time augmentation. We also show that test-time augmentation can bridge gaps between classifiers of different
sizes (e.g., we show that test-time augmentation combined
with ResNet-50 produces smaller set sizes than ResNet-101
without test-time augmentation).

Conformal prediction has emerged as a promising way to
equip existing classifiers with statistically valid uncertainty
estimates. It does so by replacing the prediction of the most
likely class with an uncertainty set–a set of classes accompanied by a probabilistic guarantee that the true class appears in the set [36].
Conformal prediction faces two limitations in practice.
First, achieving a suitably strong guarantee often leads
to prediction sets that are uninformatively large [10, 47].
Large prediction sets have been shown to decrease performance when provided as a decision-making aid [3, 10, 47].
Second, conformal classifiers inherit the instability of
the underlying models. As a result, prediction sets can
change significantly in response to small input perturbations, a well-known weakness of neural networks [39]. Applying a horizontal flip to each image in ImageNet, for example, changes the prediction set sizes for 75% of examples
at a coverage guarantee of 99%. Such behavior also represents a barrier to broader use.
In this work, we show that test-time augmentation

20622

Our analysis of why test-time augmentation reduces prediction set sizes reveals a previously unknown effect of testtime augmentation. Specifically, TTA increases the predicted probability of the true class even when it is predicted
to be unlikely (for example, promoting the true class from
200th most likely to 100th most likely). Although such behavior has no impact on the maximum predicted probability
— commonly the focus of literature on test-time augmentation [2, 32, 37] — it is valuable in conformal prediction.
This is because when the true class is promoted to a higher
rank among a classifier’s predicted probabilities, the conformal classifier includes fewer incorrect classes to meet the
conformal guarantee.

