This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EditAR: Unified Conditional Generation with Autoregressive Models
Jiteng Mu1 ,

Nuno Vasconcelos1 , Xiaolong Wang1,2
UC San Diego, 2 NVIDIA

1

Change the horse to golden.

Change the cat to tiger.

Segmentation-to-Image

Remove the bee over the flowers.

Change sky to sunset.

Edge-to-Image

Add flowers to woman’s hair.

Change to Cartoon.

Depth-to-Image

Figure 1. We propose EditAR, a unified conditional autoregressive model for diverse conditional generation tasks. We demonstrate that
without task-specific designs, a single autoregressive model achieves strong performance across diverse tasks, including texture manipulation, object replacement, object removal, local editing, canny-to-image, depth-to-image, and segmentation-to-image.

Abstract

hance the text-to-image alignment, we further propose to
distill the knowledge from foundation models into the autoregressive modeling process. We evaluate its effectiveness
across diverse tasks on established benchmarks, showing
competitive performance to various state-of-the-art taskspecific methods. Project page: https://jitengmu.
github.io/EditAR/

Recent progress in controllable image generation and editing is largely driven by diffusion-based methods. Although
diffusion models perform exceptionally well in specific tasks
with tailored designs, establishing a unified model is still
challenging. In contrast, autoregressive models inherently
feature a unified tokenized representation, which simplifies the creation of a single foundational model for various
tasks. In this work, we propose EditAR, a single unified autoregressive framework for a variety of conditional image
generation tasks, e.g., image editing, depth-to-image, edgeto-image, segmentation-to-image. The model takes both
images and instructions as inputs, and predicts the edited
images tokens in a vanilla next-token paradigm. To en-

1. Introduction
Recent advances in conditional image generation are predominantly driven by high capacity text-to-image diffusion
models [24, 25, 43, 50, 54, 57, 59, 60]. These models serve
as a strong image prior, that can be specialized to individual tasks, facilitating remarkable progress in applications

7899

