This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamCache: Finetuning-Free Lightweight
Personalized Image Generation via Feature Caching
Emanuele Aiello

Umberto Michieli†

Politecnico di Torino

Diego Valsesia
Mete Ozay†
†
Samsung R&D Institute UK

Enrico Magli

Abstract
Personalized image generation requires text-to-image
generative models that capture the core features of a reference subject to allow for controlled generation across
different contexts. Existing methods face challenges due to
complex training requirements, high inference costs, limited
ﬂexibility, or a combination of these issues. In this paper,
we introduce DreamCache, a scalable approach for efﬁcient
and high-quality personalized image generation. By caching
a small number of reference image features from a subset
of layers and a single timestep of the pretrained diffusion
denoiser, DreamCache enables dynamic modulation of the
generated image features through lightweight, trained conditioning adapters. DreamCache achieves state-of-the-art
image and text alignment, utilizing an order of magnitude
fewer extra parameters, and is both more computationally
effective and versatile than existing models.1

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-image generation, fueled by
the development of diffusion models [10, 28], have enabled
high-quality and diverse image generation from textual descriptions. Diffusion models [23, 25] gradually transform
random noise into images through a sequence of denoising
steps, conditioned on the input text prompt.
An active area of research is personalizing these models, enabling the generation of novel images of a reference
subject in various contexts, while maintaining ﬂexibility
for text-based editing. Early personalization techniques
[1, 6, 8, 24, 30, 32, 35, 35], such as the seminal DreamBooth [24] relied on ﬁne-tuning (FT) the generative model
for each reference subject. However, these approaches are
often impractical for many use cases due to costly test-time
FT, which can take several minutes per subject. To address
this, FT-free (i.e., zero-shot) personalized image generation
methods have emerged to eliminate test-time optimization.
These FT-free approaches can be broadly categorized into
1 Code, model, and synthetic dataset can be found at https://
github.com/Emanuele97x/DreamCache

Figure 1. DreamCache is a ﬁnetuning-free personalized image
generation method that achieves an optimal balance between subject ﬁdelity, memory efﬁciency, and adherence to text prompts.

two families: encoder-based methods and reference-based
methods, each with distinct drawbacks.
Encoder-based methods [7, 15, 20, 33, 36] utilize dedicated image encoders, such as CLIP [22] or DINO [2], to
extract relevant features from reference images. While these
encoders can produce high-quality results, they are often
large, require extensive training to align text and image features, and reduce the model’s ﬂexibility [13, 15, 19, 36].
In contrast, reference-based methods [21, 37] condition
the diffusion model directly on reference features drawn
from the U-Net denoiser, integrating these features at each
denoising step. While effective, these methods require feature extraction at every generation step, leading to higher
computational costs and memory demands. Additionally,
they often require an input textual caption for conditioning, which introduces variability and can decrease output
precision.
Some recent works have proposed to ﬁnetune the U-Net
backbone itself [21, 37, 39]. However, this hinders the
model’s ability to switch between personalized and nonpersonalized tasks and risks inducing the “language drift”
phenomenon, where the personalization training degrades
the model’s linguistic comprehension [12, 24].

12480

