This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Dance-to-Music Generation via Negative Conditioning Latent
Diffusion Model
Changchang Sun1 Gaowen Liu2 Charles Fleming2 Yan Yan1 *
1
2
University of Illinois Chicago
Cisco Research
{csun47, yyan55}@uic.edu

{gaoliu, chflemin}@cisco.com

Abstract

models generate data by utilizing noise sampled from Gaussian distributions as input, while conditional ones typically
incorporate noise along with embedding feature condition
extracted from some specific modalities. Due to the growing
demand of customization and the flourish of multimodel
data, increasing efforts have been dedicated to the conditional manner, giving rise to the emerging real-world application of cross-model generation, e.g., Text-to-Image (T2I)
generation [4–7], Text-to-Audio (T2A) generation [8–10],
and Text-to-Video (T2V) generation [11–13]. In this paper,
we focus on the dance-to-music (D2M) generation task and
target at training a latent diffusion model (LDM), which has
significant practical application in video-sharing platforms
such as TikTok1 and YouTube2 to generate appropriate music
accompaniments for dance videos uploaded by users.
To generate music accompaniments whose rhythms are
coordinated and harmonious to the dance movements, understanding the temporal correlation and rhythmic consistency
between dance video and music is crucial, posing greater
challenges compared to other conditional music generation
tasks, such as text-to-music generation [9]. Generally, existing diffusion-based D2M methods incline to first extract
visual rhythm and motion information from the dance video
and then embed these multiple conditions into the input
layer of the U-Net network, so as to guide and influence the
training and inference of the diffusion model. For example, CDCD [14] and LORIS [15] put forward conditional
diffusion models where the human body motions of dance
performers and the visual representation obtained from dance
video frames are concatenated to form the final continuous
conditioning input.
However, existing diffusion-based D2M generation
works [14, 15] fail to fully explore the special properties
of dance video, where only the positive rhythmic visual
cues and motion information are extracted from the dance
video played in the normal forward direction to establish
the temporal correlation and rhythmic consistency, overlooking the potential effect of negative rhythm information

Conditional diffusion models have gained increasing attention since their impressive results for cross-modal synthesis, where the strong alignment between conditioning input
and generated output can be achieved by training a timeconditioned U-Net augmented with cross-attention mechanism. In this paper, we focus on the problem of generating
music synchronized with rhythmic visual cues of the given
dance video. Considering that bi-directional guidance is
more beneficial for training a diffusion model, we propose to
enhance the quality of generated music and its synchronization with dance videos by adopting both positive rhythmic
information and negative ones (PN-Diffusion) as conditions,
where a dual diffusion and reverse processes is devised.
Specifically, to train a sequential multi-modal U-Net structure, PN-Diffusion consists of a noise prediction objective
for positive conditioning and an additional noise prediction
objective for negative conditioning. To accurately define
and select both positive and negative conditioning, we ingeniously utilize temporal correlations in dance videos, capturing positive and negative rhythmic cues by playing them
forward and backward, respectively. Through subjective
and objective evaluations of input-output correspondence
in terms of dance-music beat alignment and the quality of
generated music, experimental results on the AIST++ and
TikTok dance video datasets demonstrate that our model
outperforms SOTA dance-to-music generation models.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented development
of AI-powered realistic content generation in image, video,
and audio domains, thanks to the impressive synthesis capabilities of diffusion models. From a task-level perspective,
existing diffusion models can be roughly classified into two
lines: unconditional diffusion models [1, 2] and conditional
diffusion models [3–6]. Specifically, unconditional diffusion

1 https://www.tiktok.com/.
2 https://www.youtube.com/.

* corresponding author

8321

