This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizing Deepfake Video Detection with Plug-and-Play: Video-Level
Blending and Spatiotemporal Adapter Tuning
Zhiyuan Yan1,2 , Yandan Zhao2† , Shen Chen2 , Mingyi Guo1 , Xinghe Fu2 ,
Taiping Yao2 , Shouhong Ding2 , Yunsheng Wu2 , Li Yuan1†
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University1
Tencent Youtu Lab2
zhiyuanyan@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

 

 

      

Three key challenges hinder the development of current
deepfake video detection: (1) Temporal features can be
complex and diverse: how can we identify general temporal artifacts to enhance model generalization? (2) Spatiotemporal models are proven to lean heavily on one type
of forgery artifact and ignore the other (e.g., learning spatial only): how can we ensure balanced learning from both?
(3) Videos are naturally resource-intensive: how can we
tackle efﬁciency without compromising accuracy? This paper attempts to tackle the three challenges jointly. First, inspired by the notable generality of using image-level blending data for image forgery detection, we investigate whether
and how video-level blending can be effective in video. We
then perform a thorough analysis and identify a previously
underexplored temporal forgery artifact: Facial Feature
Drift (FFD), which commonly exists across different deepfakes. To reproduce FFD, we then propose a novel Videolevel Blending data (VB), which is implemented by blending the original image and its warped version frame-byframe, serving as a hard negative sample to mine more general artifacts. Second, we carefully design a lightweight
Spatiotemporal Adapter (StA) to equip a pretrained image
model with the ability to capture both spatial and temporal
features jointly and efﬁciently. StA is designed with twostream 3D-Conv with varying kernel sizes, allowing it to
process spatial and temporal features separately. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of our methods.

     
        
 

        
 

        
 

        
 

     

   

Figure 1. Illustration of Facial Feature Drift (FFD) phenomena in
deepfake videos. We empirically select two relatively static consecutive frames to demonstrate the facial temporal inconsistency
between fake frames (FFD), even when the two frames appear similar at the image level.

as movie-making and entertainment [42, 61–63]. However,
this technology can also be misused for malicious purposes,
including violating personal privacy, spreading misinformation, and eroding trust in digital media [27, 29, 30]. Hence,
there is a pressing need to establish a reliable system for
detecting deepfake videos.
Most prior deepfake detectors [25, 43, 46, 60, 69] perform well within the same dataset. However, they often fail
to generalize well in cross-dataset scenarios where training
and testing data distributions differ. Training with synthetic
(blending) images appears to be one of the most effective
solutions to this problem, as evidenced by [24, 44], which
encourages detectors to learn generic representations (e.g.,
blending boundaries and inconsistencies between inner and
outer faces) for detection. Given the notable success of
image-level blending, an intriguing question arises: what
about video-level blending? Can this method also be applied to learn general forgery artifacts in the video domain?
To this end, we perform a comprehensive examination

1. Introduction
Current AI-generated Content (AIGC) technology enables
effortless manipulation of facial identities in video content, bringing many impressive applications in ﬁelds such
† Corresponding Author

1
12615

