This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interpretable Image Classification via Non-parametric Part Prototype Learning
Zhijie Zhu1 * Lei Fan1 * Maurice Pagnucco1 Yang Song1
1
University of New South Wales
{zhijie.zhu@,lei.fan1@,morri@cse,yang.song1@}.unsw.edu.au

Abstract

Momentum
Update

Classifying images with an interpretable decision-making
process is a long-standing problem in computer vision. In
recent years, Prototypical Part Networks has gained traction as an approach for self-explainable neural networks,
due to their ability to mimic human visual reasoning by
providing explanations based on prototypical object parts.
However, the quality of the explanations generated by these
methods leaves room for improvement, as the prototypes
usually focus on repetitive and redundant concepts. Leveraging recent advances in prototype learning, we present
a framework for part-based interpretable image classification that learns a set of semantically distinctive object parts
for each class, and provides diverse and comprehensive explanations. The core of our method is to learn the partprototypes in a non-parametric fashion, through clustering
deep features extracted from foundation vision models that
encode robust semantic information. To quantitatively evaluate the quality of explanations provided by ProtoPNets,
we introduce Distinctiveness Score and Comprehensiveness Score. Through evaluation on CUB-200-2011, Stanford Cars and Stanford Dogs datasets, we show that our
framework compares favourably against existing ProtoPNets while achieving better interpretability. Code is available at: https://github.com/zijizhu/protonon-param.

most similar

Feature

Prototypes

(a) Existing ProtoPNets

Feature

Prototypes

(b) Ours

Figure 1. a. Existing methods [19, 40] encode various assumptions as regularizations to guide prototype learning, but often fail
to diversify the concepts learned by each prototype. Here multiple part-prototypes attend to the same image region, thereby limiting their interpretability. In contrast b. Our method partitions
the feature space into semantically distinct clusters, and updates
each prototype with the empirical mean of its respective cluster,
enabling each prototype to learn semantically different concepts.

which offer explanations derived from object concepts.
Among these, ProtoPNets have garnered attention as they
provide intuitive visual explanations rooted in past examples. Specifically, they define a number of prototypes for
each object category, each representing a distinguishable
object part, and make the prediction based on the similarity of an input image to prototypes, thereby emulating the
process of human visual reasoning.
However, existing ProtoPNets train prototypes as learnable parameters, and guide their learning process with the
core assumption that a region within each input image
should match one of the prototypes from the corresponding category. However, we observe that multiple prototypes

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-explainable networks have emerged as
a promising approach for improving the transparency of
deep neural networks by providing inherent interpretability. Unlike traditional explanation methods that operate
post-hoc [33, 49], recent approaches aim to mimic human
reasoning by justifying predictions through an interpretable
decision-making process. Examples include PrototypicalPart Networks (ProtoPNets) [7, 11], part discovery methods
[21, 37], and Concept Bottleneck Models [12, 23, 39, 48],
* Equal contribution.

9762

