This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CheXWorld: Exploring Image World Modeling
for Radiograph Representation Learning
Yang Yue1 * Yulin Wang1∗

Chenxin Tao1

Pan Liu2

Shiji Song1

Gao Huang1

1

Tsinghua University 2 PLA General Hospital
yueyang22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Humans can develop internal world models that encode
common sense knowledge, telling them how the world works
and predicting the consequences of their actions. This concept has emerged as a promising direction for establishing
general-purpose machine-learning models in recent preliminary works, e.g., for visual representation learning. In this
paper, we present CheXWorld, the first effort towards a selfsupervised world model for radiographic images. Specifically, our work develops a unified framework that simultaneously models three aspects of medical knowledge essential for qualified radiologists, including 1) local anatomical structures describing the fine-grained characteristics of
local tissues (e.g., architectures, shapes, and textures); 2)
global anatomical layouts describing the global organization of the human body (e.g., layouts of organs and skeletons); and 3) domain variations that encourage CheXWorld
to model the transitions across different appearance domains of radiographs (e.g., varying clarity, contrast, and exposure caused by collecting radiographs from different hospitals, devices, or patients). Empirically, we design tailored
qualitative and quantitative analyses, revealing that CheXWorld successfully captures these three dimensions of medical knowledge. Furthermore, transfer learning experiments
across eight medical image classification and segmentation
benchmarks showcase that CheXWorld significantly outperforms existing SSL methods and large-scale medical foundation models. Code & pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/CheXWorld.

1. Introduction
Intelligent agents like humans learn extensive background
knowledge about the world [39]. This common-sense information is embedded in the agents’ internal models of the
world, playing a pivotal role in their perception, learning,
* Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors.

and decision-making processes by simulating the world’s
dynamics, telling them what is plausible or impossible, and
predicting the outcomes of their actions. Consequently,
these world models enable agents to acquire new concepts
and skills with minimal demonstrations and trials [55]. Recent works [2, 21] have preliminarily verified the effectiveness of establishing visual representation learning approaches through the lens of world modeling. Pre-trained
world models can produce semantically rich embeddings
and adapt to various downstream tasks with limited data.
Like many other research areas, the field of medical
imaging is experiencing a paradigm shift from task-specific
models to general-purpose foundation models [20, 34, 45,
68], which are pre-trained on massive data and expected to
encode meaningful medical knowledge. The idea of world
modeling offers an approach to training a medical foundation model by capturing common sense information (e.g.
human anatomy) from medical images, which is a promising yet under-explored research direction.
In this paper, we present CheXWorld, the first initiative toward world modeling for self-supervised representation learning on radiographic images. We propose and
integrate three world modeling tasks that capture different dimensions of medical knowledge essential for qualified radiologists, depicted in Figure 1. In particular, a radiologist with a strong understanding of human anatomy
can identify different anatomical structures and determine
the relative geometry between anatomical regions. Given
the hierarchical nature of human anatomy, we introduce
world modeling tasks that focus on both local and global
levels of anatomy: local anatomical structure modeling
aims to predict specific anatomical characteristics and
structures within a localized anatomical region, such
as bones, airways, blood vessels, and lung segments;
global anatomical layout modeling learns the overall arrangement and spatial relationships of various anatomical
regions within the human body, understanding the relative
positioning of organs and tissues such as the heart, lungs,
diaphragm, and rib cage. Additionally, medical images are

20778

