This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S2Gaussian: Sparse-View Super-Resolution 3D Gaussian Splatting
Yecong Wan1 Mingwen Shao1∗ Yuanshuo Cheng1 Wangmeng Zuo2
1
Shandong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Oil & Gas Industrial Software, Qingdao Institute of
Software, College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)
2
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology
smw278@126.com, {yecongwan, cys1294414023, cswmzuo}@gmail.com
Sparse Low Resolution Views

High-Quality Rendering

3DGS

S2Gaussian
FSGS+SRGS

Ours

Figure 1. We present S2Gaussian, a novel framework capable of reconstructing high-quality 3D scenes for immersive rendering with only
sparse and low-resolution input views. S2Gaussian demonstrates superior performance and yields high-fidelity and high-resolution scene
reconstruction with sharp geometric and detailed textures, thus enjoying better functionality and practicality in realistic applications.

Abstract

neous updates caused by imperfect supervision. Extensive experiments demonstrate superior results and in particular establishing new state-of-the-art performances with
more consistent geometry and finer details. Project Page
https://jeasco.github.io/S2Gaussian/.

In this paper, we aim ambitiously for a realistic yet challenging problem, namely, how to reconstruct high-quality
3D scenes from sparse low-resolution views that simultaneously suffer from deficient perspectives and clarity.
Whereas existing methods only deal with either sparse
views or low-resolution observations, they fail to handle
such hybrid and complicated scenarios. To this end, we
propose a novel Sparse-view Super-resolution 3D Gaussian Splatting framework, dubbed S2Gaussian, that can reconstruct structure-accurate and detail-faithful 3D scenes
with only sparse and low-resolution views. The S2Gaussian
operates in a two-stage fashion. In the first stage, we
initially optimize a low-resolution Gaussian representation with depth regularization and densify it to initialize
the high-resolution Gaussians through a tailored Gaussian
Shuffle Split operation. In the second stage, we refine the
high-resolution Gaussians with the super-resolved images
generated from both original sparse views and pseudoviews rendered by the low-resolution Gaussians. In which
a customized blur-free inconsistency modeling scheme and
a 3D robust optimization strategy are elaborately designed
to mitigate multi-view inconsistency and eliminate erro-

1. Introduction
The rapid advancement of virtual reality and metaverse
technologies has significantly heightened the demand for
realistic 3D scene reconstruction, which holds vast potential across various application domains, including medicine,
education, entertainment, etc. Among the recent notable
developments, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] have
demonstrated remarkable capability in synthesizing photorealistic images; however, they still face considerable rendering and training costs, despite ongoing improvements
[4, 10, 11, 26]. More recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [18] has emerged as a prominent approach, characterized by its high quality, rapid reconstruction speed, and
support for real-time rendering. Subsequent research efforts
[5, 6, 23, 32, 39, 45] have focused on extending the applicability of 3DGS across various scenarios.
Unfortunately, these methods typically rely heavily on
well-captured dense and high-resolution images for impressive novel view synthesis, which is cumbersome and some-

1∗ Corresponding authors.

711

