This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Post-pre-training for Modality Alignment in Vision-Language Foundation Models
Shin’ya Yamaguchi*
NTT, Kyoto University

Dewei Feng
MIT

Sekitoshi Kanai
NTT

Kazuki Adachi
NTT

Abstract

Previous
Approach

Pre-training
w/ CLIP

Contrastive language image pre-training (CLIP) is an essential component of building modern vision-language foundation models. While CLIP demonstrates remarkable zeroshot performance on downstream tasks, the multi-modal
feature spaces still suffer from a modality gap, which is
a gap between image and text feature clusters and limits
downstream task performance. Although existing works attempt to address the modality gap by modifying pre-training
or fine-tuning, they struggle with heavy training costs with
large datasets or degradations of zero-shot performance.
This paper presents CLIP-Refine, a post-pre-training method
for CLIP models at a phase between pre-training and finetuning. CLIP-Refine aims to align the feature space with 1
epoch training on small image-text datasets without zeroshot performance degradations. To this end, we introduce
two techniques: random feature alignment (RaFA) and hybrid contrastive-distillation (HyCD). RaFA aligns the image
and text features to follow a shared prior distribution by minimizing the distance to random reference vectors sampled
from the prior. HyCD updates the model with hybrid soft
labels generated by combining ground-truth image-text pair
labels and outputs from the pre-trained CLIP model. This
contributes to achieving both maintaining the past knowledge and learning new knowledge to align features. Our
extensive experiments with multiple classification and retrieval tasks show that CLIP-Refine succeeds in mitigating
the modality gap and improving the zero-shot performance1 .

Our
Approach

Pre-training
w/ CLIP

Daiki Chijiwa
NTT

Zero-shot Inference
or Fine-tuning
Post-pre-training to
Align Modality Gap

Zero-shot Inference
or Fine-tuning

Figure 1. Scope of our work: post-pre-training to align the modality
gap in pre-trained CLIP models. We aim to address the modality
gap and enhance the generalization performance of pre-trained
CLIP models through lightweight training.

they are widely used as a foundation of many applications,
including zero-shot classification [14, 40, 55], cross-modal
retrieval [16, 20], text-to-image generation [41, 44], and
visual question answering [30, 31].
While CLIP achieves remarkable performance in broad
domains and tasks, its image and text alignment is still
not perfect. For example, CLIP models tend to encode
images and texts into different clusters for each modality,
and thus, there is a modality gap between images and text
features even after sufficiently training with the massive
datasets [28, 39, 66]. This modality gap suggests that CLIP
has difficulty in precisely mapping images and text. In fact,
Liang et al. [28] have shown that the modality gap largely
affects downstream task performance, especially in finegrained classification tasks, and Ray et al. [43] have demonstrated that CLIP models often fail to retrieve localized objects and attributes in images from corresponding captions.
To address the modality gap in CLIP, existing literature
mainly focuses on refining the CLIP feature spaces in the
pre-training or fine-tuning phases. For pre-training, one approach is multi-task learning of the contrastive objective and
auxiliary losses such as self-supervised loss with data augmentations [26, 27]. Another direction for pre-training is to
reduce the modality gap by modifying the encoder architectures to explicitly share the weights or feature maps between
the image and text encoders [6, 64]. For fine-tuning, previous works have demonstrated that the target downstream task
performance can be improved significantly by prompt tuning
that optimizes trainable visual/textual tokens on target tasks
to match image and text in the feature space (i.e., reducing
the modality gap) [23, 33, 68]. More recently, Yang et al.
[62] have introduced adapter parameters to share the infor-

1. Introduction
Contrastive language image pre-training (CLIP, [21, 40]) is a
standard method to build modern vision-language foundation
models. CLIP enables models to learn multimodal representations to map images and texts into a shared feature space
with contrastive loss on large-scale image-text pair datasets.
Since the pre-trained CLIP models provide a cross-modal
understanding of input image/text data in various domains,
* Corresponding author. shinya.yamaguchi@ntt.com
1 Code: https://github.com/yshinya6/clip-refine

4256

