This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Noisy Video-Text Retrieval via Relation-aware Alignment
Huakai Lai1
Guoxin Xiong1
Huayu Mai1
Xiang Liu3
Tianzhu Zhang1,2 *
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China;
2
National Key Laboratory of Deep Space Exploration, Deep Space Exploration Laboratory;
3
Dongguan University of Technology
{tbhk, xgx, mai556}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liuxiang@dgut.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

a man is juicing a lemon

a man is cooking
with spices in a
pot in the kitchen

Video-Text Retrieval (VTR) is a core task in multimodal understanding, drawing growing attention from both
academia and industry in recent years. While numerous
VTR methods have achieved success, most of them assume accurate visual-text correspondences during training,
which is difficult to ensure in practice due to ubiquitous
noise, known as noisy correspondences (NC). In this paper,
we rethink how to mitigate the NC from the perspective of
representative reference features (termed agents), and propose a novel relation-aware purified consistency (RPC) network to amend direct pairwise correlation, including representative agents construction and relation-aware ranking distribution alignment. The proposed RPC enjoys several merits. First, to learn the agents well without any
correspondence supervision, we customize the agents construction according to the three characteristics of reliability, representativeness, and resilience. Second, the ranking
distribution-based alignment process leverages the structural information inherent in inter-pair relationships, making it more robust compared to individual comparisons. Extensive experiments on five datasets under different settings
demonstrate the efficacy and robustness of our method.

a woman cooking food

clean correspondence
a fish is filleted
with a sharp knife

noisy correspondence

a man cooking on the stove

(a)

(b)

agents

Ranking distribution

Sim: 0.7

agents

Sim: 0.6

Sim: 0.1

Sim: 0.7

a fish is filleted
with a sharp knife

a fish is filleted a man is cooking
with spices in a
with a sharp
a man is cooking
pot in the kitchen with spices in a
knife

(c)

pot in the kitchen

Ranking distribution

(d)

Figure 1. The motivation of our proposed method. (a) The illustration of noisy correspondence. (b) A set of representative reference pairs (termed agents). (c) False matches tend to occur under
conditions where noise correspondence leads to inaccurate supervision signals. (d) The proposed ranking distribution consistency
suppresses false matches and provides a more reliable supervision.

In prior literature, the dominant paradigm for video-text
retrieval is to establish correspondences between the video
and text modalities by global-level and local-level alignments. Specifically, global-level methods [8, 24, 25, 27]
achieve semantic alignment by leveraging contrastive learning on holistic representations of videos and texts. For
local-level methods [5, 15, 44, 45], cross-modal correspondences are established through more fine-grained alignments, such as frame-to-word [44] or action/entity-level
alignments [5, 15]. Although these methods have shown
promising results, they are based on the core assumption of
accurate visual-language correspondences during training,
making their performance heavily reliant on the availability
of high-quality annotated data.
However, collecting such high-quality annotated data is
resource-intensive and time-consuming. In fact, due to factors such as non-expert annotators and web crawling noise,
it is often difficult or unrealistic to maintain the assumption that every video-text pair in a dataset is accurately

1. Introduction
Video-text retrieval [5, 20, 24, 27] aims to identify videos
that most accurately correspond to a textual query, and
vice versa, where textual descriptions are retrieved based
on video content. With the exponential growth of online
videos and the increasing use of video platforms, video-text
retrieval has become a critical task and benefits broad applications across various domains [2, 11, 42]. This task
is fundamental to cross-modal understanding and presents
significant challenges due to the substantial disparities in
representation between video and text modalities.
* Corresponding author

9231

