This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Devil is in Low-Level Features for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation
Yuhan Liu, Yixiong Zou∗, Yuhua Li, Ruixuan Li
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yuhan liu, yixiongz, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation (CDFSS) is proposed to transfer the pixel-level segmentation capabilities
learned from large-scale source-domain datasets to downstream target-domain datasets, with only a few annotated
images per class. In this paper, we focus on a well-observed
but under-explored phenomenon in CDFSS: for target domains, particularly those distant from the source domain,
segmentation performance peaks at the very early epochs,
and declines sharply as the source-domain training proceeds. We delve into this phenomenon for an interpretation:
low-level features are vulnerable to domain shifts, leading to
sharper loss landscapes during the source-domain training,
which is the devil of CDFSS. Based on this phenomenon and
interpretation, we further propose a method that includes
two plug-and-play modules: one to flatten the loss landscapes for low-level features during source-domain training
as a novel sharpness-aware minimization method, and the
other to directly supplement target-domain information to
the model during target-domain testing by low-level-based
calibration. Extensive experiments on four target datasets
validate our rationale and demonstrate that our method surpasses the state-of-the-art method in CDFSS signifcantly
by 3.71% and 5.34% average MIoU in 1-shot and 5-shot
scenarios, respectively.

Figure 1. (a) In CDFSS tasks, the training (source) and testing
(target) datasets belong to distinct domains, with categories in the
testing dataset being unseen during training. (b) Previous CDFSS
methods show a decreasing trend of mIoU as the source-domain
training proceeds, even at very early epochs for distant domains. (c)
Our method can effectively prevent the model from performance
decline after early epochs and achieve higher performance.

ferred to unseen novel classes. However, novel classes might
not be in the same domain as base classes [5, 7, 11, 22, 36], a
more realistic approach is to consider domain gaps between
the base (source domain) and novel (target domain) classes,
which gives rise to the Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation (CDFSS) task [20].
Although extensive works [16, 17, 20, 33] have been developed, a well-observed phenomenon is still not handled:
for target domains, especially those distant from the source
domain, the best performance is always achieved at the very
early epochs or even the first epoch. As shown in Fig. 1b, the
performance decreases sharply as the source-domain training proceeds, where the 20th epoch’s MIoU is even lower
than that of the first epoch. Although the early stop can handle this problem, the goal of the source-domain training is
to provide a generalizable model for all target domains [20].
Therefore, it may be inappropriate to try different early stops
for specific domains. In this paper, we aim to delve into this
well-observed but under-explored phenomenon and handle
it based on our interpretations of it, as shown in Fig. 1c.
To delve into this phenomenon, we first visualize the predictions of the 1st and 20th epochs in Fig. 2. We observe that

1. Introduction
Current deep neural networks [24, 30, 43] have achieved
remarkable success in semantic segmentation, but their performance heavily relies on large-scale annotated datasets [1,
23]. However, the process of annotating data, particularly
for dense pixel-wise tasks like semantic segmentation, is
labor-intensive and time-consuming. To address this issue,
Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS) has been introduced, aiming to generate pixel-level predictions for unseen categories
with only a few labeled samples. Typically, the model is pretrained on a large-scale dataset of base classes and then trans∗ Corresponding author.

4618

