This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiskVPS: Vanishing Point Detector via Hough Transform in a Disk Region
Jianping Wu
Suzhou Vocational University
Suzhou, China 215104
wujp@jssvc.edu.cn

Abstract
DiskVPS is a novel and robust vanishing point (VP) detection scheme based on Hough Transform (HT) over an
image-plane-mapped disk region. In the DiskVPS, the image plane is first mapped into a disk region, which is then
partitioned into concentrical ring-shaped subspaces. Each
subspace is further partitioned into approximately equalprobability Hough cells. By using individual edges rather
than edge pairs as voters, DiskVPS can achieve high accuracy with extreme efficiency. Involving no calibration parameters, DiskVPS is particularly suitable for VP detection in uncalibrated images and thus can be applied in image calibration. A comparative experimental study demonstrates that the basic DiskVPS model without parameter
optimization achieved significantly better performance over
the SOTA in detection accuracy and processing speed with
real-world images. The study also shows that DiskVPS is
robust against parameter changes.

1. Introduction
VP detection has a variety of applications, including
camera calibration ( [1, 3, 5, 15]), 3D reconstruction ( [25,
40]), virtual reality [30], robot navigation [12], scene tracking [6] and vehicle automatic driving [13]. Depending on
the direction of the parallel lines and the setup of the capturing camera, a VP can appear anywhere, including infinity,
in the image plane. A triplet of orthogonal VPs is formed by
3 sets of mutually orthogonal parallel lines in the man-made
world commonly called Manhattan world [5]. According to
[3], the information of any 2 orthogonal VPs in an image is
sufficient to obtain the focal length of the capturing camera.
Moreover, a triplet of orthogonal VPs fully determines the
camera’s intrinsic and extrinsic parameters.

1.1. Related Works
VP detection has long been a key research topic attracting great attention in computer vision. However, it remains
a challenging issue far from soundly resolved. The key is-

sue in VP detection is the unboundedness of the image plane
in which VPs reside. In VP detection, it is essential to map
the image plane into some bounded space before practical
techniques such as Hough Transform (HT, [9]) can be deployed.
The first such attempt came from [29] that divided the
image plane into 3 bounded subspaces to perform the HT.
Since its division method is rather arbitrary without offsetting the probability biases in cell partitioning, it failed to
yield satisfactory results. For calibrated images, Barnard [2]
proposed a VP detection algorithm that mapped the image
plane into a unit sphere called Gaussian sphere (GS) for
HT, which is widely used in VP detection( [18, 24]) and
is also universally applied in deep learning VP detection
algorithms([4, 10, 11, 16, 23, 27, 32, 39]). However, GSbased approaches have limitations. Since building the GS
requires the known parameters of the capturing camera such
as the focal length and coordinates of the optical axis in the
image plane, GS approaches are unsuitable for uncalibrated
images, which account for a substantial fraction of images
of interest. GS’s voting scheme using edge pairs can significantly amplify discretization and distortion errors in edge
detection and thus cause a high likelihood of spurious VP
detection. Accordingly, GS models are prone to spurious
detection ( [16, 24, 39]). Moreover, the process of partitioning the GS into Hough cells itself is complicated and
delicate. The non-planar shape of the GS is not amenable
for partitioning of the GS into planar Hough cells while the
Hough cell sizes on the GS are wildly non-uniform and sensitive to the errors of calibration parameters. With the limitations, the GS baseline model did not draw wide attention
until the recent rapid development of deep learning technology.
As an important alternative to HT in VP detection, random sample consensus (RANSAC [8]) is another extensively explored scheme in VP detection ( [17, 19, 21, 22,
26, 28, 33, 35, 38]). RANSAC can work directly in the
image plane and is suitable for VP detection in uncalibrated
images; moreover, RANSAC outperforms GS-based VP detection models in practice with scenes where many edges

27049

