This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PosterO: Structuring Layout Trees to Enable Language Models
in Generalized Content-Aware Layout Generation
HsiaoYuan Hsu and Yuxin Peng*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University

Domainspecific

E-commerce

Single
element shape
Rectangle

Generalized
(Ours)

Multi-purpose
Movie,
menu,
social media
...

Logo
Text

Underlay
Embellishment

(a) Diverse purposes and entities

Various
element shapes

I

(layout)

Single-purpose

(image)

kslh99@stu.pku.edu.cn, pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

L
I
L

Rectangle,
Ellipse,
Complex curve
...

Object saliency
mI

Data-hungry
training / tuning
Itest

Quintuplet
representation
(class, x, y, w, h)

Design intent
mI

Generator

mI

test

Generated
layouts

Data-efﬁcient
in-context learning

Language-based
tree node representation
SVG shape

LLM

<path id="text-curved_3" d="M 57 308 C 87 294 131 273 166 274
C 234 274 297 300 366 286 C 398 280 435 265 464 249" />

Itest

mI

test

(b) Universal representation and robust interface for different intents

Figure 1. Illustration of the generalized settings in content-aware layout generation from both (a) data and (b) approach perspectives.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Content-aware layout generation makes the poster design
process intelligent by automatically arranging visual-textual
elements on given images. As the demand for effective design grows rapidly, a mainstream platform surpasses 185
million monthly users [3], and 90% of survey participants
take AI-empowered features as key considerations [2]. This
technology is gaining more attention for its practical value
in various applications [32, 49, 50, 53], as shown in Fig. 1.

In poster design, content-aware layout generation is crucial for automatically arranging visual-textual elements on
the given image. With limited training data, existing work
focused on image-centric enhancement. However, this neglects the diversity of layouts and fails to cope with shapevariant elements or diverse design intents in generalized
settings. To this end, we proposed a layout-centric approach
that leverages layout knowledge implicit in large language
models (LLMs) to create posters for omnifarious purposes,
hence the name PosterO. Specifically, it structures layouts
from datasets as trees in SVG language by universal shape,
design intent vectorization, and hierarchical node representation. Then, it applies LLMs during inference to predict
new layout trees by in-context learning with intent-aligned
example selection. After layout trees are generated, we
can seamlessly realize them into poster designs by editing
the chat with LLMs. Extensive experimental results have
demonstrated that PosterO can generate visually appealing layouts for given images, achieving new state-of-the-art
performance across various benchmarks. To further explore
PosterO’s abilities under the generalized settings, we built
PStylish7, the first dataset with multi-purpose posters and
various-shaped elements, further offering a challenging test
for advanced research. Code and dataset will be publicly
available at https://thekinsley.github.io/PosterO/.

Unlike other generation tasks [22, 43], collecting imagelayout pairs for the target task requires costly annotation and
inpainting processes [19, 55]. Therefore, existing work has
incorporated object hints [4, 55], prior information [7, 19],
retrieved references [17, 31], and augmented data [44] to
confront the challenge of training data scarcity. However,
because these are mainly image-centric enhancements without increasing the adaptability and diversity of layouts, they
are prone to get trapped in the local solution space [18]. On
the other hand, while leveraging related knowledge implicit
in large language models (LLMs) [11, 37, 42, 47] showed
the potential for layout-centric enhancements [12, 46], existing work [31, 44] has suffered from the semantically impoverished layout representations. The two primary issues
are the monotonous rectangular shape of elements and the
isolated visual constraints, which led to failures at capturing
the complexity of real-world layouts and the intricate visual
relationship between images and elements.

* Corresponding author.

8117

