This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VISTA3D: A Unified Segmentation Foundation Model For 3D Medical Imaging
Yufan He1 , Pengfei Guo1 , Yucheng Tang1 , Andriy Myronenko1 , Vishwesh Nath1 ,
Ziyue Xu1 , Dong Yang1 , Can Zhao1 , Benjamin Simon3,4 , Mason Belue2 ,
Stephanie Harmon3 , Baris Turkbey3 , Daguang Xu1 , Wenqi Li1
1
NVIDIA
2
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
3
National Institutes of Health 4 University of Oxford

Abstract

1. Introduction

Foundation models for interactive segmentation in 2D natural images and videos have sparked significant interest in
building 3D foundation models for medical imaging. However, the domain gaps and clinical use cases for 3D medical imaging require a dedicated model that diverges from
existing 2D solutions. Specifically, such foundation models should support a full workflow that can actually reduce
human effort. Treating 3D medical images as sequences
of 2D slices and reusing interactive 2D foundation models seems straightforward, but 2D annotation is too timeconsuming for 3D tasks. Moreover, for large cohort analysis, it’s the highly accurate automatic segmentation models
that reduce the most human effort. However, these models lack support for interactive corrections and lack zeroshot ability for novel structures, which is a key feature of
“foundation”. While reusing pre-trained 2D backbones
in 3D enhances zero-shot potential, their performance on
complex 3D structures still lags behind leading 3D models. To address these issues, we present VISTA3D, Versatile
Imaging SegmenTation and Annotation model, that targets
to solve all these challenges and requirements with one
unified foundation model. VISTA3D is built on top of the
well-established 3D segmentation pipeline, and it is the first
model to achieve state-of-the-art performance in both 3D
automatic (supporting 127 classes) and 3D interactive segmentation, even when compared with top 3D expert models
on large and diverse benchmarks. Additionally, VISTA3D’s
3D interactive design allows efficient human correction,
and a novel 3D supervoxel method that distills 2D pretrained backbones grants VISTA3D top 3D zero-shot performance. We believe the model, recipe, and insights represent a promising step towards a clinically useful 3D foundation model. Code and weights are publicly available at
https://github.com/Project-MONAI/VISTA.

Three-dimensional medical imaging such as computed tomography (CT) is widely used for creating cross-sectional
volumetric images within various body regions. As a major
anatomic imaging modality, it reveals detailed morphological information of body structures and abnormalities. In
clinical practice, manual segmentation is time-consuming
and tedious, thus developing better automatic models has
been one of the most active research topics. A typical direction is enhancing network architecture and tailoring training recipes for specific tasks [18, 22, 37, 54]. For each task,
curating a specific set of training data and training expert
models is often performed, which requires strong engineering expertise. A model that solves a variety of tasks out of
the box is thus more desirable.
Unlike natural images where there could be an unlimited
number of object classes, the clinically relevant healthy human anatomies revealed by CT or MRI are limited (such as
liver, pancreas), thus training an automated segmentation
model that supports most of standard human anatomies is
technically feasible [12, 24, 29, 58, 61]. However, in practice, clinicians may be more interested in rare pathologies
or animal data that are usually unsupported by those models due to data scarcity. Lacking zero-shot capability to handle those use cases becomes a significant limitation. Meanwhile, it is important for the model to allow human input
for correction for procedures like surgical planning.
Recently, large language models [2, 55, 57] have shown
strong generalizability on various tasks and are considered
the foundation models. The idea of a “promptable” system has been proposed to achieve a flexible model that can
solve different tasks out-of-the-box. For image segmentation, Segment Anything (SAM) [26] has gained great interest and achieved impressive zero-shot performance. In the
medical domain, recent work [33] hence adapted SAM to
medical imaging modalities via model fine-tuning. These
SAM-based methods demonstrate promising results in 2D

20863

