This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Image Restoration Using Few-Step Guidance of Consistency Models
(and Beyond)
Tomer Garber
Bar-Ilan University, Israel

Tom Tirer
Bar-Ilan University, Israel

tomergarber@gmail.com

tirer.tom@gmail.com

Abstract
In recent years, it has become popular to tackle image
restoration tasks with a single pretrained diffusion model
(DM) and data-fidelity guidance, instead of training a dedicated deep neural network per task. However, such “zeroshot” restoration schemes currently require many Neural
Function Evaluations (NFEs) for performing well, which
may be attributed to the many NFEs needed in the original generative functionality of the DMs. Recently, faster
variants of DMs have been explored for image generation.
These include Consistency Models (CMs), which can generate samples via a couple of NFEs. However, existing
works that use guided CMs for restoration still require tens
of NFEs or fine-tuning of the model per task that leads to
performance drop if the assumptions during the fine-tuning
are not accurate. In this paper, we propose a zero-shot
restoration scheme that uses CMs and operates well with
as little as 4 NFEs. It is based on a wise combination
of several ingredients: better initialization, back-projection
guidance, and above all a novel noise injection mechanism.
We demonstrate the advantages of our approach for image
super-resolution, deblurring and inpainting. Interestingly,
we show that the usefulness of our noise injection technique goes beyond CMs: it can also mitigate the performance degradation of existing guided DM methods when
reducing their NFE count. The source code is available at
https://github.com/tirer-lab/CM4IR

Figure 1. Super-resolution ×4 with bicubic kernel and noise level
of 0.05. From left to right and top to bottom: original, observation,
DPS [6] (1000 NFEs), DiffPIR [40] (20 NFEs), DDRM [15] (20
NFEs) and our CM4IR (4 NFEs).

1. Introduction
Image restoration problems appear in a wide range of applications, where the goal is to recover a high-quality image
x∗ ∈ Rn from its degraded version y ∈ Rm , which can be
incomplete, noisy, blurry, low-resolution, etc. In many popular tasks, the relation between y and x∗ can be expressed
using a linear observation model
y = Ax∗ + e

Figure 2. Deblurring with Gaussian kernel and noise level of
0.025. From left to right and top to bottom: original, observation, DPS [6] (1000 NFEs), DiffPIR [40] (20 NFEs), DDRM [15]
(20 NFEs) and our CM4IR (4 NFEs).

(1)

2398

