This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLARE: Feed-forward Geometry, Appearance and Camera Estimation from
Uncalibrated Sparse Views
Shangzhan Zhang1,2*

Jianyuan Wang3*

Christian Rupprecht3
1

Zhejiang University

Uncalibrated Images

Xiaowei Zhou1†
2

Ant Group

3

†

Yinghao Xu4*
Yujun Shen2

University of Oxford

Nan Xue2
Gordon Wetzstein4
4

Stanford University

Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. We present FLARE, a feed-forward approach that simultaneously recovers high-quality poses, geometry and appearance from
uncalibrated sparse views within 0.5s. Our model excels in the scenarios with a camera circling around the subject, and also shows robust
generalization to real-world casual captures, such as an indoor bedroom. In the central area below, we casually captured six random
bedroom images with minimal overlap. Our method demonstrates high-quality geometry reconstruction even in this challenging case.

optimized through the objectives of geometry reconstruction
and novel-view synthesis. Utilizing large-scale public
datasets for training, our method delivers state-of-the-art
performance in the tasks of pose estimation, geometry
reconstruction, and novel view synthesis, while maintaining
the inference efficiency (i.e., less than 0.5 seconds). The
project page and code can be found at: https : / /
zhanghe3z.github.io/FLARE/

Abstract
We present FLARE, a feed-forward model designed to
infer high-quality camera poses and 3D geometry from
uncalibrated sparse-view images (i.e., as few as 2-8 inputs),
which is a challenging yet practical setting in real-world
applications. Our solution features a cascaded learning
paradigm with camera pose serving as the critical bridge,
recognizing its essential role in mapping 3D structures
onto 2D image planes. Concretely, FLARE starts with
camera pose estimation, whose results condition the subsequent learning of geometric structure and appearance,

1. Introduction

∗ The first three authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

Reconstructing 3D scenes from multi-view images is a fundamental problem with wide-ranging applications across
computer vision, perception, and computer graphics. Tradi-

21936

