This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAC-Ego3D: Multi-Agent Gaussian Consensus for
Real-Time Collaborative Ego-Motion and Photorealistic 3D Reconstruction
Xiaohao Xu1 * Feng Xue1∗ Shibo Zhao2 Yike Pan1 Sebastian Scherer2 Xiaonan Huang1
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Carnegie Mellon University
(a)

Abstract

t-2

Real-time multi-agent collaboration for ego-motion estimation and high-fidelity 3D reconstruction is vital for scalable
spatial intelligence. However, traditional methods produce
sparse, low-detail maps, while recent dense mapping approaches struggle with high latency. To overcome these
challenges, we present MAC-Ego3D, a novel framework
for real-time collaborative photorealistic 3D reconstruction
via Multi-Agent Gaussian Consensus. MAC-Ego3D enables
agents to independently construct, align, and iteratively refine local maps using a unified Gaussian splat representation.
Through Intra-Agent Gaussian Consensus, it enforces spatial coherence among neighboring Gaussian splats within
an agent. For global alignment, parallelized Inter-Agent
Gaussian Consensus, which asynchronously aligns and optimizes local maps by regularizing multi-agent Gaussian
splats, seamlessly integrates them into a high-fidelity 3D
model. Leveraging Gaussian primitives, MAC-Ego3D supports efficient RGB-D rendering, enabling rapid inter-agent
Gaussian association and alignment. MAC-Ego3D bridges
local precision and global coherence, delivering higher efficiency, largely reducing localization error, and improving
mapping fidelity. It establishes a new SOTA on synthetic
and real-world benchmarks, achieving a 15× increase in
inference speed, order-of-magnitude reductions in egomotion estimation error for partial cases, and RGB PSNR
gains of 4 to 10 dB. Our code is made publicly available at
https://github.com/Xiaohao-Xu/MAC-Ego3D.

Ego-Motion

t-1

Shared Pose
& Gaussian

Local Gaussian
3D Map

t

Agent 1
1

2

Agent 2
t-2

t-1

t

(b )

1) Selection

Intra-Agent/Inter-Agent Gaussian Consensus

2) Association

3) Alignment

4) Optimization

Figure 1. Towards collaborative, real-time, photorealistic 3D
reconstruction in multi-agent systems. (a) In MAC-Ego3D, each
agent independently captures observations, estimates ego-motion,
and constructs a local Gaussian-based 3D map, which is then periodically aligned with others for collaborative optimization. (b)
Multi-Agent Gaussian Consensus, with intra- and inter-agent Gaussian selection, association, alignment, and optimization, enabling
efficient tracking, rapid loop closure and high-fidelity mapping.

its pose and constructs a local map, collectively contributing
to a shared 3D representation of the environment.
Despite recent efforts to advance multi-agent SLAM, existing systems [1, 11, 14, 25, 31] remain limited in scope,
primarily focusing on localization and producing sparse, lowfidelity maps that lack the detail needed for photorealistic
scene reconstruction. Centralized architectures [11] struggle
with increased latency and communication demands as more
agents join, limiting scalability. This has led to more scalable
distributed approaches [14, 31], yet recent multi-agent dense
mapping methods [5, 8, 17] still face issues of latency and
inconsistency. These limitations highlight the need for a scalable approach capable of delivering high-fidelity, globally

1. Introduction
Multi-agent collaborative ego-motion estimation and 3D
reconstruction, known as multi-agent simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), is fundamental for achieving
scalable, high-fidelity spatial understanding in applications
such as robotic swarms [2] and augmented reality [7]. In this
process [1, 14, 15, 30], each agent independently estimates
* Equal contribution

854

