This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

F-LMM: Grounding Frozen Large Multimodal Models
Size Wu1

Sheng Jin2 Wenwei Zhang3 Lumin Xu4 Wentao Liu2,3 Wei Li1 Chen Change Loy1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
size001@e.ntu.edu.sg
ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1. An example of user-AI conversation around an image. Left: The current state-of-the-art grounding model GLaMM [60] is
effective for grounded conversation when prompted by ”answer with interleaved masks”, but fails to follow user instruction to answer a
single word (yes or no) and misunderstands the question as a referring segmentation prompt. Right: Our F-LMM preserves instructionfollowing ability while being able to perform visual grounding.

Abstract
Endowing Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) with visual
grounding capability can significantly enhance AIs’ understanding of the visual world and their interaction with humans. However, existing methods typically fine-tune the
parameters of LMMs to learn additional segmentation tokens and overfit grounding and segmentation datasets. Such
a design would inevitably cause a catastrophic diminution in the indispensable conversational capability of general AI assistants. In this paper, we comprehensively
evaluate state-of-the-art grounding LMMs across a suite
of multimodal question-answering benchmarks, observing
drastic performance drops that indicate vanishing general knowledge comprehension and weakened instruction
following ability. To address this issue, we present FLMM—grounding frozen off-the-shelf LMMs in human-AI
conversations—a straightforward yet effective design based
on the fact that word-pixel correspondences conducive to
visual grounding inherently exist in the attention mechanism
of well-trained LMMs. Using only a few trainable CNN layers, we can translate word-pixel attention weights to mask
logits, which a SAM-based mask refiner can further optimise. Our F-LMM neither learns special segmentation to-

24710

kens nor utilises high-quality grounded instruction-tuning
data, but achieves competitive performance on referring
expression segmentation and panoptic narrative grounding benchmarks while completely preserving LMMs’ original conversational ability. Additionally, with instructionfollowing ability preserved and grounding ability obtained,
F-LMM can be directly applied to complex tasks like reasoning segmentation, grounded conversation generation
and visual chain-of-thought reasoning. Our code can be
found at https://github.com/wusize/F-LMM .

1. Introduction
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), which integrate Large
Language Models (LLMs) with visual signals, have demonstrated remarkable success in multimodal understanding,
reasoning and interaction [34, 38–40, 44, 65, 78]. To further
advance LMMs with better perception capability, a recent
line of research [28, 60, 61, 70, 80, 84] that visually grounds
language contents in user-model conversations has drawn
increasing attention. This explicit association between key
phrases/words and visual objects greatly enhances LMMs’
understanding of the visual world and allows for more intuitive and meaningful human-AI interactions.

