This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoKi: Low-dimensional KAN for Efficient Fine-tuning Image Models
Xuan Cai, Renjie Pan, Hua Yang*
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Shanghai Key Lab of Digital Media Processing and Transmission, China
China MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Abstract
’Pre-training + fine-tuning’ has been widely used in various
downstream tasks. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)
has demonstrated higher efficiency and promising performance compared to traditional full-tuning. The widely used
adapter-based and prompt-based methods in PEFT can be
uniformly represented as adding an MLP structure to the
pre-trained model. These methods are prone to over-fitting
in downstream tasks, due to the difference in data scale
and distribution. To address this issue, we propose a new
adapter-based PEFT module, i.e., LoKi, which consists of
an encoder, a learnable activation layer, and a decoder. To
maintain the simplicity of LoKi, we use single-layer linear
networks for the encoder and decoder, and for the learnable activation layer, we use a Kolmogorov-Arnold Network
(KAN) with the minimal number of layers (only 2 KAN linear layers). With a bottleneck rate much lower than that of
Adapter, LoKi is equipped with fewer parameters (only half
of Adapter) and eliminates slow training speed and high
memory usage of KAN. We conduct extensive experiments
on LoKi under image classification and video action recognition across 9 datasets. LoKi demonstrates highly competitive generalization performance compared to other PEFT
methods with fewer tunable parameters, ensuring both effectiveness and efficiency.

Figure 1. Common fine-tuning methods of pre-trained models.The “lock mark” indicates frozen during training. Compared
to Adapter and LoRA, LoKi introduces trainable activation with
nonlinear fitting capabilities.

1. Introduction

apart from simple strategies to evaluate vision backbones
i.e., zero-shot and linear probe, existing PT+FT methods can be roughly categorized to two types: (1) Fulltuning [3, 10, 17, 54, 61, 65] trains the entire model in an
end-to-end manner, requiring a relatively large computation
costs. (2) Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [30, 31,
44, 67, 72, 87] methods such as Adapter [30], LoRA [31],
and prompt-based tuning [44], have shown promising results by freezing the majority of the pre-trained model while
only training a small set of parameters. These methods
achieve strong performance while reducing computational
costs compared to full-tuning. Among them, adapter-based
and prompt-based approaches can be uniformly represented
as a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) structure [26], which
uses the universal approximation theorem to fit nonlinear
functions. Existing studies typically increase the number of
layers and neurons in MLP for performance improvement,
which adds to more parameters. Meanwhile, regularization
is utilized to prevent over-fitting by driving some of the
parameters toward zero. This creates a trade-off between
adding parameters and reducing their impact. Balancing
this requires hyper-parameter tuning and model selection,
which undoubtedly increases training costs [7, 32, 63, 66],
especially for downstream tasks. A fine-tuning method with
excellent generalization should perform equally well across
different pre-trained weights or datasets without additional
hyperparameter adjustments, even using exactly the same

The rise of pre-trained models has transformed the landscape of computer vision [15, 38, 61], with models like Vision Transformers (ViT) [15] achieving state-of-the-art performance across various tasks. The widely used paradigm
of Pre-training + Fine-tuning (PT+FT) has become a cornerstone for transferring these fundamental models to various downstream tasks [1, 3, 29, 33, 34, 54, 59, 61, 82],
which leverages the strong generalized representations of
pre-trained models for generalization. As shown in Fig. 1,
* corresponding author

14869

