This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Omnimatte: Learning to Decompose Video into Layers
Yao-Chih Lee1,2,∗
Erika Lu1
Sarah Rumbley1
Michal Geyer1,3
Jia-Bin Huang2
Tali Dekel1,3
Forrester Cole1
1

Google DeepMind

2

University of Maryland College Park

3

Weizmann Institute of Science

https://gen-omnimatte.github.io
See-through foreground

ActionShot (duplicating + retiming)

Layer resizing + background replacement

Input video

Object removal

Output: Omnimatte layers

Layer editing

Figure 1. Generative Omnimatte. Our method decomposes a video into a set of RGBA omnimatte layers, where each layer consists of
a fully-visible object and its associated effects like shadows and reflections. We improve upon existing work by adding a generative video
prior, allowing our method to complete occluded regions (top, middle) and handle dynamic backgrounds (bottom).

Abstract
Given a video and a set of input object masks, an omnimatte method aims
to decompose the video into semantiMotion retiming
cally meaningful layers containing individual objects along
with their associated effects, such as shadows and reflections. Existing omnimatte methods assume a static background or accurate pose and depth estimation and produce
poor decompositions when these assumptions are violated.
Furthermore, due to the lack of generative prior on natural videos, existing methods cannot complete dynamic occluded regions. We present a novel generative layered video
decomposition framework to address the omnimatte problem. Our method does not assume a stationary scene or
require camera pose or depth information and produces
clean, complete layers, including convincing completions

of occluded dynamic regions. Our core idea is to train a
video diffusion model to identify and remove scene effects
caused by a specific object. We show that this model can
be finetuned from an existing video inpainting model with
a small, carefully curated dataset, and demonstrate highquality decompositions and editing results for a wide range
of casually captured videos containing soft shadows, glossy
reflections, splashing water, and more.

1. Introduction
Natural videos typically intertwine complex signals about
our dynamic world, such as camera motion, articulated object movement, intricate scene effects, and time-varying interaction between objects. Mid-level representations that

12522

*Work done while Yao-Chih was an intern at Google DeepMind.

