This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

U-Know-DiffPAN: An Uncertainty-aware Knowledge Distillation Diffusion
Framework with Details Enhancement for PAN-Sharpening
WV3 full img16

Sungpyo Kim
1
KAIST

Jeonghyeok Do
1
KAIST

Jaehyup Lee†
2
KNU

Munchurl Kim†
1
KAIST

ksp04204@kaist.ac.kr

ehwjdgur0913@kaist.ac.kr

jaehyuplee@knu.ac.kr

mkimee@kaist.ac.kr

CANConv (CVPR 2024)

U-Know-DiffPAN (Ours)

PanDiff (TGRS 2023)

TMDiff (TGRS 2024)

LRMS

PAN

Figure 1. Visual comparison of PAN-sharpening results on the full-resolution WV3 dataset. The rightmost image shows the output of
our proposed U-Know-DiffPAN framework, specifically the result produced by FSA-S (frequency selective attention student network).
Notably, the proposed framework generates more detailed and robust results, particularly in high-uncertainty regions, outperforming the
state-of-the-art model CANConv [14] and recent diffusion-based methods PanDiff [31] and TMDiff [56]. As highlighted in the red box,
our approach successfully restores challenging highly-uncertain regions, such as cars, where other models fall short.

Abstract

HQNR : 0.952

certainty map. From this, the teacher model can guide the
HQNR
0.951 on difficult imageHQNR
: 0.955 for PANstudent model
to :focus
regions
sharpening via the usage of the uncertainty map. Extensive
experiments on diverse datasets demonstrate the robustness
and superior performance of our U-Know-DiffPAN over
very recent state-of-the-art PAN-sharpening methods. The
project page is available at https://kaist-viclab.github.io/UKnow-DiffPAN-site/.

HQNR : 0.924

Conventional methods for PAN-sharpening often struggle to restore fine details due to limitations in leveraging high-frequency information. Moreover, diffusionbased approaches lack sufficient conditioning to fully utilize Panchromatic (PAN) images and low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) inputs effectively. To address these challenges, we propose an uncertainty-aware knowledge distillation diffusion framework with details enhancement for
PAN-sharpening, called U-Know-DiffPAN. The U-KnowDiffPAN incorporates uncertainty-aware knowledge distillation for effective transfer of feature details from our
teacher model to a student one. The teacher model in our
U-Know-DiffPAN captures frequency details through freqeuncy selective attention, facilitating accurate reverse process learning. By conditioning the encoder on compact vector representations of PAN and LRMS and the decoder on
Wavelet transforms, we enable rich frequency utilization.
So, the high-capacity teacher model distills frequency-rich
features into a lightweight student model aided by an un-

1. Introduction

1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST).

Satellite imagery plays a vital role in a wide range of
applications, including environmental monitoring, surveillance, and mapping [2, 10, 15, 29, 67]. High-resolution
multispectral (HRMS) images that combine high spatial
and spectral fidelity are commonly generated using PANsharpening techniques, fusing low-resolution multispectral
(LRMS) images with high-resolution (HR) panchromatic
(PAN) images. The primary objective of PAN-sharpening
is to retain the spatial detail of PAN images while preserving the spectral information of LRMS images. Recently,
deep learning (DL)-based approaches have gained attraction in PAN-sharpening tasks, leveraging deep networks to
perform end-to-end image regression. However, DL models

2 Kyungpook National University (KNU).
† Co-corresponding authors (equal contribution).

23069

