This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Heterogeneous Skeleton-Based Action Representation Learning
Hongsong Wang1,2 Xiaoyan Ma3 Jidong Kuang3 Jie Gui3,4,5 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
4
Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application, Supervision And Management
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
5
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 210000, China
{hongsongwang, 220224977, jidongkuang, guijie}@seu.edu.cn

Predictions

Skeleton-based human action recognition has received
widespread attention in recent years due to its diverse range
of application scenarios. Due to the different sources of human skeletons, skeleton data naturally exhibit heterogeneity. The previous works, however, overlook the heterogeneity of human skeletons and solely construct models tailored
for homogeneous skeletons. This work addresses the challenge of heterogeneous skeleton-based action representation learning, specifically focusing on processing skeleton
data that varies in joint dimensions and topological structures. The proposed framework comprises two primary
components: heterogeneous skeleton processing and unified representation learning. The former first converts twodimensional skeleton data into three-dimensional skeleton
via an auxiliary network, and then constructs a prompted
unified skeleton using skeleton-specific prompts. We also
design an additional modality named semantic motion encoding to harness the semantic information within skeletons. The latter module learns a unified action representation using a shared backbone network that processes different heterogeneous skeletons. Extensive experiments on
the NTU-60, NTU-120, and PKU-MMD II datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in various tasks of action understanding. Our approach can be applied to action
recognition in robots with different humanoid structures.

Heterogeneous
Skeletons

Abstract

Model

Model

Model

Figure 1. Comparison between our approach (right) and existing
works (left). Previous works train specific models for each type of
heterogeneous skeletons, whereas we design a unified model for
heterogeneous skeletons.

1. Introduction

Skeleton-based action recognition has emerged as a prevalent task in the field of computer vision. It holds a significant role in areas such as human-computer interaction, medical rehabilitation, video surveillance and intelligent sports.
Skeletons are a commonly used modality in action recognition tasks. Compared to other modalities, such as videos
and depth map sequences, skeletons possess characteristics
of high abstraction, low complexity, and good robustness.
Furthermore, skeletons naturally align with human actions
in a physical sense, allowing for a better representation of
human motion. Skeletons can be collected by numerous
sensors, thus resulting in heterogeneity in skeleton data.
The heterogeneity of skeleton data is mainly manifested in
the differences in coordinate dimensions and the number of
joints defining the human body structure. For example, the
skeleton data recorded by the Kinect V2 depth sensor is a
three-dimensional sequence featuring 25 joints, whereas the
skeleton data estimated from the RGB video is typically a

With the rapid advancement of sensors and detection algorithms, acquiring accurate human poses has become easier.
* Corresponding Author

19154

