This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Adversarial Robustness of Multi-Exit Neural Networks
in an Attack-Defense Game
Keyizhi Xu

Chi Zhang Zhan Chen Zhongyuan Wang Chunxia Xiao Chao Liang*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software (NERCMS)
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan
{xukeyizhi,zhangchii,chenzhan,cxxiao,cliang}@whu.edu.cn, wzy hope@163.com

Abstract
Multi-exit neural networks represent a promising approach
to enhancing model inference efficiency, yet like common
neural networks, they suffer from significantly reduced robustness against adversarial attacks. While some defense
methods have been raised to strengthen the adversarial robustness of multi-exit neural networks, we identify a longneglected flaw in the evaluation of previous studies: simply
using a fixed set of exits for attack may lead to an overestimation of their defense capacity. Based on this finding,
our work explores the following three key aspects in the adversarial robustness of multi-exit neural networks: (1) we
discover that a mismatch of the network exits used by the
attacker and defender is responsible for the overestimated
robustness of previous defense methods; (2) by finding the
best strategy in a two-player zero-sum game, we propose
AIMER as an improved evaluation scheme to measure the
intrinsic robustness of multi-exit neural networks; (3) going further, we introduce NEED defense method under the
evaluation of AIMER that can optimize the defender’s strategy by finding a Nash equilibrium of the game. Experiments
over 3 datasets, 7 architectures, 7 attacks and 4 baselines
show that AIMER evaluates the robustness 13.52% lower
than previous methods under AutoAttack, while the robust
performance of NEED surpasses single-exit networks of the
same backbones by 5.58% maximally.

Figure 1. The triple focuses of this paper and their relationship.
(1) the A-D mismatch phenomenon we find; (2) The improved
evaluation scheme AIMER we propose; (3) The NEED method to
optimize the defense under the evaluation of AIMER. (2) and (3)
are principled by game theory.

1. Introduction

from shallower branches, maintaining accuracy while reducing computational load. Second, the vulnerability of
neural networks to adversarial attacks [2, 22, 32, 42] poses
a significant challenge, where small, carefully crafted perturbations can be added to input data to deceive the predictions of models. In recent years, enhancing the robustness
of models under adversarial attacks has thus emerged as a
pivotal research topic [9, 19, 22, 27, 41, 47].

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable advancements in the field of computer vision, yet researchers are
drawn to two pressing issues. First, the computational cost
escalates as the networks grow deeper, leading to the rise
of multi-exit neural networks [11, 12, 33, 37, 43]. These
networks utilize an early-exit mechanism to produce results

Inspired by the above work, increasing efforts have been
devoted to the study of the adversarial robustness of multiexit neural networks [3, 10, 13, 15, 16]. However, we identify a subtle defect long-neglected in the current robustness
evaluation: simply using fixed network exits as the targets of
attack results in insufficient flexibility that unfairly weakens
the attacker while favoring the defender. This might lead to
an overestimation in the robustness evaluation of multi-exit
neural networks. In this paper, by delving into the following

* Chao Liang is the corresponding author.

10265

