This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AniDoc: Animation Creation Made Easier
Yihao Meng1,2

Hao Ouyang2

Ka Leong Cheng1,2
1

HKUST

Hanlin Wang3,2

Zhiheng Liu5
2

Yujun Shen2
3

Ant Group

Qiuyu Wang2

NJU

4

ZJU

Wen Wang4,2

Huamin Qu†,1
5

HKU

Figure 1. AniDoc colorizes a sequence of sketches based on a character design reference with high fidelity, even when the sketches
significantly differ in pose and scale. Additionally, the model supports sparse sketch inputs, enabling effective interpolation and highquality colorization simultaneously, as shown in the last row.

Abstract
The production of 2D animation follows an industrystandard workflow, encompassing four essential stages:
character design, keyframe animation, in-betweening, and
coloring. Our research focuses on reducing the labor
costs in the above process by harnessing the potential of
increasingly powerful generative AI. Using video diffusion
models as the foundation, AniDoc1 emerges as a video line
art colorization tool, which automatically converts sketch
sequences into colored animations following the reference
character specification. Our model exploits correspondence
matching as an explicit guidance, yielding strong robustness to the variations (e.g., posture) between the reference

character and each line art frame. In addition, our model
could even automate the in-betweening process, such that
users can easily create a temporally consistent animation
by simply providing a character image as well as the start
and end sketches. Our code is available at: https://yihaomeng.github.io/AniDoc demo.

1. Introduction

1 “Doc” is one of the seven dwarfs in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,
the first animated feature film produced by Disney.

The animation industry, particularly in the realm of 2D
anime production, relies heavily on the meticulous process
of coloring line art to bring characters and scenes to life.
Colorization of line art [11, 12, 17, 33, 42, 51, 65] in videos
is a critical task that not only adds aesthetic value but also
enhances the storytelling experience by conveying emotions
and actions vividly. Automating this process holds signifi-

18187

