This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GoalFlow: Goal-Driven Flow Matching for Multimodal Trajectories Generation
in End-to-End Autonomous Driving
Zebin Xing1,2∗ , Xingyu Zhang2 *, Yang Hu2 , Bo Jiang4,2
Tong He5 , Qian Zhang2 , Xiaoxiao Long3 , Wei Yin2†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Horizon Robotics
3
Nanjing University 4 Huazhong University of Science & Technology 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory
Generation Model

Abstract
We propose GoalFlow, an end-to-end autonomous driving method for generating high-quality multimodal trajectories. In autonomous driving scenarios, there is rarely a single suitable trajectory. Recent methods have increasingly
focused on modeling multimodal trajectory distributions.
However, they suffer from trajectory selection complexity
and reduced trajectory quality due to high trajectory divergence and inconsistencies between guidance and scene information. To address these issues, we introduce GoalFlow,
a novel method that effectively constrains the generative
process to produce high-quality, multimodal trajectories.
To resolve the trajectory divergence problem inherent in
diffusion-based methods, GoalFlow constrains the generated trajectories by introducing a goal point. GoalFlow establishes a novel scoring mechanism that selects the most
appropriate goal point from the candidate points based on
scene information. Furthermore, GoalFlow employs an
efficient generative method, Flow Matching, to generate
multimodal trajectories, and incorporates a refined scoring mechanism to select the optimal trajectory from the
candidates. Our experimental results, validated on the
Navsim[7], demonstrate that GoalFlow achieves state-ofthe-art performance, delivering robust multimodal trajectories for autonomous driving. GoalFlow achieved PDMS
of 90.3, significantly surpassing other methods. Compared with other diffusion-policy-based methods, our approach requires only a single denoising step to obtain excellent performance. The code is available at https:
//github.com/YvanYin/GoalFlow.

Generation
Model
BEV Feature

Goal-Driven Generation Model
Goal Point
Construction
Generation
Model
BEV Feature

Figure 1. The comparison of different multimodal trajectory
generation paradigms recently. A standalone generative model
often produces highly diverse trajectories with no clear boundaries
between different modalities. In contrast, the Goal-Driven Generation Model leverages the strong guidance of goal points, effectively distinguishing multiple modalities by utilizing different goal
points.

detection ultimately serve the planning task. To enhance
system reliability, some end-to-end algorithms[16, 17, 27]
have begun exploring ways to generate multimodal trajectories as trajectory candidates for the algorithms. In autonomous driving, command typically includes indicators
for left, right, and straight actions. VAD[17] uses this command information to generate multimodal trajectories. Goal
points, which provide the vehicle’s location information for
the next few seconds, are commonly used as guiding information in other approaches, such as SparseDrive[27]. These
methods pre-define a set of goal points to generate different trajectory modes. Both approaches have succeeded
in autonomous driving, offering candidate trajectories that
significantly reduce collision rates. However, since these
methods’ guiding information does not pursue accuracy but
instead provides a set of candidate values for the trajec-

1. Introduction
Since UniAD[15], autonomous driving has increasingly favored end-to-end systems, where tasks like mapping and
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author, project leader. Email: yvanwy@outlook.com

1602

