This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Apollo: An Exploration of Video Understanding in Large Multimodal Models
Orr Zoharµ,σ,ω , Xiaohan Wangσ , Yann Duboisσ , Nikhil Mehtaµ , Tong Xiaoµ , Philippe Hansen-Estruchµ ,
Licheng Yuµ , Xiaofang Wangµ , Felix Juefei-Xuµ , Ning Zhangµ , Serena Yeung-Levyσ , Xide Xiaµ
µ
Meta GenAI σ Stanford University ω Work done at Meta
Project Page:

https://apollo-lmms.github.io

Abstract
Despite the rapid integration of video perception capabilities into Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), what drives
their video perception remains poorly understood. Consequently, many design decisions in this domain are made
without proper justification or analysis. The high computational cost of training and evaluating such models and limited open research hinder the development of video-LMMs.
To address this, we present a comprehensive study that
helps uncover what effectively drives video understanding
in LMMs. We begin by critically examining the primary
contributors to the high computational requirements associated with video-LMM research and discover Scaling Consistency, wherein design and training decisions made on
smaller models and datasets (up to a critical size) effectively transfer to larger models. Leveraging these insights,
we explored many video-specific aspects of video-LMMs,
including video sampling, architectures, data composition,
training schedules, and more. Guided by these findings,
we introduce Apollo, a state-of-the-art family of LMMs that
achieve superior performance across different model sizes.
Our models process over 1-hour videos efficiently, with the
3B parameter variant outperforming most existing 7B models. Apollo-7B is state-of-the-art compared to 7B LMMs
with a 70.9 on MLVU, and 63.3 on Video-MME.

1. Introduction
Despite the rapid advancements in language and imagelanguage modeling [10, 16, 17, 34, 37], the development
of video Large Multimodal Models (video-LMMs) has not
kept pace. Videos offer a rich and dynamic source of information, capturing temporal and spatial nuances that static
images cannot. However, video-LMMs remain relatively
under-explored due to unique challenges such as significantly higher computational demands for training and evaluation and a broader, more complex design space compared
to their image-based counterparts.
Many critical questions in video-LMM design remain

18891

unanswered: How should we sample videos effectively?
Which vision encoders provide optimal token representations? What are the best practices for resampling video tokens? Early approaches primarily extended image-LMMs
with video-specific fine-tuning [19, 55]. Recent methods
introduced diverse strategies with distinct design choices,
such as longer context windows [59], multi-modality mixing [18], agent workflows [42], self-training [67], and more.
Despite these efforts, the impact of these design decisions
on video-LMM performance is poorly understood. This
lack of systematic investigation motivates our study.
To overcome the computational challenges of training
video-LMMs, we explore whether design decisions from
smaller models correlate effectively with larger ones. Traditional scaling laws [10] predict model performance based
on size but apply to models trained from scratch. Scaling laws have also been observed in LMM pretraining [2].
Since LMMs integrate multiple pre-trained components, it’s
uncertain if these laws hold. Our experiments reveal that
design choices made with smaller LMMs transfer to larger
ones, a phenomenon we term Scaling Consistency (Sec. 4).
Utilizing these insights, we conduct an extensive study
across the video-LMM design space, addressing essential
aspects of video-language modeling, such as video sampling and encoding methods, token resampling and integration strategies, and data compositions (Sec. 5 & 6). For instance, we discover that frames-per-second video sampling
significantly outperforms standard uniform sampling used
in previous works [25, 27]. We also find which vision encoder combinations are the most robust and that the Perceiver Resampler [11] outperforms average pooling. When
studying the numerous benchmarks available, we discovered a large portion of the performance improvements are
driven primarily via language modeling and, therefore, curate ApolloBench, which significantly reduces evaluation
time while improving assessment quality (Sec. 3).
Building upon our findings, we introduce Apollo, a family of state-of-the-art LMMs capable of comprehending
hour-long videos. Apollo models exhibit strong performance across various scales. Notably, Apollo-3B surpasses

