This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-fidelity 3D Object Generation from Single Image with RGBN-Volume
Gaussian Reconstruction Model
Yiyang Shen1 Kun Zhou1 He Wang2 Yin Yang3 Tianjia Shao1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
AI Centre, University College London 3 University of Utah

Single Image

Generated 2D Gaussians

Textured Meshes

Figure 1. GS-RGBN is an RGBN-volume Gaussian reconstruction model that generates high-quality 2D Gaussians (middle) using a single
image (left). The textured meshes can be reconstructed from the generated 2D Gaussians optionally (right).

Abstract
Recently single-view 3D generation via Gaussian splatting has emerged and developed quickly. They learn 3D
Gaussians from 2D RGB images generated from pre-trained
multi-view diffusion (MVD) models, and have shown a
promising avenue for 3D generation through a single image. Despite the current progress, these methods still suffer from the inconsistency jointly caused by the geometric ambiguity in the 2D images, and the lack of structure
of 3D Gaussians, leading to distorted and blurry 3D object generation. In this paper, we propose to fix these issues by GS-RGBN, a new RGBN-volume Gaussian Reconstruction Model designed to generate high-fidelity 3D objects from single-view images. Our key insight is a structured 3D representation can simultaneously mitigate the
afore-mentioned two issues. To this end, we propose a
novel hybrid Voxel-Gaussian representation, where a 3D
voxel representation contains explicit 3D geometric information, eliminating the geometric ambiguity from 2D images. It also structures Gaussians during learning so that

the optimization tends to find better local optima. Our 3D
voxel representation is obtained by a fusion module that
aligns RGB features and surface normal features, both of
which can be estimated from 2D images. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our methods over
prior works in terms of high-quality reconstruction results,
robust generalization, and good efficiency.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author.

Crafting 3D assets from 2D images has broad applications
in fields such as virtual reality (VR), augmented reality
(AR), industrial design, gaming, and animation. Recently,
significant attention has been focused on utilizing only a
single image to generate a 3D object with superior shapes
and textures as a subtopic. However, the persisting challenge arises due to the inherent geometric ambiguity and
limited information provided in single-view images.
Emerging multi-view diffusion (MVD) models [46, 47]
present a potential solution to address the above information scarcity. These models extend one image to multi-view
images, thus providing more comprehensive information

21558

