This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hand-held Object Reconstruction from RGB Video with Dynamic Interaction
Rengan Xie3
Yuchi Huo3,4
Jiming Chen1
Shijian Jiang1
Qi Ye1,2 *
1
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
Key Lab of CS&AUS of Zhejiang Province
3
4
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Zhejiang Lab
Time

Time

Figure 1. Hand-held object reconstruction. Given a monocular RGB sequence of one or both hands manipulating a rigid object, our
method accurately reconstructs the object even when it is poorly textured. Here, we present reconstructed surface normals and meshes
from both lab-recorded and self-captured mobile phone videos.

Abstract
This work aims to reconstruct the 3D geometry of a rigid
object manipulated by one or both hands using monocular RGB video. Previous methods rely on Structure-fromMotion or hand priors to estimate relative motion between
the object and camera, which typically assume textured objects or single-hand interactions. To accurately recover
object geometry in dynamic interactions, we incorporate
priors from 3D generation model into object pose estimation and propose semantic consistency constraints to solve
the challenge of shape and texture discrepancy between
the generated priors and observations. The poses are initialized, followed by joint optimization of the object poses
and implicit neural representation. During optimization,
a novel pose outlier voting strategy with inter-view consistency is proposed to correct large pose errors. Experiments
on three datasets demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art in reconstruction quality
for both single- and two-hand scenarios. Our project page:
https://east-j.github.io/dynhor/

turing static objects by manually moving a camera around
them, rotating the object by hand in front of a camera or
head-mounted device offers greater convenience for applications involving dynamic hand-object interactions. This
approach also enables reconstruction of the entire object
surface, including the bottom part. This hand-held object
reconstruction problem is the focus of the work.
Recent hand-held object reconstruction methods generally adopt multi-view reconstruction techniques [49, 54]
to aggregate observations of in-hand objects across multiple rigid poses. The key challenge lies in accurately estimating the relative motion between the object and the
camera. Some works [18, 21, 42] assume the object is
firmly grasped, tracking object motion with a hand pose
tracker instead. This constrains hand-object movement and
causes parts of the object to be consistently occluded by the
hand, requiring post-processing or prior knowledge to obtain a complete surface, which limits reconstruction quality and the potential application scenarios. Another line
of method [9] uses Structure-from-Motion (SfM) to initialize object poses and refine them with hand priors. However, as pointed out by [13, 43], SfM struggles in dynamic
scenes. The solution is also limited to single-hand interactions due to using hand priors. To overcome these limitations, Hampali et al. [13] proposed an incremental training
approach that divides sequences into trackable segments for
joint shape and pose optimization. While effective for twohand interactions, this approach struggles with texture-less

1. Introduction
Modeling the 3D shapes of objects has numerous applications in fields such as virtual/augmented reality and robotic
manipulation. Compared to the common approach of cap* Corresponding author.

12220

