This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D IFIX 3D+: Improving 3D Reconstructions with Single-Step Diffusion Models
Jay Zhangjie Wu1,2* Yuxuan Zhang1* Haithem Turki1 Xuanchi Ren1,3,4 Jun Gao1,3,4
Mike Zheng Shou2 Sanja Fidler1,3,4 Zan Gojcic1† Huan Ling1,3,4†
1

NVIDIA

2

Show Lab, National University of Singapore

3

University of Toronto

4

Vector Institute

https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/difix3d
Nerfacto

Ours

3DGS

Ours

Nerfacto

Ours

Nerfacto

Ours

Figure 1. We demonstrate D IFIX 3D+ on both in-the-wild scenes (top) and driving scenes (bottom). Recent Novel-View Synthesis methods struggle in
sparse-input settings or when rendering views far from the input camera poses. D IFIX distills the priors of 2D generative models to enhance reconstruction
quality and can further act as a neural-renderer at inference time to mitigate the remaining inconsistencies. Notably, the same model effectively corrects
NeRF [37] and 3DGS [20] artifacts.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields and 3D Gaussian Splatting have
revolutionized 3D reconstruction and novel-view synthesis
task. However, achieving photorealistic rendering from extreme novel viewpoints remains challenging, as artifacts
persist across representations. In this work, we introduce
D IFIX 3D+, a novel pipeline designed to enhance 3D reconstruction and novel-view synthesis through single-step
diffusion models. At the core of our approach is D IFIX, a
single-step image diffusion model trained to enhance and
remove artifacts in rendered novel views caused by underconstrained regions of the 3D representation. D IFIX serves
two critical roles in our pipeline. First, it is used during the
reconstruction phase to clean up pseudo-training views that
*/† Equal contribution/advising.

are rendered from the reconstruction and then distilled back
into 3D. This greatly enhances underconstrained regions
and improves the overall 3D representation quality. More
importantly, D IFIX also acts as a neural enhancer during inference, effectively removing residual artifacts arising from imperfect 3D supervision and the limited capacity
of current reconstruction models. D IFIX 3D+ is a general
solution, a single model compatible with both NeRF and
3DGS representations, and it achieves an average 2× improvement in FID score over baselines while maintaining
3D consistency.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural rendering, particularly Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [37] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [20], represent an important step towards photore-

26024

