This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CGMatch: A Different Perspective of Semi-supervised Learning
∗

∗

Bo Cheng1 , Jueqing Lu2 , Yuan Tian1 , Haifeng Zhao3 , Yi Chang1 , Lan Du2*
1
Jilin University, China
2
Monash University, Australia
3
Jinling Institute of Technology, China
chengbo21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, jueqing.lu@monash.edu, yuantian@jlu.edu.cn
zhf@jit.edu.cn, yichang@jlu.edu.cn, lan.du@monash.edu

Model

Abstract

Weak
Augmentation

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has garnered significant attention due to its ability to leverage limited labeled data and
a large amount of unlabeled data to improve model generalization performance. Recent approaches achieve impressive successes by combining ideas from both consistency regularization and pseudo-labeling. However, these
methods tend to underperform in the more realistic situations with relatively scarce labeled data. We argue that
this issue arises because existing methods rely solely on
the model’s confidence, making them challenging to accurately assess the model’s state and identify unlabeled examples contributing to the training phase when supervision
information is limited, especially during the early stages
of model training. In this paper, we propose a novel SSL
model called CGMatch, which, for the first time, incorporates a new metric known as Count-Gap (CG). We demonstrate that CG is effective in discovering unlabeled examples beneficial for model training. Along with confidence,
a commonly used metric in SSL, we propose a fine-grained
dynamic selection (FDS) strategy. This strategy dynamically divides the unlabeled dataset into three subsets with
different characteristics: easy-to-learn set, ambiguous set,
and hard-to-learn set. By selective filtering subsets, and applying corresponding regularization with selected subsets,
we mitigate the negative impact of incorrect pseudo-labels
on model optimization and generalization. Extensive experimental results on several common SSL benchmarks indicate the effectiveness of CGMatch especially when the labeled data are particularly limited. Source code is available
at https://github.com/BoCheng-96/CGMatch.

* Joint Corresponding Author

Unlabeled data

Strong
Augmentation

Model

Class Prediction

Class Prediction

Pseudo-label

Consistency
Regularization

ℒ!

Figure 1. Paradigm of X-Match. Given an unlabeled sample, the
weakly-augmented image is fed into the model, and the sample
is assigned to a corresponding class (i.e., pseudo-label) when its
highest prediction probability exceeds the confidence threshold.
This threshold is determined by various strategies proposed in XMatch. Consistency regularization is then applied to ensure that
the prediction from the strongly-augmented version remains consistent with the pseudo-label.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has gained increasing attention across various fields (e.g., computer vision [17, 26,
42, 50], natural language processing [6, 13, 21], and bioinformatics [27, 30, 45]) due to its ability to utilise both labeled and unlabeled data for model training. This is beneficial in many real-world situations where large-scale labeled
datasets are costly or labour-intensive to acquire.
The key of SSL is not only leveraging the informative
semantic view provided by labeled data, but also enabling
the model to capture the underlying structure in unlabeled
data, thereby improving generalization and performance in
downstream tasks, such as visual recognition [24, 41]. Numerous methods have been explored [8, 38, 43, 52], including pseudo-labeling (PL) methods [19], consistency regularization methods [1, 18, 34], deep generative methods
[14, 20, 22, 35], and graph-based methods [12, 15, 44]. Recently, attention has shifted to hybrid methods that combine pseudo-labeling and consistency regularization to ensure that the predicted labels of different perturbations align

15381

