This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Segment This Thing: Foveated Tokenization for Efficient Point-Prompted
Segmentation
Tanner Schmidt
Meta Reality Labs

Richard Newcombe
Meta Reality Labs

tanner.schmidt@meta.com

newcombe@meta.com

Abstract

Patch Tokenization

This paper presents Segment This Thing (STT), a new efficient image segmentation model designed to produce a single segment given a single point prompt. Instead of following prior work and increasing efficiency by decreasing
model size, we gain efficiency by foveating input images.
Given an image and a point prompt, we extract a crop centered on the prompt and apply a novel variable-resolution
patch tokenization in which patches are downsampled at a
rate that increases with increased distance from the prompt.
This approach yields far fewer image tokens than uniform
patch tokenization. As a result we can drastically reduce the
computational cost of segmentation without reducing model
size. Furthermore, the foveation focuses the model on the
region of interest, a potentially useful inductive bias. We
show that our Segment This Thing model is more efficient
than prior work while remaining competitive on segmentation benchmarks. It can easily run at interactive frame rates
on consumer hardware and is thus a promising tool for augmented reality or robotics applications.

Foveated Tokenization

Figure 1. A visualization of the foveated tokenization employed
by Segment This Thing. Pixels are grouped into small patches in
the center and progressively larger patches towards the edges.

1. Introduction

We introduce a new efficient segmentation model called
“Segment This Thing” (STT) that was designed for streaming video applications. There have been many other followup works aimed at making SAM more efficient, but they
have all done so by reducing the model size. We take a
different approach, and instead apply a novel biologicallyinspired tokenization scheme which results in a drastic reduction in token count and a concomitant increase in efficiency of the Transformer-based image encoder. This
scheme, which we refer to as “foveated tokenization,” is
modeled after the variability of the visual acuity of human
eye, which is highest in the fovea and decreases with increased eccentricity [3]. Instead of dividing the image into
evenly sized patches on a uniform grid, we resample patches
with variable resolution on an irregular grid centered on a
single point prompt (see Figure 1). The further a patch is
from the center, the lower its resolution.
In the analogy with the human eye, it is as if the model
directs its visual attention towards the prompt point and estimates the extent of the thing it is “looking at” (hence the
name of our model). If the object is small or far away such
that it subtends a small solid angle, it will be contained
within the highest resolution patches and thus will not be
affected by the downsampling (so long as there is sufficient

Since its introduction in 2023, the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) [20] has brought new focus to the image segmentation task and enabled numerous downstream applications
with its flexible design and impressive performance. However, SAM’s capabilities come at a cost: the model leverages a heavyweight image encoder (ViT-H in the standard
model).
In this paper we focus on segmentation for streaming use
cases, for example robotics or augmented/virtual reality applications. With many frames arriving every second, it is
likely that only one or a few entities need to be segmented
in each image. Latency is critical, as frames may be separated in time by only tens of milliseconds. Depending on the
relative locations of and communication channels between
sensors and compute, bandwidth may also be a concern.

29428

