This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prosody-Enhanced Acoustic Pre-training and Acoustic-Disentangled
Prosody Adapting for Movie Dubbing
Zhedong Zhang1,2 * Liang Li2† Chenggang Yan1 Chunshan Liu1
Anton van den Hengel3 Yuankai Qi4
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University 2 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Adelaide 4 Macquarie University

Abstract

Voice

…

Prosody

Silent Movie Clip

Model

Reference Audio

Movie dubbing describes the process of transforming a
script into speech that aligns temporally and emotionally
with a given movie clip while exemplifying the speaker’s
voice demonstrated in a short reference audio clip. This
task demands the model bridge character performances
and complicated prosody structures to build a high-quality
video-synchronized dubbing track. The limited scale of
movie dubbing datasets, along with the background noise
inherent in audio data, hinder the acoustic modeling performance of trained models. To address these issues, we propose an acoustic-prosody disentangled two-stage method
to achieve high-quality dubbing generation with precise
prosody alignment. First, we propose a prosody-enhanced
acoustic pre-training to develop robust acoustic modeling capabilities. Then, we freeze the pre-trained acoustic
system and design an acoustic-disentangled framework to
model prosodic text features and dubbing style while maintaining acoustic quality. Additionally, we incorporate an
in-domain emotion analysis module to reduce the impact
of visual domain shifts across different movies, thereby enhancing emotion-prosody alignment. Extensive experiments
show that our method performs favorably against the stateof-the-art models on two primary benchmarks. The project
is available at https://zzdoog.github.io/ProDubber/.

Dubbing

Content

Dubbing Script

Text-Speech
Corpus

Text

Prosody
Ground Truth
Content

LRec

Stage Ⅰ

Stage Ⅱ

LDub

Acoustic System

Speech

Acoustic System

(a) Visual Voice Cloning (V2C) task
Voice(Ref)

Voice
Reference Audio
Prosody
Prediction
Content

…

Prosody Adapting

Dubbing Script

(b) Illustration of our proposed method

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the V2C task. (b) Illustration of the
proposed acoustic pre-training stage (Stage I) and prosody adapting stage (Stage II), which aim to generate dubbing with high
acoustic quality and aligned prosody.

production, media production, and personal speech AIGC.
Compared to traditional speech synthesis [4, 27, 30, 35,
36] or Voice Cloning [1] tasks, movie dubbing presents
greater challenges. It demands the ability not only to align
the prosody with complex character performances but also
to maintain high acoustic quality even when managing diverse and exaggerated prosody inherent in dubbing.
Previous works achieve significant progress in aligning
prosody with the performances of movie characters. V2CNet [5] incorporates visual features from each frame of the
movie clip into the mel-spectrogram frame-level prosody
modeling. HPMDubbing [6] employs a hierarchical design,
where lip, face, and video-level features correspond to pronunciation duration, prosody, and the overall video atmosphere, respectively. StyleDubber [8] uses a fine-grained
adaptor to bridge the speaker’s style and character’s emotion states at the phoneme level, facilitating joint modeling of prosody. However, existing methods overlook the visual domain discrepancies arising from variations in movie
styles and other visual elements, such as color grading,

1. Introduction
Movie Dubbing, also known as Visual Voice Cloning
(V2C) [5], aims to generate speech from scripts using a
specified voice conditioned by a single short reference audio while ensuring prosody alignment with the character’s
performance in terms of both pronunciation duration and
intonation (as shown in Figure 1 (a)). It promises significant potential in real-world applications such as film post* This work is done during the intern in VIPL group, ICT, CAS.
† Corresponding author.

172

