This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-guided Perturbation for Image Super-Resolution Diffusion Model
Leheng Zhang Weiyi You Kexuan Shi Shuhang Gu*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{lehengzhang12, shuhanggu}@gmail.com

https://github.com/LabShuHangGU/UPSR

Abstract
Diffusion-based image super-resolution methods have
demonstrated significant advantages over GAN-based approaches, particularly in terms of perceptual quality. Building upon a lengthy Markov chain, diffusion-based methods possess remarkable modeling capacity, enabling them
to achieve outstanding performance in real-world scenarios. Unlike previous methods that focus on modifying
the noise schedule or sampling process to enhance performance, our approach emphasizes the improved utilization of LR information. We find that different regions of
the LR image can be viewed as corresponding to different timesteps in a diffusion process, where flat areas are
closer to the target HR distribution but edge and texture
regions are farther away. In these flat areas, applying a
slight noise is more advantageous for the reconstruction.
We associate this characteristic with uncertainty and propose to apply uncertainty estimate to guide region-specific
noise level control, a technique we refer to as Uncertaintyguided Noise Weighting. Pixels with lower uncertainty (i.e.,
flat regions) receive reduced noise to preserve more LR
information, therefore improving performance. Furthermore, we modify the network architecture of previous methods to develop our Uncertainty-guided Perturbation SuperResolution (UPSR) model. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that, despite reduced model size and training overhead, the proposed UPSR method outperforms current state-of-the-art methods across various datasets, both
quantitatively and qualitatively.

Figure 1. A comparison of initial state setup between different diffusion-based image super-resolution methods, where ω →
2
N (0, ωmax
I). (b) SR3 [27] initiate the diffusion process from
pure Gaussian noise, whereas (c) ResShift [44] and (d) our UPSR
embed the LR input into the initial noise map. Additionally, we
apply uncertainty-guided weighting coefficient wu (y0 ) to reduce
the noise level in flat areas, achieving a more specialized diffusion
process for SR to improve performance.

1. Introduction

need for robust super-resolution modeling capability to recover missing details and produce visually pleasing results.
Existing SR methods have explored a variety of advanced
network architectures and complex degradation modeling
to improve performance in classical SR [2, 19, 47] and realworld SR [37, 46], respectively.
Recently, diffusion models [8, 12, 30] have demonstrated
impressive capability in image synthesis, offering a promising new approach for the real-world image super-resolution
task. These methods transform pure Gaussian noise into
high-quality images through a predefined Markov chain,
and their solid theoretical foundation endows them with exceptional modeling capacity to bridge diverse data distri-

Single image super-resolution (SR), which aims to recover
clean the high-resolution (HR) image from its degraded,
contaminated low-resolution (LR) counterpart, is a classical
problem in the computer vision society. Significant information loss during the degradation process underscores the
* corresponding author

17980

