This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards All-in-One Medical Image Re-Identification
Yuan Tian1

Kaiyuan Ji2

Rongzhao Zhang1

Xiaosong Wang1
1
2
3

Yankai Jiang1

Chunyi Li3

Guangtao Zhai3B

Shanghai AI Laboratory

School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University

Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong Unversity
tianyuan168326@outlook.com

Abstract
Medical image re-identification (MedReID) is underexplored so far, despite its critical applications in personalized healthcare and privacy protection. In this paper,
we introduce a thorough benchmark and a unified model
for this problem. First, to handle various medical modalities, we propose a novel Continuous Modality-based Parameter Adapter (ComPA). ComPA condenses medical content into a continuous modality representation and dynamically adjusts the modality-agnostic model with modalityspecific parameters at runtime. This allows a single model
to adaptively learn and process diverse modality data. Furthermore, we integrate medical priors into our model by
aligning it with a bag of pre-trained medical foundation
models, in terms of the differential features. Compared to
single-image feature, modeling the inter-image difference
better fits the re-identification problem, which involves discriminating multiple images. We evaluate the proposed
model against 25 foundation models and 8 large multimodal language models across 11 image datasets, demonstrating consistently superior performance. Additionally,
we deploy the proposed MedReID technique to two realworld applications, i.e., history-augmented personalized diagnosis and medical privacy protection. Codes and model
is available at https://github.com/tianyuan168326/All-inOne-MedReID-Pytorch.

Figure 1. (a) We propose MaMI, an all-in-one modality-adaptive
ReID model for medical images. (b) MaMI enhances personalized healthcare by integrating historical medical data. (c) MaMI
detects identity cues and removes them from the original images,
protecting privacy while maintaining medical utility.

1. Introduction

ical images for personalized healthcare [2, 44, 58] and (2)
effectively protect privacy before images are shared [22, 30,
41]. We argue that both sides call for the medical image reidentification (MedReID) technique.
As for historical image management, traditional methods [52, 68] manually pre-link images to patient metadata (e.g., name, medical record numbers), and retrieve
images by querying the system with the metadata. However, the links are not always complete and accurate, especially when data are stored in different Picture Archiving
and Communication System (PACS) platforms. This requires the MedReID technique to retrieve personal images
from poorly organized data, providing accurate historical
evidence for disease diagnosis [37].
As for medical image privacy protection, current methods only remove explicit information, such as the patient

Medical images [88], such as X-ray images and Computed
Tomography (CT) scans, are essential for diagnosing and
monitoring various health conditions. Up to 2020, images
have accounted for about 90% of all medical data [114].
Despite the large-scale data advanced the computeraided diagnosis tasks [6, 80], its privacy concern [62] is also
serious. It is urgent to (1) efficiently manage patient historB Corresponding Author

30774

