This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Object Keypoint Localization from Generative Priors
Dongkai Wang1,2 Jiang Duan1 Liangjian Wen1 Shiyu Xuan3 Hao Chen4 Shiliang Zhang4,5
1

Southwestern University of Finance and Economics 2 Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Finance, Ministry of Education

3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University

5

4

National Key Laboratory for

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

{wdk, duanj t, wenlj}@swufe.edu.cn, shiyu xuan@njust.edu.cn, {hchen, slzhang.jdl}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

“Shoulder”

Generalizable object keypoint localization is a fundamental
computer vision task in understanding the object structure.
It is challenging for existing keypoint localization methods
because their limited training data cannot provide generalizable shape and semantic cues, leading to inferior performance and generalization capability. Instead of relying on
large scale training data, this work tackles this challenge by
exploiting the rich priors from large generative models. We
propose a data-efficient generalizable localization method
named GenLoc. GenLoc extracts the generative priors from
a pre-trained image generation model by calculating the
correlation map between image latent feature and condition
embedding. Those priors are hence optimized with our proposed heatmap expectation loss to perform object keypoint
localization. Benefited by the rich knowledge of generative
priors in understanding of object semantics and structures,
GenLoc achieves superior performance on various object
keypoint localization benchmarks. It shows more substantial performance enhancements in cross-domain, few-shot
and zero-shot evaluation settings, e.g., getting 20%+ AP enhancement over CLAMP [43] in various zero-shot settings.

Goal: locate left shoulder

“hip”

Learnable Condition

Direct optimization

Our method

Figure 1. Upper: The pre-trained image generation model
LDM [25] has shown the correlation between input image latent
feature and different text condition through the cross attention
mechanism. Bottom: We aim to optimize the correlation map to
locate the object keypoint by learning a specific condition embedding. Directly optimizing the cross attention map in LDM cannot
produce well-localized heatmap. Our method can address this issue and produce more accurate results.

1. Introduction
set, i.e., training backbone from scratch on a specific keypoint localization dataset and test it on corresponding test
set. This pipeline is limited to the narrow domain defined
by the training data, making those methods hard to generalize to different domains or various objects, resulting in poor
generalization capability.
Designing a generalizable keypoint localization method
is important but challenging. The generalization capability
of neural network is inseparable from large scale training
data, which is demonstrated by recent generative models
in language and vision area, e.g., Large Language Model
(LLM) [2] and Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) [25] show
remarkable generation performance across a wide range of

The rapid progress in deep learning and computer vision
has pushed the object visual perception from coarse detection to fine-grained structure analysis. Typically, the object structure can be represented as a set of pre-defined keypoints, e.g., shoulder, elbow, or tail and root. As an important step for object structure analysis, general object keypoint localization has attracted increasing attention. Existing keypoint localization methods typically utilize powerful neural networks, e.g., Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [28, 35] or Vision Transformer (ViT) [21, 38] to either directly regress keypoint coordinates [15] or estimate
the keypoint heatmaps [28, 35] to perform localization.
Those methods learn keypoint priors purely from training

20265

