This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Community Forensics: Using Thousands of Generators to Train
Fake Image Detectors
Jeongsoo Park
Andrew Owens
University of Michigan

Abstract

mAP

One of the key challenges of detecting AI-generated images is spotting images that have been created by previously
unseen generative models. We argue that the limited diversity of the training data is a major obstacle to addressing
this problem, and we propose a new dataset that is significantly larger and more diverse than prior works. As part of
creating this dataset, we systematically download thousands
of text-to-image latent diffusion models and sample images
from them. We also collect images from dozens of popular
open source and commercial models. The resulting dataset
contains 2.7M images that have been sampled from 4803
different models. These images collectively capture a wide
range of scene content, generator architectures, and image
processing settings. Using this dataset, we study the generalization abilities of fake image detectors. Our experiments
suggest that detection performance improves as the number of models in the training set increases, even when these
models have similar architectures. We also find that increasing the diversity of the models improves detection performance, and that our trained detectors generalize better than
those trained on other datasets. The dataset can be found in

1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
101
102
103
Number of Latent Diffusion Models in Training Set
Latent Diffusion
Pixel Diffusion

Commercial
GAN

Other

Figure 1. Performance vs. model diversity. We use images sampled from different numbers of open source latent diffusion models
in our Community Forensics dataset to train fake image detectors
(shown in Fig. 2a). We fix the total number of images and only vary
the number of models. The detector’s performance increases across
all generator types as we train from more models, even though
these added models are entirely latent diffusion. This improvement
is largest for test images from out-of-distribution generators, such
as pixel-based diffusion models or GANs.

https://jespark.net/projects/2024/community_forensics

low-level image processing details, such as the ways that
training images are resized or compressed, can strongly influence detection accuracy [125]. As a result of these modelspecific idiosyncrasies, a generator’s images may evade detection, even when images from architecturally similar models exist in the training set. This issue has been exacerbated
by the thousands of open source models that are now available online, many of which extend pretrained base models
in complex ways.
We hypothesize that the lack of diversity in training
datasets is a major source of these shortcomings. Although
today’s datasets often contain millions of fake images, they
come from a relatively small number of generators. As a
result, this data fails to capture many sources of variation that
one might encounter in the wild. These limitations also make
it challenging to accurately benchmark performance, since
it is easy for cues that work well on one set of generators to
fail on others.

1. Introduction
Our ability to automatically generate realistic images is
quickly outpacing our ability to detect them, potentially
leading to a state of affairs in which neither humans nor
machines can reliably tell real from fake. While the field
of image forensics has been developing methods to address
this problem, existing fake image detectors still struggle
with generalization. These methods often excel at detecting
images from generators that were present in their training
sets, but fail when given images sampled from unseen models [87, 101, 102, 125].
A core challenge is dealing with the large amounts of
variation between models. Each generator has a potentially
unique combination of the architecture, loss function, and
training distribution. Even seemingly minor differences in

8245

