This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Redefining <Creative> in Dictionary:
Towards an Enhanced Semantic Understanding of Creative Generation
Fu Feng1,2 Yucheng Xie1,2 Xu Yang1,2 Jing Wang1,2 * Xin Geng1,2 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
1

{fufeng, xieyc, xuyang palm, wangjing91, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

Redefine

(b) A creative mixture (c) A <CreTok> mixture
that resembles a
that resembles a
(a) A blue banana. lettuce and a mantis. lettuce and a mantis.

“Creative” remains an inherently abstract concept for both
humans and diffusion models. While text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models can easily generate out-of-distribution concepts like “a blue banana”, they struggle with generating
combinatorial objects such as “a creative mixture that resembles a lettuce and a mantis”, due to difficulties in understanding the semantic depth of “creative”. Current methods
rely heavily on synthesizing reference prompts or images to
achieve a creative effect, typically requiring retraining for
each unique creative output—a process that is computationally intensive and limits practical applications. To address
this, we introduce CreTok, which brings meta-creativity to
diffusion models by redefining “creative” as a new token,
<CreTok>, thus enhancing models’ semantic understanding for combinatorial creativity. CreTok achieves such redefinition by iteratively sampling diverse text pairs from our
proposed CangJie dataset to form adaptive prompts and
restrictive prompts, and then optimizing the similarity between their respective text embeddings. Extensive experiments demonstrate that <CreTok> enables the universal
and direct generation of combinatorial creativity across diverse concepts without additional training, achieving stateof-the-art performance with improved text-image alignment
and higher human preference ratings. Code will be made
available at https://github.com/fu-feng/CreTok.

Out-of-Distribution Generation

Figure 1. (a) In out-of-distribution generation, diffusion models
can directly generate “a blue banana” without additional training, benefiting from the clear and concrete semantics of “blue”.
(b) However, they lack an intrinsic understanding of the abstract
and ambiguous semantics of “creative”. (c) Leveraging the TP2O
(i.e., Creative Text Pair to Object) task, we redefine the token
associated with “creative” as <CreTok> to bring models metacreativity, allowing them to directly generate combinatorial creativity by enhancing their semantic understanding of “creative”.

1. Introduction

artists [2, 38, 58]. The high-quality image generation results
from models’ strength of capturing complex data distributions [5, 24, 51]. However, such strength also leads diffusion models to replicate patterns from their training data,
limiting their potential for genuine creativity [8, 61].
Creativity, an inherently abstract concept even for humans [28, 48], presents a significant challenge for diffusion
models. Recent efforts have sought to integrate creativity
into diffusion models in more concrete ways. For instance,
ConceptLab [44] approaches creativity as the generation
of novel, indescribable concepts beyond conventional language. BASS [23] extends this interpretation, defining creativity as the combinatorial generation of unique objects
from text pairs (e.g., (Lettuce, Mantis)), exemplified in Figure 1c. Both approaches suggest that creative
ability involves generating out-of-distribution images.

“Creativity is the power to connect the seemingly unconnected.”
— William Plomer

Recent advancements have witnessed the impressive capabilities of diffusion models, such as DALL-E 3 [42],
Stable Diffusion 3 [10], and Midjourney [31], which can
now generate images comparable to those created by human
* Corresponding authors

18444

