This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DSPNet: Dual-vision Scene Perception for Robust 3D Question Answering
Jingzhou Luo1 Yang Liu1,5 * Weixing Chen1 Zhen Li2 Yaowei Wang3,4 Guanbin Li1,4,5 Liang Lin1,4,5
1
Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
{luojzh5,chenwx228}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {liuy856,liguanbin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn, yaoweiwang@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract

3D Scene

3D Question Answering (3D QA) requires the model to
comprehensively understand its situated 3D scene described by the text, then reason about its surrounding environment and answer a question under that situation. However, existing methods usually rely on global scene perception from pure 3D point clouds and overlook the importance
of rich local texture details from multi-view images. Moreover, due to the inherent noise in camera poses and complex occlusions, there exists significant feature degradation
and reduced feature robustness problems when aligning 3D
point cloud with multi-view images. In this paper, we propose a Dual-vision Scene Perception Network (DSPNet),
to comprehensively integrate multi-view and point cloud
features to improve robustness in 3D QA. Our Text-guided
Multi-view Fusion (TGMF) module prioritizes image views
that closely match the semantic content of the text. To
adaptively fuse back-projected multi-view images with point
cloud features, we design the Adaptive Dual-vision Perception (ADVP) module, enhancing 3D scene comprehension. Additionally, our Multimodal Context-guided Reasoning (MCGR) module facilitates robust reasoning by integrating contextual information across visual and linguistic
modalities. Experimental results on SQA3D and ScanQA
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our DSPNet. Codes
will be available at https://github.com/LZ-CH/DSPNet.

A Closer Look

picture? TV?
A: right

picture! TV!
Q: Which side of the
picture is the TV located?

A: left

Multi-view Images

Figure 1. Comprehensive scene perception with dual-vision (point
clouds and multi-view images).

1. Introduction

sion of QA tasks from 2D to 3D also broadens the scope of
cross-domain applications, such as visual language navigation [2, 36], embodied agents [14, 31] , and autonomous
driving [4, 28, 37]. However, compared with the 2D VQA
task, 3D QA introduces unique challenges that extend beyond planar visual understanding. These challenges primarily manifest in the necessity to accurately perceive complex
geometric relations among multiple scene entities and effectively reason about spatially semantic dependencies through
natural language interactions in 3D environments.
Many efforts have been made to address the challenges
of 3D QA. For example, ScanQA [3] introduced a 3D
perception-based model to fuse 3D and language information. To capture rich high-level semantic relations among
objects, 3DGraphQA [38] proposed a Graph Transformerbased model for intra-graph and inter-graph feature fusion.
However, most of these methods predominantly rely on 3D
point clouds as the primary source of visual information,
overlooking the critical role of multi-view images for comprehensive 3D scene perception and reasoning. For example, consider the question given in Fig. 1, “Which side of
the picture is the TV located?” not only requires recognizing entities in geometric scenes but also understanding the

Recently, 3D Question Answering (3D QA), the task of answering questions about 3D scenes, has emerged as a significant research area in artificial intelligence [22]. Unlike
traditional 2D Question Answering (2D QA), which relies
on flat images, 3D QA offers the potential for richer spatial comprehension and immersive interaction. The expan* Corresponding Author

14169

