This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperNet Fields: Efficiently Training Hypernetworks without
Ground Truth by Learning Weight Trajectories
Eric Hedlin1, 2 * Munawar Hayat2 Fatih Porikli2 Kwang Moo Yi1 Shweta Mahajan2
1
University of British Columbia 2 Qualcomm AI Research†

tra
je

cto
r

y

Supervision

Convergence

ce

est
ima

a
sp
ht
g
i
e

w

ted
tr

Gradient
Supervision

Initialization

Vanilla
Hypernetwork

aj ecto ry

Hypernetwork
Fields (Ours)

a) Overview

b) Example generations from HyperNet Fields

Condition

Figure 1. Teaser – We propose hypernetwork fields, where we learn the entire weight space trajectory instead of only the final state,
which allows us to train without ever needing to know the final converged weights. Our method can be applied to any application of
hypernetworks, including diffusion model personalization and modeling of 3D neural representations.

Abstract
To efficiently adapt large models or to train generative models of neural representations, Hypernetworks have drawn
interest. While hypernetworks work well, training them
is cumbersome, and often requires ground truth optimized
weights for each sample. However, obtaining each of these
weights is a training problem of its own—one needs to train,
e.g., adaptation weights or even an entire neural field for
hypernetworks to regress to. In this work, we propose a
method to train hypernetworks, without the need for any
per-sample ground truth. Our key idea is to learn a Hypernetwork ‘Field’ and estimate the entire trajectory of network weight training instead of simply its converged state.
In other words, we introduce an additional input to the Hypernetwork, the convergence state, which then makes it act
as a neural field that models the entire convergence pathway
of a task network. A critical benefit in doing so is that the
gradient of the estimated weights at any convergence state
must then match the gradients of the original task—this constraint alone is sufficient to train the Hypernetwork Field.

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through the
task of personalized image generation and 3D shape reconstruction from images and point clouds, demonstrating
competitive results without any per-sample ground truth.

1. Introduction
Various generative modeling tasks [39] require adaptation, thus data-dependent network weights, or in other
words, model parameters being adjusted according to various circumstances (conditions and user input). These
include personalized text-to-image generation where the
weights of the underlying personalization model, such as
DreamBooth [39], are fine-tuned on the concept of interest and used to generate target images conditioned on input
prompts. Another example is 3D modeling, where neural
* Work done as part of a summer internship.
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

22129

Inc.

