This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Embracing Collaboration Over Competition:
Condensing Multiple Prompts for Visual In-Context Learning
Jinpeng Wang1 *, Tianci Luo2∗ , Yaohua Zha1 , Yan Feng6 , Ruisheng Luo1 ,
Bin Chen2†, Tao Dai3 , Long Chen4 , Yaowei Wang5 , Shu-Tao Xia1,5
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2

3
5

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

Shenzhen University

4

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
wjp20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual In-Context Learning (VICL) enables adaptively
solving vision tasks by leveraging pixel demonstrations,
mimicking human-like task completion through analogy.
Prompt selection is critical in VICL, but current methods
assume the existence of a single “ideal” prompt in a pool
of candidates, which in practice may not hold true. Multiple suitable prompts may exist, but individually they often fall short, leading to difficulties in selection and the
exclusion of useful context. To address this, we propose
a new perspective: prompt condensation. Rather than relying on a single prompt, candidate prompts collaborate
to efficiently integrate informative contexts without sacrificing resolution. We devise C ONDENSER, a lightweight
external plugin that compresses relevant fine-grained context across multiple prompts. Optimized end-to-end with
the backbone, C ONDENSER ensures accurate integration
of contextual cues. Experiments demonstrate C ONDENSER
outperforms state-of-the-arts across benchmark tasks, showing superior context compression, scalability with more
prompts, and enhanced computational efficiency compared
to ensemble methods, positioning it as a highly competitive solution for VICL. Code is open-sourced at https:
//github.com/gimpong/CVPR25-Condenser.

6

Meituan, Beijing

chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn

ing (ICL) [6], especially with the advent of foundational
models [3, 26, 27]. Recent work with Large Language
Models (LLMs) [11, 33] and Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs)
[13, 38, 40] has demonstrated that prompting models using task-specific examples can efficiently adapt downstream
tasks, achieving comparable efficacy to in-weight learning
[4]. More inspiringly, the vision community has revealed
that vision backbones [2, 30] can also exhibit this property,
unlocking a novel paradigm as Visual ICL (VICL) [9, 14, 30].
As shown in Figure 1(a), VICL enables leveraging contextual
pixel cues from prompts (i.e., demonstrations), which helps
vision backbones solve tasks adaptively and effectively.

1. Introduction

Prompt selection plays a crucial role in VICL. While the
early work [2] selected prompts randomly, Zhang et al. [37]
suggested choosing prompts with higher relevance can notably enhance effectiveness. Based on this insight, a range
of efforts [24, 34, 37] has been devoted to selecting the
best prompt for the query image, typically using backbone’s
task performance conditioned by single prompts as signals
to learn prompt retrieval or ranking. Albeit remarkable
progress, these methods are soon reaching a plateau. Essentially, they operate on a competitive assumption—that there
exists a perfect prompt within the database to be retrieved.
However, as illustrated in Figure 1(b), this assumption may
be challenged in practice. There are often multiple suitable
prompts, but each one alone may fall short of being ideal. In
such cases, prompt selection may struggle to make a single
choice, inevitably dropping helpful prompts as context. This
limitation could restrict the generalizability of VICL.

Humans can complete tasks through imitation and analogy,
even when these tasks are difficult or unfamiliar. Could a
similar paradigm be extended to machines? This fundamental question has evoked research on In-Context Learn* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

We believe prompt candidates necessity collaboration
rather than exclusive competition in VICL. Combining multiple prompts is expected to enhance the compositional generalization ability, yet preliminary solutions, including downsampling and ensemble, still have clear limitations. The
downsampling methods [2, 29, 37] scale down sub-images

25156

