This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhysAnimator: Physics-Guided Generative Cartoon Animation
Tianyi Xie1,2˚
tianyixie77@ucla.edu

Rig

Yiwei Zhao1† Ying Jiang2
1
Netflix, 2 UCLA
yiweiz@netflix.com

Chenfanfu Jiang2

{yingjiang, cffjiang}@ucla.edu

Force

t

Figure 1. PhysAnimator is a novel framework that combines physics principles with video diffusion models to generate high-quality
animations from static anime illustrations, allowing users to specify external forces or rigging points for custom effects.

Abstract
Creating hand-drawn animation sequences is laborintensive and demands professional expertise. We introduce PhysAnimator, a novel approach for generating physically plausible meanwhile anime-stylized animation from
static anime illustrations. Our method seamlessly integrates physics-based simulations with data-driven generative models to produce dynamic and visually compelling
animations. To capture the fluidity and exaggeration characteristic of anime, we perform image-space deformable
body simulations on extracted mesh geometries. We enhance artistic control by introducing customizable energy
strokes and incorporating rigging point support, enabling
* Work done during the internship at Netflix.
† Corresponding author.

the creation of tailored animation effects such as wind interactions. Finally, we extract and warp sketches from the simulation sequence, generating a texture-agnostic representation, and employ a sketch-guided video diffusion model to
synthesize high-quality animation frames. The resulting animations exhibit temporal consistency and visual plausibility, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method in creating dynamic anime-style animations. See our project page
for more demos: https://xpandora.github.io/
PhysAnimator/.

1. Introduction
Dynamic visual effects are essential to the immersive quality of 2D animation. From the subtle sway of a character’s hair to the fluid motion of garments in response to

10793

