This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dataset Distillation with Neural Characteristic Function: A Minmax Perspective
Shaobo Wang1,2 Yicun Yang2 Zhiyuan Liu2 Chenghao Sun2
Xuming Hu3 Conghui He4 Linfeng Zhang1,2 *
1
2
SAI, SJTU
EPIC Lab, SJTU 3 HKUST, Guangzhou 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{shaobowang1009,zhanglinfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Synthetic Data

MSE

Dataset distillation has emerged as a powerful approach
for reducing data requirements in deep learning. Among
various methods, distribution matching-based approaches
stand out for their balance of computational efficiency and
strong performance. However, existing distance metrics
used in distribution matching often fail to accurately capture distributional differences, leading to unreliable measures of discrepancy. In this paper, we reformulate dataset
distillation as a minmax optimization problem and introduce Neural Characteristic Function Discrepancy (NCFD),
a comprehensive and theoretically grounded metric for
measuring distributional differences. NCFD leverages the
Characteristic Function (CF) to encapsulate full distributional information, employing a neural network to optimize the sampling strategy for the CF’s frequency arguments, thereby maximizing the discrepancy to enhance distance estimation. Simultaneously, we minimize the difference between real and synthetic data under this optimized
NCFD measure. Our approach, termed Neural Characteristic Function Matching (NCFM), inherently aligns the
phase and amplitude of neural features in the complex plane
for both real and synthetic data, achieving a balance between realism and diversity in synthetic samples. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves significant
performance gains over state-of-the-art methods on both
low- and high-resolution datasets. Notably, we achieve a
22.9% accuracy boost on ImageSquawk. Our method also
reduces GPU memory usage by over 300× and achieves
20× faster processing speeds compared to state-of-the-art
methods. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work to achieve lossless compression of CIFAR-100 on a
single NVIDIA 2080 Ti GPU using only 2.3 GB of memory.
The code for this work is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/gszfwsb/NCFM .

* Corresponding Author.

𝒵ℝ

෩1 |𝒵ℝ
min ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷

Real Data
𝒵ℝ

෩2 |𝒵ℝ
ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷

𝒵: Latent Space 𝜓: Parameterized Network

MMD

𝒵ℋ

෩1 |𝒵ℋ
min ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷

𝒵ℋ

෩2 |𝒵ℋ
ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷

෩ to minimize the distance within 𝒵.
(a) Previous paradigm: optimize 𝐷

Ours 𝒵𝜓
1

෩1 |𝒵𝜓
max ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷
1

𝒵𝜓2

෩1 |𝒵𝜓
ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷
2

𝒵𝜓2

෩1 |𝒵𝜓
min ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷
2

𝒵𝜓2

෩2 |𝒵𝜓
ℒ 𝐷, 𝐷
2

(b) Our minmax paradigm: first optimize 𝜓 to maximize the distance in
෩ to minimize the distance within 𝒵𝜓 .
parameterized space 𝒵𝜓 , then optimize 𝐷

Figure 1. Comparison of different paradigms for dataset distillation. (a) The MSE approach compares point-wise features within
Euclidean space, denoted as ZR , while MMD evaluates moment
differences in Hilbert space, ZH . (b) Our method redefines distribution matching as a minmax optimization problem, where the
distributional discrepancy is parameterized by a neural network ψ.
We begin by optimizing ψ to maximize the discrepancy, thereby
establishing the latent space Zψ , and subsequently optimize the
synthesized data D̃ to minimize this discrepancy within Zψ .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
progress across a range of tasks, largely due to the availability of vast amounts of training data. However, training
effectively with limited data remains challenging and crucial, particularly when large-scale datasets become too voluminous for storage. To address this, dataset distillation
has been proposed to condense a large, real dataset into a
smaller, synthetic one [6, 49, 51, 54, 58, 59]. Dataset distillation has been applied in various areas, including neural architecture search [34, 45], continual learning [15, 53], medical image computing [29], and privacy protection [7, 8, 11].
Among dataset distillation methods, feature or distribution matching (DM) approaches [48, 58] have gained popularity for their effective balance between high performance
and computational efficiency. Unlike bi-level optimizationbased distillation approaches [6, 20, 24, 57, 59], DM-based

25570

