This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse2DGS: Geometry-Prioritized Gaussian Splatting for
Surface Reconstruction from Sparse Views
Jiang Wu

2.81

Rui Li Yu Zhu✝ Rong Guo Jinqiu Sun Yanning Zhang✝
Northwestern Polytechnical University

Reconstruction Performance

1.26

1.27

Training Time

25min

CLMVS. 2DGS+CLMVS. Ours

SparseNeus

VolRecon

ReTR

2DGS

PGSR

GOF

Ours

10min

1.13

2DGS

Image

SparseNeus

Ours

Figure 1. Sparse2DGS boosts the strengths of Gaussian Splatting and Multi-view Stereo in sparse-view surface reconstruction, with
notable improvement over 2DGS [11], CLMVSNet [31], as well as their plain combination (left). Meanwhile, Sparse2DGS is 2× faster
than NeRF-based sparse-view method [20] (middle) and leads to complete and accurate reconstruction (right).

Abstract
We present a Gaussian Splatting method for surface reconstruction using sparse input views. Previous methods relying on dense views struggle with extremely sparse
Structure-from-Motion points for initialization. While
learning-based Multi-view Stereo (MVS) provides dense 3D
points, directly combining it with Gaussian Splatting leads
to suboptimal results due to the ill-posed nature of sparseview geometric optimization. We propose Sparse2DGS, an
MVS-initialized Gaussian Splatting pipeline for complete
and accurate reconstruction. Our key insight is to incorporate the geometric-prioritized enhancement schemes, allowing for direct and robust geometric learning under illposed conditions. Sparse2DGS outperforms existing methods by notable margins while being 2× faster than the
NeRF-based fine-tuning approach. Code is available at
https://github.com/Wuuu3511/Sparse2DGS.

typical methods require abundant input images, reconstructing accurate 3D surfaces from sparse views is particularly
challenging and is crucial for scenes that are frequently captured with limited images.
NeRF-based surface reconstruction methods [22] have
gained popularity by encoding scene geometry into an
occupancy field [17, 23] or a signed distance function
(SDF) [28, 38]. However, when faced with sparse views,
these methods often yield incomplete surfaces with artifacts
due to insufficient supervision. Although sparse-view methods [19, 20, 25, 34] use pre-trained feed-forward NeRFs to
provide geometric priors, they still exhibit limited generalization to unseen scenes.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [14] has leveraged Structure-from-Motion (SfM) point cloud to construct
Gaussian primitives for fast and high-quality novel view
synthesis (NVS). Subsequent works [4, 5, 7, 11, 41, 43] aim
to achieve more efficient 3D surface reconstruction using
3DGS. Notably, 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS) [11] proposes a 2D variant of Gaussian primitives, with disk-shaped
primitives suitable for geometry representation. However,
when dealing with sparse views, existing methods [4, 11,
43] struggle to produce faithful reconstructions due to initially over-sparse SfM points.
On the other hand, learning-based multi-view stereo
(MVS) [6, 16, 30, 36] predicts dense depth maps from

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D surfaces from multiple views is a fundamental task in computer vision and has been widely used in
autonomous driving [9, 18] and virtual reality [21]. While
✝ indicates corresponding authors.

11307

