This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterative Predictor-Critic Code Decoding for Real-World Image Dehazing
Jiayi Fu1 Siyu Liu1 Zikun Liu3 Chun-Le Guo1,2
Hyunhee Park4 Ruiqi Wu1 Guoqing Wang5 Chongyi Li1,2 *
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
3
Samsung R&D Institute China-Beijing 4 CIG, Samsung Electronics
5
Donghai Laboratory, Zhoushan, Zhejiang
{fujiayi,liusiyu29}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, zikun.liu@samsung.com,
guochunle@nankai.edu.cn, inextg.park@samsung.com,
wuruiqi@mail.nankai.edu.cn, gqwang0420@hotmail.com, lichongyi@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel Iterative Predictor-Critic Code Decoding framework for real-world image dehazing, abbreviated
as IPC-Dehaze, which leverages the high-quality codebook prior encapsulated in a pre-trained VQGAN. Apart
from previous codebook-based methods that rely on oneshot decoding, our method utilizes high-quality codes obtained in the previous iteration to guide the prediction of
the Code-Predictor in the subsequent iteration, improving code prediction accuracy and ensuring stable dehazing performance. Our idea stems from the observations
that 1) the degradation of hazy images varies with haze
density and scene depth, and 2) clear regions play crucial
cues in restoring dense haze regions. However, it is nontrivial to progressively reﬁne the obtained codes in subsequent iterations, owing to the difﬁculty in determining
which codes should be retained or replaced at each iteration. Another key insight of our study is to propose CodeCritic to capture interrelations among codes. The CodeCritic is used to evaluate code correlations and then resample a set of codes with the highest mask scores, i.e.,
a higher score indicates that the code is more likely to be
rejected, which helps retain more accurate codes and predict difﬁcult ones. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of our method over state-of-the-art methods in
real-world dehazing. Our project page can be found at
https://github.com/Jiayi-Fu/IPC-Dehaze.

1. Introduction
In real-world scenarios, capturing hazy images is a common occurrence, wherein the visual output exhibits diminished clarity and sharpness. This phenomenon is primarily
* Corresponding author

12700

Hazy image

RIDCP [38]

KA-Net [15]

IPC-Dehaze (Ours)

‫ݐ‬ൌͲ

As the iteration goes

‫ݐ‬ൌܶ

Iterative results of our IPC-Dehaze
Figure 1. A comparison between the state-of-the-art real-world
image dehazing methods and our IPC-Dehaze. In comparison, our
result is sharper and clearer, with less color distortion and overexposure. The bottom images present the results of each iteration in
our method, showing the continuous improvements with our core
Predictor-Critic mechanism.

attributable to the presence of atmospheric particles that irregularly disperse and scatter light. The presence of haze
can signiﬁcantly impact the visual quality or accuracy of
subsequent perception algorithms. Consequently, there has
been a growing interest in image dehazing, aiming to restore
clear images from their hazy counterparts.
Achieving a clean image from a hazy one is inherently
challenging. Traditional methods address this ill-posed

