This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperPC: A Single Diffusion Model for Point Cloud
Completion, Upsampling, Denoising, and Colorization
Yi Du, Zhipeng Zhao, Shaoshu Su, Sharath Golluri, Haoze Zheng, Runmao Yao, Chen Wang
Spatial AI & Robotics (SAIR) Lab, University at Buffalo
{yid, chenw}@sairlab.org

Abstract
Point cloud (PC) processing tasks—such as completion, upsampling, denoising, and colorization—are crucial in applications like autonomous driving and 3D reconstruction.
Despite substantial advancements, prior approaches often
address each of these tasks independently, with separate
models focused on individual issues. However, this isolated approach fails to account for the fact that defects like
incompleteness, low resolution, noise, and lack of color
frequently coexist, with each defect influencing and correlating with the others. Simply applying these models sequentially can lead to error accumulation from each model,
along with increased computational costs. To address these
challenges, we introduce SuperPC, the first unified diffusion model capable of concurrently handling all four tasks.
Our approach employs a three-level-conditioned diffusion
framework, enhanced by a novel spatial-mix-fusion strategy, to leverage the correlations among these four defects
for simultaneous, efficient processing. We show that SuperPC outperforms the state-of-the-art specialized models
as well as their combination on all four individual tasks.
Project website: https://sairlab.org/superpc/.

1. Introduction
Point cloud (PC) processing [19, 26] has become a cornerstone technique in many fields such as object recognition
[2, 81], mapping [56, 75], autonomous vehicle navigation
[29, 43], and 3D modeling [13, 51]. This diverse applicability stems from the ability of point cloud to capture the geometric intricacies of the physical world with high fidelity,
offering a detailed substrate from which nuanced computational analyses can be performed [5, 19, 26, 54].
Despite this critical need and importance, the prior PC
processing methods, either geometry-based or data-driven,
have typically concentrated on individual sub-tasks like denoising [35, 53], upsampling [21, 70], completion [72, 73],
and colorization [32, 58], rather than a single comprehensive solution. While some studies [9, 35, 36, 38] addressed

the partial combination of those tasks, there is still a lack of
a single model that addresses all four tasks simultaneously,
which could bring multiple benefits to this field. This is
because an integrated model may be advantageous not just
for its computational efficiency but also for preventing error
accumulation and allowing them to implicitly improve each
other due to the interconnectivity of the tasks. For instance,
in the experiments, we found that the error of the completion model accumulated and affected the upsampling; the
error pattern produced by an upsampling model often resulted in suboptimal denoising. As a result, we argue that
a single unified model that is capable of concurrently handling the four point cloud processing tasks is necessary.
To this end, we take PC processing as generative tasks
and resort to diffusion-based models [33, 33, 34, 36, 38, 55],
which have shown significant advancements on PC generation. Despite this, using diffusion models to address all four
tasks is challenging, and previous studies [33, 34, 36, 38]
have been limited to tackling either individual tasks. The
first limitation is their selective preservation of input information, whether global, local, or raw, using the input
point cloud solely as a condition to guide the diffusion process. These approaches lacks the ability to generate point
clouds that meet the requirements of all four tasks, as each
task possesses distinct characteristics and demands. For instance, the approach [34] relies solely on the global shape
latent features for guiding 3D shape generation, which results in a limited capacity to capture the local object details;
“PC2 ” [38] only employs the raw features of the input image as the condition, lacking the ability to preserve globallevel information. Another limitation of previous methods
is their restriction to a single modality. For instance, the
approach by Luo et al. [34] is confined to processing point
cloud inputs, while the method by Luke et al. [38] is limited
to handling only image inputs. As a result, they only work
for simple object-level PC like ShapeNet [7] but struggle on
complex scene-level PC such as KITTI-360 [31].
To address the first limitation, we introduce SuperPC,
which integrates a Three-Level-Conditioned (TLC) diffusion framework to simultaneously handle four tasks. For

16953

