This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Monocular Scene Flow Estimation in the Wild
Yiqing Liang1,2

Abhishek Badki1∗
1
NVIDIA

Hang Su1∗
James Tompkin2
2
Brown University

Orazio Gallo1

Figure 1. Our model for monocular scene flow estimation predicts accurate pointmaps and 3D offsets for dynamic scenes from two input
images (shown below each pane) captured by two cameras C1 and C2 at times t1 an t2 , respectively. The image shows an interpolation
of the pointmaps from C1 at t1 to C2 at t2 . These examples are from datasets not seen in training, showcasing the strong generalization
abilities of our method.

Abstract
Large models have shown generalization across datasets
for many low-level vision tasks, like depth estimation, but
no such general models exist for scene flow. Even though
scene flow prediction has wide potential, its practical use is
limited because of the lack of generalization of current predictive models. We identify three key challenges and propose
solutions for each. First, we create a method that jointly estimates geometry and motion for accurate prediction. Second,
we alleviate scene flow data scarcity with a data recipe that
affords us 1M annotated training samples across diverse synthetic scenes. Third, we evaluate different parameterizations
for scene flow prediction and adopt a natural and effective
parameterization. Our model outperforms existing methods
as well as baselines built on large-scale models in terms of
3D end-point error, and shows zero-shot generalization to
the casually captured videos from DAVIS and the robotic
manipulation scenes from RoboTAP. Overall, our approach
makes scene flow prediction more practical in-the-wild.
Website: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/lpr/zero msf/

1. Introduction
Scene flow (SF) captures geometric transformations of dynamic scenes by the motion of points in 3D. As such, its
accurate estimation can benefit applications like augmented
reality [47], autonomous driving [23], and robotics [115].
∗ indicates equal contribution

Yet, despite its potential, it is not commonly used in practice. One contributing factor is the limited generalization
ability of existing methods. This may be surprising given the
progress of large-scale models [10] on other low-level vision
tasks. For instance, the state-of-the-art approaches for tasks
like image segmentation [45] and depth estimation (singleand multi-view) [51, 107, 117, 118] lead the benchmarks
with impressive results.
Why is SF estimation different? We identify three critical
challenges that hinder the generalization ability of feedforward SF estimation from monocular RGB videos.
First, geometry and motion are entangled, and thus require joint reasoning. That is because the 2D displacement
we observe in image space is the combined effect of depth
and motion, so an error in estimating either one will result
in incorrect SF predictions. Even when predicting depth and
motion jointly, estimating SF remains ill-posed because of
the scale ambiguity, requiring effective learning to resolve it.
Second, good generalization requires training on large
and diverse datasets, but labeled SF data are scarce. Further, some datasets are metric and some are in relative units,
which can compromise learning if not properly accounted for.
While this scale issue is well known in single-image depth
estimation [83], it has not been addressed for SF estimation.
Existing methods do not account for both of these factors,
and therefore struggle to generalize to out-of-domain data.
Third, the estimation of SF is sensitive to the choice of
parametrization. We find that, using depth + optical flow or
taking the difference between the estimated 3D points before
and after motion both compromise the quality of the results.

21031

