This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-based Event Generation for High-Quality Image Deblurring
Xinan Xie1 Qing Zhang1,2 * Wei-Shi Zheng1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
xiexn9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Blurred Image

HI-Diff (image-only)

zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn

EFNet(event-based)

wszheng@ieee.org

Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Comparison with previous methods on image blurring. As shown, by leveraging event guidance generated by a diffusion model,
our method allows to produce high-quality deblurring results for images with complex motion blur, which are comparable to results of
EFNet [43], a recent event-based deblurring method using GT event as input, and clearly better than results produced by HI-Diff [5]), a
state-of-the-art image-only deblurring method.

Abstract

datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art image deblurring methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/XinanXie/EGDeblurring.

While event-based deblurring have demonstrated impressive results, they are impractical for consumer photos captured by cell phones and digital cameras that are
not equipped with the event sensor. To address this problem, we in this paper propose a novel deblurring framework called Event Generation Deblurring (EGDeblurring),
which allows to effectively deblur an image by generating event guidance describing the motion information using a diffusion model. Specifically, we design a motion
prior generation diffusion model and a feature extractor to
produce prior information beneficial for deblurring, rather
than generating the raw event representation. In order to
achieve effective fusion of motion prior information with
blurry images and produce high-quality results, we develop
a regression deblurring network embedded with a dualattention channel fusion block. Experiments on multiple

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is an important problem in computer
vision, aiming to recover a sharp image from the original
blurred input. Traditional methods primarily address the
problem by formulating an optimization that incorporates
various hand-crafted priors and assumptions [2, 3, 7, 11,
21, 24, 32, 39, 54]. In recent years, learning-based methods
[4, 8, 31, 42, 45, 47, 56] have made significant progress.
However, they are often less effective for images with complex motion blur, as shown in Figure 1.
To enhance the robustness to complex blurry images,
event-based deblurring methods [17, 27, 33, 40, 53, 60]
have been developed, where the motion information cap-

* Corresponding author.

2194

