This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CL-MoE: Enhancing Multimodal Large Language Model with Dual Momentum
Mixture-of-Experts for Continual Visual Question Answering
Tianyu Huai1 , Jie Zhou1 *, Xingjiao Wu1 , Qin Chen1 , Qingchun Bai2 , Ze Zhou3 , Liang He1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
Shanghai Open University, Shanghai, China 3 ZhuQingTing Data Technology (Zhejiang) Co., Ltd.
70

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have garnered widespread attention from researchers due to their
remarkable understanding and generation capabilities in
visual language tasks (e.g., visual question answering).
However, the rapid pace of knowledge updates in the real
world makes offline training of MLLMs costly, and when
faced with non-stationary data streams, MLLMs suffer from
catastrophic forgetting during learning. In this paper,
we propose an MLLMs-based dual momentum Mixture-ofExperts (CL-MoE) framework for continual visual question answering (VQA). We integrate MLLMs with continual learning to utilize the rich commonsense knowledge in
LLMs. We introduce a Dual-Router MoE (RMoE) strategy to select the global and local experts using task-level
and instance-level routers, to robustly assign weights to the
experts most appropriate for the task. Then, we design a
dynamic Momentum MoE (MMoE) to update the parameters of experts dynamically based on the relationships between the experts and tasks/instances, so that the model can
absorb new knowledge while maintaining existing knowledge. The extensive experimental results indicate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on 10 VQA
tasks, proving the effectiveness of our approach.

Average Precision (%)

Multitask

CL-MoE

50

EWC

MAS

30

EWC
10
2017

ER

DER

VS

ER

DER

VS

MAS

(Upperbound)

VQACL
VQACL

Vanilla

(Lowerbound)

Model Architecture
VL-T5
LLaVA-7B
2019

2021
Date of Publication

2023

2025

Figure 1. Progress of continual learning over time on VQA v2.
We give the results of previous CL methods based on VL-T5 and
LLaVA. Multitask represents the upper bound of the model, which
trains over all the tasks once.

1. Introduction

hance their ability to follow human instructions.
MLLMs have demonstrated remarkable abilities in
learning new tasks and knowledge by training on offline
data. However, training MLLMs with data streams in an
incremental learning setting can result in forgetting previously acquired knowledge, known as catastrophic forgetting [16, 24]. Combining new instructions with the original
ones for multi-task training from scratch can address this issue. Nevertheless, it is impractical due to the high costs and
the relentless influx of data in the real world. Hence, it is
essential to explore ways to follow new human instructions
and assimilate new knowledge while preserving the original
knowledge of MLLM as much as possible.
Many efforts have been made previously about continual
learning (CL) to improve catastrophic forgetting, which can
be divided into regularization- and rehearsal-based methods [44]. For regularization-based methods, MAS [3] estimates importance weights for network parameters in an unsupervised and online way, which allows the model to adapt
to unlabeled data. NPC [34] retains existing knowledge by
controlling the plasticity of each neuron or filter in CNN and
proposes a memory-efficient consolidation algorithm. For
rehearsal-based methods, ER [7] proposes using a memory
bank to store a tiny episodic memory to be trained jointly
with the current task. DER [5] proposes mixing rehearsal

In recent years, multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) [2, 8, 26, 28, 43] have attracted widespread attention for their outstanding abilities of understanding and
generating in visual language tasks. These models typically
employ pre-training to acquire comprehensive knowledge
and utilize fine-tuning synchronized with human instructions. The pre-training phase focuses on aligning visual
and language modalities through extensive data and various techniques. During the fine-tuning phase, these aligned
models use meticulously crafted instruction datasets to en* Corresponding author, jzhou@cs.ecnu.edu.cn.

19608

