This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evaluating Vision-Language Models as Evaluators in Path Planning
Mohamed Aghzal1 , Xiang Yue2 , Erion Plaku3 ,* Ziyu Yao1
1
George Mason University, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 National Science Foundation
{maghzal, ziyuyao}@gmu.edu, xyue2@andrew.cmu.edu, eplaku@nsf.gov

Abstract

horizon planning have rendered them ineffective as endto-end motion planners [2, 3, 11, 75]. This has made researchers wonder: if these models cannot be good motion
planners themselves, can they still support a motion planning framework? Intuitively, using these models still holds
the promise of significantly enhancing the motion planning framework, as they have learned extensive factual and
commonsense knowledge that could benefit planning during their pre-training. As a result, there has been an emerging paradigm exploring how these models can be leveraged
in combination with traditional methods [27].

Despite their promise to perform complex reasoning,
large language models (LLMs) have been shown to have
limited effectiveness in end-to-end planning. This has inspired an intriguing question: if these models cannot plan
well, can they still contribute to the planning framework as
a helpful plan evaluator? In this work, we generalize this
question to consider LLMs augmented with visual understanding, i.e., Vision-Language Models (VLMs). We introduce PATH E VAL, a novel benchmark evaluating VLMs as
plan evaluators in complex path-planning scenarios. Succeeding in the benchmark requires a VLM to be able to abstract traits of optimal paths from the scenario description,
demonstrate precise low-level perception on each path, and
integrate this information to decide the better path. Our
analysis of state-of-the-art VLMs reveals that these models face significant challenges on the benchmark. We observe that the VLMs can precisely abstract given scenarios to identify the desired traits and exhibit mixed performance in integrating the provided information. Yet, their vision component presents a critical bottleneck, with models
struggling to perceive low-level details about a path. Our
experimental results show that this issue cannot be trivially
addressed via end-to-end fine-tuning; rather, task-specific
discriminative adaptation of these vision encoders is needed
for these VLMs to become effective path evaluators.12

One particularly interesting approach within this line of
work involves using these models as plan evaluators. Motivated by the intuition that “evaluation is easier than generation” [31], several efforts have explored leveraging these
models as “critics” to assess the quality of generated plans
[5, 21, 73, 83]. However, most of these efforts have focused
on scenarios that require only limited, high-level visual perception, without necessitating fine-grained or precise perceptual abilities. On the other hand, while there have been
prior works similarly investigating VLMs’ low-level perception [26, 64], studies specifically about the use of these
models in planning remain limited. Tasks such as motion
planning often require fine-grained visual understanding in
highly specific contexts, while also drawing on broad commonsense knowledge acquired during pre-training. Hence,
there is a pressing need to investigate the potential of VLMs
to understand both low-level visual details and leverage
these visual signals for high-level reasoning.

1. Introduction

In this work, we explore whether we can utilize VLMs
as evaluators in highly intricate continuous path planning
problems. We introduce PATH E VAL (Figure 1), a controllable benchmark designed around path planning in complex
environments under diverse commonsense decision-making
scenarios (e.g., A firefighting robot has to cover as much of
the area as possible to extinguish fires and scout for survivors, thus needs to prioritize paths with more coverage
and higher clearance). Traditionally, encoding constraints
in a planning algorithm requires significant human effort in
hand-crafting scenario-specific criteria for path evaluation,
such that the constraints can be injected into the planner

The impressive capabilities of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [6, 8, 71] and Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
[82] have led to an increasing interest in applying them to
automated motion planning and navigation tasks [50, 51].
However, the inherent limitations of these models in long* The work by E. Plaku is supported by (while serving at) the National
Science Foundation. Any opinion, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
1 Source code: https://github.com/MohamedAghzal/PathEval
2 Dataset: https://huggingface.co/datasets/maghzal/PathEval

6886

