This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-Supervised State-Space Model with Dynamic Stacking Filter for
Real-World Video Deraining
Shangquan Sun1,2
Wenqi Ren3,4,5
Juxiang Zhou6
7
6
Shu Wang
Jianhou Gan
Xiaochun Cao3†
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
4
MoE Key Laboratory of Information Technology
5
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
6
Key Laboratory of Educational Information for Nationalities, Yunnan Normal University
7
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Fuzhou University
shangquansun@gmail.com, {renwq3,caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Significant progress has been made in video restoration under rainy conditions over the past decade, largely propelled
by advancements in deep learning. Nevertheless, existing
methods that depend on paired data struggle to generalize effectively to real-world scenarios, primarily due to the
disparity between synthetic and authentic rain effects. To
address these limitations, we propose a dual-branch spatiotemporal state-space model to enhance rain streak removal
in video sequences. Specifically, we design spatial and temporal state-space model layers to extract spatial features
and incorporate temporal dependencies across frames, respectively. To improve multi-frame feature fusion, we derive a dynamic stacking filter, which adaptively approximates statistical filters for superior pixel-wise feature refinement. Moreover, we develop a median stacking loss
to enable semi-supervised learning by generating pseudoclean patches based on the sparsity prior of rain. To further explore the capacity of deraining models in supporting
other vision-based tasks in rainy environments, we introduce a novel real-world benchmark focused on object detection and tracking in rainy conditions. Our method is extensively evaluated across multiple benchmarks containing numerous synthetic and real-world rainy videos, consistently
demonstrating its superiority in quantitative metrics, visual
quality, efficiency, and its utility for downstream tasks.

Min

Median

(a) Rain Streak Removal

Mean

Max

DSF

(b) Noise Reduction

(c) Empty Filling

(d) Ours

Figure 1. The functionality of various stacking filters in video
restoration. With aligned candidate frames, (a) shows that the min
and median filters effectively remove falling rain streaks, while
(b) and (c) illustrate how the mean and max filters aid in noise
reduction and filling missing pixels, respectively. Our dynamic
stacking filter can adaptively approximate these filters at the pixel
level, facilitating versatile frame fusion.

impairing downstream high-level vision tasks such as
object detection [23, 43, 45] and tracking [20]. Given
the prevalence of rain as an adverse weather condition,
effective rain streak removal is essential.

1. Introduction

Since the advent of deep learning, numerous architectures have been developed to tackle this issue, including
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [7, 60, 66], Transformers [8, 46], and sequential models [54]. Despite these
advancements, two key challenges persist: the disparity between synthetic and real-world rain streaks, and the practical application of deraining methods in real-world downstream tasks. Model-based methods can effectively remove
rain streaks from real-world rainy frames by solving complex, prior-based objective functions [27, 28, 52]. However, the high computational demands and manually defined
hyper-parameters of model-based methods limit their real-

Rain streaks in captured videos or images obscure the
background, diminishing image quality and potentially
†Corresponding author.

26114

