This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Keep the Balance: A Parameter-Efficient Symmetrical Framework
for RGB+X Semantic Segmentation
∗

∗

†

Jiaxin Cai1 , Jingze Su1 , Qi Li1 , Wenjie Yang1 , Shu Wang1 , Tiesong Zhao1 , Shengfeng He2 , Wenxi Liu1
1
Fuzhou University
2
Singapore Management University

Abstract
Multimodal semantic segmentation is a critical challenge
in computer vision, with early methods suffering from high
computational costs and limited transferability due to full
fine-tuning of RGB-based pre-trained parameters. Recent studies, while leveraging additional modalities as supplementary prompts to RGB, still predominantly rely on
RGB, which restricts the full potential of other modalities. To address these issues, we propose a novel symmetric
parameter-efficient fine-tuning framework for multimodal
segmentation, featuring with a modality-aware prompting
and adaptation scheme, to simultaneously adapt the capabilities of a powerful pre-trained model to both RGB
and X modalities. Furthermore, prevalent approaches use
the global cross-modality correlations of attention mechanism for modality fusion, which inadvertently introduces
noise across modalities. To mitigate this noise, we propose
a dynamic sparse cross-modality fusion module to facilitate effective and efficient cross-modality fusion. To further
strengthen the above two modules, we propose a training
strategy that leverages accurately predicted dual-modality
results to self-teach the single-modality outcomes. In comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that our method
outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches across six
multimodal segmentation scenarios with minimal computation cost.

Figure 1. Feature visualization comparison between the representative method with an asymmetrical network structure, CMNeXt [67], and our proposed method with a symmetric network
structure. CMNeXt [67] treats depth as an auxiliary modality, leading to misidentifications in highlighted regions by RGB
but correctly predicted by depth, resulting in false positives. In
contrast, our model leverages the representational power of pretrained models to enhance depth features, equating their contribution with RGB features and achieving superior results.

1. Introduction

tion blur. These limitations are particularly critical in realworld applications, especially safety-sensitive ones, like autonomous driving. Therefore, there is a burgeoning interest
in integrating multimodal data to achieve more comprehensive information acquisition, e.g., [5, 9, 31, 39, 47, 60].
Prevailing methods [42, 60, 66] in the field of multimodal segmentation utilize independent backbones for each
modality, emulating a symmetric structure, to leverage their
distinct capabilities. These methods rely on a fully finetuned training (FFT) strategy. With the success of prompt
tuning in various domains, prompt-tuning based methods
have emerged, significantly alleviating the computational
burden. These methods typically employ asymmetric network architectures, primarily focusing on the RGB modality while treating other modalities as prompts [12, 19].
However, these methods are constrained by two primary
limitations: (1) their asymmetric architecture inherently relegates the X modality to a supportive role, thereby failing
to fully leverage its potential (See Fig. 1); and (2) the prevalent approach to modality fusion relies on attention-based

Semantic segmentation, which aims to assign a semantic category to each pixel within an image, is a cornerstone task for scene analysis across a variety of contexts
[6, 14, 69]. Despite the promising outcomes, segmentation
methods that rely solely on RGB data often encounter difficulties in complex and challenging scenarios, such as extreme illumination conditions, background clutter, and mo* Equal contribution (jiaxincai528@163.com).
† Corresponding author (wenxi.liu@hotmail.com).

10587

