This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Personalized Search with Regularized Low-Rank Parameter Updates
Fiona Ryan1,2∗ , Josef Sivic2,3 , Fabian Caba Heilbron2 , Judy Hoffman1 , James M. Rehg4 , Bryan Russell2
1
Georgia Tech, 2 Adobe Research, 3 CIIRC CTU, 4 UIUC

POLAR

Textual Inversion

(Ours: Internal Parameter Update)

Abstract
compare

Personalized vision-language retrieval seeks to recognize
new concepts (e.g., “my dog Fido”) from only a few examples. This task is challenging because it requires not
only learning a new concept from a few images, but also
integrating the personal and general knowledge together to
recognize the concept in different contexts. In this paper,
we show how to effectively adapt the internal representation of a vision-language dual encoder model for personalized vision-language retrieval. We find that regularized
low-rank adaption of a small set of parameters in the language encoder’s final layer serves as a highly effective alternative to textual inversion for recognizing the personal
concept while preserving general knowledge. Additionally,
we explore strategies for combining parameters of multiple
learned personal concepts, finding that parameter addition
is effective. To evaluate how well general knowledge is preserved in a finetuned representation, we introduce a metric that measures image retrieval accuracy based on captions generated by a vision language model (VLM). Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on two benchmarks for personalized image retrieval with natural language queries – DeepFashion2 and ConCon-Chi – outperforming the prior art by 4% − 22% on personal retrievals.

1. Introduction
Personalizing a vision-language retrieval model (PerVL)
aims to adapt a pretrained vision-language dual encoder
model (e.g., CLIP [27]) to recognize new concepts (e.g.,
“my dog Fido”) from just a few examples [7]. This task is
important for search applications that need to identify concepts missing from the pretrained model’s knowledge, such
as searching one’s personal photo library for a specific person, object, or pet. PerVL is challenging because it requires
not only learning a new concept from a few visual examples,
but also reasoning about the personal concept and general
knowledge together to retrieve the concept in different contexts. For instance, searching for “my dog Fido catching
*Work partially done during internship at Adobe Research.

CLIP
Text
Encoder

compare

CLIP
Image
Encoder

“A photo of

ℱ

LR update

”

CLIP
Text
Encoder

CLIP
Image
Encoder

“A photo
of V*”
Retrieval
image

Retrieval
image

Personal
Train image
Optimized during personalization

Personal
Train image
Optimized during pretraining

Frozen

Figure 1. Left: Prior works use a pretrained textual inversion network (F) to compute a pseudo-token to represent a new concept,
which may be further optimized during personalization. Right: We
present POLAR, which represents new concepts as a small lowrank parameter update within the text encoder. Instead of inserting
a learned pseudo-token to the text query, we use a fixed vocabulary
token V*. We show that our method is effective at recognizing the
personal concept from a few examples while retaining the model’s
general knowledge, and does not require large scale pretraining.

a frisbee” requires both personal knowledge (“Fido”) and
general knowledge (“catching a frisbee”).
Recent approaches for PerVL use textual inversion to
learn a pseudo-text token (e.g., “V*”) for each new personal concept by inverting from the target training images
to the token [4, 7] (illustrated in Figure 1 (left)). These
pseudo-text tokens require updating only a minimal set of
parameters, and they can be used within a natural language
query as input to the language encoder (e.g., “V* catching a frisbee”). Typically, these approaches train a textual inversion network on large-scale data to predict a token representing a new concept, which may then be further
optimized during personalization. While these approaches
avoid updating the model’s internal parameters, preventing
the “overriding” of its general knowledge, their ability to
represent the personal concept is limited to the single input text token. Furthermore, the token affects the entire text
embedding process and can interfere with the language encoder’s general knowledge. Consequently, textual inversion

19748

