This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COBRA: COmBinatorial Retrieval Augmentation for Few-Shot Adaptation
Arnav M. Das*

Gantavya Bhatt* Lilly Kumari Sahil Verma
University of Washington, Seattle

Jeff Bilmes

{arnavmd2, gbhatt2, bilmes}@uw.edu

Abstract
Retrieval augmentation, the practice of retrieving additional
data from large auxiliary pools, has emerged as an effective technique for enhancing model performance in the lowdata regime. Prior approaches have employed only nearestneighbor based strategies for data selection, which retrieve
auxiliary samples with high similarity to instances in the target task. However, these approaches are prone to selecting
highly redundant samples, since they fail to incorporate any
notion of diversity. In our work, we first demonstrate that
data selection strategies used in prior retrieval-augmented
few-shot adaptation settings can be generalized using a class
of functions known as Combinatorial Mutual Information
(CMI) measures. We then propose COBRA (COmBinatorial Retrieval Augmentation), which employs an alternative
CMI measure that considers both diversity and similarity
to a target dataset. COBRA consistently outperforms previous retrieval approaches across image classification tasks
and few-shot learning techniques when used to retrieve samples from LAION-2B. COBRA introduces negligible computational overhead to the cost of retrieval while providing
significant gains in downstream model performance.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of web-scale data sources, retrieval has
become an immensely popular technique to improve model
performance. Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) has
achieved much success in natural language, where additional
data is retrieved from auxiliary sources to supplement model
knowledge and guide the output of large language models
(LLMs) at inference time [41, 54, 75, 85]. More recently,
retrieval has been leveraged to select additional weakly labeled training samples from external image-caption data
sources that are relevant to a target image classification task
[58, 94, 100]. This strategy enables practitioners to train
performant models on domains where labeled datasets are
scarce and small, without incurring any extra labeling costs.
Web-scale datasets are highly heterogeneous and often
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. COBRA uses the target pool to select diverse and relevant
samples from a large web-scale auxiliary pool. The retrieved data
and the target data are then used to train a few-shot learner with a
CLIP backbone.

contain massive amounts of data that are irrelevant to a
specific downstream task [33, 80]. Therefore, it is natural for retrieval strategies to assess the relevance of each
sample from an auxiliary retrieval pool using some notion
of similarity to the target dataset. To this end, past work
typically considers nearest-neighbor based retrieval strategies, which score each auxiliary sample from the retrieval
pool based on its similarity to a class of images in the target task, and retrieve the samples with the highest scores
[37, 58, 94, 100, 107]. However, independently scoring the
auxiliary data in a sample-wise manner neglects notions of
diversity of the retrieved set and may induce redundancy. Diversity has been shown to be a key ingredient in data subset
selection for many different tasks [2, 7, 9, 81], but has not
been employed in the context of retrieval augmentation. In
this work, we seek to answer the following question: Can
we improve the effectiveness of retrieval augmentation by
using a diversity-aware data selection strategy?
We propose the use of a class of functions called Combinatorial Mutual Information (CMI) functions for retrieval.
CMI functions capture the similarity between sets [9, 38] and
have been employed in various contexts that require targeted
data subset selection [38, 50, 52]. We demonstrate that CMI
measures are inherently well-suited for retrieval augmentation by showing that the underlying objective used in nearestneighbor based retrieval strategies are instances of this func-

20534

