This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Locomotive Crowd Behavior Generation
Inhwan Bae, Junoh Lee and Hae-Gon Jeon*
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea
{inhwanbae, juno}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr
3.0s

2.7s

User Control

Group
Appearance

Start point

Scene-Level

Destination

Controllability
Group
Walking

Collision
Avoidance

0.0s

StateSwitching

Locomotion
Trajectory

Enable control

Population size

min

max

Appearance map

None

Population density map

None

Agent-Level

Enable control

Agent type

Pedestrian Bicycle

Car

Walking pace

slow

fast

Starting point

Select...

Destination point

Select...

Figure 1. Generating realistic, continuous crowd behaviors with learned dynamics. Given a scene image, CrowdES iteratively populates the
environment and synthesizes diverse locomotion patterns to create lifelike crowd scenarios. CrowdES also allows users to control parameters
to achieve tailored and flexible outcomes.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Modeling and reproducing crowd behaviors are important in
various domains including psychology, robotics, transport
engineering and virtual environments. Conventional methods have focused on synthesizing momentary scenes, which
have difficulty in replicating the continuous nature of realworld crowds. In this paper, we introduce a novel method for
automatically generating continuous, realistic crowd trajectories with heterogeneous behaviors and interactions among
individuals. We first design a crowd emitter model. To do this,
we obtain spatial layouts from single input images, including
a segmentation map, appearance map, population density
map and population probability, prior to crowd generation.
The emitter then continually places individuals on the timeline by assigning independent behavior characteristics such
as agents’ type, pace, and start/end positions using diffusion
models. Next, our crowd simulator produces their long-term
locomotions. To simulate diverse actions, it can augment
their behaviors based on a Markov chain. As a result, our
overall framework populates the scenes with heterogeneous
crowd behaviors by alternating between the proposed emitter and simulator. Note that all the components in the proposed framework are user-controllable. Lastly, we propose
a benchmark protocol to evaluate the realism and quality of
the generated crowds in terms of the scene-level population
dynamics and the individual-level trajectory accuracy. We
demonstrate that our approach effectively models diverse
crowd behavior patterns and generalizes well across different geographical environments. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/InhwanBae/CrowdES.
* Corresponding author

Crowds exhibit highly complex behaviors, because people
are driven by individual goals, and are influenced by other
crowd members and environmental factors [196]. Synthesizing these behaviors is crucial for various applications such
as autonomous driving [60], computer games [36], virtual
cinematography [135] and urban planning [168]. Unfortunately, creating vivid, lifelike crowd behaviors requires
labor-intensive human annotation. Artists or graphic designers must manually position agents in virtual environments,
and employ handcrafted intelligence to replicate natural behavioral motions.
To accelerate these tasks, many efforts have been made
to automatically populate the environments using interactive authoring [169] and procedural modeling [72, 199], and
motion synthesis using rule-[135]/force-[50]/velocity-based
approaches [170]. Learning-based methods have recently
been used to facilitate realistic behavior planning by integrating visual information and contextual cues [19, 71, 114, 132].
However, because a wide variety of crowd collective patterns
emerge from self-organization, as yet a holistic framework
for learning and generating realistic human dynamics is, to
the best of our knowledge, still unavailable.
Meanwhile, research into automatic actor placement has
begun for traffic scene generation [31, 38, 161]. In this
task, generative models augment plausible agent layouts on
high-definition maps of the surrounding area [93, 128, 160].
However, by generating momentary 2D distributions of vehicles, such methods are hardly able to handle the continuous,
evolving nature of real-world environments.
In this paper, our goal is to automatically produce con-

22416

