This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Link-based Contrastive Learning for
One-Shot Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Yue Zhang Mingyue Bin YuyangZhang Zhongyuan Wang Zhen Han Chao Liang*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software(NERCMS)
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan
{moozy924, bin mingyue, 2021302131204, hanzhen, cliang}@whu.edu.cn, wzy hope@163.com

Abstract

…

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) transfers knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain via distribution alignment. However, in realworld scenarios like public safety or access control, obtaining sufficient source data is challenging, limiting existing UDA methods. This paper investigates a realistic but
rarely studied problem called one-shot unsupervised domain adaptation (OSUDA), where only one source example per category is available. OSUDA faces dual challenges in feature learning and domain alignment due to the
extreme source data scarcity. To address these, we propose link-based contrastive learning (LCL), a simple yet
effective approach for OSUDA. LCL leverages in-domain
links to learn discriminative features from abundant unlabeled target data and cross-domain links to achieve precise domain alignment with only one source sample per
category. Extensive experiments on four domain adaptation benchmarks (VisDA-2017, Office-31, Office-Home, and
DomainNet) demonstrate LCL’s effectiveness under the OSUDA setting. Additionally, we construct a real-world OSUDA surveillance face recognition dataset, where LCL consistently improves recognition performance across various
face recognition methods.

ID = 001

ID = ?

ID = ?

Source

ID = ?
Target

…
ID = 002

ID = ?

ID = ?

ID = ?

Figure 1. A real-world cross-domain surveillance video face
recognition task (eyes are obscured for the sake of privacy protection.). The source domain contains only one clear registration
portrait for each identity, and the target domain contains abundant
blurry and angled faces captured by surveillance cameras.

data, focusing on learning discriminative knowledge from
the source and aligning data distributions across domains.
In real-world scenarios, however, abundant source data
can be hard to obtain, leading to new research directions.
Few-shot UDA (FUDA) methods [22, 52] address cases
with very few labeled source samples but abundant unlabeled source data for self-supervised learning and distribution estimation. Source-free DA (SFDA) methods
[21, 28, 51] handle scenarios where source data are unavailable during adaptation, using a model pretrained on
fully-supervised source data to approximate discriminative
knowledge and source domain distributions.
This paper studies a realistic but more challenging setting called one-shot UDA (OSUDA), where the source domain is composed of only one example from each category
and the target domain contains abundant unlabeled samples.1 Take a real-world surveillance video face recognition task as an example: as shown in Figure 1, each person
has one clear frontal face image (source domain) and many
blurry angled faces from high-mounted cameras (target do-

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable performance in the
past decade. But due to the domain shift problem [11], deep
neural networks trained on specific datasets often fail to
generalize to new domains. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods [17, 18, 30, 47, 55] address this issue
by transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain
to an unlabeled target domain. Conventional UDA methods assume abundant labeled source and unlabeled target

1 In the current OSUDA problem, we confine our study to the simplest
close-set setting [4], in which the source and target domain share the same
set of category labels.

* Chao Liang is the corresponding author.

4916

