This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Regularization-Guided Equivariant Approach for Image Restoration
Qi Xie1,†
Deyu Meng1,2,3
Jiahong Fu1, *
Yulu Bai1, *
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macao
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
https://github.com/yulu919/EQ-REG

Abstract
Equivariant and invariant deep learning models have been
developed to exploit intrinsic symmetries in data, demonstrating significant effectiveness in certain scenarios. However, these methods often suffer from limited representation accuracy and rely on strict symmetry assumptions that
may not hold in practice. These limitations pose a significant drawback for image restoration tasks, which demands
high accuracy and precise symmetry representation. To address these challenges, we propose a rotation-equivariant
regularization strategy that adaptively enforces the appropriate symmetry constraints on the data while preserving
the network’s representational accuracy. Specifically, we
introduce EQ-Reg, a regularizer designed to enhance rotation equivariance, which innovatively extends the insights of
data-augmentation-based and equivariant-based methodologies. This is achieved through self-supervised learning and the spatial rotation and cyclic channel shift of
feature maps deduce in the equivariant framework. Our
approach firstly enables a non-strictly equivariant network
suitable for image restoration, providing a simple and adaptive mechanism for adjusting equivariance based on task.
Extensive experiments across three low-level tasks demonstrate the superior accuracy and generalization capability
of our method, outperforming state-of-the-art approaches.

a

d

CNN+Data Aug.

EQ-CNN

e

EQ-Reg

f

Figure 1. The feature map of the trained neural network for
CNN+Data Aug., EQ-CNN[11], and the proposed EQ-Reg.

CNNs across various computer vision tasks, including image restoration (IR), segmentation, and recognition[2]. Recent advances [3–10] have highlighted the crucial role of incorporating transformation symmetry priors, such as equivariant networks, in the design of network architectures.
Data augmentation is one of the most commonly used
techniques for introducing equivariance to transformations
beyond simple translation [3, 4, 6]. The idea is to enrich the
training set with transformed samples and train networks
on the augmented data set to achieve a model that is robust to transformations. A key advantage of this approach is
that it enhances the network’s equivariance without necessitating any structural modifications. As a result, it remains
both highly feasible and effective, preserving the representational capacity while introducing transformation robustness. This is why it continues to be a widely adopted strategy in IR tasks.
However, there are also notable limitations in dataaugmentation-based methods. The primary issue is that supervision imposed on the network is overly simplistic, relying solely on self-supervision at the final output. As shown
in Fig.2 (a), it is indeed a non-trivial task to construct regulation for feature maps in commonly used CNN, as the
transformations of feature maps are unpredictable when the
input image occurs transformation. While in current dataaugmentation approaches, the internal feature layers of the

1. Introduction
Various types of transformation symmetry can be observed
in both local features and global semantic representations
of images, including translation, rotation, reflective and
scaling symmetries[1]. Compared to fully connected networks, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) incorporate
translation symmetry into their architecture. This intrinsic property has contributed to the widespread success of
* Equal contribution.

c

b

† Corresponding author.

2300

