This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HEIE: MLLM-Based Hierarchical Explainable AIGC Image
Implausibility Evaluator
Fan Yang1,2,5 * Ru Zhen3 * Jianing Wang4 Yanhao Zhang3† Haoxiang Chen3
Haonan Lu3 Sicheng Zhao1,2 ‡ Guiguang Ding1,2 ‡
1
Tsinghua University 2 BNRist 3 OPPO AI Center
4
Peking University 5 Hangzhou Zhuoxi Institute of Brain and Intelligence
yfthu@outlook.com, {zhenru1,zhangyanhao,luhaonan}@oppo.com,
schzhao@gmail.com, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

(b) MLLMs

(a) Specialized Models

Insufficient perception of detailed implausibility

Lack the ability to explain and analyze.

In this AIGC image, which areas demonstrate implausibility?

AIGC images are prevalent across various fields, yet they
frequently suffer from quality issues like artifacts and unnatural textures. Specialized models aim to predict defect region heatmaps but face two primary challenges: (1)
lack of explainability, failing to provide reasons and analyses for subtle defects, and (2) inability to leverage common sense and logical reasoning, leading to poor generalization. Multimodal large language models (MLLMs)
promise better comprehension and reasoning but face their
own challenges: (1) difficulty in fine-grained defect localization due to the limitations in capturing tiny details, and
(2) constraints in providing pixel-wise outputs necessary for
precise heatmap generation. To address these challenges,
we propose HEIE: a novel MLLM-Based Hierarchical
Explainable Image Implausibility Evaluator. We introduce
the CoT-Driven Explainable Trinity Evaluator, which integrates heatmaps, scores, and explanation outputs, using
CoT to decompose complex tasks into subtasks of increasing
difficulty and enhance interpretability. Our Adaptive Hierarchical Implausibility Mapper synergizes low-level image features with high-level mapper tokens from LLMs, enabling precise local-to-global hierarchical heatmap predictions through an uncertainty-based adaptive token approach. Moreover, we propose a new dataset: ExplAIGI-Eval, designed to facilitate interpretable implausibility evaluation of AIGC images. Our method demonstrates state-of-the-art performance through extensive experiments. Our project is at https://yfthu.github.io/HEIE/.

Specialized
Model

Impedes users’
understanding of
defect causes.

Explanation: N/A

MLLM

Heatmap:
N/A

(c) Ours: Hierarchical Explainable Image Implausibility Evaluator
1. Image Description

Multimodal Large Language Model

CoT Instruction

A young woman with long, wavy silver-blue hair …

2. Problematic Regions Identification
Eye,hands …

3. Adaptive Hierarchical Implausibility Mapper
Uncertainty

Global

Local

4. Implausibility Region Analysis
⚫
⚫

Eye：Misaligned, inconsistent anatomy and perspective …
Hands: Distorted, unnaturally thin fingers, incorrect proportions …

5. Verisimilitude Score Prediction
Based on the overall analysis, the plausibility score is 0.6812.

Figure 1. (a) Specialized models lack the ability to explain and
analyze subtle implausibility regions, hindering understanding for
general users. (b) MLLMs struggle with precise localization of
local defects and cannot directly output pixel-level implausibility
areas. (c) Our CoT-Driven Explainable Trinity Evaluator can generate heatmaps, analyses, and scores. In our Adaptive Hierarchical Implausibility Mapper, local and global heatmaps are predicted
separately, improving the localization of tiny implausibilities.

AIGC images across various fields. However, they often
face quality issues such as artifacts, unnatural textures, and
problematic regions. Accordingly, many studies focus on
the evaluation of AIGC images [22, 47, 48]. Current evaluations primarily yield scalar scores, simple 0-1 values, failing
to identify specific defect regions, which hinders targeted
improvements in generative models.

Recently, Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC)
has rapidly advanced, leading to the widespread use of
† Project lead.

There appear
to be no
defects in the
image.

Incapable of predicting implausibility region
heatmaps

Please provide the
explanation and reason.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution.

MLLM

‡ Corresponding authors.

3856

