This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Zero-shot Adversarial Robustness of Vision-Language Models: A Truly
Zero-shot and Training-free Approach
Baoshun Tong, Hanjiang Lai*, Yan Pan, Jian Yin
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangdong, China
tongbsh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {laihanj3, panyan5, issjyin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP,
have demonstrated strong zero-shot generalization capabilities. Despite their effectiveness on various downstream
tasks, they remain vulnerable to adversarial samples. Existing methods fine-tune VLMs to improve their performance
via performing adversarial training on a certain dataset.
However, this can lead to model overfitting and is not a true
zero-shot scenario. In this paper, we propose a truly zeroshot and training-free approach that can significantly improve the VLM’s zero-shot adversarial robustness. Specifically, we first discover that simply adding Gaussian noise
greatly enhances the VLM’s zero-shot performance. Then,
we treat the adversarial examples with added Gaussian
noise as anchors and strive to find a path in the embedding space that leads from the adversarial examples to the
cleaner samples. We improve the VLMs’ generalization
abilities in a truly zero-shot and training-free manner compared to previous methods. Extensive experiments on 16
datasets demonstrate that our method can achieve state-ofthe-art zero-shot robust performance, improving the top-1
robust accuracy by an average of 9.77%. The code will be
publicly available.

liberately designed imperceptible perturbations to the image, the VLMs can easily make incorrect identifications.
Since many vision-language models are applied to securitysensitive downstream tasks, addressing this issue has become an urgent priority.
Recently, researchers have proposed several methods [10–12] to enhance model robustness, among which
adversarial training [13] is one of the most effective approaches. By adding adversarial perturbations to the training data during training, the model’s robustness can be enhanced. For example, Li et al. [11] proposed APT which
learns a robust text prompt for VLMs via adversarial training. Adversarial purification [14] has recently emerged as
another effective method for defending adversarial examples. It uses generative models to purify adversarial domain
samples into clean domain samples, thereby removing the
impact of adversarial perturbations. For instance, Song et
al. [15] proposed a mimic diffusion to purify the adversarial
noise.
Similarly, to enhance the robustness of VLMs in zeroshot recognition, a recent study [9] also proposed using adversarial training techniques to fine-tune VLMs. These finetuning methods require adversarial training on an additional
dataset to fine-tune the image encoder, thereby enhancing
the model’s zero-shot adversarial robustness. For example, PMG-AFT [10] requires adversarial training of the image encoder using the TinyImageNet dataset [16] before
conducting zero-shot robustness testing on other datasets.
However, using a smaller dataset for adversarial fine-tuning
of the image encoder poses a risk of overfitting [17]. Moreover, enhancing zero-shot robustness should not require additional training data. Prior methods struggle to produce
effective results when no data is available for adversarial
fine-tuning.
In this work, we present a novel truly zero-shot and
training-free method for VLMs’ zero-shot adversarial robustness, named Anchor-guided One-step linear Movement
(AOM). Besides enhancing the VLM’s robustness, AOM
can effectively preserve the original model’s generaliza-

1. Introduction
Pre-trained large-scale vision-language models [1, 2], e.g.,
CLIP [3], have gained significant attention due to their
powerful capabilities. Benefiting from their zero-shot generalization ability, they are widely transferred to various
downstream tasks such as classification [4, 5], segmentation [6], and retrieval [7]. Take CLIP [3] as an example, it
can be applied to zero-shot classification [8] since it computes the cosine similarity between text and image. However, robustness in the face of adversarial noise remains a
significant challenge [9] for VLMs. By adding some de* Hanjiang Lai is the corresponding author

19921

