This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-Visual Instance Segmentation
Ruohao Guo1 , Xianghua Ying1 *, Yaru Chen2 , Dantong Niu3 , Guangyao Li4 , Liao Qu5 , Yanyu Qi6 ,
Jinxing Zhou7 Bowei Xing1 , Wenzhen Yue1 , Ji Shi1 , Qixun Wang1 , Peiliang Zhang8 , Buwen Liang6
1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, Peking University, 2 University of Surrey, 3 UC Berkeley, 4 Tsinghua University,
5
CMU, 6 China Agricultural University, 7 MBZUAI, 8 Wuhan University of Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new multi-modal task, termed
audio-visual instance segmentation (AVIS), which aims
to simultaneously identify, segment and track individual
sounding object instances in audible videos. To facilitate this research, we introduce a high-quality benchmark
named AVISeg, containing over 90K instance masks from
26 semantic categories in 926 long videos. Additionally, we
propose a strong baseline model for this task. Our model
first localizes sound source within each frame, and condenses object-specific contexts into concise tokens. Then it
builds long-range audio-visual dependencies between these
tokens using window-based attention, and tracks sounding objects among the entire video sequences. Extensive experiments reveal that our method performs best
on AVISeg, surpassing the existing methods from related
tasks. We further conduct the evaluation on several multimodal large models. Unfortunately, they exhibits subpar
performance on instance-level sound source localization
and temporal perception. We expect that AVIS will inspire the community towards a more comprehensive multimodal understanding. Dataset and code is available at
https://github.com/ruohaoguo/avis.

pose a new task, namely audio-visual instance segmentation
(AVIS). As can be seen in Figure 1 (c), it requests a model
to simultaneously classify, segment and track sounding object instances—identify which object categories are making
sounds, infer where the sounding objects are, and monitor
when they are making sounds. This new task facilitates a
wide range of practical applications, including embodied
robotics, video surveillance, video editing, etc. Moreover,
it can serve as a fundamental task for evaluating the comprehension capabilities of multi-modal large models.
Audio-visual instance segmentation is related to several
existing tasks. For example, audio-visual object segmentation (AVOS) [65] is to separate sounding objects from the
background region of a given audible video, as shown in
Figure 1 (a). Unlike AVOS being tasked with binary foreground segmentation, audio-visual semantic segmentation
(AVSS) [69] aims at predicting semantic maps that assign
each pixel with a specific category, as shown in Figure 1 (b).
To accomplish the above tasks, many works [17, 22, 35, 56]
extend the image segmentation frameworks [5, 12] to the
video domain, and design various audio-visual fusion modules for sound source localization. Despite promising performance in the AVSBench dataset [69], current methods
still suffer from two limitations in real-world scenarios.
First, these methods fail to differentiate two sounding objects with the same category, such as the woman, man,
left ukulele and right ukulele depicted in Figure 1. Second, these methods focus on 5- or 10-second trimmed short
videos and ignore long-range modeling abilities, which may
lead to weak performance in real world.
One potential reason that the AVIS task is rarely studied
is the absence of a high-quality dataset. Despite the existence of audio-visual segmentation datasets [65, 69], none
are directly applicable to our proposed task, due to lacking
instance-level annotations and long-form videos. Therefore, in this work, we built the first audio-visual instance
segmentation dataset, namely AVISeg. The new dataset
consists of 926 videos with an average duration of 61.4 seconds and 94,074 high-quality masks, covering 26 common

1. Introduction
Vision and hearing are our primary channels of communication and sensation [9, 23, 63, 64, 66–68]. Audio-visual
collaboration is beneficial for humans to better perceive and
interpret the world. Humans have the ability to associate
mixed sounds with object instances in complicated realistic
scenarios. Imagine a cocktail-party scenario: when a group
of people is speaking, we can not only locate the sound
sources but also determine how many people are talking.
Inspired by this human perception, we explore instancelevel sound source localization in long videos and pro* Corresponding Author

13550

