This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAM2-LOVE: Segment Anything Model 2 in Language-aided
Audio-Visual Scenes

1

Yuji Wang1 *, Haoran Xu2 *, Yong Liu1 , Jiaze Li2 , Yansong Tang1†
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 2 ZJU
yuji-wan24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, † tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

(b)

(a)

Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS) aims to
provide a pixel-wise scene understanding in Languageaided Audio-Visual Scenes (LAVS). This task requires the
model to continuously segment objects referred to by text
and audio from a video. Previous dual-modality methods
always fail due to the lack of a third modality and the existing triple-modality method struggles with spatio-temporal
consistency, leading to the target shift of different frames. In
this work, we introduce a novel framework, termed SAM2LOVE, which integrates textual, audio, and visual representations into a learnable token to prompt and align SAM2
for achieving Ref-AVS in the LAVS. Technically, our approach includes a multimodal fusion module aimed at improving multimodal understanding of SAM2, as well as token propagation and accumulation strategies designed to
enhance spatio-temporal consistency without forgetting historical information. We conducted extensive experiments
to demonstrate that SAM2-LOVE outperforms the SOTA by
8.5% in J &F on the Ref-AVS benchmark and showcase the
simplicity and effectiveness of the components. Our code
will be available here.

SAM

SAM
embeddings

embeddings

Image-Audio
Fusion

Image-Text
Fusion

The one near the
sounding object

(c)

SAM2
embeddings

Video-Text-Audio Fusion

1. Introduction
In the process of human perception of the world, visual signals play a primary role, often accompanied by other multimodal signals such as audio and text. These additional
multimodal cues are not only essential to locating and separating objects and areas of interest but also to understanding
the changing behaviors of the objects. The dynamic scene
that integrates visual elements with diverse multimodal
cues including audio and text is regarded as the Languageaided Audio-Visual Scene (LAVS). To mimic the effect
from humans, prior works such as Music-AVQA [10] and
AVQA [39] have primarily focused on question-answering
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

The one near the
sounding object

Figure 1. The comparison with dual-modality SAM pipelines. (a)
The text-visual SAM struggles to distinguish the sounding object
in the silent scenes. (b) The audio-visual SAM fails to understand
the dynamic control from the text input. (c) Our model fuses three
modalities’ information and expands to the video due to SAM2.

tasks. Nevertheless, these approaches lack a fine-grained
understanding of LVAS at the pixel level. As shown in
Figure 2, Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS)
task [31] makes a good example to improve the pixel-wise

28932

