This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Derivative-Free Diffusion Manifold-Constrained Gradient for Unified XAI
Won Jun Kim1 *

Hyungjin Chung2 *
Jaemin Kim1 *
Byeongsu Sim1
Jong Chul Ye1
1

2

KAIST

Sangmin Lee1

EverEx

{wonjun, kjm981995, leeleesang, byeongsu.s, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
Class: “Tiger”

“Ladybug”

“Flamingo”

Class: “Cheetah”

“Rhinoceros beetle”

“Little blue heron”

Feature Attribution

Source

Gradient-based methods are a prototypical family of “explainability for AI” (XAI) techniques, especially for imagebased models. However, they (1) require white-box access to models, (2) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks,
and (3) produce attributions that lie off the image manifold, leading to explanations that are not amenable to human perception. To overcome these challenges, we introduce Derivative-Free Diffusion Manifold-Contrained Gradients (FreeMCG): by leveraging ensemble Kalman filters and diffusion models, we derive a derivative-free approximation of the model’s gradient projected onto the
data manifold, requiring access only to the model’s outputs (i.e., black-box setting). We demonstrate the effectiveness of FreeMCG by applying it to both counterfactual
generation and feature attribution, which have traditionally been treated as different tasks requiring distinct methods. Through comprehensive evaluation on both counterfactual explanation and feature attribution we show that our
method yields state-of-the-art results for both tasks while
preserving the essential properties expected of XAI tools.
Code: https://github.com/one-june/FreeMCG.

Counterfactual

Abstract

hj.chung@everex.co.kr

Figure 1. Representative results of FreeMCG, operating as a universal framework for black box XAI.

1. Introduction

standing the local behavior of a function around a given
input data point. It has thus been used since the beginning of the rise of neural networks to explain their decisions [50]. There have been many subsequent works improving the vanilla gradient to serve as better feature attributions for a deep neural network [3, 46, 47, 55, 57, 61].
Gradients are also utilized for generating counterfactual explanations [4, 25, 44], in which the gradient of the target
model serves as the direction that guides the change made
to the original image so that prediction of the model flips to
another class.
While gradient-based methods are popular explainable
AI (XAI) tools, they suffer from three significant limitations:
1. Access to model gradients is not always feasible: Obtaining gradients requires access to the model’s internal
weights, which is often not possible in practice. For

Understanding the decision-making process of complex
deep neural networks is crucial for their deployment in
high-stakes applications such as medical imaging [6, 7],
autonomous systems [2, 43], etc. Explainable AI (XAI)
seeks to address this challenge by providing insights into
how models arrive at specific predictions, thus enhancing
trust, accountability, and usability in critical applications.
Two widely used tools for XAI are counterfactual explanation [59] and feature attribution1 [31].
Among various XAI methods, the gradient of the target
(e.g. classifier) model is the prototypical method of under* Equal contribution
1 The term “saliency maps” are also often used interchangeably.

23795

