This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pose-Guided Temporal Enhancement for Robust Low-Resolution Hand
Reconstruction
Kaixin Fan, Pengfei Ren*, Jingyu Wang†, Haifeng Sun, Qi Qi, Zirui Zhuang, Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{fkxbupt, rpf, wangjingyu, hfsun, qiqi8266, zhuangzirui, liaojx}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) No Interaction

3D hand reconstruction is essential in non-contact humancomputer interaction applications, but existing methods
struggle with low-resolution images, which occur in slightly
distant interactive scenes. Leveraging temporal information can mitigate the limitations of individual lowresolution images that lack detailed appearance information, enhancing the robustness and accuracy of hand reconstruction. Existing temporal methods typically use joint
features to represent temporal information, avoiding interference from redundant background information. However,
joint features excessively disregard the spatial context of visual features, limiting hand reconstruction accuracy. We
propose to integrate temporal joint features with visual features to construct a robust low-resolution visual representation. We adopt Triplane Features, a dense representation with 3D spatial awareness, to bridge the gap between
the joint features and visual features that are misaligned in
terms of representation form and semantics. Triplane Features are obtained by orthogonally projecting joint features,
embedding hand structure information into the 3D spatial
context. Furthermore, we compress the spatial information of the three planes into a 2D dense feature thourgh
Spatial-Aware Fusion to enhance the visual features. By
using enhanced visual features enriched with temporal information for hand reconstruction, our method achieves
competitive performance at much lower resolutions compared to state-of-the-art methods operating at high resolution on DexYCB, HanCo and H2O. Code is available at
https://github.com/NewbieFan/Temp-LowRes-hand.

…
Frames

Regressor

Joint Feature Sequence

Hand Mesh

(b) Cross Attention

Previous Frames

Joint Features

Current Frame

Cross
Atten
Refined Feature

Hand Mesh

Refined Feature

Hand Mesh

Visual Feature

(c) Triplane Feature
Project

Previous Frames

Current Frame

Joint Features

Visual Feature

Fusion

Fused Feature

Figure 1. Different way to utilizing joint features. a) Directly
reconstruct hand from joint features, relying solely on sparse features without spatial context. b) Fusing joint and visual features
through cross-attention, which avoids representation discrepancies
but neglects the hand’s structural priors. c) Using triplane features
to bridge joint and visual features by decoding structural joint information into dense representations that enhance visual features.

1. Introduction

cant advancements in recent years with the advent of largescale datasets and deep learning technologies. Many studies [6, 7, 30, 31, 34, 40] have focused on reconstructing
3D hands from a single RGB image. In typical interaction scenarios, these methods require the subject to stay
close to the capture camera to obtain high-resolution (e.g.,
256×256) cropped hand images. However, as the interaction distance increases—such as in XR teaching activities
within a classroom—the available cropped hand images are
limited to lower resolutions (e.g., 64×64). Current methods

3D hand reconstruction, a crucial component in non-contact
human-computer interaction applications, has made signifi* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

22627

