This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do We Always Need the Simplicity Bias?
Looking for Optimal Inductive Biases in the Wild
Damien Teney
Idiap Research Institute

Liangze Jiang
EPFL

Florin Gogianu
Bitdefender

Abstract

▲
▼

1. Learning dataset-specific activation functions

Img. classification

Neural architectures tend to fit their data with relatively
simple functions. This “simplicity bias” is widely regarded
as key to their success. This paper explores the limits of
this principle. Building on recent findings that the simplicity bias stems from ReLU activations [96], we introduce a
method to meta-learn new activation functions and inductive biases better suited to specific tasks.

Ehsan Abbasnejad
University of Adelaide

Tabular data

Regression

Grokking

…

2. Training networks with new activation functions



§

 ReLU

 Learned activation function

Figure 1. (1) We modulate the inductive bias of neural architectures by learning novel activation functions that improve generalization on specific datasets. (2) With this tool, we study the relation between model accuracy and complexity. We identify tasks
where the simplicity bias of ReLU architectures is suboptimal.

Findings. We identify multiple tasks where the simplicity
bias is inadequate and ReLUs suboptimal. In these cases,
we learn new activation functions that perform better by
inducing a prior of higher complexity. Interestingly, these
cases correspond to domains where neural networks have
historically struggled: tabular data, regression tasks, cases
of shortcut learning, and algorithmic grokking tasks. In
comparison, the simplicity bias induced by ReLUs proves
adequate on image tasks where the best learned activations
are nearly identical to ReLUs and GeLUs.

This paper studies inductive biases i.e. the assumptions
made by learning algorithms to generalize beyond training
data [67].1 A vast literature examines the inductive biases
of architectures [14], optimizers [69], losses [42], regularizers [50], etc. The simplicity bias is one aspect of the inductive biases of NNs that makes them fit their training data
with simple2 functions [8, 71]. Despite wide belief that the
simplicity bias could be due to SGD [7, 40, 60, 92], work on
untrained networks showed that it can be explained with architectures alone [15, 31, 64, 99]. ReLUs also seem critical
to induce the simplicity bias in typical architectures [96].

Implications. Contrary to popular belief, the simplicity
bias of ReLU networks is not universally useful. It is nearoptimal for image classification, but other inductive biases
are sometimes preferable. We showed that activation functions can control these inductive biases, but future tailored
architectures might provide further benefits. Advances are
still needed to characterize a model’s inductive biases beyond “complexity”, and their adequacy with the data.

Limits of the simplicity bias. The simplicity bias is an
intuitive explanation for the ability to generalize on realworld data. It embodies Occam’s razor [66] and assumes
that data-generating processes in the real world are simple.
Additionally, a prior for simplicity is supported by results in
algorithmic information theory [18] stating essentially that
“a bias in the distribution of target functions must be towards low complexity”. However, this only means that simplicity is a good prior on average, but not necessarily the
best choice on any task or dataset. This matches the no-free
lunch theorem [101] according to which no inductive bias is
universally useful. Therefore, this paper asks the following.

1. Introduction
When and why NNs generalize is yet to be understood.
Neural networks (NNs) have proven more effective than
other machine learning models. However, we still miss a
complete explanation of their generalization abilities. A
better understanding could help address failures from shortcut learning [29, 93] to distribution shifts [47, 95], biases,
and spurious correlations in language models for example [28, 38, 87]. Understanding conditions for generalization would also enable the design of architectures and data
preparation from first principles, rather than trial and error.

1 Inductive biases can formalized as a prior over the space of functions [65].
2 Simplicity can be formalized using Kolmogorov complexity or its approx-

imations, e.g. frequency, compressibility, sensitivity, etc. [17, 18, 37, 96]

79

