This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focal Split: Untethered Snapshot Depth from Differential Defocus
Junjie Luo∗,1 , John Mamish∗,2 , Alan Fu∗,1 , Thomas Concannon1 ,
Josiah Hester2 , Emma Alexander3,† , and Qi Guo1,‡
1
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
2
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
3
McCormick School of Engineering, Northwestern University
∗
Equal contributions, † ealexander@northwestern.edu, ‡ qiguo@purdue.edu



Lens

432 1
Corneal lens



Beamsplitter
Photosensor 2



4c
m

Layered retina
Photosensor 1

Figure 1. Overview. (a) The principal eyes of jumping spiders comprise layered retinae, allowing the same scene to be imaged simultaneously at slightly different distances from the lens. This enables them to see two differentially defocused images of a target, from which
depth can be estimated efficiently [22]. (b) Focal Split’s novel optomechanical setup leverages a beamsplitter and two photosensors placed
at different sensor distances to the lens to mimic the jumping spider’s eye structures. (c) Our handheld, untethered Focal Split prototype
can generate real-time sparse depth maps from battery-powered on-board computing.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Depth from differential defocus (DfDD) is a family of physically rigorous depth-sensing methods that generate a depth
map from a series of differentially defocused images with
extremely efficient computations [1]. Its development was
partially inspired by the optical functionalities of jumping
spider’s eyes [16, 22]. Here, we address two major shortcomings in this family. First, existing DfDD cameras either
require sequential image captures and assume the scene to
be static [7, 20], additional computation to handle motion
between frames [2, 3], or narrowed illumination bandwidth
in conjunction with a multifunctional metasurface [8]. In
contrast to the snapshot multi-focus capture of the spider’s
layered retina (Fig. 1a), this limits their accuracy or light
efficiency in the face of moving scenes under normal illumination. Second, despite the promise of DfDD algorithms
for low-power applications, these prototypes have all been
tethered to wall sockets for power [7] and to laptop computers for depth map calculation [2, 7, 8, 20].

We introduce Focal Split, a handheld, snapshot depth
camera with fully onboard power and computing based
on depth-from-differential-defocus (DfDD). Focal Split is
passive, avoiding power consumption of light sources. Its
achromatic optical system simultaneously forms two differentially defocused images of the scene, which can be independently captured using two photosensors in a snapshot.
The data processing is based on the DfDD theory, which efficiently computes a depth and a confidence value for each
pixel with only 500 floating point operations (FLOPs) per
pixel from the camera measurements. We demonstrate a
Focal Split prototype, which comprises a handheld custom
camera system connected to a Raspberry Pi 5 for real-time
data processing. The system consumes 4.9 W and is powered on a 5 V, 10,000 mAh battery. The prototype can
measure objects with distances from 0.4 m to 1.2 m, outputting 480×360 sparse depth maps at 2.1 frames per second (FPS) using unoptimized Python scripts. Focal Split is
DIY friendly. A comprehensive guide to building your own
Focal Split depth camera, code, and additional data can be
found at https://focal-split.qiguo.org.

26965

We present Focal Split, the first snapshot, untethered
DfDD camera. As shown in Fig. 1c, Focal Split utilizes a
novel optical design that functionally mimics jumping spiders’ eye structure. It splits the incident light focused by a

