This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I!!"#$

: Improving Safety Against Jailbreaks in Multi-modal LLMs via
Inference-Time Alignment

Soumya Suvra Ghosal1→ Souradip Chakraborty1∗ Vaibhav Singh2∗ Tianrui Guan1 Mengdi Wang3
Ahmad Beirami Furong Huang1 Alvaro Velasquez4 Dinesh Manocha1† Amrit Singh Bedi5†
1

2
3
University of Maryland;
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay;
Princeton University
4
5
University of Colorado Boulder;
University of Central Florida

Abstract
With the widespread deployment of Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) for visual-reasoning tasks, improving their safety has become crucial. Recent research
indicates that despite training-time safety alignment, these
models remain vulnerable to jailbreak attacks. In this work,
we first highlight an important safety gap to describe that
alignment achieved solely through safety training may be
insu!cient against jailbreak attacks. To address this vulnerability, we propose I!!"#$, an inference-time defense
framework that leverages a safety reward model through
controlled decoding to defend against jailbreak attacks. Additionally, we provide a mathematical characterization of
I!!"#$, o"ering insights on why it improves safety against
jailbreaks. Extensive evaluations on diverse jailbreak benchmarks using recent MLLMs reveal that I!!"#$ e"ectively
enhances model safety while preserving the model’s original
capabilities. For instance, against text-based jailbreak attacks on LLaVA-1.6, I!!"#$ reduces the attack success rate
by 57.82% and 16.78% compared to the base MLLM and
state-of-the-art defense strategy, respectively.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have made
remarkable progress in vision-language reasoning tasks such
as visual question-answering [1, 3, 71] and image captioning [1, 23]. However, ensuring their outputs are safe and free
from discrimination, disinformation, and harmful content
is important for their adoption. Safety alignment through
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has
shown promise in aligning model behavior with social norms
to prevent harmful outputs [63, 78, 88]. Despite these sig∗ Equal contribution.

nificant alignment e!orts, recent studies reveal that MLLMs
remain vulnerable to jailbreaking attacks, where malicious
image-text pairs bypass safety mechanisms, raising safety
concerns [19, 32, 36, 48, 54, 59, 60, 65].
Why training-time safety alignment might not be enough?
Fine-tuning-based safety alignment approaches rely on a
static prompt distribution, leaving them inherently vulnerable to jailbreak attacks. These attacks exploit this limitation
by solving a prompt (text or image) optimization problem
to craft adversarial prompts that bypass the safety mechanisms of aligned models [54, 90]. In this work, we argue
that safety finetuning against jailbreak attacks while keeping model capabilities may be inherently challenging given
that the adversary can find a prompt that bypasses the safety
mechanisms of the model. This underscores the fundamental
limitation of relying solely on training-time safety alignment
procedures to ensure robustness. These leads us to ask: Is it
possible to design a safeguarding strategy to defend against
given possible adversarial prompts?
In this paper, we take a step towards answering this question
in the a"rmative. We propose shifting from training-time
alignment to inference-time safeguarding. Although initial
e!orts in this direction [14, 67] show promise, they exhibit
weak empirical performance. Further, Weng et al. [69] note
that adding a safety prompt to the input [67] can lead to overly
cautious behavior, resulting in generic responses like, “I am
sorry. . . ” even for benign queries (see Figure 1), thereby affecting model utility. In real-world applications, an ideal
jailbreaking defense should not only minimize the success
rate of attacks but also maintain high utility by preserving
model performance on legitimate queries. Moreover, existing
inference-time approaches lack mathematical characterization, relying primarily on heuristic-based methods. This gap
motivates the need for robust inference-time safeguarding
mechanisms, which we address in this paper.
Our key idea and proposed approach. We present I!!"#$,

† Equal advising.

25038

