This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Long-tailed Datasets
Zhenghao Zhao1 *
Haoxuan Wang1 *
Yuzhang Shang2
1
University of Illinois Chicago 2 Illinois Institute of Technology
{zzhao72, hwang339, yyan55}@uic.edu

Kai Wang3
Yan Yan1†
3
National University of Singapore

yshang4@hawk.iit.edu

kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Dataset distillation aims to synthesize a small, informationrich dataset from a large one for efficient model training.
However, existing dataset distillation methods struggle with
long-tailed datasets, which are prevalent in real-world scenarios. By investigating the reasons behind this unexpected
result, we identified two main causes: 1) The distillation
process on imbalanced datasets develops biased gradients,
leading to the synthesis of similarly imbalanced distilled
datasets. 2) The experts trained on such datasets perform
suboptimally on tail classes, resulting in misguided distillation supervision and poor-quality soft-label initialization. To address these issues, we first propose Distributionagnostic Matching to avoid directly matching the biased expert trajectories. It reduces the distance between the student
and the biased expert trajectories and prevents the tail class
bias from being distilled to the synthetic dataset. Moreover,
we improve the distillation guidance with Expert Decoupling, which jointly matches the decoupled backbone and
classifier to improve the tail class performance and initialize reliable soft labels. This work pioneers the field of longtailed dataset distillation, marking the first effective effort
to distill long-tailed datasets. Our code will be made public
at https://github.com/ichbill/LTDD.

Figure 1. Performance comparison on CIFAR-10-LT. Existing
Dataset Distillation methods exhibit degraded performance when
applied to imbalanced datasets, especially when the imbalance
factor increases, whereas our method provides significantly better performance under different imbalanced scenarios.

1. Introduction

and generative-based methods [12, 40]. Currently, parameter matching methods have demonstrated significant performance improvements across various datasets.
Research on dataset distillation has predominantly focused on uniformly distributed datasets, such as CIFAR10,
CIFAR100 [22], and TinyImageNet [24]. However, in realworld applications such as medical image diagnosis [19],
training samples typically exhibit a long-tailed class distribution [45]. In these scenarios, a small number of classes
(head classes) have a large number of samples, while the
majority of classes (tail classes) have only a few samples.
Motivated by this discrepancy and the desire for practical
application, we are interested in the novel task of longtailed dataset distillation (LTDD). LTDD aims to distill a
long-tailed target dataset into a small and uniformly distributed synthetic dataset, where models trained on this distilled dataset can achieve satisfactory performance on the
uniformly distributed test set.
Nevertheless, distilling long-tailed datasets presents significant challenges, as the effectiveness of current dataset
distillation methods diminishes when applied to such imbalanced distributions. As shown in Figure 1, we find that the
performance of different dataset distillation methods consistently decreases as the degree of imbalance increases.
The degree of imbalance is quantified by the imbalance fac-

Dataset distillation (DD) [4, 13, 28] aims to synthesize
small and high-quality data summaries which contain the
most important knowledge from a given target dataset [35].
Such a compact data summary offers numerous advantages,
including faster model training, reduced memory consumption, and greater flexibility for various tasks [48], such as
continual learning [31], neural architecture search [27], and
knowledge distillation [15]. Various types of dataset distillation methods have been developed, including performance
matching methods [30, 32, 50], parameter matching methods [13, 28, 46], representation matching methods [38, 47]
* equal contribution
† corresponding author

30609

