This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EnvGS: Modeling View-Dependent Appearance with Environment Gaussian
Tao Xie1∗ Xi Chen1∗ Zhen Xu1 Yiman Xie1 Yudong Jin1
Yujun Shen2 Sida Peng1 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1

Ground Truth

Zhejiang University

Ours

2

Ant Group

GaussianShader

3DGS

Figure 1. Photorealistic, real-time rendering of real-world scenes with complex reflections. Our proposed EnvGS outperforms prior
works in capturing complex reflection effects, especially near-field reflections and high-frequency details while maintaining real-time
rendering speed. Please see our supplementary video for better visualizations.

ing real-time rendering speeds. Results from multiple realworld and synthetic datasets demonstrate that our method
produces significantly more detailed reflections, achieving
the best rendering quality in real-time novel view synthesis.
The code is available at https://zju3dv.github.io/envgs.

Abstract
Reconstructing complex reflections in real-world scenes
from 2D images is essential for achieving photorealistic
novel view synthesis. Existing methods that utilize environment maps to model reflections from distant lighting often
struggle with high-frequency reflection details and fail to
account for near-field reflections. In this work, we introduce
EnvGS, a novel approach that employs a set of Gaussian
primitives as an explicit 3D representation for capturing
reflections of environments. These environment Gaussian
primitives are incorporated with base Gaussian primitives
to model the appearance of the whole scene. To efficiently
render these environment Gaussian primitives, we developed a ray-tracing-based renderer that leverages the GPU’s
RT core for fast rendering. This allows us to jointly optimize
our model for high-quality reconstruction while maintain-

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis aims to generate novel views of 3D
scenes based on a set of input images, which enables many
applications such as VR/AR, and autonomous driving. Recent advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [28] have
demonstrated impressive rendering performance. However, NeRF’s high computational cost makes it challenging for real-time applications. More recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17] explicitly models scenes with
3D Gaussian primitives and utilizes rasterization for rendering, achieving real-time rendering with competitive quality. However, modeling complex high-frequency specular

* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou

5742

