This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Just Dance with π!
A Poly-modal Inductor for Weakly-supervised Video Anomaly Detection
Snehashis Majhi1,2∗ , Giacomo D’Amicantonio5∗ , Antitza Dantcheva1,2 , Quan Kong3 , Lorenzo
Garattoni4 , Gianpiero Francesca4 , Egor Bondarev5 , François Brémond1,2

Solid Arrow:- Training + Inference

Dotted Arrow:- Only Training

1

INRIA

2

Côte d’Azur University
* Joint first authors.

RGB

Pose

Depth

3

Woven by Toyota 4 Toyota Motor Europe
of Technology

5

Eindhoven University

Code: https://github.com/snehashismajhi/PI-VAD
Panoptic
Masks

Optical Flow

Text
A photo of
“Abuse”

Solid Arrow: Training + Inference Dashed Arrow: Only Training

Multi-Modality Estimators

Previous
Methods

Abuse: Sharp Cue (An intruder hits an old woman while reading book)
RGB
A photo of
“Shoplift”

Encoder

Time ( T )

PI

Shoplift: Subtle Cue (A thief steals a laptop from a store while acting normal)
A photo of
“Arrest”

Multi-Modality Estimators

Arrest: Subtle & Sharp Cue (First, policemen argue with a suspect, then arrest him by force)
(a)

VAD

Complex real-world anomalies with multi-modal saliencies

Ground Truth for
Pseudo Modality
Generation

Our PI-VAD
(b) Key difference between previous methods and our PI-VAD

Figure 1. a): Illustration of abnormal frames and respective multi-modal saliencies in complex real-world scenes. Optical flow captures
distinct abnormal motion in “Abuse” and “Arrest”, while depth and pose detect subtle movements that optical flow may miss. Panoptic
masks and text provide overall scene context. b): Comparison of multi-modal methods with our PI-VAD. PI-VAD requires the five
modalities only during training, significantly reducing computation and enabling real-world applicability.

Abstract
Weakly-supervised methods for video anomaly detection
(VAD) are conventionally based merely on RGB spatiotemporal features, which continues to limit their reliability in real-world scenarios. This is due to the fact that
RGB-features are not sufficiently distinctive in setting apart
categories such as shoplifting from visually similar events.
Therefore, towards robust complex real-world VAD, it is
essential to augment RGB spatio-temporal features by additional modalities. Motivated by this, we introduce the
Poly-modal Induced framework for VAD: “PI-VAD” (or
π-VAD), a novel approach that augments RGB representations by five additional modalities. Specifically, the modalities include sensitivity to fine-grained motion (Pose), three
dimensional scene and entity representation (Depth), surrounding objects (Panoptic masks), global motion (optical
flow), as well as language cues (VLM). Each modality rep-

resents an axis of a polygon, streamlined to add salient
cues to RGB. π-VAD includes two plug-in modules, namely
Pseudo-modality Generation module and Cross Modal Induction module, which generate modality-specific prototypical representation and, thereby, induce multi-modal information into RGB cues. These modules operate by performing anomaly-aware auxiliary tasks and necessitate five
modality backbones – only during training. Notably, πVAD achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on three prominent
VAD datasets encompassing real-world scenarios, without
requiring the computational overhead of five modality backbones at inference.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised video anomaly detection (WSVAD)
aims to predict frame-level anomaly scores using only
video-level labels, avoiding the need for detailed frame-

24265

