This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SILMM: Self-Improving Large Multimodal Models for Compositional
Text-to-Image Generation
Leigang Qu1 , Haochuan Li1 , Wenjie Wang2 *, Xiang Liu1 , Juncheng Li3 , Liqiang Nie4 , Tat-Seng Chua1
1

National University of Singapore, 2 University of Science and Technology of China, 3 Zhejiang University,
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)

leigangqu@gmail.com, haochuan@u.nus.edu, wenjiewang96@gmail.com, liu.xiang@u.nus.edu
junchengli@zju.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in multimodal understanding and generation, pushing forward advancements in text-to-image
generation. However, achieving accurate text-image alignment for LMMs, particularly in compositional scenarios,
remains challenging. Existing approaches, such as layout
planning for multi-step generation and learning3 from human feedback or AI feedback, depend heavily on prompt
engineering, costly human annotations, and continual upgrading, limiting flexibility and scalability. In this work,
we introduce a model-agnostic iterative self-improvement
framework (SILMM) that can enable LMMs to provide
helpful and scalable self-feedback and optimize text-image
alignment via Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). DPO
can readily applied to LMMs that use discrete visual tokens as intermediate image representations; while it is less
suitable for LMMs with continuous visual features, as obtaining generation probabilities is challenging. To adapt
SILMM to LMMs with continuous features, we propose a
diversity mechanism to obtain diverse representations and
a kernel-based continuous DPO for alignment. Extensive
experiments on three compositional text-to-image generation benchmarks validate the effectiveness and superiority
of SILMM, showing improvements exceeding 30% on T2ICompBench++ and around 20% on DPG-Bench. The code
is available at https://silmm.github.io/.

a green leaf and a
yellow butterfly

five balloons

a bicycle on the
left of a man

Attribute Binding

Counting Error

Relation Inaccuracy

(a) Text-image misalignment in compositional prompts
Diverse Images

One Image

...
Decoder

Decoder

( z | x)
Sample

...
Discrete LMMs

Diverse
Discrete
Tokens

Deterministic
Continuous
Feature

Continuous LMMs

Prompt: The yellow fluttering butterfly landed on
the purple fragrant flower and the thorny thistle.

Learnable
Embedding

(b) Discrete & Continuous LMMs for text-to-image generation

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) text-image misalignment in compositional prompts and (b) comparison of discrete and continuous
LMMs for T2I. Given a prompt, discrete LMMs can sample diverse token sequences from categorical distributions, while continuous LMMs can only produce a single deterministic feature vector.
Note that the input learnable embeddings are optional for some
continuous LMMs [64].

1. Introduction

In particular, LMMs demonstrate promising abilities in interpreting user input prompts for text-to-image generation
(T2I) [55, 57], producing vivid and photorealistic images.
However, as shown in Fig. 1(a), achieving precise textimage alignment between generated images and complex
prompts remains challenging, especially for compositional
prompts involving multiple objects, attributes, counting,
and complex relationships [6, 16, 49].
To enhance text-image alignment, existing work falls

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) are advancing rapidly,
surpassing Large Language Models (LLMs) by embracing multimodal capabilities for multimodal content perception, understanding [34, 35, 48], and generation [19, 64].
* Corresponding author.

18497

