This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MV-SSM: Multi-View State Space Modeling for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Aviral Chharia1 , Wenbo Gou1 , Haoye Dong2, *
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 National University of Singapore
{achharia, wgou}@andrew.cmu.edu, haoye@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
While significant progress has been made in single-view 3D
human pose estimation, multi-view 3D human pose estimation remains challenging, particularly in terms of generalizing to new camera configurations. Existing attention-based
transformers often struggle to accurately model the spatial
arrangement of keypoints, especially in occluded scenarios.
Additionally, they tend to overfit specific camera arrangements and visual scenes from training data, resulting in substantial performance drops in new settings. In this study, we
introduce a novel Multi-View State Space Modeling framework, named MV-SSM, for robustly estimating 3D human
keypoints. We explicitly model the joint spatial sequence
at two distinct levels: the feature level from multi-view images and the person keypoint level. We propose a Projective
State Space (PSS) block to learn a generalized representation of joint spatial arrangements using state space modeling. Moreover, we modify Mamba’s traditional scanning
into an effective Grid Token-guided Bidirectional Scanning
(GTBS), which is integral to the PSS block. Multiple experiments demonstrate that MV-SSM achieves strong generalization, outperforming state-of-the-art methods: +10.8 on
AP25 (+24% ↑) on the challenging three-camera setting in
CMU Panoptic, +7.0 on AP25 (+13% ↑) on varying camera arrangements, and +15.3 PCP (+38% ↑) on Campus
A1 in cross-dataset evaluations. Project Website: https:
//aviralchharia.github.io/MV-SSM .

Figure 1. Motivation. Comparison of different token scanning
methods. (a) Cross Attention acts on all image tokens. (b) Projective Attention [27, 43] obtains anchors with perspective projection
and selectively attends to sample tokens surrounding the anchor
points. (c) The proposed Grid Token-guided Bidirectional Scanning (GTBS) encodes the local context and the joint spatial sequence at the visual feature and person-keypoint levels.

1. Introduction

Previous works [4, 6–8, 12, 13, 33, 44] have tried to
address this task using a multi-stage approach. They first
estimated the 2D keypoints in all views using off-the-self
models such as OpenPose [5] and YOLOv10 [38]. Next,
they associate these keypoints with their respective human
subjects before finally triangulating the matched 2D keypoints to obtain 3D estimates. Consequently, recent works
have focused on refining individual steps in these multistage frameworks. However, the multi-stage paradigm has
limitations, as the matching algorithm is susceptible to complications in scenes with multiple humans, and errors tend
to accumulate at each stage of the pipeline. To address this,
a few recent works [20, 27, 35, 36, 42, 43] have focused on
end-to-end supervised learning approaches. These models
bypass the explicit geometry modeling required in multistage models. However, they suffer from a lack of gener-

Estimating 3D human pose from multiple views is a crucial task in computer vision, with diverse applications in
sports, industrial monitoring, and surveillance. However, it
remains challenging due to its inherent complexity. Unlike
single-view methods [1, 9, 14, 26, 31, 34, 39, 41], estimating 3D human pose from multi-view inputs involves several
challenges, including—keypoint-level association to find
cross-view correspondences while fusing multi-view information, multi-person association, and high occlusion.
* Corresponding author

11590

