This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decouple Distortion from Perception: Region Adaptive Diffusion for
Extreme-low Bitrate Perception Image Compression
1

1

2

2

1

Jinchang Xu
Shaokang Wang
Jintao Chen
Zhe Li
Peidong Jia
1
3
4
1*
1
Fei Zhao
Guoqing Xiang
Zhijian Hao
Shanghang Zhang
Xiaodong Xie
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
2
Peking University School of Software & Microelectronics, Peking University,
3
4
Alibaba Cloud Computing, Beijing, China State Key Discipline Laboratory of Wide Band-Gap
Semiconductor Technology, School of Microelectronics, Xidian University
{jinchang xu,feizhao}@pku.edu.cn,{skwang6272,cjt,2401210335,2101111573}@stu.pku.edu.cn
xiangguoqing.xgq@alibaba-inc.com,haozhijian@xidian.edu.cn,{shanghang,donxie}@pku.edu.cn

Figure 1. Visual comparison of decoded images. (a) Original images with the user-specified RoI area highlighted by a green dashed box.
(b) VAE compression method cannot achieve extreme-low bitrate considering distortion optimization. (c) PerCo sacrifices the consistency
of key areas to obtain realism at extreme-low bitrate. (d) Traditional encoders have severe blocking effects at extreme-low bitrate. (e) The
proposed method maintains the overall advanced perceptual quality and maintains the consistency of key areas.

Abstract
Leveraging the generative power of diffusion models, generative image compression has achieved impressive per∗

Corresponding Author. This work was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (62476011), and the Alibaba Innovative Research Program.

ceptual fidelity even at extremely low bitrates. However,
current methods often neglect the non-uniform complexity of images, limiting their ability to balance global perceptual quality with local texture consistency and to allocate coding resources efficiently. To address this, we
introduce the Map-guided Masking Realism Image Diffusion Codec (MRIDC), designed to optimize the trade-

18051

