This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pixel-level and Semantic-level Adjustable Super-resolution:
A Dual-LoRA Approach
Lingchen Sun1,2 , Rongyuan Wu1,2 , Zhiyuan Ma1 , Shuaizheng Liu1,2 , Qiaosi Yi1,2 , Lei Zhang1,2, *
1
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute
{ling-chen.sun, rong-yuan.wu, zm2354.ma}@connect.polyu.hk
{shuaizhengliu21, qiaosiyijoyies}@gmail.com cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Diffusion prior-based methods have shown impressive results in real-world image super-resolution (SR). However,
most existing methods entangle pixel-level and semanticlevel SR objectives in the training process, struggling to
balance pixel-wise fidelity and perceptual quality. Meanwhile, users have varying preferences on SR results, thus it
is demanded to develop an adjustable SR model that can be
tailored to different fidelity-perception preferences during
inference without re-training. We present Pixel-level and
Semantic-level Adjustable SR (PiSA-SR), which learns two
LoRA modules upon the pre-trained stable-diffusion (SD)
model to achieve improved and adjustable SR results. We
first formulate the SD-based SR problem as learning the
residual between the low-quality input and the high-quality
output, then show that the learning objective can be decoupled into two distinct LoRA weight spaces: one is characterized by the ℓ2 -loss for pixel-level regression, and another
is characterized by the LPIPS and classifier score distillation losses to extract semantic information from pre-trained
classification and SD models. In its default setting, PiSASR can be performed in a single diffusion step, achieving
leading real-world SR results in both quality and efficiency.
By introducing two adjustable guidance scales on the two
LoRA modules to control the strengths of pixel-wise fidelity
and semantic-level details during inference, PiSA-SR can
offer flexible SR results according to user preference without re-training. The source code of our method can be found
at https://github.com/csslc/PiSA-SR.

Figure 1. Visual illustration of our pixel- and semantic-level adjustable method for real-world SR. By increasing the pixel-level
guidance scale λpix , the image degradations such as noise and
compression artifacts can be gradually removed; however, a toostrong λpix will make the SR image over-smoothed. By increasing
the semantic-level guidance scale λsem , the SR images will have
more semantic details; nonetheless, a too-high λsem will generate
visual artifacts. Please zoom in for a better view.

downsampling, etc. SR is a challenging ill-posed problem due to the inherent ambiguity in reconstructing details [3, 29], and various deep neural networks (DNNs)
[5, 8, 10, 22, 27, 68] have been developed to address it. The
pixel-level regression losses, such as ℓ1 and ℓ2 losses, are
essential to keep the pixel-level fidelity of SR outputs, yet
they tend to produce over-smoothed details [3, 29]. The
SSIM [52] and perceptual losses can alleviate this problem. In specific, SSIM measures the local structural similarity between the SR and ground-truth (GT) images, and
the perceptual loss [17] extracts semantic features with a
pre-trained classification model [39] to improve the per-

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) [53] aims to reconstruct
a high-quality (HQ) image from its low-quality (LQ) counterpart suffering from various degradations, e.g., noise, blur,
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the PolyU-OPPO
Joint Innovative Research Center.

2333

