This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Stable and Storage-efficient Dataset Distillation: Matching Convexified
Trajectory
Wenliang Zhong1 , Haoyu Tang1, *, Qinghai Zheng2 , Mingzhu Xu1 , Yupeng Hu1 , Weili Guan3
1

School of Software, Shandong University, 2 College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University,
3

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
zhongwenliang@mail.sdu.edu.cn
{tanghao258,xumingzhu,huyupeng}@sdu.edu.cn
zhengqinghai@fzu.edu.cn
guanweili@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
The rapid evolution of deep learning and large language
models has led to an exponential growth in the demand for
training data, prompting the development of Dataset Distillation methods to address the challenges of managing
large datasets. Among these, Matching Training Trajectories (MTT) has been a prominent approach, which replicates the training trajectory of an expert network on real
data with a synthetic dataset. However, our investigation
found that this method suffers from three significant limitations: 1. Instability of expert trajectory generated by
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD); 2. Low convergence
speed of the distillation process; 3. High storage consumption of the expert trajectory. To address these issues, we
offer a new perspective on understanding the essence of
Dataset Distillation and MTT through a simple transformation of the objective function, and introduce a novel method
called Matching Convexified Trajectory (MCT), which aims
to provide better guidance for the student trajectory. MCT
creates convex combinations of expert trajectories by selecting a few expert models, guiding student networks to
converge quickly and stably. This trajectory is not only easier to store, but also enables continuous sampling strategies
during the distillation process, ensuring thorough learning
and fitting of the entire expert trajectory. The comprehensive experiment of three public datasets verified that MCT
is superior to the traditional MTT method.

With the emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs),
there has been a corresponding rise in model complexity,
further intensifying the demand for extensive datasets to
facilitate the training of these intricate models. However,
collecting and managing large datasets presents significant
challenges, including storage requirements, computational
load, privacy concerns, and the costs of data labeling. To
mitigate these challenges, Dataset Distillation (DD) has
emerged as a compelling strategy [20]. DD endeavors to
distill the essence of a large, real-world dataset into a more
compact, synthetic dataset that can train models with comparable efficacy.
In the landscape of DD methods, Matching Training Trajectories has emerged as a prominent approach. The MTT
method aims to generate a synthetic dataset that guides the
learning trajectory of the student network to approximate
the expert trajectory of this network on real data. In other
words, the expert trajectory should provide the guidance
training dynamic during each distillation iteration, which is
⃗T = ∥θ(t+M ) − θ(t) ∥2 , where θ(t+M ) and
often defined as V
2
T
T
T
(t)
θT denotes the parameter of the (t + M )-th and t-th model
on the expert trajectory. Despite the great progress [1, 6] in
this field, we have identified several inherent limitations of
the traditional MTT method due to poor training dynamics:
1. Instability of Expert Trajectory: As shown in Figure 1a, the validation accuracy of the expert network on the
MTT trajectory exhibits oscillations. Matching the trajectory locally in each iteration will lead to similar oscillation
in the trajectory of the synthetic data, thereby impeding robust distillation.
2. Low Convergence Speed: The learning process for
the expert trajectory is often slow. As in Figure 1b, a considerable number of distillation iterations are required to generate a synthetic dataset capable of achieving satisfactory
test accuracy, resulting in time-consuming procedures.

1. Introduction
The advancement of deep learning has catalyzed an exponential surge in the requisite volume of training data [19].
* Corresponding author.

25581

