This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HybridMQA: Exploring Geometry-Texture Interactions for Colored Mesh
Quality Assessment
Armin Shafiee Sarvestani*, Sheyang Tang*, Zhou Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo
{a5shafie, sheyang.tang, zhou.wang}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Mesh quality assessment (MQA) models play a critical role
in the design, optimization, and evaluation of mesh operation systems in a wide variety of applications. Current MQA models, whether model-based methods using
topology-aware features or projection-based approaches
working on rendered 2D projections, often fail to capture the intricate interactions between texture and 3D geometry. We introduce HybridMQA, a first-of-its-kind hybrid full-reference colored MQA framework that integrates
model-based and projection-based approaches, capturing
complex interactions between textural information and 3D
structures for enriched quality representations. Our method
employs graph learning to extract detailed 3D representations, which are then projected to 2D using a novel feature rendering process that precisely aligns them with colored projections. This enables the exploration of geometrytexture interactions via cross-attention, producing comprehensive mesh quality representations. Extensive experiments demonstrate HybridMQA’s superior performance
across diverse datasets, highlighting its ability to effectively
leverage geometry-texture interactions for a thorough understanding of mesh quality. Our project website is available at https://arshafiee.github.io/hybridmqa/.

1. Introduction
Advancements in 3D capture and display technologies have
sparked a growing interest in immersive media. 3D meshes,
a key form of 3D media, are widely used in applications
like virtual and augmented reality [20, 49], gaming, animation, medical modeling [37], and generative 3D content creation [21, 35]. A mesh, comprising triangular faces formed
by vertices, is colorized by assigning RGB colors to each
vertex (vertex-color mesh) or applying a 2D texture map
with UV coordinates (textured mesh). The demand for colored meshes calls for high-quality acquisition [3], compres* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Interactions between texture and geometry. top: complex texture makes the geometry distortion imperceptible. bottom:
modifying the geometry affects the appearance of texture distortion. Right half (gray) of each object represents geometry.

sion [11, 24], and transmission [25]. However, these processes often introduce artifacts that degrade visual quality,
highlighting the need for robust mesh quality assessment
(MQA) methods. Full-reference (FR) approaches, which
take distorted meshes and their pristine references as input
and generate a quality score by comparing their visual quality, are essential for accurate mesh quality assessment.
The perceived quality of a 3D colored mesh is affected
by its geometry and texture. Different mesh processing operations cause diverse geometrical and texture distortions
that degrade the visual quality of meshes by perturbing the
interactions between the object’s shape and color. Figure 1 illustrates an example of such geometry-texture interactions, where either the geometry or texture can affect
the visual appearance of distortions in the other. In the
top row, the easily visible geometry distortion becomes imperceptible when we replace the uniform texture with a
complex one. In the bottom row, the noisy texture patterns become smooth when we modify the geometry. This
highlights the need for MQA methods that capture these
complex geometry-texture interaction—a significant factor
largely overlooked by existing methods.

21414

