This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EEE-Bench: A Comprehensive Multimodal Electrical And Electronics
Engineering Benchmark

1

Ming Li1 * Jike Zhong2 * Tianle Chen3
Yuxiang Lai4
Konstantinos Psounis2
2
3
University of Tokyo
University of Southern California
Boston University 4 Emory University
Abstract

Recent studies on large language models (LLMs) and large
multimodal models (LMMs) have demonstrated promising
skills in various domains including science and mathematics. However, their capability in more challenging and realworld related scenarios like engineering has not been systematically studied. To bridge this gap, we propose EEEBench, a multimodal benchmark aimed at assessing LMMs’
capabilities in solving practical engineering tasks, using
electrical and electronics engineering (EEE) as the testbed.
Our benchmark consists of 2860 hand-picked and carefully
curated problems spanning 10 essential subdomains such as
analog circuits, control systems, etc. Compared to other domains, engineering problems are intrinsically 1) more visually complex and versatile and 2) less deterministic in solutions. Successful solutions to these problems often demand
more-than-usual rigorous integration of visual and textual
information as models need to understand intricate images
like abstract circuits and system diagrams while taking professional instructions. Alongside EEE-Bench, we provide
extensive quantitative evaluations, ﬁne-grained analysis,
and improvement methods using 17 widely-used open- and
closed-sourced LLMs and LMMs and 7 popular prompting
techniques. Our results reveal notable deﬁciencies in current foundation models for EEE, including an average performance ranging from 19.48% to 46.78% and a tendency
toward “laziness” in overlooking essential visual context.
In summary, we believe EEE-Bench not only reveals some
noteworthy limitations of LMMs but also provides a valuable resource for advancing research on their application
in practical engineering tasks, driving future improvements
in their capability to handle complex, real-world scenarios.
The EEE-Bench is publicly released on this link.

1. Introduction
Electrical and electronics engineering (EEE) embodies a
profound synthesis of theoretical knowledge and practical
* Equal contribution.

application, serving as the backbone of modern digital and
power technological advancements [5, 6, 34]. From designing intricate circuitry to advancing power systems, this
discipline demands rigorous logical reasoning and a deep
understanding of physical laws [7, 70]. Addressing problems in EEE requires that researchers and engineers not
only grasp the related theoretical knowledge but also comprehend the associated visual contexts, such as circuit diagrams and signal waveforms. Leveraging machine learning models equipped with robust knowledge and reasoning
capabilities, alongside accurate perception of visual contexts, can signiﬁcantly enhance various aspects of our lives.
These models can aid in intricate hardware design processes
[10, 50, 87], optimize operations within the electric energy
sector [57], drive innovation by proposing novel approaches
to traditional scientiﬁc challenges [75], and assist in solving
complex educational problems.
Recent Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 8, 18, 35,
78] and Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [21, 48, 76, 97]
have achieved much progress and demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in various domains, e.g., mathematical reasoning [90, 91] and general science [54]. To evaluate the abilities of these foundation models, various specialized or versatile benchmarks [56, 92, 99] have been developed. However, the reasoning ability of these foundation models on
engineering problems with visual contexts has not been systematically examined. Therefore, to better harness the potential of foundation models, it is crucial to develop a new
benchmark speciﬁc to engineering problems, and we select
EEE as our case study for the reasons mentioned before.
This will facilitate the evaluation of LLMs and LMMs in
terms of their ability to tackle rigorous engineering reasoning tasks, thereby advancing research progress in this ﬁeld.
Compared with other subjects such as mathematics, the
visual contexts in EEE are often more abstract and heavily
logic-oriented. Solving EEE problems demands specialized
technical knowledge, as illustrated in Figure 1. Speciﬁcally,
unlike mathematical problems [56, 81, 98] which might involve clear numerical data and operations, visual representations in EEE, such as circuit diagrams, are intricate and
logical, often containing minimal textual information (more

13337

