This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minding Fuzzy Regions: A Data-driven Alternating Learning Paradigm for
Stable Lesion Segmentation
Lexin Fang1 , Yunyang Xu1 , Xiang Ma1 , Xuemei Li1, *, Caiming Zhang1
1
School of Software, Shandong University
{fanglexin, xuyunyang}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {xiangma, xmli, czhang}@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved significant advancements in
medical image segmentation, but existing models still face
challenges in accurately segmenting lesion regions. The
main reason is that some lesion regions in medical images
have unclear boundaries, irregular shapes, and small tissue density differences, leading to label ambiguity. However, the existing model treats all data equally without taking quality differences into account in the training process,
resulting in noisy labels negatively impacting model training and unstable feature representations. In this paper, a
data-driven alternating learning (DALE) paradigm is proposed to optimize the model’s training process, achieving
stable and high-precision segmentation. The paradigm focuses on two key points: (1) reducing the impact of noisy
labels, and (2) calibrating unstable representations. To mitigate the negative impact of noisy labels, a loss consistencybased collaborative optimization method is proposed, and
its effectiveness is theoretically demonstrated. Specifically,
the label confidence parameters are introduced to dynamically adjust the influence of labels of different confidence
levels during model training, thus reducing the influence of
noise labels. To calibrate the learning bias of unstable representations, a distribution alignment method is proposed.
This method restores the underlying distribution of unstable
representations, thereby enhancing the discriminative capability of fuzzy region representations. Extensive experiments
on various benchmarks and model backbones demonstrate
the superiority of the DALE paradigm, achieving an average performance improvement of up to 7.16%.

Figure 1. T-SNE visualization of features from fuzzy and nonfuzzy regions on the MosMedData+ dataset. (a) shows that model
[43] learns well-discriminative features in non-fuzzy regions (blue
box). (b) shows significant overlap between lesion and normal
tissue representations in fuzzy regions (red box).

1. Introduction

have significantly advanced the field, including expanding
receptive fields [2, 4], introducing attention mechanisms [3,
23], and incorporating additional modality information [14,
43].
In medical images, the regions of lesions appear unclear or irregular due to slight tissue density differences
and irregular shapes. We refer to these regions as fuzzy
regions, while others are non-fuzzy regions. Fuzzy regions
often contain noisy labels, which arise from unclear boundaries, as well as subjective differences, fatigue, and experience limitations among medical image labelers. However, current segmentation models [14, 16, 23, 34] treat all
data equally during training, including data with noisy labels. Two key issues arise from this. First, noisy labels interfere with the model’s training direction, misguiding the
optimization process and causing error accumulation [17].
Second, the fuzzy region representation is unstable, which
makes learning discriminative features challenging. This
instability arises due to the unclear nature of fuzzy regions
and low label confidence, causing the model to struggle in
forming consistent feature representations. As shown in
Fig. 1(b), in fuzzy regions, the feature projections of normal

Medical image segmentation is a crucial step in computeraided diagnosis (CAD), assisting doctors in identifying and
locating internal organs and lesions. Recently, several deep
learning-based lesion segmentation methods [4, 14, 16, 23]
* Corresponding author

10425

