This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UA-Pose: Uncertainty-Aware 6D Object Pose Estimation and Online Object
Completion with Partial References
Ming-Feng Li1 Xin Yang4 Fu-En Wang4 Hritam Basak2
Yuyin Sun4 Shreekant Gayaka4 Min Sun3,4 Cheng-Hao Kuo4
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Stony Brook University
4
Amazon

Abstract
6D object pose estimation has shown strong generalizability to novel objects. However, existing methods often
require either a complete, well-reconstructed 3D model or
numerous reference images that fully cover the object. Estimating 6D poses from partial references, which capture
only fragments of an object’s appearance and geometry, remains challenging. To address this, we propose UA-Pose,
an uncertainty-aware approach for 6D object pose estimation and online object completion specifically designed for
partial references. We assume access to either (1) a limited set of RGBD images with known poses or (2) a single
2D image. For the first case, we initialize a partial object 3D model based on the provided images and poses,
while for the second, we use image-to-3D techniques to
generate an initial object 3D model. Our method integrates uncertainty into the incomplete 3D model, distinguishing between seen and unseen regions. This uncertainty enables confidence assessment in pose estimation
and guides an uncertainty-aware sampling strategy for online object completion, enhancing robustness in pose estimation accuracy and improving object completeness. We
evaluate our method on the YCB-Video, YCBInEOAT, and
HO3D datasets, including RGBD sequences of YCB objects
manipulated by robots and human hands. Experimental
results demonstrate significant performance improvements
over existing methods, particularly when object observations are incomplete or partially captured. Project page:
https://minfenli.github.io/UA-Pose/

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation, which determines the rigid 6degree-of-freedom transformation between an object and a
camera, is essential for various real-world applications such
as robotic manipulation [17, 38, 39, 49] and augmented re-

3

National Tsing Hua University

(a) Object Modeling with Partial Observations

Input Scenarios

SDF Training

Uncertainty
Modeling

Unseen
Seen

Initial Model

(1) Few posed RGBD

Image-to-3D

Uncertainty Map
Unseen

Uncertainty
Modeling
Seen

(2) Single Unposed RGB

Incomplete
Model

Uncertainty Map

Initial Model

Test RGBD

(b) Uncertainty-Aware Pose Estimation
Pose
Estimation

&

6D Object Pose
Update

Append
Memory Pool
Refine

Refined Model

…
(c) Online Object Completion

Figure 1. Overview of UA-Pose. (a) We initialize an incomplete
object 3D model M (Sec. 3.2), which is a hybrid mesh that combines texture, geometry, and uncertainty. (b) Given a sequence of
RGBD test images, our method estimates the 6D pose of the object in each test image (Sec. 3.3) based on the incomplete model
M. (c) While more test images are captured, we store them with
estimated poses in a memory pool, which will be used for online
object completion (Sec. 3.4) to refine the incomplete model M.

ality [22, 29]. Recent research introduced model -based and
model-free approaches that can generalize to arbitrary novel
objects. These methods push the boundaries of pose estimation for real-world applications and can be divided into two
scenarios based on the object information available beforehand. Model-based methods [1, 2, 4, 11, 13, 16, 23, 24, 28]
require textured 3D CAD models of the object to estimate
6D object poses in 2D images by establishing 2D-3D correspondences. In contrast, model-free methods leverage a
large set of posed reference RGB images [19], RGBD images [10, 41], or video sequences [7, 31] to estimate object
poses without the need for CAD models.

1180

