This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BadToken: Token-level Backdoor Attacks to Multi-modal Large Language
Models
Zenghui Yuan1 Jiawen Shi1 Pan Zhou1 * Neil Zhenqiang Gong2 Lichao Sun3
1
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security,
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Duke University 3 Lehigh University
{zenghuiyuan, shijiawen, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn, neil.gong@duke.edu, lis221@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) extend large
language models (LLMs) to process multi-modal information, enabling them to generate responses to image-text inputs. MLLMs have been incorporated into diverse multimodal applications, such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis, via plug-and-play without fine-tuning. This
deployment paradigm increases the vulnerability of MLLMs
to backdoor attacks. However, existing backdoor attacks
against MLLMs achieve limited effectiveness and stealthiness. In this work, we propose BadToken, the first tokenlevel backdoor attack to MLLMs. BadToken introduces two
novel backdoor behaviors: Token-substitution and Tokenaddition, which enable flexible and stealthy attacks by making token-level modifications to the original output for backdoored inputs. We formulate a general optimization problem that considers the two backdoor behaviors to maximize the attack effectiveness. We evaluate BadToken on two
open-source MLLMs and various tasks. Our results show
that our attack maintains the model’s utility while achieving
high attack success rates and stealthiness. We also show the
real-world threats of BadToken in two scenarios, i.e., autonomous driving and medical diagnosis. Furthermore, we
consider defenses including fine-tuning and input purification. Our results highlight the threat of our attack.

domain, resulting in the emergence of numerous multimodal large language models (MLLMs). These include
commercial models like GPT-4v [32] and Gemini [39], as
well as open-source models such as LLaVA [26], MiniGPT4 [50], and BLIP-2 [20]. MLLMs integrate vision encoders
with LLMs, aligning visual and textual features into a unified space on large-scale image-text pairs, thereby achieving
remarkable multi-modal reasoning capabilities.

1. Introduction

However, most existing works on MLLMs primarily focus on the performance improvement [2, 20, 26, 50], leaving significant gaps in the exploration of model security.
Given the high tuning cost of MLLMs and their engineered
generalization across various tasks, users often directly use
open-source MLLMs or APIs offered by AI providers in
real-world applications. The plug-and-play paradigm of deployment increases the risk of backdoor attacks [11, 17, 27].
Recent studies have explored data poisoning-based backdoor attacks [23, 30, 31] and test-time backdoor attacks [29]
on MLLMs. However, these attacks are limited to specific
tasks and datasets. Moreover, they are designed to generate
fixed sequences [23, 29] for any backdoored images, irrespective of the image’s semantic content, or randomly insert
the target sentence into the output [30]. Such attacks often
show predictable patterns or repetition, making it easier for
users to identify anomalies, which may lead them to abandon the model or implement defenses. Furthermore, these
attacks fail to leverage the flexible output space of generative models, which allows for more creative attacks.

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs),
such as Llama-2 [41], Vicuna [7], and Mistral [18], have
propelled generative models to the forefront of natural language processing (NLP). Researchers have extended the
text generation capabilities of LLMs into the multi-modal

Our work: In this paper, we propose BadToken, the
first token-level backdoor attack targeting MLLMs. As
illustrated in Figure 1, BadToken is designed to enable
more flexible and stealthy backdoor attacks across various
tasks while preserving the utility of MLLMs. Specifically,
we define two backdoor behaviors: Token-substitution and
Token-addition, both of which alter critical tokens in the
MLLM’s output sequence. These behaviors pose signif-

* Corresponding author.

29927

