This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-SLNR: A Super Lightweight Neural Representation for Large-scale 3D
Mapping
Chenhui Shi1,2
Fulin Tang1†
Ning An3,4
Yihong Wu1,2†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
China Coal Research Institute 4 State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Coal Mining and Strata Control
shichenhui2022@ia.ac.cn,tangfulin2015@ia.ac.cn,ning.an@ccteg-bigdata.com,yhwu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
We propose 3D-SLNR, a new and ultra-lightweight neural representation with outstanding performance for largescale 3D mapping. The representation deﬁnes a global
signed distance function (SDF) in near-surface space based
on a set of band-limited local SDFs anchored at support
points sampled from point clouds. These SDFs are parameterized only by a tiny multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
with no latent features, and the state of each SDF is modulated by three learnable geometric properties: position,
rotation, and scaling, which make the representation adapt
to complex geometries. Then, we develop a novel parallel
algorithm tailored for this unordered representation to efﬁciently detect local SDFs where each sampled point is located, allowing for real-time updates of local SDF states
during training. Additionally, a prune-and-expand strategy is introduced to enhance adaptability further. The synergy of our low-parameter model and its adaptive capabilities results in an extremely compact representation with
excellent expressiveness. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction performance with less than 1/5 of the memory footprint
compared with previous advanced methods.

1. Introduction
This paper aims to reconstruct large-scale scenes from
point clouds, covering from indoors to outdoors, and even
extending to city-scale environments. This is a key research
topic in computer vision and graphics and remains greatly
promising in applications such as self-driving, robotics, and
mixed reality. However, the task presents signiﬁcant challenges, as larger scene scales introduce more complex geometry and higher memory demands. Thus, an expressive
yet highly compact map representation is desirable.
† Corresponding author.

Previous approaches have extensively explored the optimal scene representations. Traditional approaches usually
directly model scenes as discrete distance grids [28, 42] or
predeﬁned basis functions [13, 15], which then are converted into 3D ﬁelds through techniques like truncated
signed distance function (TSDF) fusion [26] or ﬁnite element analysis [13, 15]. To enable scalability for large
scenes, various sparse data structures [9, 12, 14, 28, 42] are
widely employed. However, capturing detailed geometry
with these methods necessitates a large allocation of data
nodes, resulting in a substantial increase in memory usage.
Building on the above traditional concepts, many learningbased methods [20, 37, 38, 48, 52] represent scenes as continuous and differentiable implicit ﬁelds using neural networks, often incorporating sparse feature grids [22, 25, 40]
to facilitate scalability and expressiveness. Some methods
[11, 46] reconstruct scenes using data-driven neural kernels,
offering greater expressiveness than the basis functions used
in traditional methods [13, 15]. These methods mitigate the
need for extensive data node allocation but require numerous high-dimensional latent features to capture intricate geometric details, introducing additional memory overhead.
The recent point-based learning methods [30, 35, 47] show
great potential for lightweight representation due to their inherent adaptivity. However, they still heavily rely on latent
features, neglecting the further exploitation of the adaptivity. In summary, prior methods often prioritize expressiveness at the expense of memory efﬁciency.
In this paper, we present 3D-SLNR, a new and super lightweight representation with exceptional expressiveness for large-scale 3D mapping. A visualization is provided in Fig. 1. Our method combines the principles
from neural implicit representations and basis functions
while fully exploiting the adaptive nature of the point-based
representations. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a continuous and
differentiable global SDF using a set of band-limited local SDFs anchored at support points sampled from point

27233

