This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape and Texture: What Influences Reliable Optical Flow Estimation?
Libo Long, Xiao Hu, Jochen Lang
EECS, University of Ottawa
{ llong014, xhu008, jlang}@uottawa.ca

Abstract
Recent methods have made significant progress in optical
flow estimation. However, the evaluation of these methods
focuses mainly on improved accuracy in benchmarks and
often overlooks the analysis of network robustness, which
may be important in safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous driving. In this paper, we propose a novel method
for robustness evaluation by modifying data from original
benchmarks. Unlike previous benchmarks that focus on
complex scenes, we propose to modify shape and texture of
objects from the original images in order to analyze the sensitivity to these changes observed in the output. Our aim is
to identify common failure cases of state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods to evaluate their robustness and understand their
behaviors. We show that: Optical flow methods are more
sensitive to shape changes than to texture changes; and optical flow methods tend to “remember” objects seen during training and may “ignore” the motion of unseen objects. Our experimental results and findings provide a more
in-depth understanding of the behavior of recent optical
flow methods. (See https://github.com/llesky/RobustnessAnalysis-Optical-Flow).

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation, which aims to estimate pixel-level
motion in videos, is fundamental for high-level computer
vision applications, such as autonomous driving [5, 24, 37],
video editing [2, 16, 18, 29], and 3DGS [10, 48]. Given
their widespread use, evaluating the robustness of optical
flow methods is crucial considering safety.
To enhance the robustness of optical flow methods, various solutions have been proposed. Some studies have
addressed occlusion maps using dedicated networks [14,
23, 30]. Others have incorporated attention mechanisms
to improve performance, particularly for large displacements [39]. Recently, studies have begun to replace convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with transformer blocks
to further improve accuracy [13, 25, 38]. However, a systematic analysis of the robustness of deep models in optical

27894

flow is still lacking.
Inspired by [8, 15], we start by analyzing how shape and
texture affect matching in optical flow. SOTA optical flow
methods estimate optical flow by relying on matching pixels (i.e., 4D cost volume) between input images. However,
there has been limited study to explain how this matching
process works. Motivated by this gap, we introduce FlowR, a synthetic test set generated by a diffusion model for
optical flow tasks. Unlike existing datasets, we modify the
shape and texture of a key object (e.g., a car) in the KITTI
benchmark [7] and evaluate the changes in the output compared to the original results. This allows us to measure the
sensitivity of the method to certain types of semantic change
in the input. Through this, we aim to explore two fundamental questions about optical flow methods:
1. Shape vs. Texture: Do optical flow methods estimate
motion primarily based on an object’s shape or texture?
2. Memorization: Do these methods tend to memorize
objects from previously seen scenes?
Our Flow-R test set includes three subsets: Flow-R-T for
texture replacement, Flow-R-S for shape replacement, and
Flow-R-O for adding objects changing both shape and texture. Figure 1 presents two samples of data. We develop an
application using the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [19]
to generate the corresponding masks of the main objects in
each pair of images. We then manually select high-quality
samples.
To build Flow-R-T, we apply a set of 24 common texture prompts to ControlNet with specific masks to generate
new textures for an object. We evaluate the performance
of SOTA optical flow methods on Flow-R-T and find that
these methods can still match the motion of an object with
entirely different textures.
To build Flow-R-S, we directly scale the selected object
in the image by a random factor θ and assign an image motion to the object based on its real non-linear motion. We
demonstrate that optical flow methods rely more on shape
information than texture, and changes of the object flow can
significantly affect the optical flow of the background.
To build Flow-R-O, we introduce a set of 13 unseen objects, i.e., objects that do not occur in the training data, and

