This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry in Style: 3D Stylization via Surface Normal Deformation
Nam Anh Dinh
University of Chicago

Itai Lang
University of Chicago

Oded Stein
University of Southern California

Hyunwoo Kim
University of Chicago

Rana Hanocka
University of Chicago

a 3d render of...

a pineapple-themed vase

an A-pose knight in armor

a cute animal-themed chair

a lego goat

Figure 1. Our method deforms a source shape (gray) into a text-specified semantic style (blue). While the deformations are expressive,
they preserve the identity of the original shape.

Abstract
We present Geometry in Style, a new method for identitypreserving mesh stylization. Existing techniques either adhere to the original shape through overly restrictive deformations such as bump maps or significantly modify the input shape using expressive deformations that may introduce
artifacts or alter the identity of the source shape. In contrast, we represent a deformation of a triangle mesh as a
target normal vector for each vertex neighborhood. The deformations we recover from target normals are expressive
enough to enable detailed stylizations yet restrictive enough
to preserve the shape’s identity. We achieve such deformations using our novel differentiable As-Rigid-As-Possible
(dARAP) layer, a neural-network-ready adaptation of the
classical ARAP algorithm which we use to solve for pervertex rotations and deformed vertices. As a differentiable
layer, dARAP is paired with a visual loss from a text-toimage model to drive deformations toward style prompts,
altogether giving us Geometry in Style. Our project page is
at https://threedle.github.io/geometry-in-style.

1. Introduction
Semantically deforming triangle meshes is a basic task in
3D surface modeling. A common paradigm for shape cre-

ation is to take a base 3D object and deform it to sculpt a
desired shape. For example, a human artist creates an intricate surface by starting with a simple generic version of
an object (from a shape library, or quickly sketched), and
successively deforms parts of the object like a sculptor modeling clay.
Recently, machine learning pipelines have adopted deformations as a strategy for neural shape manipulation [2,
38, 77]. However, existing learning-based methods do not
always fully mimic the classical approach: they either make
small, surface-level changes for simple stylization [30, 60],
or they generate large deformations that destroy the identity
of the base object [26, 41]. Our method, Geometry in Style,
uses text prompts to generate large deformations that create unique shapes while preserving the identity of the base
shape (see Fig. 1) – much like a human sculptor would.
We posit that existing learning methods’ failure to generate the kinds of large, identity-preserving deformations that
a human artist would is due to not employing the right representation for the space of deformations. Existing methods
either (a) adhere to the original shape through overly restrictive deformations, such as bump maps [30, 60]; or they (b)
significantly modify the input shape using expressive deformations based on gradient fields that may introduce artifacts
or destroy the identity of the original shape [26, 41].
In this work, a deformation of a triangle mesh is repre-

28456

