This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperbolic Category Discovery
Yuanpei Liu*
Zhenqi He*
Kai Han†
Visual AI Lab, The University of Hong Kong
{ypliu0,zhenqi he}@connect.hku.hk

Abstract

kaihanx@hku.hk

different
scale

Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) is an intriguing open-world problem that has garnered increasing attention. Given a dataset that includes both labelled and
unlabelled images, GCD aims to categorize all images in
the unlabelled subset, regardless of whether they belong to
known or unknown classes. In GCD, the common practice typically involves applying a spherical projection operator at the end of the self-supervised pretrained backbone, operating within Euclidean or spherical space. However, both of these spaces have been shown to be suboptimal for encoding samples that possesses hierarchical
structures. In contrast, hyperbolic space exhibits exponential volume growth relative to radius, making it inherently
strong at capturing the hierarchical structure of samples
from both seen and unseen categories. Therefore, we propose to tackle the category discovery challenge in the hyperbolic space. We introduce HypCD, a simple Hyperbolic
framework for learning hierarchy-aware representations
and classifiers for generalized Category Discovery. HypCD
first transforms the Euclidean embedding space of the backbone network into hyperbolic space, facilitating subsequent
representation and classification learning by considering
both hyperbolic distance and the angle between samples.
This approach is particularly helpful for knowledge transfer
from known to unknown categories in GCD. We thoroughly
evaluate HypCD on public GCD benchmarks, by applying
it to various baseline and state-of-the-art methods, consistently achieving significant improvements. Project page:
https://visual-ai.github.io/hypcd/

same scale

Spherical-based

Hyperbolic-based
(a) Method Comparison

Prev. SOTA
Ours

71.9

ACC（%）

69.5

74.4
2.5
67.2

6.4

63.1

58.8

All

Old
(b) Accuracy Comparison

8.4

New

Figure 1. (a) Spherical-based vs. Hyperbolic-based methods,
where hyperbolic space better accommodates variations in scale
and improves connections between samples. (b) Average ACC
comparison of our method and previous SOTA across ‘All’, ‘Old’,
and ‘New’ categories on the SSB [52] benchmark using DINO [7].

by partially labelled datasets, where the unlabelled subset
may contain instances from both seen and unseen classes.
The goal is to leverage knowledge from labelled data to
effectively categorize the unlabelled data. Based on the
way to predict category index, existing GCD methods can
be broadly classified into two types: non-parametric methods [27, 44, 45, 51] and parametric methods [37, 55, 59].
Non-parametric methods predict category index based on
feature clustering while parametric methods utilize a parametric classifier.
As shown in the GCD literature [51], object parts are
effective for knowledge transfer from seen to unseen categories, which is crucial for novel category discovery. Methods have been developed to explicitly learn better local features by learning pixel-level prompts around local image regions [55] or utilizing part-level features [63]. However,

1. Introduction
Recently, category discovery – initially explored as novel
category discovery (NCD) [24] and subsequently extended to generalized category discovery (GCD) [51] – has
emerged as an intriguing open-world problem, gaining increasing attention. GCD addresses the challenges posed
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

9891

