This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coeff-Tuning: A Graph Filter Subspace View for Tuning Attention-Based Large
Models
Zichen Miao† , Wei Chen† , Qiang Qiu
Purdue University, IN, USA
{miaoz, chen2732, qqiu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Transformer-based large pre-trained models have shown
remarkable generalization ability, and various parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have been proposed to
customize these models on downstream tasks with minimal
computational and memory budgets. Previous PEFT methods are primarily designed from a tensor-decomposition
perspective that tries to effectively tune the linear transformation by finding the smallest subset of parameters to
train. Our study adopts an orthogonal view by representing the attention operation as a graph convolution and formulating the multi-head attention maps as a convolutional
filter subspace, with each attention map as a subspace element. In this paper, we propose to tune the large pre-trained
transformers by learning a small set of combination coefficients that construct a more expressive filter subspace from
the original multi-head attention maps. We show analytically and experimentally that the tuned filter subspace can
effectively expand the feature space of the multi-head attention and further enhance the capacity of transformers. We
further stabilize the fine-tuning with a residual parameterization of the tunable subspace coefficients, and enhance
the generalization with a regularization design by directly
applying dropout on the tunable coefficient during training. The tunable coefficients take a tiny number of parameters and can be combined with previous PEFT methods in
a plug-and-play manner. Extensive experiments show that
our approach achieves superior performances than PEFT
baselines with neglectable additional parameters.1

1. Introduction
Large foundational models have demonstrated remarkable performance and generalization ability across a wide
range of natural language processing and computer vision

Figure 1. (Up) Under the graph convolution view of the attention, the proposed Coeff-Tuning enhances the expressiveness by
combining the attention maps with a tiny tunable subspace coefficient α. It can be seamlessly integrated with other PEFT methods,
e.g., LoRA [21], by introducing neglectable additional parameters.
(Bottom) Combining Coeff-Tuning with LoRA achieves better results in the concept customization task with SDXL [51].

† Equal contribution.

tasks [11, 28, 55, 68]. The success of these models can be
attributed to their ability to learn rich, transferable representations by leveraging the power of the transformer architecture [68] and the extensive knowledge captured during

1 Code is available at: https://github.com/ZichenMiao/
Coeff_Tuning

20146

