This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScribbleLight: Single Image Indoor Relighting with Scribbles
Jun Myeong Choi1
1

Annie Wang1

Pieter Peers2

Anand Bhattad3

Roni Sengupta1

2
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
College of William & Mary
3
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
https://chedgekorea.github.io/ScribbleLight

Figure 1. We introduce ScribbleLight, a generative model designed for indoor scene relighting from a single RGB image, that allows users
to iteratively refine lighting effects in a photo using simple scribble annotations. For the first scribble example, the natural lighting coming
from the window changes from nighttime to daytime by turning off both lamps and brightening the area near the window (left side) and
casting a soft glow on the bed. In the second scribble example, only the right lamp is turned on. In the third scribble example, the natural
lighting intensifies, thereby increasing the gloss on the bed’s surface. For the final scribble example, adding the split in the light cast from
the window causes the angle of the incoming light to change, creating a strong contrast with the warm glow of the bedside lamp.

Abstract

and scribble annotations. We demonstrate ScribbleLight’s
ability to create different lighting effects (e.g., turning lights
on/off, adding highlights, cast shadows, or indirect lighting
from unseen lights) from sparse scribble annotations.

Image-based relighting of indoor rooms creates an immersive virtual understanding of the space, which is useful for
interior design, virtual staging, and real estate. Relighting indoor rooms from a single image is especially challenging due to complex illumination interactions between
multiple lights and cluttered objects featuring a large variety in geometrical and material complexity. Recently, generative models have been successfully applied to imagebased relighting conditioned on a target image or a latent code, albeit without detailed local lighting control.
In this paper, we introduce ScribbleLight, a generative
model that supports local fine-grained control of lighting
effects through scribbles that describe changes in lighting. Our key technical novelty is an Albedo-conditioned
Stable Image Diffusion model that preserves the intrinsic
color and texture of the original image after relighting and
an encoder-decoder-based ControlNet architecture that enables geometry-preserving lighting effects with normal map

1. Introduction
In today’s digital age, the ability to control and visualize
lighting in indoor spaces is crucial, especially in downstream applications such as real estate, virtual staging, and
interior design. Traditional static images of indoor scenes
often fail to show how a room would look under different lighting conditions, missing key elements that affect the
space’s aesthetics and mood. Scene relighting techniques
offer a solution by enabling dynamic lighting adjustments
within an image, letting users envision how a room transforms under various lighting scenarios, such as natural sunlight or with different lamps in the room turned on. The
ability to relight provides a deeper and immersive understanding of the space, without needing a physical visit.

5720

