This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PMNI: Pose-free Multi-view Normal Integration for Reflective and Textureless
Surface Reconstruction
Mingzhi Pei1
Xu Cao2
Xiangyi Wang1
Heng Guo1∗
Zhanyu Ma1
1
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Independent Researcher
{pmz, el777216wxy, guoheng, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn

xucao.42@gmail.com

Abstract
Reflective and textureless surfaces remain a challenge in
multi-view 3D reconstruction. Both camera pose calibration and shape reconstruction often fail due to insufficient
or unreliable cross-view visual features. To address these
issues, we present PMNI (Pose-free Multi-view Normal Integration), a neural surface reconstruction method that incorporates rich geometric information by leveraging surface normal maps instead of RGB images. By enforcing
geometric constraints from surface normals and multi-view
shape consistency within a neural signed distance function
(SDF) optimization framework, PMNI simultaneously recovers accurate camera poses and high-fidelity surface geometry. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world
datasets show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in the reconstruction of reflective surfaces, even
without reliable initial camera poses.

GT Mesh

DUSt3R [25]

Ours

SuperNormal [3]

Init. Pose

DUSt3R [25]

Ours

Calib. Pose

Figure 1. (Top row) Given multi-view surface normals of a reflective and textureless surface, our method jointly recovers a highfidelity surface (middle row) and accurate camera poses (bottom
row). The reconstructed shape is comparable to the results of [3],
which uses calibrated poses.

1. Introduction
Detailed 3D reconstruction from multi-view image observations is a fundamental task in computer vision, empowering
various applications like virtual reality and e-Heritage. A
typical pipeline first calibrates the camera poses for each
image and then uses the posed images to recover the shape.
Many methods have achieved promising results in scenes
with diffuse and specular surfaces [2, 9, 10, 13, 15, 18, 24].
However, surface reconstruction without pose calibration,
which is desired for practical causal capture scenarios, still
remains challenging for reflective and textureless surfaces,
as shown in Fig. 1.
Existing methods for reconstructing reflective and textureless surfaces, such as NeRO [18], require precise camera pose calibration. To achieve this, a calibration board is
often placed under the object, limiting the method’s appli∗ Corresponding author.

cability in more casual setups. However, jointly recovering
camera poses and surface from images presents a chickenand-egg problem. As shown in Fig. 2, without knowing the
relative pose between cameras c1 and c2 , the epipolar plane
c1 − c2 − x remains ambiguous. To mitigate this ambiguity, existing methods either attempt to establish feature
correspondences [p1 , p2 ] [1, 17] between views or to constrain the shape at specific locations using monocular depth
estimation [8, 25]. However, establishing reliable feature
correspondences for reflective surfaces is particularly challenging due to view-dependent reflectance. Moreover, the
lack of texture further complicates shape estimation using
learning-based monocular depth estimators [20, 26]. Con-

Released at: https://github.com/pmz-enterprise/PMNI

26834

