This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Style-Editor: Text-driven object-centric style editing
Jihun Park,* Jongmin Gim,* Kyoungmin Lee,* Seunghun Lee, Sunghoon Im†
DGIST, Daegu, Republic of Korea
{pjh2857, jongmin4422, kyoungmin, lsh5688, sunghoonim}@dgist.ac.kr

Source Image

Source Image

Source Image

Source Image

Source Image

Source Image

“Butterfly” →
“Stained glass”

“Barn” →
“Snowy”

“Rock” →
“Crystal”

“Strawberry” →
“Frozen”

“Cookie” →
“Red velvet”

“Door” →
“Stone wall”

“Red flower” →
“Yellow”

“Mountain” →
“Lava”

“Tree” →
“Autumn style”

“Wooden board” →
“Marble style”

“Blue tableware” →
“White marble style”

“Plant” →
“Golden”

Figure 1. Results of our Style-Editor under diverse textual conditions. To the left and right of the arrow(→) indicate the source text T src
and style text T sty , respectively.

Background Preservation (ABP) loss to maintain the original style and structural essence of the image’s background.
This loss is applied to dynamically identified background
areas. Extensive experiments underline the effectiveness
of our approach in creating visually coherent and textually
aligned style editing.

Abstract
We present Text-driven object-centric style editing model
named Style-Editor, a novel method that guides style editing
at an object-centric level using textual inputs. The core of
Style-Editor is our Patch-wise Co-Directional (PCD) loss,
meticulously designed for precise object-centric editing that
are closely aligned with the input text. This loss combines
a patch directional loss for text-guided style direction and
a patch distribution consistency loss for even CLIP embedding distribution across object regions. It ensures a seamless and harmonious style editing across object regions.
Key to our method are the Text-Matched Patch Selection
(TMPS) and Pre-fixed Region Selection (PRS) modules for
identifying object locations via text, eliminating the need
for segmentation masks. Lastly, we introduce an Adaptive

1. Introduction

* Equal Contribution
†Corresponding author

In the realm of creative digital industries such as advertising, film, and video game development, the demand for
advanced image manipulation is surging. The introduction
of an object-focused style editing model, driven by textual
commands, is transforming these sectors. It allows for detailed and user-friendly adjustments to the visual aspects
of objects in images. This innovation empowers designers to bypass traditional manual editing, enabling them to
define stylistic alterations using just text, thus facilitating

18281

