This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An End-to-End Robust Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Network with Single-Step Conditional Diffusion Models
Wentao Qu1 , Jing Wang2 , YongShun Gong3 , Xiaoshui Huang4∗ , Liang Xiao1∗
NJUST1 , THU2 , SDU3 , SJTU4
{quwentao, jwang}@njust.edu.cn, huangxiaoshui@163.com, xiaoliang@mail.njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DDPMs) with a Noise-Conditional Framework
(NCF) remain challenging for 3D scene understanding
tasks, as the complex geometric details in scenes increase
the difﬁculty of ﬁtting the gradients of the data distribution (the scores) from semantic labels. This also results in
longer training and inference time for DDPMs compared to
non-DDPMs. From a different perspective, we delve deeply
into the model paradigm dominated by the Conditional
Network. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end robust
semantic Segmentation Network based on a ConditionalNoise Framework (CNF) of DDPMs, named CDSegNet.
Speciﬁcally, CDSegNet models the Noise Network (NN) as
a learnable noise-feature generator. This enables the Conditional Network (CN) to understand 3D scene semantics
under multi-level feature perturbations, enhancing the generalization in unseen scenes. Meanwhile, beneﬁting from
the noise system of DDPMs, CDSegNet exhibits strong robustness for data noise and sparsity in experiments. Moreover, thanks to CNF, CDSegNet can generate the semantic
labels in a single-step inference like non-DDPMs, due to
avoiding directly ﬁtting the scores from semantic labels in
the dominant network of CDSegNet. On public indoor and
outdoor benchmarks, CDSegNet signiﬁcantly outperforms
existing methods, achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Point cloud, as a fundamental 3D representation, provides the most crucial data structure support for 3D tasks.
Beneﬁting from the rapid development of 3D devices and
continuous innovation in data synthesis techniques, largescale scene point clouds have become accessible [1, 5, 10,
13]. Therefore, accurate semantic understanding of 3D
scenes, applied to a wide range of 3D downstream tasks
such as autonomous driving [47], robotic technology [36],
and virtual reality [23], has gained increasing attention.
∗ Corresponding Author. https://github.com/QWTforGithub/CDSegNet

27325

Figure 1. The training and inference difference between NCF and
CNF. NCF dominated by NN, relies on the noise ﬁtting quality,
requiring extensive training and inference iterations. In contrast,
CNF alleviates the noise ﬁtting necessity by focusing on CN, cleverly avoiding this issue, alongside retaining the DDPM robustness.

Encouraged by deep learning, a large number of learnable point cloud semantic segmentation methods have
achieved signiﬁcant results in recent years [8, 24, 50, 52,
53, 64]. Nevertheless, these methods often overlook the fact
that raw point clouds from 3D devices are usually perturbed
and sparse [5, 42], making them sensitive to data noise and
sparsity [21, 43, 56]. This limits the optimal segmentation
accuracy, especially recognizing in object boundaries and
small objects [60, 61].
Along another research line, DDPMs [16] with a strong
noise-robust denoising architecture, originated from and
ﬂourished in image generation [11, 28, 41], have been explored in various 3D tasks [34, 39, 54, 66]. They typically consider the 3D task as a conditional generation problem, built upon the Noise-Conditional Framework (NCF,
see Fig. 1(a)). In general, the Conditional Network (CN)
extracts the conditional features for generating guidance.
Meanwhile, the Noise Network (NN) predicts the scores
[45] from task targets, dominating the results of tasks.
Unfortunately, this framework poses challenges when
applied to real-time 3D scene understanding tasks, such as
autonomous driving. This is because, to better ﬁt the scores
from task targets, DDPMs typically require more training
and inference steps compared to non-DDPMs [44, 45]. Al-

