This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperLoRA: Parameter-Efficient Adaptive Generation for Portrait Synthesis
Mengtian Li*

Jinshu Chen*
Wanquan Feng*†
Songtao Zhao
Qian He

Bingchuan Li

Fei Dai

Intelligent Creation, ByteDance

Wizard hat

Pink wavy hair

Chinese clothing

Snow

Beach

Cyberpunk

HyperLoRA
w.o. fine-tuning

Figure 1. We propose HyperLoRA, a parameter-efficient adaptive method for portrait synthesis. Given an input face image, HyperLoRA
generates personalized LoRA weights without online fine-tuning. Due to the natural interpolability of LoRA, it is easy to support multiple
inputs by simple averaging. Leveraging the generated LoRA, we can create personalized portraits with high photorealism and fidelity.

Abstract
Personalized portrait synthesis, essential in domains
like social entertainment, has recently made significant
progress. Person-wise fine-tuning based methods, such as
LoRA and DreamBooth, can produce photorealistic outputs but need training on individual samples, consuming
time and resources and posing an unstable risk. Adapter
based techniques such as IP-Adapter freeze the foundational model parameters and employ a plug-in architecture
to enable zero-shot inference, but they often exhibit a lack
of naturalness and authenticity, which are not to be overlooked in portrait synthesis tasks. In this paper, we introduce a parameter-efficient adaptive generation method,

namely HyperLoRA, that uses an adaptive plug-in network
to generate LoRA weights, merging the superior performance of LoRA with the zero-shot capability of adapter
scheme. Through our carefully designed network structure
and training strategy, we achieve zero-shot personalized
portrait generation (supporting both single and multiple image inputs) with high photorealism, fidelity, and editability.

* Equal contribution

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author

The personalized portrait synthesis task [14, 44, 45] aims
to generate images sharing the same identity with what is
contained in the given single or multiple portrait images.
By feeding the identity information into specific generative model, the task enables the users to create diverse,
high-quality and creative personalized portraits, thus hold-

13114

