This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

When Domain Generalization meets Generalized Category Discovery:
An Adaptive Task-Arithmetic Driven Approach
Vaibhav Rathore1
1

IIT Bombay

Shubhranil B1
2

Sarthak Mehrotra1 *

Saikat Dutta1,2 *

Biplab Banerjee1
IITB-Monash Research Academy

3

Zsolt Kira3

Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Generalized Class Discovery (GCD) clusters base and
novel classes in a target domain, using supervision from
a source domain with only base classes. Current methods
often falter with distribution shifts and typically require access to target data during training, which can sometimes be
impractical. To address this issue, we introduce the novel
paradigm of Domain Generalization in GCD (DG-GCD),
where only source data is available for training, while the
target domain—with a distinct data distribution—remains
unseen until inference. To this end, our solution, DG2 CDNet, aims to construct a domain-independent, discriminative embedding space for GCD. The core innovation is an
episodic training strategy that enhances cross-domain generalization by adapting a base model on tasks derived from
source and synthetic domains generated by a foundation
model. Each episode focuses on a cross-domain GCD task,
diversifying task setups over episodes and combining openset domain adaptation with a novel margin loss and representation learning for optimizing the feature space progressively. To capture the effects of fine-tunings on the
base model, we extend task arithmetic by adaptively weighting the local task vectors concerning the fine-tuned models
based on their GCD performance on a validation distribution. This episodic update mechanism boosts the adaptability of the base model to unseen targets. Experiments across
three datasets confirm that DG2 CD-Net outperforms existing GCD methods customized for DG-GCD.

Figure 1. We present a novel variant of GCD, Domain Generalization for Generalized Category Discovery, where a model
is trained on a source domain (photo) and evaluated on a target
domain (cartoon). During inference, the model must cluster seen
classes while also identifying and distinguishing novel classes.

main generalization (DG) [51, 72] aim to create domainagnostic embeddings for distribution generalization. However, in open-set applications [3, 37], they typically classify
novel samples in a single outlier class.
Applications like autonomous driving and healthcare require finer categorization of novel samples. Novel Class
Discovery (NCD) [15, 18] addresses this by clustering novel
classes in an unlabeled target domain using labeled source
data with known classes. Generalized Class Discovery
(GCD) [35, 45, 67] extends this to both known and novel
classes in the target domain, with the support of source domain knowledge. Cross-Domain GCD (CD-GCD) [36] further advances this by handling cases where the source and
target domains differ in distribution. Nonetheless, all these
settings assume simultaneous access to source and target
data to carry out training, which is often impractical. For
example, an autonomous vehicle [41, 66] trained on California’s roads in summer may face unexpected challenges
on snowy Moscow streets. Similarly, medical AI models
[2, 64] trained on high-quality images may need to analyze lower-resolution scans from rural areas to detect new
pathologies. In these cases, the target domains are majorly
inaccessible until inference. Thus, robust AI systems must
adapt to varying environments, organizing both known and
novel data categories without prior exposure and ensuring
reliable performance in unexpected scenarios.
To meet these challenges, we propose DG-GCD (Table
1), a novel and practical setting that leverages a labeled
source domain to train a feature extractor on known classes.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning [8, 48] have improved visual inference models; however, challenges persist in limited supervision, domain shifts, and detecting novel classes
in inference. Semi-supervised and self-supervised methods [21, 44, 65] address limited supervision but assume a
closed-set environment. Domain adaptation (DA) and do* These authors contributed equally to this work.

4905

