This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EquiPose: Exploiting Permutation Equivariance
for Relative Camera Pose Estimation
Yuzhen Liu1,2
1

Qiulei Dong1,2, *

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of Automation
2

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
liuyuzhen2022@ia.ac.cn, qldong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Existing methods for relative camera pose estimation
in literature could be roughly divided into two categories:
matching-based methods and end-to-end methods. The
matching-based methods [13, 33] generally employ a twostage computational strategy: Firstly, they establish the
point correspondences between an input pair of images by
utilizing local feature extraction and matching techniques
[13, 33]. Then according to the established correspondences, they solve a two-view geometric problem via a typical 5-point algorithm [24] with robust fitting [21] for pursuing the relative pose. However, since the performances
of the matching-based methods depend on the established
point correspondences, their performance would significantly decrease or even fail in cases of weak/repeated textures and degenerated configurations as indicated in [20].
Unlike the above matching-based methods, many recent
methods [6, 12, 19, 28, 36, 46, 57, 61] have employed deep
neural networks to directly learn a mapping from the input
two images to their relative pose without explicitly establishing point correspondences. Here, it has to be pointed out
that ideally, the estimated relative pose by these end-to-end
methods should have the following intrinsic pose permutation equivariance (PPE) property between an image pair:

Relative camera pose estimation between two images is a
fundamental task in 3D computer vision. Recently, many
relative pose estimation networks have been explored for
learning a mapping from two input images to their corresponding relative pose, however, the estimated relative
poses by these methods do not have the intrinsic Pose Permutation Equivariance (PPE) property: the estimated relative pose from Image A to Image B should be the inverse
of that from Image B to Image A. It means that permuting the input order of two images would cause these methods to obtain inconsistent relative poses. To address this
problem, we firstly introduce the concept of PPE mapping,
which indicates such a mapping that captures the intrinsic PPE property of relative poses. Then by enforcing the
aforementioned PPE property, we propose a general framework for relative pose estimation, called EquiPose, which
could easily accommodate various relative pose estimation networks in literature as its baseline models. We further theoretically prove that the proposed EquiPose framework could guarantee that its obtained mapping is a PPE
mapping. Given a pre-trained baseline model, the proposed EquiPose framework could improve its performance
even without fine-tuning, and could further boost its performance with fine-tuning. Experimental results on four public
datasets demonstrate that EquiPose could significantly improve the performances of various state-of-the-art models.

Pose Permutation Equivariance
Let {I1 , I2 } be a pair of images, then the relative
pose P12 from I1 to I2 should be the inverse of the
relative pose P21 from I2 to I1 :
−1
P21 = P12
.

(1)

1. Introduction
By writing P12 and P21 in the matrix form:

Estimating the relative camera pose between an image pair
is one of the fundamental tasks in 3D computer vision [6,
46]. It has a broad range of applications, such as structurefrom-motion (SfM) [14, 15, 42], visual localization [10, 40,
45], novel view synthesis [7, 53, 54], etc.



R12
P12 =
0


t12
,
1


R21
P21 =
0


t21
,
1

(2)

where R12 and t12 are the relative rotation and translation
from I1 to I2 , and R21 and t21 are the relative rotation and

* Corresponding author

1127

