This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval
Lan Wang1
Wei Ao1
Vishnu Naresh Boddeti1
Ser-Nam Lim2
1
2
Michigan State University
University of Central Florida
{wanglan3, aowei, vishnu}@msu.edu

Abstract
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) is a vision-language task
utilizing queries comprising images and textual descriptions to achieve precise image retrieval. This task seeks
to find images that are visually similar to a reference image while incorporating specific changes or features described textually (visual delta). CIR enables a more flexible and user-specific retrieval by bridging visual data with
verbal instructions. This paper introduces a novel generative method that augments Composed Image Retrieval
by Composed Image Generation (CIG) to provide pseudotarget images. CIG utilizes a textual inversion network
to map reference images into semantic word space, which
generates pseudo-target images in combination with textual
descriptions. These images serve as additional visual information, significantly improving the accuracy and relevance of retrieved images when integrated into existing retrieval frameworks. Experiments conducted across multiple CIR datasets and several baseline methods demonstrate
improvements in retrieval performance, which shows the
potential of our approach as an effective add-on for existing composed image retrieval. Project Page: https://lanlw.github.io/CIG/

1. Introduction
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) takes the composed
vision-language queries as input and searches for target
images [3, 8, 17, 24, 30, 49]. By combining visual data
and verbal instructions, CIR enables a more flexible, userspecific, and precise image retrieval. The composed query
includes a reference image Ir and a delta caption Tr . The
target image It should visually be like the reference image
Ir but capture the content described by the caption Tr [4].
Compared to image-only or text-only retrieval, it is easier
for the user to find an image (Ir ) that depicts the necessary
visual content and then describe the desired difference in
natural language [49].
CIR datasets, like CIRR [30] and CIRCO [4], are made
up of (Ir , Tr , It ) triplets. Constructing CIR datasets, therefore, requires huge human labeling efforts, which hinders

29690

sernam@ucf.edu

the widespread adoption and development of CIR algorithms. Existing methods can be categorized into two
groups, namely supervised CIR and zero-shot CIR. Supervised CIR methods [2, 7, 9, 11, 19, 21, 24, 31, 32, 41, 46,
49, 52], are trained on CIR datasets. However, due to the
lack of large-scale triplets datasets, supervised methods can
only be trained and evaluated on small datasets, which limits their generalization capability. On the contrary, zeroshot methods [1, 4, 15, 26, 29, 38, 43, 44, 51] do not require
triplets and train solely based on the reference image and
delta caption.
The mainstream solutions like SEARLE [1, 4],
Pic2Word [38], Context-I2W [45], LinCIR [15] encode the
reference image as a pseudo token and further train a fusion encoder, Φ(Ir , Tr ), that composes the reference image
and delta caption in the language embedding space. There
is a representation gap between the composed embeddings
(Φ(Ir , Tr )) and the target image embeddings (ψ(It )). The
former is in the language space, while the latter is in the
image space. Intuitively, if we train a fusion encoder
(Ψ(Ir , Tr )) in the image space, we would improve the image retrieval performance because now both Ψ(Ir , Tr ) and
ψ(It ) are in the image space. However, TIRG [49] reports
inferior performance when integrating the text information
into image embedding space. Some LLM-based methods,
such as CIReVL [20], have significantly improved performance. However, their inefficiency remains an issue for retrieval. In this paper, we therefore propose a different approach towards this by asking the question: Can a pseudo
target image help composed image retrieval?
To answer the above question, we propose a Composed
Image Generation (CIG) approach to assist the CIR task
from image space. Our method is straightforward, utilizing
the reference image and delta caption to generate pseudotarget images, which are then used to aid image retrieval,
as shown in Figure 1. Our method does not require triplet
datasets for pre-training, and it can serve as an add-on to any
existing CIR method to enhance its performance. First, during the training phase, we only need image-caption pairs.
Using pre-trained text inversion networks, we map the image to the token embedding space. The caption is then encoded to produce a composed embedding, which we use as

