This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

dFLMoE: Decentralized Federated Learning via Mixture of Experts for Medical
Data Analysis
Tianyu Luan1,3,4†
Luyuan Xie1,2,3 *
4
Nan Xi
Yuejian Fang1,2,3

Wenyuan Cai1
Qingni Shen1,2,3
2

Guochen Yan2,3
Zhonghai Wu1,2,3

1

School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University

3

National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University

Zhaoyu Chen1,2,3
Junsong Yuan4

PKU-OCTA Laboratory for Blockchain and Privacy Computing
4

State University of New York at Buffalo

(a) Centralized Federated Learning (Previous)

Abstract

Knowledge
Damage

Centralized Aggregation

Federated learning has wide applications in the medical
field. It enables knowledge sharing among different healthcare institutes while protecting patients’ privacy. However,
existing federated learning systems are typically centralized,
requiring clients to upload client-specific knowledge to a central server for aggregation. This centralized approach would
integrate the knowledge from each client into a centralized
server, and the knowledge would be already undermined
during the centralized integration before it reaches back to
each client. Besides, the centralized approach also creates a
dependency on the central server, which may affect training
stability if the server malfunctions or connections are unstable. To address these issues, we propose a decentralized
federated learning framework named dFLMoE. In our framework, clients directly exchange lightweight head models with
each other. After exchanging, each client treats both local
and received head models as individual experts, and utilizes a client-specific Mixture of Experts (MoE) approach to
make collective decisions. This design not only reduces the
knowledge damage with client-specific aggregations but also
removes the dependency on the central server to enhance the
robustness of the framework. We validate our framework on
multiple medical tasks, demonstrating that our method evidently outperforms state-of-the-art approaches under both
model homogeneity and heterogeneity settings.

1. Introduction
Federated learning has extensive medical applications. A
well-designed federated system can protect data privacy
while sharing high-level knowledge among different clients.
This enables each client’s network to receive additional sup* This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
under Grant No.2022YFB2703301.
† Tianyu Luan is corresponding author: tianyulu@buffalo.edu

Client A

Client B

Client C

Client D

Client E

(b) Decentralized Federated Learning (Ours)
Client-specific Mixture of Experts

Client A

Client-specific
Mixture of Experts

Client B

Client-specific
Mixture of Experts

Client E

Client C

Client D

Client-specific Mixture of Experts

Client-specific Mixture of Experts

Client-specific knowledge

Aggregated knowledge

Figure 1. (a) Previous centralized federated learning framework
aggregates knowledge from each client in a centralized server. This
process can lead to knowledge damage in centralized aggregation
and the framework is heavily dependent on the central server’s
stability. (b) Our decentralized framework dFLMoE eliminates centralized server and aggregation by having clients directly exchange
knowledge with each other. Each client then uses a Mixture of
Experts (MoE) approach to adaptively combine local and received
knowledge.

port and achieve better performance and generalizability. In
medical scenarios, patient data is hard to collect and has
strong privacy protection requirements. Federated learning
systems can effectively address the data limitations at each
healthcare institution, enhancing their model performance
and generalizability while ensuring privacy.
Existing federated learning systems, such as [8, 9, 27, 36],
are designed in a centralized manner. In each training round,
each client needs to upload client-specific knowledge (e.g.
model parameters) to a central server for aggregation, which
is then distributed back to each client. Regarding aggregation
methods, they require a unified model structure [8, 9, 36], a
centralized messenger model [52, 53, 56], or a unified public
dataset [20, 23, 28, 58]. Such centralized designs achieve

10203

