This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stochastic Human Motion Prediction with Memory of Action
Transition and Action Characteristic
Jianwei Tang1⋆ Hong Yang1⋆ Tengyue Chen1 Jian-Fang Hu1,2,3†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
1

{tangjw7,yangh553,chenty63}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Action-driven stochastic human motion prediction aims to
generate future motion sequences of a pre-defined target
action based on given past observed sequences performing non-target actions. This task primarily presents two
challenges. Firstly, generating smooth transition motions
is hard due to the varying transition speeds of different actions. Secondly, the action characteristic is difficult to be
learned because of the similarity of some actions. These issues cause the predicted results to be unreasonable and inconsistent. As a result, we propose two memory banks, the
Soft-transition Action Bank (STAB) and Action Characteristic Bank (ACB), to tackle the problems above. The STAB
stores the action transition information. It is equipped
with the novel soft searching approach, which encourages
the model to focus on multiple possible action categories
of observed motions. The ACB records action characteristic, which produces more prior information for predicting certain actions. To fuse the features retrieved from
the two banks better, we further propose the Adaptive Attention Adjustment (AAA) strategy. Extensive experiments
on four motion prediction datasets demonstrate that our
approach consistently outperforms the previous state-ofthe-art. The demo and code are available at https:
//hyqlat.github.io/STABACB.github.io/.

Figure 1. Limitations of WAT [1] in predicting action-driven
stochastic human motion. (a) shows the transition from “Warmup” to “Drink”, where the generated “Drink” action is inaccurate,
resembling a hand-raising motion. (b) shows the transition from
“Warm-up” to “Throw”, where the left hand moves naturally, but
the arm fails to lift, resulting in uncoordinated movement.

to make predictions and responses in advance. However,
generating smooth transition motions is difficult due to the
varying transition speeds of different actions and the action
characteristic is hard to be learned. As a result, the predicted
results may be inconsistent and unreasonable.
Some researchers are dedicated to addressing these issues. Ye et al. [4] design a loss function that encourages the
model to generate more diverse motion sequences. Wei et
al. [1] proposed to predict future motion controlled by the
action labels. However, these models still have some shortcomings. They did not make good use of the action transition information and the action characteristics, making it
difficult for the model to generate smooth motion sequences
and pay attention to these subtle differences.
Take the samples in Figure 1 as an example, in which
(a) illustrates the generation from the “Warm-up” action to
the “Drink” action. However, the generated drink action is
somewhat inaccurate. It resembles a hand-raising motion.
This may be due to the high similarity between the two actions, making it challenging for prior methods to achieve

1. Introduction
Action-driven stochastic human motion prediction [1] aims
to predict future motion sequences based on past observed
sequences with certain future action labels. This task is
widely used in many applications like virtual reality [2]
and human-computer interaction [3]. Solving this problem
can play a significant role in enabling artificial intelligence
⋆ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1883

