This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StreamingT2V: Consistent, Dynamic, and Extendable
Long Video Generation from Text
Roberto Henschel1∗+ , Levon Khachatryan1∗ , Hayk Poghosyan1∗ , Daniil Hayrapetyan1∗ ,
Vahram Tadevosyan1† , Zhangyang Wang1,2 , Shant Navasardyan1 , Humphrey Shi1,3
1

Picsart AI Resarch (PAIR)

2

UT Austin

3

Georgia Tech

https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/StreamingT2V

Figure 1. StreamingT2V is an advanced autoregressive technique to create long videos featuring rich motion dynamics, ensuring temporal
consistency, alignment with descriptive text, high frame-level image quality, and no stagnation. Demonstrations include videos up to 1200
frames, spanning 2 minutes, which can be extended further. The effectiveness of StreamingT2V is not limited by the Text2Video model
used, indicating potential for even higher-quality with improved base models.

Abstract

tent. Current methods excel in generating short videos (up
to 16s), but produce hard-cuts when naively extended to
long video synthesis. To overcome these limitations, we
present StreamingT2V, an autoregressive method that generates long videos of up to 2 minutes or longer with seamless transitions. The key components are: (i) a short-term
memory block called conditional attention module (CAM),
which conditions the current generation on the features extracted from the preceding chunk via an attentional mech-

Text-to-video diffusion models enable the generation of
high-quality videos that follow text instructions, simplifying the process of producing diverse and individual con* Equal contribution.
+ Current affiliation: Moonvalley.
† Current
affiliation: Superside.
Correspondence to: Roberto Henschel <firstname@moonvalley.com>, for Levon Khachatryan, Hayk Poghosyan,
Daniil Hayrapetyan: <firstname.lastname@picsart.com>.

2568

