This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Show and Tell: Visually Explainable Deep Neural Nets via Spatially-Aware
Concept Bottleneck Models

1

Itay Benou1,2 Tammy Riklin Raviv1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
2
Data Science Research Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev

Input Image

“a hat”

“an intelligent expression”

“long, shaggy hair”

“a small, dainty dog”

“a ball”

“a pot”

SALF-CBM

Input Image

SALF-CBM

Figure 1. Concept maps generated by our SALF-CBM. Inspired by human visual interpretation, our method first decomposes input
images into spatially-localized structures, associated with familiar concepts, independent of a specific task. Explainability of task-specific
outputs is obtained by training a final task layer on-top of these maps.

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks have now reached humanlevel performance across a variety of tasks. However, unlike humans they lack the ability to explain their decisions
by showing where and telling what concepts guided them.
In this work, we present a unified framework for transforming any vision neural network into a spatially and conceptually interpretable model. We introduce a spatiallyaware concept bottleneck layer that projects “black-box”
features of pre-trained backbone models into interpretable
concept maps, without requiring human labels. By training a classification layer over this bottleneck, we obtain
a self-explaining model that articulates which concepts
most influenced its prediction, along with heatmaps that
ground them in the input image. Accordingly, we name

this method “Spatially-Aware and Label-Free Concept Bottleneck Model” (SALF-CBM). Our results show that the
proposed SALF-CBM: (1) Outperforms non-spatial CBM
methods, as well as the original backbone, on a variety
of classification tasks; (2) Produces high-quality spatial
explanations, outperforming widely used heatmap-based
methods on a zero-shot segmentation task; (3) Facilitates
model exploration and debugging, enabling users to query
specific image regions and refine the model’s decisions by
locally editing its concept maps.

1. Introduction

30063

Humans often rationalize visually-based assessments or
conclusions by describing what they have seen and where
they have seen it, using both semantic concepts and their

