This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConceptGuard: Continual Personalized Text-to-Image Generation
with Forgetting and Confusion Mitigation
Zirun Guo Tao Jin B
Zhejiang University
zrguo.cs@gmail.com

Abstract
Diffusion customization methods have achieved impressive
results with only a minimal number of user-provided images. However, existing approaches customize concepts
collectively, whereas real-world applications often require
sequential concept integration. This sequential nature can
lead to catastrophic forgetting, where previously learned
concepts are lost. In this paper, we investigate concept forgetting and concept confusion in the continual customization. To tackle these challenges, we present ConceptGuard,
a comprehensive approach that combines shift embedding,
concept-binding prompts and memory preservation regularization, supplemented by a priority queue which can adaptively update the importance and occurrence order of different concepts. These strategies can dynamically update,
unbind and learn the relationship of the previous concepts,
thus alleviating concept forgetting and confusion. Through
comprehensive experiments, we show that our approach
outperforms all the baseline methods consistently and significantly in both quantitative and qualitative analyses.

Figure 1. Examples of catastrophic forgetting and concept confusion in existing methods under the continual training setting.

to problems when they are applied to a dynamic and continual environment. For example, as shown in Figure 1,
when generating previous concepts, these methods might
experience catastrophic forgetting [16] or concept confusion. Concretely, catastrophic forgetting occurs when the
model fails to retain previously learned concepts, resulting in an inability to generate them accurately. Concept
confusion arises when the model struggles to differentiate
between earlier concepts, leading to outputs that blend elements of different concepts. In such continual settings,
when fine-tuned on new concepts, the update of model parameters will influence the generation of previous concepts,
thus leading to these issues.
To address the forgetting problem in continual diffusion customization, Continual Diffusion [24] proposes CLoRA, composed of a continually self-regularized low-rank
adaptation in cross attention layers of the diffusion models. However, Continual Diffusion only explores how to
deal with the forgetting problem, overlooking the concept
confusion in the continual environment. As shown in Figure 5, combinations of multiple concepts are still generated
wrongly or blended together. Based on these observations,
we propose ConceptGuard, consisting of several simple
yet effective strategies to address these issues. Specifically,
we propose shift embeddings, concept-binding prompts and

1. Introduction
Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models [17, 18, 21, 23] have
emerged as a promising approach in the field of generative
artificial intelligence, enabling the creation of high-quality
images from textual descriptions. These models find a wide
range of applications across various domains. Among their
many uses, customization stands out as one of the most
practical and popular applications. By harnessing the capabilities of T2I diffusion models, diffusion customization
allows for the generation of user-defined concepts, achieving impressive results [4, 11, 13, 14, 22, 29].
However, in real-world applications, the new concepts
we aim to customize typically arrive in a sequence. Existing methods [4, 11, 14, 22, 29] primarily focus on how to
personalize these concepts collectively. This will give rise
B Corresponding author

2945

