This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimal Transport-Guided Source-Free Adaptation for Face Anti-Spoofing
Zhuowei Li1 *†, Tianchen Zhao2 *, Xiang Xu2 , Zheng Zhang2 , Zhihua Li2 ,
Xuanbai Chen2 , Qin Zhang2 , Alessandro Bergamo2 , Anil K. Jain2 , Yifan Xing2
1
Rutgers University 2 AWS AI Labs

Abstract

Confidential

Client Accessible

Server

Developing a face anti-spoofing model that meets the
security requirements of clients worldwide is challenging
due to the domain gap between training datasets and diverse end-user test data. Moreover, for security and privacy reasons, it is undesirable for clients to share a large
amount of their face data with service providers. In this
work, we introduce a novel method in which the face antispoofing model can be adapted by the client itself to a target domain at test time using only a small sample of data
while keeping model parameters and training data inaccessible to the client. Specifically, we develop a prototypebased base model and an optimal transport-guided adaptor that enables adaptation in either a lightweight training or training-free fashion, without updating base model’s
parameters. Furthermore, we propose geodesic mixup, an
optimal transport-based synthesis method that generates
augmented training data along the geodesic path between
source prototypes and target data distribution. This allows training a lightweight classifier to effectively adapt
to target-specific characteristics while retaining essential
knowledge learned from the source domain. In crossdomain and cross-attack settings, compared with recent
methods, our method achieves average relative improvements of 19.17% in HTER and 8.58% in AUC, respectively.

1. Introduction
Traditional approaches for developing face anti-spoofing
models involve collecting extensive training datasets designed to cover a broad spectrum of real user interactions and spoof attempts. These datasets aim to represent
diverse environmental conditions, user behaviors, demographic variations, and client-specific properties, such as artifacts introduced by image acquisition devices. However,
these approaches have proven ineffective in practice [88],
* Equal contribution.
† Work done during internship at AWS AI Labs.

Custom Layer
for Client A

Host Model Database

Custom Layer
for Client B

Sharable

No Data / Weight Sharing

Sharable

Client A

In-context Data

Client B

In-context Data

Figure 1. Overview of our setting. Unlike Few-shot Learning (FSL), Domain Adaptation (DA), and Domain Generalization
(DG), our approach uses few-shot client data at test stage to adapt
a customizable layer for each client’s needs, while keeping the
host model and source training data confidential. This layer refers
to prototypes and a lightweight classifier in our training-free and
lightweight training approaches.

as the variety of user conditions is virtually limitless. Moreover, client-specific properties are dynamic and evolve over
time, for example, upon the introduction of new image sensors and acquisition technologies. The conventional strategies struggle to keep up with these rapid advancements, as
collecting new training datasets and retraining models on a
daily basis is impractical.
Furthermore, conventional approaches involving tuning
the model to meet client requirements using a small set of
labeled end-user examples face several critical challenges.
First, legal and privacy restrictions concerning human faces
and security models often limit the quantity of available reference data and prohibit explicit sharing of host model parameters and source training data with clients for improvement. Second, fine-tuning a separate model at the service
host side to address specific requirements for each client is
impractical, as it is costly to maintain and manage future
updates [16, 30, 66]. Third, clients often desire a quick customization service that can avoid the inefficiencies of backand-forth communication with the host in order to meet

24351

