This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HUNet: Homotopy Unfolding Network for Image Compressive Sensing
Feiyang Shen, Hongping Gan*
School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
shenfeiyang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; ganhongping@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

k-th iterative phase

Deep Unfolding Networks (DUNs) have risen to prominence due to their interpretability and superior performance for image Compressive Sensing (CS). However, existing DUNs still face significant issues, such as the insufficient representation capability of single-scale image information during the iterative reconstruction phase and loss
of feature information, which fundamentally limit the further enhancement of image CS performance. In this paper, we propose Homotopy Unfolding Network (HUNet) for
image CS, which enables phase-by-phase reconstruction of
images along homotopy path. Specifically, each iteration
step of the traditional homotopy algorithm is mapped to a
Multi-scale Homotopy Iterative Module (MHIM), which includes U-shaped stacked window-based Transformer blocks
capable of efficient feature extraction. Within the MHIM,
we design the deep homotopy continuation strategy to ensure the interpretability of the homotopy algorithm and
facilitate feature learning. Additionally, we introduce a
dual-path feature fusion module to mitigate the loss of
high-dimensional feature information during the transmission between iterative phases, thereby maximizing the
preservation of details in the reconstructed image. Extensive experiments indicate that HUNet achieves superior image reconstruction results compared to existing
state-of-the-art methods. The source code is available at
https://github.com/ICSResearch/HUNet.

k-th input

Prior Work
Next
Phase

k-th output
Single scale

Feature loss

...

Ɂ

reconstruction

k-th homotopy iterative phase
Next
Phase

Scale 1

Ours
...
...

Scale 2

k-th input

k-th output

Scale 3

homotopy path guided

Dual-path
Feature Fusion

reconstruction

Figure 1. Different approaches to iterative reconstruction in CS.
(a) Existing methods such as NesTD-Net (24’TIP) [11], UFC-Net
(24’CVPR) [39], OCTUF (23’CVPR) [35] generate information
within each iterative phase that is only passed to the next phase,
leading to inevitable feature loss. (b) Our approach enables multiscale feature interactions along the homotopy path, with the dualpath feature fusion module collecting the outputs from each phase
and directly applying them to the final reconstruction.

1. Introduction

antenna communication [24], computational imaging [7],
among others [17, 19, 37].
In CS theory, the sampling process can be modeled as
y = Ux, where the original signal x 2 Rd , the observed
measurements y 2 Rm , and U 2 Rm⇥d represents the
sensing matrix with d
m. The CS ratio ⌧ is defined as
the ratio of m to d.
CS theory is capable of reconstructing x from y by solving the convex optimization problem, provided that the signal is sparse or demonstrates sparsity within a specific transform domain. One of the most renowned decoders in the
field of CS is the `1 -regularized Least Squares (`1 -LS) formulation. When x is sparse after the transformation by F,
the `1 -LS can be modeled as:

Compressive Sensing (CS) [3] aims to perceive the original
structure of a signal through a small number of linear measurements. The amalgamation of signal compression and
sampling processes within CS confers substantial benefits,
such as conserving storage resources and optimizing transmission bandwidth. As an extensively utilized framework in
signal processing, CS is propelling progress in various domains, such as magnetic resonance imaging [23], movable-

min

1

x2Rd 2

ky

Uxk22 + ⌘kFxk1 ,

(1)

* Corresponding author

where 12 ky Uxk22 serves as the data fidelity term, measuring the loss between the reconstructed signal and the original signal, while ⌘ is a pre-set regularization parameter and
⌘||Fx||1 acts as the regularization term, constraining the

12799

