This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIAD: Pose and Illumination agnostic Anomaly Detection
Kaichen Yang1,2

Junjie Cao1,2

Zeyu Bai1,2

Zhixun Su1,2

Andrea Tagliasacchi3

1

2

Dalian University of Technology
Key Laboratory for Computational Mathematics and Data Intelligence of Liaoning Province
3
Simon Fraser University

Abstract
We introduce the Pose and Illumination agnostic Anomaly
Detection (PIAD) problem, a generalization of poseagnostic anomaly detection (PAD). Being illumination agnostic is critical, as it relaxes the assumption that training
data for an object has to be acquired in the same light configuration of the query images that we want to test. Moreover, even if the object is placed within the same capture
environment, being illumination agnostic implies that we
can relax the assumption that the relative pose between environment light and query object has to match the one in
the training data. We introduce a new dataset to study this
problem, containing both synthetic and real-world examples, propose a new baseline for PIAD, and demonstrate
how our baseline provides state-of-the-art results in both
PAD and PIAD, not only in the new proposed dataset, but
also in existing datasets that were designed for the simpler PAD problem. Project page: https://kaichenyang.github.io/piad/.

Figure 1. Teaser – Inconsistent illumination between training
images and the query challenges PAD methods [16, 41]. They
struggle to estimate the query camera pose, and fail to conduct
anomaly detection robustly. In our method, we resolve this by
jointly operating in the reflectance and color domains.

aligned configuration typically assumed by anomaly detection; see Figure 2 (middle).
However, this recent line of work still suffers a significant shortcoming due to the representation they use. In
particular, radiance fields store point-wise outgoing radiance: the result of the interaction between the incoming
light and the surface material. Therefore, this representation is not illumination agnostic, as global illumination gets
“baked” within it. Therefore, OmniposeAD can only perform anomaly detection under the assumption that the relationship between objects and lights is more or less unchanged (i.e. place the test object in a controlled lighting
room, and in the same pose as the training object). Without
these precautions, variations in illumination can cause appearance discrepancies between training and query images,
impacting both the accuracy of camera pose estimation, as
well as the localization of anomalies; see Figure 1.
Therefore, in this paper we introduce the more challenging problem of Pose and Illumination agnostic Anomaly
Detection (PIAD). We develop a technique that is not only
agnostic to pose variations, but also to illumination configurations; see Figure 2 (right). As this is a new problem, we
introduce a new dataset to benchmark this task, which ex-

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection is an important problem in numerous
industries including manufacturing [18], medical image
analysis [13], surveillance [28], and autonomous driving [7, 31]. In recent years, a variety of methods have been
proposed [12, 22, 23, 25, 38], but they all assume that training and query images are pose-aligned; see Figure 2 (left).
When this assumption is relaxed, the performance of
anomaly detection drops sharply. To overcome this shortcoming, Zhou et al. [41] recently introduced the problem of
Pose-agnostic Anomaly Detection (PAD), and a technique
named OmniposeAD to address it. At training time, OmniposeAD assumes that multiple posed anomaly-free images
of an object are available, from which a Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) is computed in a pre-processing stage. At test
time, this NeRF model is registered to the query image by
minimizing a photometric loss, therefore restoring the pose-

4734

