This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accurate Differential Operators for Hybrid Neural Fields
Aditya Chetan, Guandao Yang, Zichen Wang, Steve Marschner, Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University
achetan@cs.cornell.edu, {gy46, zw336}@cornell.edu, {srm, bharathh}@cs.cornell.edu

Figure 1. Noisy gradients in hybrid neural fields. Normal images of Blub the fish [42] (inset), using gradients queried from its hybrid
neural SDF using automatic differentiation (AD) and our approach. Naively using AD gradients as surface normals leads to grainy artifacts,
which our method alleviates.

as images [41], signed distance fields [36], and radiance
fields [31]. The advent of hybrid neural fields, which modulate the neural network using features from a feature grid,
has enabled much faster training [11, 33, 38] and much better scaling to large-scale 3D structures with incredible detail, including entire cities [37, 43, 45, 49]. Hybrid neural fields are thus gaining popularity as a representation of
choice in many applications. However, while these hybrid
neural fields can be trained to represent large, complex spatial signals with high fidelity, we find that the derivatives
(computed with automatic differentiation or autodiff) of the
trained field do not match the derivatives of the ground-truth
signal; e.g., compare the grainy normals obtained from a
fully trained hybrid neural SDF to the much smoother normals from the mesh in Figure 1. Such artifacts in derivatives
can cause significant artifacts in rendering [43] or simulation pipelines [12] which heavily rely on accurate derivatives. Thus, for hybrid neural fields to fulfill their promise
of a practical representation for spatial signals, we need to
eliminate these errors in the derivatives.
Why are the derivatives of hybrid neural fields so noisy?
We observe that to enable the capture of complex geometry
with high fidelity, hybrid fields are designed to have highfrequency components (e.g., spatial grids of a high resolution). As such, they also have high-frequency noise. This
noise will be of fairly low magnitude in a well-trained hybrid field. But even so, differentiation will significantly am-

Abstract
Neural fields have become widely used in various fields,
from shape representation to neural rendering, and for solving partial differential equations (PDEs). With the advent
of hybrid neural field representations like Instant NGP that
leverage small MLPs and explicit representations, these
models train quickly and can fit large scenes. Yet in many
applications like rendering and simulation, hybrid neural
fields can cause noticeable and unreasonable artifacts. This
is because they do not yield accurate spatial derivatives
needed for these downstream applications. In this work, we
propose two ways to circumvent these challenges. Our first
approach is a post hoc operator that uses local polynomial
fitting to obtain more accurate derivatives from pre-trained
hybrid neural fields. Additionally, we also propose a selfsupervised fine-tuning approach that refines the hybrid neural field to yield accurate derivatives directly while preserving the initial signal. We show applications of our method to
rendering, collision simulation, and solving PDEs. We observe that using our approach yields more accurate derivatives, reducing artifacts and leading to more accurate simulations in downstream applications.

1. Introduction
Neural fields are neural networks that take spatial coordinates as input and approximate spatial functions such

530

