This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4Deform: Neural Surface Deformation for Robust Shape Interpolation
Lu Sang1,2 , Zehranaz Canfes1 , Dongliang Cao3 ,
Riccardo Marin1,2 , Florian Bernard3 , Daniel Cremers1,2
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Munich Center of Machine Learning, 3 University of Bonn

Figure 1. 4Deform takes a sparse temporal sequence of point clouds as input and generates realistic intermediate shapes. Starting from just
pairs of point clouds and estimated sparse, noisy correspondences (indicated using colors in the point clouds), our method obtains realistic
long-range interpolations, even for shapes with changing topology (e.g., the human-object interaction in the top row), and can generalize
the interpolation results to real-world data (Kinect point clouds in the second row). Meanwhile, our method can handle non-isometrically
deformed shapes (bottom left) as well as partial shapes (bottom right).

1. Introduction

Abstract

Inferring the dynamic 3D world from just a sparse set of
discrete observations is among the fundamental goals of
computer vision. These observations might come, for example, from video sequences [50], Lidar scans [22, 51] or
RGB-D cameras [43, 47]. Even more challenging is the
recovery of plausible motion in between such observations.
Despite the relevance of this problem, just a few works addressed this, likely because the solution requires merging
concepts of camera-based reconstruction with techniques of
3D shape analysis and interpolation.
In the computer graphics literature, researchers have
developed interpolation approaches for mesh representations [1, 21, 48]. These often require a dense, exact point-topoint correspondence between respective frames [9, 11, 21],
which is usually unpractical and rare in real-world applications. Also, such methods rely on a predefined topology and
do not support changes (e.g., partiality, the interaction of
multiple independent components). Moreover, the recovered
interpolation is defined only on the mesh surface, which
limits the applicability to other data forms.
The recent advent of neural implicit fields [27, 29, 44, 46]
opened the door to more flexible solutions. These methods
convert the start and final meshes or point clouds into im-

Generating realistic intermediate shapes between nonrigidly deformed shapes is a challenging task in computer
vision, especially with unstructured data (e.g., point clouds)
where temporal consistency across frames is lacking, and
topologies are changing. Most interpolation methods are
designed for structured data (i.e., meshes) and do not apply to real-world point clouds. In contrast, our approach,
4Deform, leverages neural implicit representation (NIR) to
enable free topology changing shape deformation. Unlike
previous mesh-based methods that learn vertex-based deformation fields, our method learns a continuous velocity field
in Euclidean space. Thus, it is suitable for less structured
data such as point clouds. Additionally, our method does not
require intermediate-shape supervision during training; instead, we incorporate physical and geometrical constraints
to regularize the velocity field. We reconstruct intermediate surfaces using a modified level-set equation, directly
linking our NIR with the velocity field. Experiments show
that our method significantly outperforms previous NIR
approaches across various scenarios (e.g., noisy, partial,
topology-changing, non-isometric shapes) and, for the first
time, enables new applications like 4D Kinect sequence upsampling and real-world high-resolution mesh deformation.

6542

