This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Part Learning for Fine-Grained Generalized Category Discovery:
A Plug-and-Play Enhancement
Qiyuan Dai1 Hanzhuo Huang1 Yu Wu2 Sibei Yang3†
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Wuhan University 3 Sun Yat-sen University
Abstract
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) aims to recognize unlabeled images from known and novel classes by
distinguishing novel classes from known ones, while also
transferring knowledge from another set of labeled images
with known classes. Existing GCD methods rely on selfsupervised vision transformers such as DINO for representation learning. However, focusing solely on the global representation of the DINO CLS token introduces an inherent
trade-off between discriminability and generalization. In
this paper, we introduce an adaptive part discovery and
learning method, called APL, which generates consistent
object parts and their correspondences across different similar images using a set of shared learnable part queries and
DINO part priors, without requiring any additional annotations. More importantly, we propose a novel all-min contrastive loss to learn discriminative yet generalizable part
representation, which adaptively highlights discriminative
object parts to distinguish similar categories for enhanced
discriminability while simultaneously sharing other parts to
facilitate knowledge transfer for improved generalization.
Our APL can easily be incorporated into different GCD
frameworks by replacing their CLS token feature with our
part representations, showing signiﬁcant enhancements on
ﬁne-grained datasets.

1. Introduction
Trained on large-scale annotated data [9, 25] and simpliﬁed
by the “closed-world” assumption, where the test data to be
classiﬁed adheres to predeﬁned training classes, deep learning models [10, 17, 34] have made remarkable progress in
image recognition, even surpassing human abilities. However, in practical real-world scenarios, this assumption often
fails to hold true. This is not only due to the high expense
of fully annotating data but, more importantly, due to the
impossibility of predeﬁning all categories because of the
† Corresponding author

inherent variability and openness of the real world, where
novel classes emerge alongside the known ones. Therefore,
Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) [40] seeks to challenge the “closed-world” assumption and adapt to an “openworld” scenario. In GCD, only a subset of data is labeled
with known categories, aiming to assign a category label to
each remaining data point, potentially encompassing both
known and novel categories.
Two primary challenges arise in GCD: 1) Discriminability: accurately discerning between known and novel
classes, and correctly categorizing each; 2) Generalization:
transferring shared knowledge from known to novel classes
to recognizing novel classes without annotations. Stateof-the-art GCD methods [40, 42, 43] primarily exploit the
beneﬁts of generalization representation via self-supervised
vision transformers (ViT) like DINO [4] to uphold fundamental generalization capabilities. On one hand, to improve semantic discriminability, some approaches utilize an
explicit parametric classiﬁer on known data [43] or learn
prompt-adapted backbones [42, 45]. On the other hand,
to safeguard generalization capabilities, they introduce entropy regularization to mitigate bias towards tending to predict known categories [43] or incorporate shared dynamic
concepts [30], hierarchies [31], or memory bank [45] to enhance shared semantics between known and novel classes.
However, an inherent trade-off arises between discriminability and generalization when utilizing the image semantics at the global level, namely, the feature representation of ViT’s [cls] token, in current GCD methods, particularly in open-world ﬁne-grained recognition. The strong
discriminability at the global level impedes the potential
for generalization. The global semantics are rooted in ﬁnegrained local semantics, with the [cls] token’s representation obtained through self-attention over local patches [4,
10]. Introducing signiﬁcant differences in the global semantics of similar categories, such as crested auklet and
parakeet auklet as shown in Figure 1, can improve discriminability but also lead to similarly notable distinctions in
their local semantics (refer to Figure 1b). Consequently,
this impedes the sharing and knowledge transfer of local

25444

