This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OverLoCK: An Overview-first-Look-Closely-next ConvNet
with Context-Mixing Dynamic Kernels
Meng Lou
Yizhou Yu
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
loumeng@connect.hku.hk, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Top-down attention plays a crucial role in the human vision system, wherein the brain initially obtains a rough
overview of a scene to discover salient cues (i.e., overview
first), followed by a more careful finer-grained examination (i.e., look closely next). However, modern ConvNets
remain confined to a pyramid structure that successively
downsamples the feature map for receptive field expansion,
neglecting this crucial biomimetic principle. We present
OverLoCK, the first pure ConvNet backbone architecture
that explicitly incorporates a top-down attention mechanism. Unlike pyramid backbone networks, our design features a branched architecture with three synergistic subnetworks: 1) a Base-Net that encodes low/mid-level features; 2) a lightweight Overview-Net that generates dynamic top-down attention through coarse global context
modeling (i.e., overview first); and 3) a robust Focus-Net
that performs finer-grained perception guided by top-down
attention (i.e., look closely next). To fully unleash the
power of top-down attention, we further propose a novel
context-mixing dynamic convolution (ContMix) that effectively models long-range dependencies while preserving inherent local inductive biases even when the input resolution increases, addressing critical limitations in existing
convolutions. Our OverLoCK exhibits a notable performance improvement over existing methods. For instance,
OverLoCK-T achieves a Top-1 accuracy of 84.2%, significantly surpassing ConvNeXt-B while using only around
one-third of the FLOPs/parameters. On object detection,
our OverLoCK-S clearly surpasses MogaNet-B by 1% in
APb . On semantic segmentation, our OverLoCK-T remarkably improves UniRepLKNet-T by 1.7% in mIoU. Code is
publicly available at https://rb.gy/wit4jh.

Figure 1. Performance comparisons between our OverLoCK and
other representative backbone networks on vision tasks.

form an overall high-level perception, which goes back to
fuse with the sensory input, enabling the brain to make more
accurate judgments, such as object locations, shapes, and
categories. Many previous works have incorporated such
top-down attention into vision models, but some of them
are unsuitable for building modern vision backbones due
to incompatible model designs [1, 6, 26, 51, 67] while the
remaining methods primarily focus on recurrent architectures [3, 4, 52, 57, 72], which introduce additional computational overhead due to recurrent operations, resulting in
a suboptimal trade-off between performance and computational complexity.
A key property of the top-down attention mechanism is
the use of feedback signals as explicit guidance to locate
meaningful regions in a scene [55]. However, the classic hierarchical architecture employed in most existing vision backbones [23, 41–43, 62, 63] contrasts with this biological mechanism, as it progressively encodes features
from lower to higher levels so that the input features of a
layer rely solely on features from previous layers. Hence,
there is a lack of explicit top-down semantic guidance in

1. Introduction
Top-down neural attention [17, 38, 55] is a crucial perception mechanism in the human vision system, which suggests
that the brain initially processes a visual scene to quickly

128

