This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SFDM: Robust Decomposition of Geometry and Reflectance for Realistic Face
Rendering from Sparse-view Images

1

Daisheng Jin1 Jiangbei Hu1,2 Baixin Xu1 Yuxin Dai1 Chen Qian3 Ying He1 *
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 2 Dalian University of Technology, 3 SenseTime Research

Abstract

Applications

SFDM

Multiple views

In this study, we introduce a novel two-stage technique
for decomposing and reconstructing facial features from
sparse-view images, a task made challenging by the unique
geometry and complex skin reflectance of each individual.
To synthesize 3D facial models more realistically, we endeavor to decouple key facial attributes from the RGB color,
including geometry, diffuse reflectance, and specular reflectance. Specifically, we design a Sparse-view Face Decomposition Model (SFDM): 1) In the first stage, we create a general facial template from a wide array of individual faces, encapsulating essential geometric and reflectance characteristics. 2) Guided by this template, we
refine a specific facial model for each individual in the second stage, considering the interaction between geometry
and reflectance, as well as the effects of subsurface scattering on the skin. With these advances, our method can reconstruct high-quality facial representations from as few as
three images. The comprehensive evaluation and comparison reveal that our approach outperforms existing methods
by effectively disentangling geometric and reflectance components, significantly enhancing the quality of synthesized
novel views, and paving the way for applications in facial
relighting and reflectance editing. Visit our project page for
more details https://kingjg.github.io/SFDM.github.io/.

Synthesis
Multiple Individuals

Mean Face

Diffuse

Specular

Geometry

Sparse views (5)

Relighting

Diffuse

Single Person

Specular

Geometry

Specular editing

Figure 1. Our method learns a general facial template with distinct key facial attributes from multiple individuals. This template
enables photorealistic novel-view synthesis for each individual, as
well as other applications.

1. Introduction

sues like dependency on mesh resolution and difficulties
in managing topological variations. Furthermore, implicit
neural representation methods demonstrate their effectiveness in 3D face reconstruction from low-view images [47],
expression transfer [1, 23, 30], and animations [19, 59, 60].
In 3D face model rendering, both accurate shape attributes and high-quality reflectance properties are essential
for synthesizing photorealistic faces. Thus, robustly decomposing key facial attributes including geometry, diffuse and
specular reflectance, and environment light is a crucial task,
which not only enhances the accuracy of face reconstruction
but also opens up possibilities for more applications like relighting [7, 11, 22, 29, 55]. However, most previous studies
only use neural networks to learn radiance and geometric information from images, neglecting the effect of renderingrelated physical information such as facial skin characteristics and environmental lighting conditions. NeRV [42],
PhySG [53], and following methods [8, 9, 13, 21, 31, 34] incorporate the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Functions (BRDFs) into the neural rendering framework, facilitating the decomposition and joint reconstruction of shape,
reflectance, and illumination. Nonetheless, these methods
primarily concentrate on non-biological materials, which
are not suitable for decomposing face models that possess
complex attributes. NeuFace [58] introduces an approxi-

3D human face reconstruction finds widespread applications in various fields, including game design and film production. Developments in neural rendering techniques have
shown promising performance and advantages in synthesizing photo-realistic images for complex scenes [3, 32, 33,
43]. Concurrently, a surge of research focusing on head and
facial attribute reconstruction from images via implicit neural representations [18, 36, 37, 59] has emerged. These innovative approaches address the limitations associated with
traditional explicit methods, such as those based on the 3D
Morphable Model (3DMM) [6], which struggled with is* Corresponding author: Y. He (Email: yhe@ntu.edu.sg)

26409

