This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Approach to Interpreting Self-supervised Pre-training Methods
for 3D Point Clouds via Interactions
Qiang Li, Jian Ruan, Fanghao Wu, Yuchi Chen, Zhihua Wei* , and Wen Shen*
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{qli,jianruan,2432055,1953721,zhihua wei,wenshen}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, many self-supervised pre-training methods have
been proposed to improve the performance of deep neural
networks (DNNs) for 3D point clouds processing. However,
the common mechanism underlying the effectiveness of different pre-training methods remains unclear. In this paper,
we use game-theoretic interactions as a unified approach
to explore the common mechanism of pre-training methods.
Specifically, we decompose the output score of a DNN into
the sum of numerous effects of interactions, with each interaction representing a distinct 3D substructure of the input point cloud. Based on the decomposed interactions, we
draw the following conclusions. (1) The common mechanism across different pre-training methods is that they enhance the strength of high-order interactions encoded by
DNNs, which represent complex and global 3D structures,
while reducing the strength of low-order interactions, which
represent simple and local 3D structures. (2) Sufficient
pre-training and adequate fine-tuning data for downstream
tasks further reinforce the mechanism described above. (3)
Pre-training methods carry a potential risk of reducing
the transferability of features encoded by DNNs. Inspired
by the observed common mechanism, we propose a new
method to directly enhance the strength of high-order interactions and reduce the strength of low-order interactions
encoded by DNNs, improving performance without the need
for pre-training on large-scale datasets. Experiments show
that our method achieves performance comparable to traditional pre-training methods.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised pre-training methods for 3D point clouds
have developed rapidly in recent years [1, 9, 13, 16, 21, 23,
30, 32, 38, 43]. Pre-training methods first train DNNs on
large-scale unlabeled datasets, then fine-tune the DNNs on
downstream tasks, generally enhancing their performance.

However, the common mechanism underlying different pretraining methods remains unclear, posing challenges for
gaining insights into effective model training strategies.
In this paper, we aim to explore the common mechanism behind the performance improvements of different
pre-training methods, thereby providing insights into pretraining, and offering better guidance for the training process. Recent studies have employed interactions to explain
the reasoning processes of DNNs [20, 25, 41]. Inspired by
these studies, we use interactions to provide a unified interpretation of different pre-training methods.
Specifically, given a point cloud x with n regions1 indexed by  N=\{1,2,\ldots ,n\} , an interaction represents the
collaborations among regions within a specific 3D structure  S \subseteq N  , where each interaction has a numerical effect  I(S)  on the network output. For example, as shown
in Fig. 1, the interaction between the regions in
 S_1=\{\text {\textit {wingtip}},\text {\textit {wing root}}\} 
form a concept
of “wing”, contributing  I(S_1)  to push the classification result toward the class
“airplane”. It has been proven by [6, 44] that the output
score of a DNN consistently equals the sum of the effects
of all activated interactions, regardless of how the input regions are masked. In this way, interactions can be seen as
the detailed inference patterns encoded by the DNN.
Based on interactions, we conduct comparative experiments to explore the common reasons behind the performance improvements of different pre-training methods.
Specifically, we explore the impact of pre-training methods on the complexity of interactions encoded by DNNs.
Here, the complexity refers to the number of regions contained in an interaction, i.e., the order of the interaction. A
high-order interaction, e.g.,  S_3  in Fig. 1, captures collaborations among massive point regions, representing complex
and global 3D structures. In contrast, a low-order interaction, e.g., S1 , measures collaborations between a few regions, representing simple and local 3D structures. From
the experiments, we draw the following key conclusions.
• The common mechanism across different pre-training
1 We divide a point cloud into n regions following [26].

* Corresponding authors: Wen Shen and Zhihua Wei.

27315

