This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SALOVA: Segment-Augmented Long Video Assistant
for Targeted Retrieval and Routing in Long-Form Video Analysis
Junho Kim*
Hyunjun Kim*
Hosu Lee
Yong Man Ro†
Integrated Vision and Language Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{arkimjh, kimhj709, leehosu01, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

the exceptional generalization and reasoning capabilities of
LLMs to evolve into Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs).
Accordingly, users can unrestrictedly interact with the
models across various modalities beyond text, expanding
the scope of machine understanding and enhancing user
engagement. Especially, considering the widespread adoption of long-form videos across various web platforms, the
importance of understanding long, untrimmed video has
become increasingly prominent in the multi-modal domain.
After the pioneer works [14, 37, 38] utilizing visual instruction tuning to augment vision perception into LLMs,
remarkable strides [11, 17, 65] have been made in aligning
cross-modal consistency—especially between vision and
language domains. Albeit more recent models [29, 69] integrate various vision modalities all at once, current approaches still face significant challenges in understanding
untrimmed and long-form video content. The main challenge is attributed to the limited context length of LMMs,
which is an inherent structural limitation that restricts the
models to process only a finite number of tokens as the input
sequences. We can exemplify that LLaVA series [29, 30],
when processing a video data, require 144 visual tokens per
each frame, where numerical approximation is only maximum of ∼56 frames using 8K max context length LMMs,
which is still limited to handle long sequence data.
Accordingly, current video-LMMs [12, 35, 39] rely on
(i) sparse frame sampling to represent entire videos [26, 72],
(ii) dense compression of visual tokens into a smaller size
to manage the excessive number of frames [34, 41], and
(iii) adaptive pooling strategies [59, 60] based on the SlowFast approach [19], all aimed at fitting the long video sequences within the limited context window of LMMs. Several studies focusing on the long video understanding task
have presented memory-augmented generation [23, 53] utilizing an additional buffer to embed long-term information,
or have extended the context using RoPE-based frequency
extension during the training [70]. Despite of such endeavors, when handling massive video frames, previous works
still confront restricted context size and significant memory overhead, which leads to substantial visual information

Despite advances in Large Multi-modal Models, applying
them to long and untrimmed video content remains challenging due to limitations in context length and substantial memory overhead. These constraints often lead to
significant information loss and reduced relevance in the
model responses. With the exponential growth of video
data across web platforms, understanding long-form video
is crucial for advancing generalized intelligence. In this
paper, we introduce SALOVA: Segment-Augmented LOng
Video Assistant, a novel video-LLM framework designed
to enhance the comprehension of lengthy video content
through targeted retrieval process. We address two main
challenges to achieve it: (i) We present the SceneWalk
dataset, a high-quality collection of 87.8K long videos, each
densely captioned at the segment level to enable models to
capture scene continuity and maintain rich descriptive context. (ii) We develop robust architectural designs integrating
dynamic routing mechanism and spatio-temporal projector
to efficiently retrieve and process relevant video segments
based on user queries. Our framework mitigates the limitations of current video-LMMs by allowing for precise identification and retrieval of relevant video segments in response
to queries, thereby improving the contextual relevance of
the generated responses. Through extensive experiments,
SALOVA demonstrates enhanced capability in processing
complex long-form videos, showing significant capability to
maintain contextual integrity across extended sequences.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in Large Language Models
(LLMs) [22, 43, 44] have brought us one step closer
to achieving Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Next
following step, the current trend is shifting toward modular
systems that integrate various multi-modality, leveraging
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
Code is available at https://ivy-lvlm.github.io/SALOVA

3352

