This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reference-Based 3D-Aware Image Editing with Triplanes
Bahri Batuhan Bilecen1 Yigit Yalin1 Ning Yu2 Aysegul Dundar1
Bilkent University1 Netflix Eyeline Studios2
{batuhan.bilecen@, yigit.yalin@ug., adundar@cs.}bilkent.edu.tr, ning.yu@scanlinevfx.com

Figure 1. Our approach excels in refer ence-based edits, faithfully reproducing the copied reference parts with a single source and reference
image. Leveraging 3D-aware triplanes, our edits are versatile and 3D consistent, allowing for rendering from various viewpoints. We show
results on human faces, heads, bodies, and extending beyond to animal faces and class-agnostic samples.

Abstract

of-the-art performance over relevant latent direction, text,
and image-guided 2D and 3D-aware diffusion and GAN
methods, both qualitatively and quantitatively.1

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have emerged as
powerful tools for high-quality image generation and real
image editing by manipulating their latent spaces. Recent advancements in GANs include 3D-aware models such
as EG3D, which feature efficient triplane-based architectures capable of reconstructing 3D geometry from single
images. However, limited attention has been given to providing an integrated framework for 3D-aware, high-quality,
reference-based image editing. This study addresses this
gap by exploring and demonstrating the effectiveness of the
triplane space for advanced reference-based edits. Our
novel approach integrates encoding, automatic localization, spatial disentanglement of triplane features, and fusion learning to achieve the desired edits. We demonstrate
how our approach excels across diverse domains, including
human faces, 360-degree heads, animal faces, partially stylized edits like cartoon faces, full-body clothing edits, and
edits on class-agnostic samples. Our method shows state-

1. Introduction
In recent years, the high-fidelity image synthesis performance has been profoundly transformed by the emergence
of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [24, 34, 35].
Through adversarial training, they learn to map random distributions to actual data observations, enabling the generation of photo-realistic images from latent codes. The evolution of GANs from 2D into 3D-aware [9, 10, 25, 51] has further boosted this capability, integrating hybrid 3D representations and Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [49] into stylebased generators, yielding unparalleled success in crafting
highly realistic 3D portraits.
The application of GANs extends beyond generation,
venturing into real image editing through GAN inversion [3,
1 three-bee.github.io/triplane edit

5904

