This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lifting Motion to the 3D World via 2D Diffusion
Jiaman Li

C. Karen Liu†
Jiajun Wu†
Stanford University

{jiamanli,karenliu,jiajunwu}@cs.stanford.edu

Training Data
(2D pose sequences)
2D Human Poses

2D Interaction Poses

2D Animal Poses

Figure 1. Our framework, MVLift, can be trained only on 2D pose sequences and generate 3D motions including joint rotations and root
trajectories in the world coordinate system. The approach generalizes to the various domains of human poses, interactions, and animal poses.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Estimating 3D motion from 2D observations is a longstanding research challenge. Prior work typically requires
training on datasets containing ground truth 3D motions,
limiting their applicability to activities well-represented in
existing motion capture data. This dependency particularly
hinders generalization to out-of-distribution scenarios or
subjects where collecting 3D ground truth is challenging,
such as complex athletic movements or animal motion. We
introduce MVLift, a novel approach to predict global 3D
motion—including both joint rotations and root trajectories
in the world coordinate system—using only 2D pose sequences for training. Our multi-stage framework leverages
2D motion diffusion models to progressively generate consistent 2D pose sequences across multiple views, a key step in
recovering accurate global 3D motion. MVLift generalizes
across various domains, including human poses, humanobject interactions, and animal poses. Despite not requiring
3D supervision, it outperforms prior work on five datasets,
including those methods that require 3D supervision.
† indicates equal advising.

Generating 3D motion is critical for applications in computer graphics, embodied AI, and robotics. High-quality
3D motion datasets [1, 11, 24, 32, 46], essential for developing generative models that synthesize human movement,
are typically obtained using advanced motion capture systems. However, these systems are often confined to lab
environments and are costly to scale, particularly for capturing complex motions that require specialized expertise, such
as dancing, yoga, and gymnastics. Extensive work has studied monocular video pose estimation to predict 3D human
motion from 2D observations without the need for elaborate
mocap setups ([15, 43, 66]). Despite advancements, even
state-of-the-art methods ([43]) still heavily rely on motion
capture datasets and videos with paired 3D ground truth.
This dependence limits their ability to generate accurate
global 3D motions for out-of-distribution motions—those
not well-represented in existing 3D datasets.
To overcome the challenge of generating out-ofdistribution 3D motions, recent studies have explored methods to leverage in-domain 2D poses and generate 3D poses
using only 2D poses during training. Some efforts train mod-

17518

