This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IterIS: Iterative Inference-Solving Alignment for LoRA Merging
Hongxu Chen1,2 Zhen Wang2 Runshi Li1 Bowei Zhu1 Long Chen2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
https://github.com/HKUST-LongGroup/IterIS-merging

LoRANEG

LoRA2

LoRA1

IterIS

+
LoRAbarn

LoRAcat

LoRAPOS

LoRAA
<Human>: {Question TypeA}
<Robot> : {Answer TypeA}

Unified
Adapter

Adaptercat+barn

LoRAB
Caption (NEG):
a dead man sitting
on a couch with a
laptop and a dog

<Human>: {Question TypeB}

Caption (POS):
a pretty woman in a
red jacket skiing
down a snowy hill

<Robot> : {Answer TypeB}

AdapterA+B
AdapterNEG+POS

Prompt:
a [V1] barn

Prompt:
a [V2] cat

Caption (POS):
a good team of baseball
players standing around
home plate during a game

Prompt:
a [V2] cat standing
by a [V1] barn

(a) Multi-Concept Customization

Caption (NEG):
a group of stupid people
playing baseball on a field

(b) Multi-Style Caption

Question Question
TypeB
TypeA

LLM
Answer

Answer

✅

✅

(c) Multiple NLP Tasks Integration

Figure 1. Overview of the application of our method (IterIS) across multiple domains. Our general method is adaptable for merging
LoRAs in various contexts. IterIS can be applied to (a) text-to-image diffusion models for multi-concept customization, (b) vision-language
models for multi-style caption generation, and (c) large language models for multiple NLP tasks integration.

Abstract

can progressively refine the optimization objective for improved performance. 2) We introduce an efficient regularization term to reduce the need for massive sample requirements (requiring only 1-5% of the unlabeled samples compared to prior methods). 3) We utilize adaptive weights in
the optimization objective to mitigate potential unbalances
in LoRA merging process. Our method demonstrates significant improvements over multiple baselines and state-ofthe-art methods in composing tasks for text-to-image diffusion, vision-language models, and large language models.
Furthermore, our layer-wise algorithm can achieve convergence with minimal steps, ensuring efficiency in both memory and computation.

Low-rank adaptations (LoRA) are widely used to finetune large models across various domains for specific
downstream tasks. While task-specific LoRAs are often
available, concerns about data privacy and intellectual
property can restrict access to training data, limiting the
acquisition of a multi-task model through gradient-based
training. In response, LoRA merging presents an effective solution by combining multiple LoRAs into a unified
adapter while maintaining data privacy. Prior works on
LoRA merging primarily frame it as an optimization problem, yet these approaches face several limitations, including
the rough assumption about input features utilized in optimization, massive sample requirements, and the unbalanced
optimization objective. These limitations can significantly
degrade performance. To address these, we propose a novel
optimization-based method, named IterIS: 1) We formulate
LoRA merging as an advanced optimization problem to mitigate the rough assumption. Additionally, we employ an
iterative inference-solving framework in our algorithm. It

1. Introduction
Recent advancements have produced increasingly larger
pre-trained models with notable performance improvements
[1, 18, 20, 29, 30, 33, 39]. However, their size makes
Work was done when Hongxu Chen and Zhen Wang were visiting
students at HKUST. † Long Chen is the corresponding author.

4829

