This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiPART: Hierarchical Pose AutoRegressive Transformer for
Occluded 3D Human Pose Estimation
Hongwei Zheng*, Han Li*, Wenrui Dai†, Ziyang Zheng†, Chenglin Li, Junni Zou, Hongkai Xiong
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{1424977324, qingshi9974, daiwenrui, zhengziyang, lcl1985, zoujunni, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Video

Existing 2D-to-3D human pose estimation (HPE) methods struggle with the occlusion issue by enriching information like temporal and visual cues in the lifting stage. In
this paper, we argue that these methods ignore the limitation of the sparse skeleton 2D input representation, which
fundamentally restricts the 2D-to-3D lifting and worsens
the occlusion issue. To address these, we propose a novel
two-stage generative densification method, named Hierarchical Pose AutoRegressive Transformer (HiPART), to generate hierarchical 2D dense poses from the original sparse
2D pose. Specifically, we first develop a multi-scale skeleton tokenization module to quantize the highly dense 2D
pose into hierarchical tokens and propose a Skeleton-aware
Alignment to strengthen token connections. We then develop
a Hierarchical AutoRegressive Modeling scheme for hierarchical 2D pose generation. With generated hierarchical
poses as inputs for 2D-to-3D lifting, the proposed method
shows strong robustness in occluded scenarios and achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the single-frame-based 3D
HPE. Moreover, it outperforms numerous multi-frame methods while reducing parameter and computational complexity and can also complement them to further enhance performance and robustness.

Image

2D Detector

2D Detector

2D Pose
Sequence
2D Pose

Temporal
Model

Lifting

3D Pose
3D Pose

Visual
Model

Sparse
2D Pose

Generative
Model

Hierarchical
2D Poses

Lifting

3D Pose

: Extra complex temporal or visual models with significant model and computational complexity increase.
: We alleviate the occlusion in an effective and lightweight manner by incorporating hierarchical dense 2D poses.

Diameter

50 100 GFLOPs

42.0mm

42.4mm

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Top: Comparison of temporal-based and visual-based
methods with our densification approach at the framework level.
These methods enrich information in the lifting stage, while ours
address a more fundamental issue, i.e., the sparse 2D pose input. Bottom: Comparison of parameters, GFLOPs, and MPJPE
across various methods on Human3.6M. The circle size indicates
GFLOPs for inference. Our method achieves the SOTA result with
reduced complexity compared to the temporal-based methods.

3D human pose estimation (HPE) from monocular images
has attracted wide attention due to its flexibility in adaptation on various devices. It is usually decoupled into
the 2D estimation and 3D lifting stages in existing methods [27, 52], where the 2D estimation stage estimates
2D poses from input images via off-the-shelf 2D detectors [5, 28, 33], and subsequently, the 3D lifting stage
achieves 2D-to-3D estimation with a lifting model. Such
decoupling enables large-scale training with a large amount
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Authors

of 3D MOCAP data [27] by circumventing the scarce labeled 2D/3D ground truth poses for monocular images.
However, the real-world application of 3D HPE faces a
challenge of the occlusion problem (i.e., self-occlusion and
object occlusion), where the unreliable occluded 2D poses
could lead to corrupted 3D lifted poses.
Recent works have introduced additional information in
the lifting stage to alleviate the occlusion issues. Some
methods leverage topology priors (e.g., kinematic priors [21, 31, 41] and geometric constraints [2, 46]) to im-

16807

