This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DORNet: A Degradation Oriented and Regularized Network for
Blind Depth Super-Resolution
Zhengxue Wang1 *, Zhiqiang Yan1∗† , Jinshan Pan1 , Guangwei Gao2 , Kai Zhang3 , and Jian Yang1†
1
PCA Lab‡, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3 Nanjing University
{zxwang, yanzq, jspan, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, csggao@gmail.com, kaizhang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

ࡵ
RGB feature learning

Recent RGB-guided depth super-resolution methods have
achieved impressive performance under the assumption of
fixed and known degradation (e.g., bicubic downsampling).
However, in real-world scenarios, captured depth data often
suffer from unconventional and unknown degradation due
to sensor limitations and complex imaging environments
(e.g., low reflective surfaces, varying illumination). Consequently, the performance of these methods significantly
declines when real-world degradation deviate from their assumptions. In this paper, we propose the Degradation Oriented and Regularized Network (DORNet), a novel framework designed to adaptively address unknown degradation
in real-world scenes through implicit degradation representations. Our approach begins with the development of a
self-supervised degradation learning strategy, which models the degradation representations of low-resolution depth
data using routing selection-based degradation regularization. To facilitate effective RGB-D fusion, we further introduce a degradation-oriented feature transformation module
that selectively propagates RGB content into the depth data
based on the learned degradation priors. Extensive experimental results on both real and synthetic datasets demonstrate the superiority of our DORNet in handling unknown
degradation, outperforming existing methods.

ࡰࢎ࢘

ࡰ࢒࢘

RGB-D feature fusion

(a) Previous depth super-resolution methods
ࡵ

Degradation-oriented
RGB feature learning

ࡰ࢒࢘

Degradation
learning

෩
ࡰ

ࡰ

Degradation-oriented
RGB-D feature fusion

ࡰࢎ࢘

ࡰ࢒࢘
Degradation
regularization

(b) Our degradation oriented and regularized framework

Figure 1. Previous methods (a) directly fuse the RGB information
aligned with the LR depth, while our method (b) focuses more on
modeling the degradation representation of the LR depth to provide targeted guidance for HR depth recovery.

1. Introduction

augmented reality [6, 31, 41, 43, 48], and 3D reconstruction [3, 4, 34, 46, 49]. As shown in Fig. 1(a), recent RGBguided DSR methods [2, 26, 45, 52, 58] have been proposed
that integrate RGB features aligned with input depth based
on the assumption of known and fixed degradation, achieving excellent performance on synthetic data.
However, due to limitations in sensor technology and
imaging environments, depth data captured from real-world
scenes often suffer from unconventional and unknown
degradation [47] (e.g., structural distortion and blur). Such
real-world degradation results in structure inconsistency between depth and RGB, impairing the performance of previous methods. Moreover, real-world degradation labels
are unavailable, preventing us from explicitly estimating the
degradation between LR depth and HR depth.
As illustrated in Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(c), the LR depth
synthesized using bicubic downsampling exhibits accurate
depth structures, while the real-world LR depth experiences
more severe structural distortion. Furthermore, Fig. 2(i)

Blind depth super-resolution (DSR) aims to recover precise
high-resolution (HR) depth from low-resolution (LR) depth
with unknown degradation, which has been widely applied
in many fields, such as virtual reality [17, 33, 35, 44],
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors
‡ PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for HighDimensional Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology.

15813

