This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detect Any Mirrors: Boosting Learning Reliability on Large-Scale Unlabeled
Data with an Iterative Data Engine
Zhaohu Xing1 Lihao Liu2 Yijun Yang1 Hongqiu Wang1
∗
Tian Ye1 Sixiang Chen1 Wenxue Li1 Guang Liu3 Lei Zhu1,4
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 Amazon
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(1) Mean Teacher

Abstract
ℒ!"#$%$&'#!(

Mirrors are commonly found in our daily lives and can
significantly affect the performance of various deep learning methods, including depth estimation [33], semantic
*Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author of this work.

Teacher Model

ℒ!"#$%$&'#!(

Student Model

Unlabeled (4) DAM
(Ours)
Data

(2) DepthAnything

Strong Perturbations

Teacher Model

Unlabeled
Data Segment
Model
Pseudo Label

Semantic Preservation

Unlabeled Data

Unified Augmentation

(3) UniMatch

ℒ!"#$%$&'#!(

Student Model

Scoring
Model

Unlabeled
Data

Iterative
Optimization

1. Introduction

Student Model

···

Mirror detection is a challenging task because a mirror’s visual appearance varies depending on the reflected
content. Due to limited annotated data, current methods
failed to generalize well for detecting diverse mirror scenes.
Semi-supervised learning with large-scale unlabeled data
can improve generalization capabilities on mirror detection, but these methods often suffer from unreliable pseudolabels due to distribution differences between labeled and
unlabeled data, therefore affecting the learning process. To
address this issue, we first collect a large-scale dataset of
approximately 0.4 million mirror-related images from the
internet, significantly expanding the data scale for mirror
detection. To effectively exploit this unlabeled dataset, we
propose the first semi-supervised framework (namely an iterative data engine) consisting of four steps: (1) mirror
detection model training, (2) pseudo label prediction, (3)
dual guidance scoring, and (4) selection of highly reliable
pseudo labels. In each iteration of the data engine, we
employ a geometric accuracy scoring approach to assess
pseudo labels based on multiple segmentation metrics, and
design a multi-modal agent-driven semantic scoring approach to enhance the semantic perception of pseudo labels. These two scoring approaches can effectively improve
the reliability of pseudo labels by selecting unlabeled samples with higher scores. Our method demonstrates promising performance across three mirror detection tasks and
exhibits strong generalization on unseen examples. Our
code will be publicly available at https://github.com/gexing/DAM.

How to improve the
reliability of pseudo labels
from the teacher model?

Unlabeled
Data

High-Reliable
Pseudo Label

Teacher Model

Figure 1. Examples of semi-supervised learning from (1) Mean
Teacher [36], (2) DepthAnything [50], (3) UniMatch [49]. These
methods explore how to effectively exploit large-scale unlabeled
data to improve model generalization by challenging the student model and aligning the predictions between the student and
teacher models. In contrast, our (4) DAM introduces an iterative
optimization process and a scoring model to improve the reliability of the teacher model’s predictions.
RGBD-Mirror
BER

MSD-IoU

MSD-Accuracy

RGBD-Mirror
MAE

MSD-𝐹!

RGBD-Mirror
𝐹!

MSD-MAE

RGBD-Mirror
Accuracy

MSD-BER

RGBD-Mirror
IoU

PMD-IoU

PMD-BER

PMD-Accuracy
PMD-MAE

PMD-𝐹!

MT

DepthAnything

UAMT

UniMatch

DAM (ours)

MSD

Dataset

RGBD-Mirror

PMD

Method

DAM (ours)

HetNet

VCNet

PMDNet

Figure 2. Comparison between our DAM with other SOTA methods in terms of segmentation metrics (i.e., IoU, Accuracy, Fβ ,
MAE, and BER.), parameter scale (#Param), and frames per second (FPS). In the radar chart, we normalized the metrics and reversed the MAE and BER metrics for better presentation.

segmentation [12, 44, 45, 47], and video instance detection [16, 25, 43]. In applications such as drone tracking [3] and robot navigation [11], accurate mirror detection is crucial to avoid potential safety issues. There-

25476

