This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SketchVideo: Sketch-based Video Generation and Editing
Feng-Lin Liu1,2
1

Hongbo Fu3

Xintao Wang4

Weicai Ye4

Pengfei Wan4

Di Zhang4

Lin Gao1,2*

Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Kuaishou Technology

Figure 1. Our method enables high-quality video generation (a) and editing (b) based on sketch and text inputs. (a) Top: With the same
text prompt, different keyframe sketches lead to results with similar semantics but diverse sketch-faithful geometry. (a) Bottom: With the
same sketches, varied text prompts yield diverse appearances. (b) Users can also edit real videos by drawing on keyframe sketches, with
edits automatically propagated even when edited objects in original videos have translation and rotation.

Abstract
Video generation and editing conditioned on text prompts
or images have undergone significant advancements. However, challenges remain in accurately controlling global
layout and geometry details solely by texts, and supporting
motion control and local modification through images. In
this paper, we aim to achieve sketch-based spatial and motion control for video generation and support fine-grained
editing of real or synthetic videos. Based on the DiT video
generation model, we propose a memory-efficient control
structure with sketch control blocks that predict residual
features of skipped DiT blocks. Sketches are drawn on one
or two keyframes (at arbitrary time points) for easy interaction. To propagate such temporally sparse sketch conditions across all frames, we propose an inter-frame at-

tention mechanism to analyze the relationship between the
keyframes and each video frame. For sketch-based video
editing, we design an additional video insertion module
that maintains consistency between the newly edited content and the original video’s spatial feature and dynamic
motion. During inference, we use latent fusion for the accurate preservation of unedited regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our SketchVideo achieves superior
performance in controllable video generation and editing.

1. Introduction

*Corresponding Author: Lin Gao (gaolin@ict.ac.cn)

Diffusion-based text-to-image [12, 51, 53] and text-to-video
[27, 35, 43, 73, 84] models advance significantly due to improvements in datasets [4, 42, 55, 61] and denoising network architectures [12, 51]. While text prompts effectively
describe high-level semantics, they lack control of scene

23379

