This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Contrastive Masked Autoencoders: A Two-Stage Progressive
Pre-training Approach for RGBD Datasets
Muhammad Abdullah Jamal and Omid Mohareri
Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new progressive pre-training
method for image understanding tasks which leverages
RGB-D datasets. The method utilizes Multi-Modal Contrastive Masked Autoencoder and Denoising techniques.
Our proposed approach consists of two stages. In the first
stage, we pre-train the model using contrastive learning
to learn cross-modal representations. In the second stage,
we further pre-train the model using masked autoencoding and denoising/noise prediction used in diffusion models.
Masked autoencoding focuses on reconstructing the missing
patches in the input modality using local spatial correlations, while denoising learns high frequency components of
the input data. Moreover, it incorporates global distillation
in the second stage by leveraging the knowledge acquired
in stage one. Our approach is scalable, robust and suitable
for pre-training RGB-D datasets. Extensive experiments on
multiple datasets such as ScanNet, NYUv2 and SUN RGBD show the efficacy and superior performance of our approach. Specifically, we show an improvement of +1.3%
mIoU against Mask3D on ScanNet semantic segmentation.
We further demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
low-data regime by evaluating it for semantic segmentation
task against the state-of-the-art methods.

have explored contrastive learning for high-level scene understanding and low-level point matching [8, 88]. The
second family of SSL is Masked Image Modeling (MIM)
which is inspired by the recent success of masking in the
NLP domain [23]. The seminal work in MIM is Masked
Autoencoders (MAE) [38] which masks out high number
of patches in the input before passing them into a Transformer encoder. Then, a lightweight decoder is used to
reconstruct the masked patches in the input. Such reconstruction task provides the model with understanding of
the data beyond low-level image statistics. It has achieved
state-of-art performance in a variety of image recognition
tasks. MAEs have also been extended to pre-train transformers using multi-modal data for tasks such as video-text
retrieval [55, 78], image-text retrieval [68] and video-audiotext understanding [1].
However, utilizing MAEs for dense prediction tasks like
semantic segmentation and depth estimation requires understanding beyond image level statistics. With the availability of RGB-D or Time-of-Flight (ToF) cameras, various approaches [6, 27, 32, 45] have been developed to improve the
dense prediction tasks using multi-modal datasets [4, 14,
21, 62, 74]. A few methods [6, 45] also leverage RGB-D
datasets to pre-train ViTs backbones under MAE paradigm.
One such work is MultiMAE [6] which pre-trains the vision
transformers using RGB, depth and segmentation masks in
a multi-task MAE fashion. However, MultiMAE requires
semantic segmentation labels during pre-training and access
to multiple modalities during fine-tuning for downstream
tasks. This method learns cross-modal relationships using a
cross-attention module but under the paradigm of MAE to
help reconstruct the masked patches in each modality. Another work in this line is Mask3D [45] which embeds 3D
priors in ViT backbones to learn structural and geometric
priors by reconstructing the masked patches in the depth
input using RGB-D data. However, it doesn’t learn crossmodal relationships to capture more local context beyond
3D priors.
Motivated by this, we believe contrastive learning and
Masked autoencoders can be complementary to each other
as both can provide unique data representations by extract-

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has paved the way for
improving performance in various computer vision tasks
such as object recognition [9, 38, 82], semantic segmentation [30, 45, 52] and depth estimation [36] by leveraging
extensive unlabeled data and large models such as Vision
Transformers (ViT) [26, 54]. There are two self-supervised
frameworks commonly used to pre-train large vision models. The first family, contrastive learning [17, 18, 35, 86]
pre-trains a model by maximizing the similarity between
different augmentations of an image while minimizing the
similarity to the other data samples. It essentially learns
discriminative representations by enforcing invariance to
data augmentations. Some prior works [19, 43, 81, 89]

17947

