This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ALIEN: Implicit Neural Representations for Human Motion Prediction under
Arbitrary Latency

1

Dong Wei1 , Xiaoning Sun1 , Xizhan Gao2 , Shengxiang Hu1 , Huaijiang Sun1∗
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China 2 University of Jinan, China

{csdwei,sunxiaoning,hushengxiang,sunhuaijiang}@njust.edu.cn, ise gaoxz@ujn.edu.cn

Abstract

Observed Motion

We investigate a new task in human motion prediction,
which aims to forecast future body poses from historically
observed sequences while accounting for arbitrary latency.
This differs from existing works that assume an ideal scenario where future motions can be “instantaneously” predicted, thereby neglecting time delays caused by network
transmission and algorithm execution. Addressing this task
requires tackling two key challenges: The length of latency
period can vary significantly across samples; the prediction
model must be efficient. In this paper, we propose ALIEN,
which treats the motion as a continuous function parameterized by a neural network, enabling predictions under any latency condition. By incorporating Mamba-like linear attention as a hyper-network and designing subsequent low-rank
modulation, ALIEN efficiently learns a set of implicit neural
representation weights from the observed motion to encode
instance-specific information. Additionally, our model integrates the primary motion prediction task with an extradesigned variable-delay pose reconstruction task in a unified multi-task learning framework, enhancing its ability
to capture richer motion patterns. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines adapted for our new task, while maintaining competitive performance in traditional prediction setting.

Predicted Motion

time

(a) Existing human motion prediction methods
Robot

Arbitrary Latency

Algorithm Execution

Network Transmission

Wide Area Network (WAN)
Player B

Observed Motion

Player A

Predicted Motion
Latency
Period

(b) Our motion prediction under arbitrary latency

time

Figure 1. In contrast to existing methods that make predictions
under the assumption of zero latency, our approach fully accounts
for the impact of arbitrary latency caused by network transmission
and algorithm execution. This allows intelligent systems (e.g. the
surrogate robot in this context) to more accurately anticipate human movements. The first image in (b) is sourced from [1].

subsequent planning. Nevertheless, current human motion
prediction methods are all built under the ideal assumption
that future motions can be predicted instantaneously, without any latency. This reliance severely limits the applicability of motion prediction techniques in real-world scenarios, where time delays are inherent and can range from tens
to hundreds of milliseconds. For instance, in a metaverse
table tennis competition, Player A wears a Head Mounted
Display (HMD) and uses a specialized controller in place
of a real paddle, remotely controlling an on-site surrogate
robot via a Wide Area Network (WAN) to compete against
Player B. From a control perspective, accurately predicting
the poses of Player A within a certain future window is essential for the surrogate robot to faithfully replicate player’s
paddle swinging motions (as shown in Figure 1). This process inevitably requires overcoming latency caused by both
network transmission and algorithm execution. More im-

1. Introduction
In the era of intelligence, humans are increasingly collaborating with robots, machines or autonomous systems in a
wide range of applications, such as augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) [45], human-robot interaction [38, 41], and autonomous driving [8, 51]. Recently, encouraging advancements have been achieved in predicting future human motion based on past observations [11, 27–29]. Addressing
this could have a great impact on intelligent systems, enabling them to anticipate human behavior and facilitate the
*Corresponding author

1861

