This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IceDiff: High Resolution and High-Quality Arctic Sea Ice Forecasting with
Generative Diffusion Prior
Jingyi Xu1,∗ , Siwei Tu1,∗ , Weidong Yang1,† , Ben Fei3,† ,
Shuhao Li1 , Keyi Liu1 , Yeqi Luo1 , Lipeng Ma1 , Lei Bai2
1
Fudan University, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 3 Chinese University of Hong Kong
jyxu22@m.fudan.edu.cn, wdyang@fudan.edu.cn,
benfei@cuhk.edu.hk, baisanshi@gmail.com
∗
Equal Contributions, † Corresponding Authors

Abstract

models at finer scales is paramount for both transportation
in polar regions and scientific research in geoscience.

Variation of Arctic sea ice has significant impacts on polar
ecosystems, transporting routes, coastal communities, and
global climate. Tracing the change of sea ice at a finer scale
is paramount for both operational applications and scientific studies. Recent pan-Arctic sea ice forecasting methods
that leverage advances in artificial intelligence have made
promising progress over numerical models. However, forecasting sea ice at higher resolutions is still under-explored.
To bridge the gap, we propose a two-module cooperative
deep learning framework, IceDiff, to forecast sea ice concentration at finer scales. IceDiff first leverages a vision
transformer to generate coarse yet superior forecasting results over previous methods at a regular 25 km grid. This
high-quality sea ice forecasting can be utilized as reliable
guidance for the next module. Subsequently, an unconditional diffusion model pre-trained on low-resolution sea ice
concentration maps is utilized for sampling down-scaled
sea ice forecasting via a zero-shot guided sampling strategy and a patch-based method. For the first time, IceDiff demonstrates sea ice forecasting with a 6.25 km resolution. IceDiff extends the boundary of existing sea ice
forecasting models and more importantly, its capability to
generate high-resolution sea ice concentration data is vital
for pragmatic usages and research. Code is available at
https://github.com/EtronTech/IceDiff.

Existing physics-based numerical models have demonstrated the ability to accurately forecast sea ice concentration (SIC, value ranges from 0% to 100%) for short lead
times of a few weeks. However, when forecasting at longer
scales, their performance significantly decreases, and their
forecasting skills are even worse than those of simple statistical models [3]. With the advent of deep learning methods,
a series of works based on deep learning approaches have
been committed to SIC forecasting with promising results.
Notable studies cover forecasting leads range from daily to
seasonal scale, e.g., IceNet [3] provides accurate sea ice extent (SIE, areas where the SIC value is greater than 15%
and could be covered with sea ice) forecasts for 6 months
lead time. SICNet [35] and SICNet90 [34] are skillful for
forecasting SIC in subsequent 7 and 90 days, respectively.

1. Introduction
Arctic sea ice is essential for global climate change and local communities. Although the exact teleconnections between mid-latitude weather and the variation of Arctic sea
ice are yet to be revealed, the reduction of sea ice during the
last few decades clearly has impacts that transcend the Arctic region [3, 41]. Hence, establishing skillful forecasting

10567

Despite the improved forecasting skills of deep learning models over previous approaches, these models are
still trained on sea ice products provided by the National
Sea Ice Data Center (NSIDC) or the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT). These sea ice data products are primarily derived from passive microwave sensors with a resolution of
25 km, which is considered too coarse for sea ice modeling. The in situ observations are costly to acquire and
extremely spare to provide sufficient spatial coverage over
pan-Arctic region. This limitation hinders the representation of detailed information on sea ice concentration and
the accuracy of ice edge [10, 16]. The same challenge is
also presented in weather forecasts. Therefore, several endeavors are proposed to work on downscaling atmospheric
states [5, 11, 43]. For instance, SwinRDM [11] combines
an improved SwinRNN [21] model with a denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) [20] to achieve superresolution (SR) in forecasting climate variables. However,

