This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OSV: One Step is Enough for High-Quality Image to Video Generation
Xiaofeng Mao1∗ Zhengkai Jiang2∗† Fu-yun Wang3∗ Jiangning Zhang4,5
Hao Chen1 Mingmin Chi1‡ Yabiao Wang4,5‡ Wenhan Luo2
1
Fudan University 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Zhejiang University 5 Tencent YouTu Lab
{xfmao23, haochen22}@fudan.edu.cn mmchi@fudan.edu.cn
{zkjiang,whluo}@ust.hk fywang@link.cuhk.edu.hk vtzhang@tencent.com yabiaowang@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Video diffusion models have shown great potential in
generating high-quality videos, making them an increasingly popular focus. However, their inherent iterative nature leads to substantial computational and time costs. Although techniques such as consistency distillation and adversarial training have been employed to accelerate video
diffusion by reducing inference steps, these methods often
simply transfer the generation approaches from Image diffusion models to video diffusion models. As a result, these
methods frequently fall short in terms of both performance
and training stability. In this work, we introduce a twostage training framework that effectively combines consistency distillation with adversarial training to address these
challenges. Additionally, we propose a novel video discriminator design, which eliminates the need for decoding the video latents and improves the ﬁnal performance.
Our model is capable of producing high-quality videos in
merely one-step, with the ﬂexibility to perform multi-step reﬁnement for further performance enhancement. Our quantitative evaluation on the OpenVid-1M benchmark shows
that our model signiﬁcantly outperforms existing methods. Notably, our 1-step performance (FVD 171.15) exceeds the 8-step performance of the consistency distillation based method, AnimateLCM (FVD 184.79), and approaches the 25-step performance of advanced Stable Video
Diffusion (FVD 156.94).

1. Introduction
Video synthesis provides rich visual effects and creative expression for ﬁlms, television, advertisements, and games.
∗ Equal Contribution
† Project Leader

‡ Corresponding Author (This work was supported by the Natural Science

Foundation of China under contract 62171139).

Figure 1. OSV is a two-stage video diffusion acceleration strategy.
In the ﬁrst stage, GAN is applied for better training efﬁciency. In
the second stage, we apply consistency distillation to boost the
performance upper-bound.

Diffusion models are playing an increasingly important role
in video synthesis [2, 3, 5, 9, 14, 25, 26]. Typically, diffusion models involve a forward process and a reverse process. In the forward process, real data is iteratively perturbed with noise until it converges to a simple noise distribution, typically Gaussian. In the reverse process, the noise
is gradually removed, ultimately transitioning back to the
target data distribution. However, this reverse process usually requires the numerical solution of a generative ODE,
termed Probability Flow ODE (PF-ODE) [28]. The iterative nature of this numerical solving process leads to significantly higher computational costs compared to other generative models (e.g., GANs) [4, 36, 37]. These computational
demands are even more signiﬁcant in video synthesis; for
instance, generating a short 2-second video clip using Stable Video Diffusion (SVD) [2] on a high-performance A100
GPU can take over 30 seconds.
Currently, several strategies have been proposed to reduce the computational costs associated with video generation. Some approaches utilize consistency distillation in the
latent space (LCM) [16, 29] for acceleration; however, they

12585

