This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Missing Target-Relevant Information Prediction with World Model for Accurate
Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval
Yuanmin Tang1,2 Jing Yu3 * Keke Gai4 Jiamin Zhuang 1,2 Gang Xiong1 Gaopeng Gou1 Qi Wu5
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Information Engineering, Minzu University of China
4
Beijing Institute of Technology, 5 University of Adelaide
{tangyuanmin,zhuangjiamin,gougaopeng,xionggang}@iie.ac.cn, jing.yu@muc.edu.cn,
gaikeke@bit.edu.cn,qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

(a) Pre-training of the prediction-free image to word mapping (baseline)
Image

Image
Pseudo Word

Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR) involves
diverse tasks with a broad range of visual content manipulation intent across domain, scene, object, and attribute. The
key challenge for ZS-CIR tasks is to modify a reference image according to manipulation text to accurately retrieve a
target image, especially when the reference image is missing essential target content. In this paper, we propose a
novel prediction-based mapping network, named PrediCIR,
to adaptively predict the missing target visual content in reference images in the latent space before mapping for accurate ZS-CIR. Specifically, a world view generation module
first constructs a source view by omitting certain visual content of a target view, coupled with an action that includes
the manipulation intent derived from existing image-caption
pairs. Then, a target content prediction module trains a
world model as a predictor to adaptively predict the missing visual information guided by user intention in manipulating text at the latent space. The two modules map an
image with the predicted relevant information to a pseudoword token without extra supervision. Our model shows
strong generalization ability on six ZS-CIR tasks. It obtains
consistent and significant performance boosts ranging from
1.73% to 4.45% over the best methods and achieves new
state-of-the-art results on ZS-CIR. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Pter61/predicir.

1. Introduction
Given a reference image and a human manipulation text,
Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) [41] aims to retrieve a
target image visually similar to the reference image while
* Corresponding author

Mapping
Network

Contrastive
Learning

!∗

(b) Pre-training of the prediction-based image-to-word mapping (ours)
Mapping Network

Image
Crop

Target Image

PredictedMissing Content

Source Content

Pseudo Word

Contrastive

World
Model

Caption

!∗ Learning

Joint-Embedding Predictive

Target Content Predictor

A rugby player passes
the ball to his teammate
on a grassy field.
World View Generation

Trade-off Representation Abstraction of Our Model

Action

MIM

Representation
Abstraction
Representation
Content

Low

JEPA
Ours

Contrastive
CLIP High

A rugby player
passes the ball to Rugby players
his teammate…

(c) Zero-Shot Composed Image Retrieval
Image

Input
Manipulation text
Change the image
of the sea lion into
origami style

Retrieval Modal
Image Manipulation text

Retrieval Results
Baseline
Our

Mapping
Network

Put a tree trunk to the
left of the dog standing
with flowers and grass

Pseudo Word

is a black sleeve shirt
with Earth picture and
people flying

Composed
query

!∗

Image
Candidates

CLIP

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) Prediction-free visual
mapping. (b) Our prediction-based visual mapping. (c) ZS-CIR
process results from different strategies.

incorporating content modifications specified by the manipulation text. Distinct from traditional content-based image
retrieval [10], in the CIR task, the content of the manipulation text often does not appear in the reference images, as
illustrated in Figure 1(c). CIR enhances flexibility and improves the accuracy of intent expression by allowing users
to integrate visual and textual information into their search
queries. This task has gained emerging attention in internet
searches and e-commerce applications [9, 33]. As shown in
Figure 1(c), CIR tasks include image domain transforma-

24785

