This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ILIAS: Instance-Level Image retrieval At Scale
Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos Vladan Stojnić Anna Manko Pavel Šuma
Nikolaos-Antonios Ypsilantis Nikos Efthymiadis Zakaria Laskar
Jiřı́ Matas Ondřej Chum Giorgos Tolias
VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague
Abstract

40

1. Introduction
The ability to recognize and differentiate every unique object instance in the physical world represents one of the ultimate goals for foundation representation models [5, 34, 41,
75]. This work aims to assess this capability through the
lens of instance-level image retrieval at a very large scale.
Instance-level image retrieval corresponds to searching for
images of particular objects within large collections. All
images of a particular object form their own instance-level
class. This is an important information retrieval task due to
its numerous real-world applications in robotics [30, 45], e-

30

mAP@1k

This work introduces ILIAS, a new test dataset for InstanceLevel Image retrieval At Scale. It is designed to evaluate
the ability of current and future foundation models and retrieval techniques to recognize particular objects. The key
benefits over existing datasets include large scale, domain
diversity, accurate ground truth, and a performance that is
far from saturated. ILIAS includes query and positive images for 1,000 object instances, manually collected to capture challenging conditions and diverse domains. Largescale retrieval is conducted against 100 million distractor
images from YFCC100M. To avoid false negatives without
extra annotation effort, we include only query objects confirmed to have emerged after 2014, i.e. the compilation date
of YFCC100M. An extensive benchmarking is performed
with the following observations: i) models fine-tuned on
specific domains, such as landmarks or products, excel in
that domain but fail on ILIAS ii) learning a linear adaptation layer using multi-domain class supervision results in
performance improvements, especially for vision-language
models iii) local descriptors in retrieval re-ranking are
still a key ingredient, especially in the presence of severe
background clutter iv) the text-to-image performance of the
vision-language foundation models is surprisingly close to
the corresponding image-to-image case.
website: https://vrg.fel.cvut.cz/ilias/

image-to-image
text-to-image
image-to-image (adapt)
image-to-image re-ranking

SigLIP2
SigLIP

OpenCLIP

20

OAI-CLIP
10
AlexNet
2012

DenseNet EffNet

VGG

2014

2016

2018

ViT

2020

2022

2024

2026

Year
Figure 1. Performance timeline on ILIAS. Curves indicate best
performance in chronological order for image-to-image and textto-image retrieval, showing a significant boost with the release
of foundation models. Representations are linearly adapted via
multi-domain learning on UnED [72]. Re-ranking with local descriptors achieves the best results by a significant margin.

commerce [74, 76], and cultural heritage [16, 50], to name
just a few. The task faces challenges because of the substantial variations among positive examples, such as illumination/viewpoint [21, 62] changes and background clutter [4, 31]. An additional difficulty is the high similarity among negatives, which is driven by the extremely fine
granularity in the class definitions. It becomes even more
challenging at a real-world scale, where searching through
millions or even billions of images requires handling an
open-world setup with countless unseen objects spanning
diverse and complex domains.
Benchmarking instance-level retrieval under real-world
challenges is currently limited by the lack of suitable
datasets. Constructing a dataset with instance-level class
definitions necessitates huge development effort, reflected
by the many shortcomings of existing datasets. Shortcomings exist in several key aspects, such as dataset size [66],
domain diversity [39, 53], and ground-truth accuracy [67],
which suffers from both false positives and false negatives.
Popular datasets are typically limited to landmarks [39], and
as dataset scale increases, ground-truth quality tends to decline [52, 67]. This is a consequence of automating the

14777

