This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VinaBench: Benchmark for Faithful and Consistent Visual Narratives
Silin Gao1 , Sheryl Mathew1,3 , Li Mi1 , Sepideh Mamooler1 , Mengjie Zhao2 ,
Hiromi Wakaki2 , Yuki Mitsufuji2 , Syrielle Montariol1 , Antoine Bosselut1
1
EPFL, Switzerland 2 Sony Group Corporation, Japan 3 Carnegie Mellon University, USA

Discourse Constraints
Global
Features
Scene
Features

•
•

Profile of Characters:
Profile of Characters

Characters

Appearance Style

Time of Day

Location

Samantha: adult female, wife
Leo: adult male, husband

Appearance Style: photorealistic

Characters: Samantha
Time of Day: afternoon
Location: kitchen

Characters: Leo
Time of Day: evening
Location: hallway

Characters: Leo, Samantha
Time of Day: evening
Location: dining table

Samantha was cooking
dinner at home.

She washed the utensils after
cooking.

Her husband Leo came back
with bad news.

They had dinner together while Leo
said that he was fired today.

(c)

(d)

A woman wearing a green shirt is
standing in a kitchen, wiping her
hands with an apron tied around
her waist. The kitchen is wellequipped with a sink …

A woman wearing an apron is
standing in a kitchen, washing a bowl
at a sink. The sun shines through the
window on her face …

A man is standing in a hallway,
wearing a suit and tie. He has a sad
expression on his face. The hallway
leads to a door …

A man and a woman are sitting at a
dining table. The man is wearing a suit
and tie, while the woman is wearing a
shirt. The man is talking with serious
expression …

Characters: Samantha
Time of Day: afternoon
Location: kitchen

Visual
Narrative

VinaBench

Textual
Narrative

(a)

Image
Captions

Links

Image Captions

Commonsense Links

(b)

woman – Samantha
apron – cooking

woman – Samantha
kitchen – cooking
apron – cooking

…

sink – washed the utensils

man – Leo
sad expression – bad news

man – Leo
woman – Samantha
dining table – dinner
serious expression – fired

Commonsense Constraints

Figure 1. Overview of VinaBench. We augment existing visual-textual narrative pairs with discourse and commonsense constraints, to
promote the learning of consistent and faithful visual narrative generation and its evaluation. The commonsense constraints consist of links
that ground the visual entities (extracted from image captions) to their associated textual narrative entities, as labeled by the phrases paired
with the same color. The discourse constraints include scene-specific narrative features that trace the dynamics of basic narrative elements,
i.e., characters, time and location, and global narrative features that describe static character attributes and image appearance style.

Abstract

narrative. Our results across three generative vision models demonstrate that learning with VinaBench’s knowledge
constraints effectively improves the faithfulness and cohesion of generated visual narratives.1

Visual narrative generation transforms textual narratives into sequences of images illustrating the content of the
text. However, generating visual narratives that are faithful
to the input text and self-consistent across generated images
remains an open challenge, due to the lack of knowledge
constraints used for planning the stories. In this work, we
propose a new benchmark, VinaBench, to address this challenge. Our benchmark annotates the underlying commonsense and discourse constraints in visual narrative samples, offering systematic scaffolds for learning the implicit
strategies of visual storytelling. Based on the incorporated
narrative constraints, we further propose novel metrics to
closely evaluate the consistency of generated narrative images and the alignment of generations with the input textual

1. Introduction
Human narratives are often transformed from text into visual media, e.g., in the film and television industries, scripts
written by screenwriters are usually visualized as storyboards by art designers, to assist the filming of movies
and TV series. However, translating textual narratives to
sequences of images requires addressing two fundamental
1 We release our data and code to the community, our project page:
https://silin159.github.io/Vina-Bench

2870

