This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-Bench: Human-Aligned Video Generation Benchmark
Hui Han1 *
Siyuan Li1 *
Jiaqi Chen2,3,4 *
Yiwen Yuan5 *
Yuling Wu5
6
7
8
9
Yufan Deng
Chak Tou Leong
Hanwen Du
Junchen Fu
Youhua Li10
Jie Zhang4
Chi Zhang11
Li-jia Li12
Yongxin Ni13†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Stanford University 3 Fellou AI 4 Fudan University
Carnegie Mellon University 6 Peking University 7 Hong Kong Polytechnic University
8
Soochow University 9 University of Glasgow 10 City University of Hong Kong
11
Westlake University 12 LiveX AI 13 National University of Singapore

5

https://github.com/Video-Bench/Video-Bench.git

Figure 1. Overview of Video-Bench. Left: We introduce comprehensive evaluation dimensions in two main categories:
video-condition alignment (Sec. 3.1.1) and video quality (Sec. 3.1.2). Right: For these two types of dimensions, we analyze
their challenges (Sec. 4.1) and corresponding propose the MLLM-based automated video evaluation suite.

Abstract

uate generated video quality across multiple dimensions but often lack alignment with human judgments;
and large language model (LLM)-based benchmarks,
though capable of human-like reasoning, are constrained by a limited understanding of video quality metrics and cross-modal consistency. To address
these challenges and establish a benchmark that better aligns with human preferences, this paper introduces Video-Bench, a comprehensive benchmark
featuring a rich prompt suite and extensive evaluation dimensions. This benchmark represents the ﬁrst

Video generation assessment is essential for ensuring that generative models produce visually realistic, high-quality videos while aligning with human
expectations. Current video generation benchmarks
fall into two main categories: traditional benchmarks, which use metrics and embeddings to eval* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author (email: niyongxin@u.nus.edu).

18858

