This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArcPro: Architectural Programs for Structured 3D Abstraction of Sparse Points
Qirui Huang1,2 , Runze Zhang1 , Kangjun Liu2 , Minglun Gong3 , Hao Zhang4 , Hui Huang1 *
1
CSSE, Shenzhen University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory 3 University of Guelph 4 Simon Fraser University

Figure 1. Structured 3D abstraction (bottom and top right for a zoom-in) in the form of architectural programs, obtained by our method
ArcPro, which takes as input an extremely sparse point cloud (only ≈300 points) segment over each building. Despite such low-density,
non-uniform, and noisy inputs, our method produces clean, low-face-count meshes that structurally conform to the real building objects.
ArcPro can process 1,090 buildings over an area of 2.92 km2 in approximately 37 seconds on a single 4090 GPU.

1. Introduction

Abstract

Efficient extraction of structured 3D representations from
unstructured architectural scene acquisitions such as point
clouds is crucial for urban modeling, planning, and spatial computations in applications like autonomous navigation, augmented reality, and digital twins [4]. However, building a mapping from unstructured point clouds
to meshes representing potential architectural entities poses
two main challenges. First, raw point clouds from aerial or
ground scanners often contain missing data and noise, while
point clouds obtained from acquired images, e.g., through
structure-from-motion (SfM), may even be of lower quality with additional sparsity and non-uniformity. Such low
data qualities necessitate the integration of prior knowledge
to identify architectural features, since traditional methods
relying on constraints such as the manhattan [14] or planar
hypothesis [3] are inadequate for complex structures. Second, direct mapping from sparse points to the mesh space is
challenging due to the coupling of geometric data and connectivity relationships, where an overly flexible representation can easily lead a neural model to exhibit excessive
sensitivity to noise and other data artifacts from the input.

We introduce ArcPro, a novel learning framework built
on architectural programs to recover structured 3D abstractions from highly sparse and low-quality point clouds.
Specifically, we design a domain-specific language (DSL)
to hierarchically represent building structures as a program, which can be efficiently converted into a mesh. We
bridge feedforward and inverse procedural modeling by using a feedforward process for training data synthesis, allowing the network to make reverse predictions. We train an
encoder-decoder on the points-program pairs to establish
a mapping from unstructured point clouds to architectural
programs, where a 3D convolutional encoder extracts point
cloud features and a transformer decoder autoregressively
predicts the programs in a tokenized form. Inference by our
method is highly efficient and produces plausible and faithful 3D abstractions. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that ArcPro outperforms both traditional architectural proxy reconstruction and learning-based abstraction
methods. We further explore its potential to work with multiview image and natural language inputs. Project page:
https://vcc.tech/research/2025/ArcPro.

In this paper, we introduce a program-based learning
framework to recover structured 3D abstractions from lowquality, unstructured building point clouds. Our core idea

* Corresponding author.

6563

