This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taxonomy-Aware Evaluation of Vision–Language Models
Vésteinn Snæbjarnarson1,2 *
Kevin Du2
Niklas Stoehr2
Serge Belongie1
Ryan Cotterell2
Nico Lang1
Stella Frank1
1

University of Copenhagen

2

ETH Zürich

Abstract
When a vision–language model (VLM) is prompted to identify an entity depicted in an image, it may answer “I see
a conifer,” rather than the specific label NORWAY SPRUCE.
This raises two issues for evaluation: Firstly, the unconstrained generated text needs to be mapped to the evaluation label space (i.e., CONIFER). Secondly, a useful
classification measure should give partial credit to lessspecific, but not incorrect, answers (NORWAY SPRUCE being a type of CONIFER). To meet these requirements, we
propose a framework for evaluating unconstrained text predictions such as those generated from a vision–language
model against a taxonomy. Specifically, we propose the
use of hierarchical precision and recall measures to assess the level of correctness and specificity of predictions
with regard to a taxonomy. Experimentally, we first show
that existing text similarity measures do not capture taxonomic similarity well. We then develop and compare different methods to map textual VLM predictions onto a taxonomy. This allows us to compute hierarchical similarity
measures between the generated text and the ground truth
labels. Finally, we analyze modern VLMs on fine-grained
visual classification tasks based on our proposed taxonomic
evaluation scheme. Data and code are made available at
https://github.com/vesteinn/vlm-eval.

Figure 1. Vision–language-models (VLMs) as fine-grained classifiers. VLMs generate text with varying degrees of specificity and
similarity to gold-standard label classes. We tackle the problem of
aligning these outputs to taxonomic classes.

two desiderata when evaluating VLMs on FGVC (Fig. 1):
Evaluation with Textual Awareness. When tasked with
classifying entities within an image, VLMs often
generate text that does not inherently fit within
the predefined set of labels used in conventional
evaluations. For example, a model might describe
an image with the phrase pines in the snow, while
the ground-truth label is simply PINE TREE. We
suggest that a good evaluation should rely on fuzzy
or representation-based matching techniques, which
assess the similarity between the generated text and
the predefined class labels, rather than whether the
VLM generated the predefined class’s label exactly.
Such approaches have a long history in natural
language processing (see, e.g., [42, 58]). We call an
evaluation measure for FGVC that is compatible with
unconstrained text textually aware.

1. Introduction
Modern vision–language models (VLMs) [1, 6, 12, 41, 46,
50] serve as viable one-stop shops for a wide variety of
tasks at the intersection of vision and language. Given an
image as input, VLMs generate unconstrained text, a key
enabler of their flexibility across tasks. This flexibility,
however, introduces additional challenges in their evaluation. In this paper, we study the problem of evaluating the
unconstrained text generated by VLMs in the context of
fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC), and put forward

Evaluation with Hierarchical Awareness. Standard evaluation methods for VLM-based entity classification
typically treat text generated by a VLM in a binary
manner, i.e., it is either completely correct or incorrect
[18, 31, 74]. However, many classification tasks
involve label sets that are organized hierarchically,
such as taxonomic trees or knowledge graphs. When
such a structure is available, we suggest that evaluation measures take advantage of the structure, i.e.,
predictions should be judged based on their semantic

* Correspondence: vesteinnsnaebjarnarson@gmail.com.

9109

