This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EchoTraffic: Enhancing Traffic Anomaly Understanding
with Audio-Visual Insights
Zhenghao Xing1 *, Hao Chen1 *, Binzhu Xie1 , Jiaqi Xu1 , Ziyu Guo1 ,
Xuemiao Xu2 , Jianye Hao3 , Chi-Wing Fu1 , Xiaowei Hu4†, and Pheng-Ann Heng1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 South China University of Technology
3
Tianjin University 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract

Collision

Honking

Traffic Anomaly Understanding (TAU) is essential for improving public safety and transportation efficiency by enabling timely detection and response to incidents. Beyond
existing methods, which rely largely on visual data, we propose to consider audio cues, a valuable source that offers strong hints to anomaly scenarios such as crashes and
honking. Our contributions are twofold. First, we compile
AV-TAU, the first large-scale audio-visual dataset for TAU,
providing 29,865 traffic anomaly videos and 149,325 Q&A
pairs, while supporting five essential TAU tasks. Second,
we develop EchoTraffic, a multimodal LLM that integrates
audio and visual data for TAU, through our audio-insight
frame selector and dynamic connector to effectively extract
crucial audio cues for anomaly understanding with a twophase training framework. Experimental results on AV-TAU
manifest that EchoTraffic sets a new SOTA performance in
TAU, outperforming the existing multimodal LLMs. Our
contributions, including AV-TAU and EchoTraffic, pave a
new direction for multimodal TAU.

(a) Challenging anomaly events with limited visual clues
(Video)

(Video)

(Audio)

Holmes-VAD

EchoTraffic

Description: No, the video
shows a car driving down a
highway at night with its
headlights on, capturing the
normal traffic flow.
(b) Existing TAU method

Description: The dashcam
footage captures the ego
vehicle being rear-ended by
a white SUV at night. You can
clearly hear the horn honking
and a loud collision sound.

1. Introduction

Causation: The white SUV attempts an illegal overtake in the
lane, leaving insufficient space for the car to avoid a sideswipe.
Time Window: The start and end times of the abnormal event
in the video are [3.7s, 7.2s].
Prevention: To avoid this accident, drivers should maintain safe
distance, use clear signals, avoid risky overtakes in tight spaces,
and moderate speed for safe reaction time.
Response: Do not rush to move vehicles. Turn on hazard lights
of the white SUV and the video car and take photos of vehicle
positions and damage as evidence for liability. Then, move
vehicles to a safe area to avoid traffic obstruction.

Traffic Anomaly Understanding (TAU) is receiving increasing attention, given the practical need of detecting, analyzing, and responding to traffic anomalies such as accidents.
Powered by large language models, the goal of TAU is not
only to recognize relevant entities but also to understand the
underlying causes and produce timely responses. Access to
these information is critical for alerting emergency services,
lifesaving, reducing damage, enhancing public safety, and
improving transportation efficiency [58, 68].
At present, current methods [10, 19, 44, 46, 47, 49, 54]
focus largely on detecting anomalies in traffic scenarios, often neglecting the underlying causes. Leveraging large lan-

(c) Our EchoTraffic framework

Figure 1. Comparing traffic anomaly understanding in a challenging scenario with limited visual cues. (b) Holmes-VAD [67], a
very recent approach, still falls short of identifying the out-of-view
anomaly. (c) Our EchoTraffic can provide a comprehensive understanding by simultaneously considering audio and visual signals.

* Joint first authors.
† Corresponding author (huxiaowei@pjlab.org.cn).

guage models, recent methods [8, 50, 67] are able to extend beyond detection to contextual understanding of general anomaly events. Yet, the existing methods remain limited to visual inputs, overlooking audio, which is a readily
accessible but crucial modality for TAU. In real-world situations, traffic anomalies usually involve audio cues such as

19098

