This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recovering Dynamic 3D Sketches from Videos
Jaeah Lee
hayanz@snu.ac.kr

Changwoon Choi
Young Min Kim
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
changwoon.choi00@gmail.com

Jaesik Park*

{youngmin.kim, jaesik.park}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Understanding 3D motion from videos presents inherent challenges due to the diverse types of movement, ranging from rigid and deformable objects to articulated structures. To overcome this, we propose Liv3Stroke, a novel
approach for abstracting objects in motion with deformable
3D strokes. The detailed movements of an object may be represented by unstructured motion vectors or a set of motion
primitives using a pre-defined articulation from a template
model. Just as a free-hand sketch can intuitively visualize
scenes or intentions with a sparse set of lines, we utilize
a set of parametric 3D curves to capture a set of spatially
smooth motion elements for general objects with unknown
structures. We first extract noisy, 3D point cloud motion
guidance from video frames using semantic features, and
our approach deforms a set of curves to abstract essential motion features as a set of explicit 3D representations.
Such abstraction enables an understanding of prominent
components of motions while maintaining robustness to environmental factors. Our approach allows direct analysis of
3D object movements from video, tackling the uncertainty
that typically occurs when translating real-world motion
into recorded footage. The project page is accessible via:
https://jaeah.me/liv3stroke_web.

1. Introduction
Tracking 3D movement in video is subject to inherent ambiguity. The 3D motions usually exhibit various forms, including unidentified rigid, deformable, and articulated objects.
A video footage observes the 3D motions that are projected
onto 2D frames of a moving camera, which further complicates the process of extracting motion components. There
have been attempts to understand locally smooth motion patterns, such as motion factorization [31] or segmentation [46].
Recent approaches on novel-view synthesis extend the radiance field formulation into a more general form of dynamic
scenes with dense motion fields [25, 34, 44, 47]. However,
* Corresponding author.

Liv3Stroke
Guide

Draw

View-consistent Dynamic 3D Sketch

time

Figure 1. Liv3Stroke is a novel approach that compactly represents
object movements using deformable 3D strokes from videos. Our
method achieves view-consistent dynamic sketch reconstruction by
shifting and deforming the shape of each stroke.

this formulation solves for complex high-dimensional variables given an under-constrained set-up, and often produces
erroneous results that are further deteriorated when the scene
is subject to appearance variations.
We find the key insights to express 3D motion through
abstraction in the form of sketches. Sketches serve as effective tools for compactly visualizing scenes or ideas [10, 11].
While they are subjective expressions, often created by an
artist, recent works [41, 42] have shown that we can generate sketches directly from images guided by visual features. They define a perceptual loss in a latent space incorporating deep neural networks and successfully generate
abstract sketches. Interestingly, the perceptual loss alleviates enforcing pixel-wise matches in image space, and it

12423

