This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Medusa: A Multi-Scale High-order Contrastive Dual-Diffusion Approach for
Multi-View Clustering
Liang Chen1 , Zhe Xue1 *, Yawen Li1 , Meiyu Liang1 ,
Yan Wang2 , Anton van den Hengel3 , Yuankai Qi2 *
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Macquarie University, Australia
3
The University of Adelaide, Australia
{bycl, xuezhe, meiyu1210}@bupt.edu.cn, warmly0716@126.com
{yan.wang,yuankai.qi}@mq.edu.au, anton.vandenhengel@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Deep multi-view clustering methods utilize information
from multiple views to achieve enhanced clustering results
and have gained increasing popularity in recent years.
Most existing methods typically focus on either inter-view
or intra-view relationships, aiming to align information
across views or analyze structural patterns within individual views. However, they often incorporate inter-view complementary information in a simplistic manner, while overlooking the complex, high-order relationships within multiview data and the interactions among samples, resulting in
an incomplete utilization of the rich information available.
Instead, we propose a multi-scale approach that exploits all
of the available information. We first introduce a dual graph
diffusion module guided by a consensus graph. This module
leverages inter-view information to enhance the representation of both nodes and edges within each view. Secondly,
we propose a novel contrastive loss function based on hypergraphs to more effectively model and leverage complex
intra-view data relationships. Finally, we propose to adaptively learn fusion weights at the sample level, which enables a more flexible and dynamic aggregation of multi-view
information. Extensive experiments on eight datasets show
favorable performance of the proposed method compared to
state-of-the-art approaches, demonstrating its effectiveness
across diverse scenarios.

from different perspectives. An example of this could be
combining textual descriptions and images that depict the
same sports event, enabling a more comprehensive understanding [16, 22].
The feature learning capabilities of deep learning methods have seen them successfully applied to the problem
in a variety of forms. Graph neural networks (GNN),
for instance, are adept at utilizing relationships between
nodes to enhance representations [10, 12]. As a result,
multi-view clustering methods based on GNN have garnered widespread attention and demonstrated promising results [11, 25, 34]. Several methods have been applied to
refine and optimize the graph structure [8, 19], superseding
potential constraints arising from local structures within the
original graph, and leveraging global information to achieve
a more stable and effective structure. Given the complementary nature of multi-view data, [24, 29] propose to start
with constructing a consensus graph, which encapsulates
global information and guides the learning process of individual view encoders by providing complementary information from different views.

1. Introduction

Despite the progress made, there remain a number of
issues with existing methods: 1) Although some existing
methods use a consensus graph to enhance inter-view information by adding it to each view, this simple addition
may lead to underutilization of the complementary information from the consensus graph and overlook distinctions
between views. 2) The commonly used ordinary graph can
only model low-order relationships between nodes, limiting
its ability to capture complex intra-view relationships. This
limitation arises because ordinary graphs cannot capture
higher-order connections or multi-node interactions that often characterize intricate structures within each view. 3) Existing methods, when fusing views, assign equal weights to
all samples within the same view, failing to consider the

Multi-view clustering is more complex than its single-view
equivalent because it requires leveraging the complementarity and consistency among data that describe the same entity
* Corresponding author

10295

