This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense-SfM: Structure from Motion with Dense Consistent Matching
JongMin Lee
Seoul National University

Sungjoo Yoo
Seoul National University

jongmin.cv@gmail.com

sungjoo.yoo@gmail.com

Abstract
We present Dense-SfM, a novel Structure from Motion (SfM) framework designed for dense and accurate 3D
reconstruction from multi-view images. Sparse keypoint
matching, which traditional SfM methods often rely on, limits both accuracy and point density, especially in textureless areas. Dense-SfM addresses this limitation by integrating dense matching with a Gaussian Splatting (GS) based
track extension which gives more consistent, longer feature tracks. To further improve reconstruction accuracy,
Dense-SfM is equipped with a multi-view kernelized matching module leveraging transformer and Gaussian Process
architectures, for robust track refinement across multiviews. Evaluations on the ETH3D and Texture-Poor SfM
datasets show that Dense-SfM offers significant improvements in accuracy and density over state-of-the-art methods. Project page: https://icetea-cv.github.
io/densesfm/.

1. Introduction
Structure from Motion (SfM) is a fundamental task in computer vision that enables the reconstruction of 3D structures from multi-view images of a scene. It has been a
widely researched problem, focusing on reconstructing accurate camera poses and 3D point cloud of a scene, benefiting a variety of downstream tasks such as visual localization [19, 43, 46, 48, 58], AR/VR [39, 70], multi-view
stereo [20, 50, 52] and neural rendering [27, 34, 72]. Over
the years, several well-established methods have been developed to address the SfM pipeline [36, 40, 49, 55, 68].
Recently, there has been an increasing demand for dense
and accurate 3D reconstructions in various 3D vision tasks,
including dense reconstruction [17, 65], object pose estimation [5, 23, 57] and neural rendering [27, 72]. However, existing detector-based methods have limitations in
achieving sufficient accuracy and density of 3D points, especially in texture-less regions where obtaining matchable
keypoints is challenging, limiting the performance of downstream tasks. With the advent of deep learning and atten-

Figure 1. Comparison of SfM results between quantizedmatching and our matching. To solve the fragmentary track
problem, DFSfM [24] uses quantized matching, which can compromise the accuracy and completeness of 3D points due to quantization. In contrast, our Dense-SfM pipeline leverages Gaussian
Splatting to solve the problem, offering more accurate and dense
3D points. Thanks to dense matching, our pipeline can also be applied to texture-less objects, further improving the quality of 3D
points and pose estimation.

tion mechanism [62], semi-dense and dense matching methods [6, 14, 15, 56, 66] have been introduced, enabling the
reliable matches even in low-texture areas and producing
denser match results than classical detector-based methods.
This advancement has led to improved performance across
many tasks, including homography and relative pose estimation [2, 7, 29]. However, due to their pairwise matching
approach, the matching methods usually yield fragmented

6404

