This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LongDiff: Training-Free Long Video Generation in One Go
Zhuoling Li1 Hossein Rahmani1 Qiuhong Ke2 Jun Liu1 *
1
Lancaster University 2 Monash University
{z.li81, h.rahmani}@lancaster.ac.uk, Qiuhong.Ke@monash.edu, j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Video diffusion models have recently achieved remarkable
results in video generation. Despite their encouraging performance, most of these models are mainly designed and
trained for short video generation, leading to challenges
in maintaining temporal consistency and visual details in
long video generation. In this paper, we propose LongDiff,
a novel training-free method consisting of carefully designed components – Position Mapping (PM) and Informative Frame Selection (IFS) – to tackle two key challenges
that hinder short-to-long video generation generalization:
temporal position ambiguity and information dilution. Our
LongDiff unlocks the potential of off-the-shelf video diffusion models to achieve high-quality long video generation
in one go. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy
of our method.

For example, the works of [2, 35, 37] directly train models to generate entire long videos by increasing computational resources and extending model capacities. Additionally, some methods adopt auto-regressive [4, 19] or hierarchical paradigms [14, 48], which break down the complex
task of long video generation into manageable processes by
focusing on generating individual frames or short clips that
are logically assembled to form long videos [25]. However,
these training-based methods tend to be resource and time
intensive due to the complexity of their models. Moreover,
the scarcity of long video datasets makes it hard to meet
training needs, thus making it challenging for researchers to
obtain optimal parameters for long video generation [25].

1. Introduction

Considering the amazing performance of the off-theshelf short video generation models, another approach is
to directly adapt these models for long video generation
without any parameter updates. Such a training-free approach requires neither annotated long video data nor computational resources for re-training, and thus has gained
much attention, with several attempts made [27, 30, 41].
To extend videos smoothly, some of them [30, 41] split
the entire long video to be generated, into several overlapping short clips via a sliding window, and then process the
clips asynchronously. While these methods can maintain
consistency within individual video clips, the sliding window scheme limits long-range interactions between longerdistance frames, potentially leading to a lack of global temporal consistency. Another method [27] generates the long
video in one go (i.e., without using sliding-windows), and
improves video quality by mixing spatial and temporal information in the frequency domain. These training-free
methods that mainly rely on empirical designs, have made
some progress, yet the improvements achieved still remain
suboptimal. In this work, we also seek to unlock the inherent potential of the off-the-shelf short video models, to
generate high-quality long videos in one go in a trainingfree manner.

With the popularity of generative AI, text-to-video generation, which aims to create video content aligned with provided textual prompts, has become a very important and hot
research topic [12]. In recent years, extensive research has
been conducted in this area, where video diffusion models
[3, 15, 18, 21, 24, 44] have made remarkable progress. Benefiting from training on a large collection of annotated video
data, these models can generate high-quality videos that are
even nearly indistinguishable from reality. However, despite the impressive generation quality, most existing approaches [5, 18, 20, 21, 44] are mainly designed and trained
for short video generation, typically limited to fewer than
24 frames. Yet, in many real-world applications, like filmmaking [38], game development [8] and animation creation
[43], long videos are commonly required. Thus, long video
generation, with its valuable applications, has become an
urgent problem to address, attracting significant attention.
To enable long video generation, a straightforward approach is to re-train video models on long-video datasets.
* Corresponding author

To generate videos with temporal coherence, it is crucial to capture the temporal correlations over video frames.
To this end, temporal convolution and temporal transformer
are incorporated in previous works [5, 42, 44] to capture

17789

