This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

K-LoRA: Unlocking Training-Free Fusion of Any Subject and Style LoRAs
Ziheng Ouyang Zhen Li† Qibin Hou
VCIP, School of Computer Science, Nankai University
{zihengouyang666, zhenli1031}@gmail.com

Project page: https://k-lora.github.io/K-LoRA.io/

C

S

C

S

C

S

C

S

(b)

(a)

Figure 1. Visual illustrations. (a) demonstrates the superior generative performance of our proposed K-LoRA using FLUX [3], where
the object reference is presented on the left, the style reference on the right, and the generated image is shown in the center. In contrast,
(b) compares our method with existing state-of-the-art methods, B-LoRA [7] and ZipLoRA [27], which tend to lose style or content
information due to alterations in the original weight matrix or underutilization of the network structure. Our approach enhances the
information captured by each LoRA matrix, thereby achieving superior fusion effects without requiring additional training.

Abstract
Recent studies have explored the combination of different
LoRAs to jointly generate learned style and content. However, existing methods either fail to effectively preserve both
the original subject and style simultaneously or require additional training. In this paper, we argue that the intrinsic
properties of LoRA can effectively guide diffusion models in
merging learned subject and style. Based on this insight, we
propose K-LoRA, a simple yet effective training-free LoRA
fusion approach. In each attention layer, K-LoRA compares
the Top-K elements in each LoRA to be fused, determining which LoRA to select for optimal fusion. This selection
mechanism ensures that the most representative features of
both subject and style are retained during the fusion process, effectively balancing their contributions. Experiments

demonstrate that K-LoRA can effectively integrates the subject and style information learned by the original LoRAs,
outperforming state-of-the-art training-based approaches
in both qualitative and quantitative results.

1. Introduction

13041

Personalization and stylization are two well-established
tasks in computer vision and have been active research
fields for many years [4, 5, 8, 13, 18, 25, 29, 34, 37, 42].
The primary challenge in these tasks is preserving distinct
content or modifying the style of an image, typically guided
by textual or visual inputs. In this context, “content” refers
† Corresponding author.

