This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PERSE: Personalized 3D Generative Avatars from A Single Portrait
Hyunsoo Cha
Inhee Lee
Hanbyul Joo
Seoul National University
{243stephen, ininin0516, hbjoo}@snu.ac.kr
https://hyunsoocha.github.io/perse/

Reference Portrait Image

Render
PERSE
Avatar

Generated Monocular Video
with Modified Attributes

Facial Reenactment

Interpolated Sample Generation

Figure 1. PERSE. Given a reference portrait image as input, our method constructs an animatable personalized 3D generative avatar with
disentangled and editable control over various facial attributes such as beard, hair, and hat.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We present PERSE, a method for building a personalized
3D generative avatar from a reference portrait. Our avatar
enables facial attribute editing in a continuous and disentangled latent space to control each facial attribute, while
preserving the individual’s identity. To achieve this, our
method begins by synthesizing large-scale synthetic 2D video
datasets, where each video contains consistent changes in
facial expression and viewpoint, along with variations in a
specific facial attribute from the original input. We propose
a novel pipeline to produce high-quality, photorealistic 2D
videos with facial attribute editing. Leveraging this synthetic
attribute dataset, we present a personalized avatar creation
method based on 3D Gaussian Splatting, learning a continuous and disentangled latent space for intuitive facial
attribute manipulation. To enforce smooth transitions in this
latent space, we introduce a latent space regularization technique by using interpolated 2D faces as supervision. Compared to previous approaches, we demonstrate that PERSE
generates high-quality avatars with interpolated attributes
while preserving the identity of the reference individual.

A personalized 3D face avatar can represent each individual
in VR/AR environments, replicating the user’s appearance
and facial expressions. However, the exact replication of
the appearance does not fully reflect real-world humans. In
reality, people often change the attributes of their appearance,
like hairstyles, or start growing a beard or mustache. Users
may also wish to adjust their facial features in the virtual
world, like the shape of their nose, eyebrows, or mouth,
enhancing their desired look while preserving their core
identity. While most prior avatar creation methods focus on
building an exact digital twin of the person from images or
video data [6, 13, 45, 47, 56, 67, 68, 70], the personalized
avatar model with the generative ability to control and edit
facial attributes remains underexplored.

15953

In this work, we present PERSE, a method to build an
animatable personalized 3D generative avatar from a single
reference portrait image. Our method goes beyond merely
creating an exact twin from video inputs, introducing a novel
approach that emphasizes flexibility and control over facial
attributes, such as changing hairstyles or beards shown in
Fig. 1. To build PERSE from a single reference portrait image, we generate a large-scale 2D monocular synthetic video

