This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scalable Autoregressive Monocular Depth Estimation
Jinhong Wang1
1

ZJU

2

Jian Liu2 Dongqi Tang2 Weiqiang Wang2
Danny Chen3 Jintai Chen4† Jian Wu1†

Ant Group

3

4

University of Notre Dame
† Corresponding Authors

Abstract

HKUST(Guangzhou)

…

This paper proposes a new autoregressive model as an
effective and scalable monocular depth estimator. Our
idea is simple: We tackle the monocular depth estimation
(MDE) task with an autoregressive prediction paradigm,
based on two core designs. First, our depth autoregressive
model (DAR) treats the depth map of different resolutions
as a set of tokens, and conducts the low-to-high resolution autoregressive objective with a patch-wise causal
mask. Second, our DAR recursively discretizes the entire
depth range into more compact intervals, and attains the
coarse-to-fine granularity autoregressive objective
in an ordinal-regression manner. By coupling these two autoregressive objectives, our DAR establishes new state-ofthe-art (SOTA) on KITTI and NYU Depth v2 by clear
margins. Further, our scalable approach allows us to scale
the model up to 2.0B and achieve the best RMSE of 1.799 on
the KITTI dataset (5% improvement) compared to 1.896
by the current SOTA (Depth Anything). DAR further showcases zero-shot generalization ability on unseen datasets.
These results suggest that DAR yields superior performance
with an autoregressive prediction paradigm, providing a
promising approach to equip modern autoregressive large
models (e.g., GPT-4o) with depth estimation capabilities.
Project page: https://depth-ar.github.io/.

<s>

r1

r2

Wentong Li1

…
rn-1

rn

Resolution Autoregressive Objective
Depth AutoRegressive Model (DAR)

1 bin

2 bins

4 bins

Granularity Autoregressive Objective

8 bins
Bin Edge
Depth Candidate

Figure 1. We exploit two “order” properties of the MDE task that
can be transformed into two autoregressive objectives. (a) Resolution autoregressive objective: The generation of depth maps
can follow a resolution order from low to high. For each step of
the resolution autoregressive process, the Transformer predicts the
next higher-resolution token map conditioned on all the previous
ones. (b) Granularity autoregressive objective: The range of
depth values is ordered, from 0 to specific max values. For each
step of the granularity autoregressive process, we increase exponentially the number of bins (e.g., doubling the bin number), and
utilize the previous predictions to predict a more refined depth with
a smaller and more refined granularity. Our proposed DAR aims
to perform these two autoregressive processes simultaneously.

Recently, autoregressive (AR) architectures have demonstrated strong generalization capabilities and significant
scalability across a multitude of tasks: (i) Generalization:
AR models achieve remarkable zero- and few-shot performance on previously unseen datasets, and exhibit substantial flexibility in adapting to diverse downstream tasks [7,
42]. (ii) Scalability: As suggested by scaling laws [17, 24],
AR models allow flexible model size scaling for optimal
performance across various practical applications. Recent
advances in large language models (LLMs) [7, 41, 42] and
multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) (e.g., GPT-4
and LLaVA [1, 35]), built upon AR architectures, achieved
outstanding results in a wide range of tasks, including text-

1. Introduction
The Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) task aims to predict per pixel depth from a single RGB image, which
plays a crucial role in scene understanding and reconstruction [9, 21]. This task has broad applications, including
autonomous driving [58], robotics [23], augmented reality [37], medical endoscopic surgery [36], etc. Most deep
learning (DL) based methods typically followed top-downbottom-up encoder-decoder architectures [2, 3, 11, 12, 22,
25, 27, 31, 34, 38, 47, 62, 64, 66], which extract and fuse
low-level and high-level features for depth estimation.

6262

