This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FASTer: Focal Token Acquiring-and-Scaling Transformer
for Long-term 3D Object Detection
Chenxu Dang

Zaipeng Duan PeiAn Xinmin Zhang Xuzhong Hu
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Memory bank

C concatenate

Abstract

current

Recent top-performing temporal 3D detectors based on
Lidars have increasingly adopted region-based paradigms.
They first generate coarse proposals, followed by encoding
and fusing regional features. However, indiscriminate sampling and fusion often overlook the varying contributions
of individual points and lead to exponentially increased
complexity as the number of input frames grows. Moreover, arbitrary result-level concatenation limits the global
information extraction. In this paper, we propose a Focal
Token Acquring-and-Scaling Transformer (FASTer), which
dynamically selects focal tokens and condenses token sequences in an adaptive and lightweight manner. Emphasizing the contribution of individual tokens, we propose a
simple but effective Adaptive Scaling mechanism to capture geometric contexts while sifting out focal points. Adaptively storing and processing only focal points in historical
frames dramatically reduces the overall complexity. Furthermore, a novel Grouped Hierarchical Fusion strategy is
proposed, progressively performing sequence scaling and
Intra-Group Fusion operations to facilitate the exchange
of global spatial and temporal information. Experiments
on the Waymo Open Dataset demonstrate that our FASTer
significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art detectors in
both performance and efficiency while also exhibiting improved flexibility and robustness. The code is available at
https://github.com/MSunDYY/FASTer.git.

Jie Ma*

previous

current

current

Focal points
Acquisition

Spatial Fusion

Spatial-Temporal Fusion

Temporal Fusion
Decoder

Decoder

Decoder

C

Decoder

(a) Prior work

(b) Our work

Figure 1. Comparison of different temporal-based schemas. (a)
Previous methods store and collect points from the complete historical point cloud, and concatenate them on the channels after
sequential spatial and temporal fusions. (b) Our method dynamically obtains, stores and encodes notable points, condenses the
longer sequences into one long sequence through the integrated
Spatial-Temporal Fusion module.

1. Introduction

To full leverage longer lidar sequences, many twostage approaches initially generate coarse proposals (e.g.,
boxes[5, 29, 34, 39] or queries[1, 45]). Some of them [5, 29]
fuse information at the feature map level, which, however,
loses the fine-grained details in points. Recently, a series of
region-based methods[2, 8, 10, 27] have gained popularity,
which abandon feature maps rather to sample points directly
from the region of interest, followed by point-box embedding and regional fusion, achieving superior performance.

Lidar-based 3D object detection has received extensive
attention from academia and industry in the past few years,
owing to its ability to accurately percept the environment,
which is critical in autonomous driving applications.
However, the inherent sparsity of point clouds limits
the performance of conventional detectors. Therefore, researchers have sought to exploit temporal information from
point cloud sequences. A common approach is to concatenate multiple frames of points[40] or features[11, 18], but
this works within short clips.

Earlier works[2, 8] follow an encode-fuse-concatenate
routine, as shown in Fig. 1(a). They alternate between spatial and temporal fusion, concatenating the decoding outputs of all frames along the channel axis. However, as the
number of frames grows, their storage and computational
demands increase exponentially, limiting the model’s capacity of handling longer sequences. Moreover, the simple
result-level concatenation also struggles to capture and exchange global information. Recently, PTT[10] introduced
a pipeline that models current points and historical box tra-

17029

