This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GUI-Xplore: Empowering Generalizable GUI Agents with One Exploration
Yuchen Sun1 Shanhui Zhao2 Tao Yu2 Hao Wen2
Samith Va1 Mengwei Xu5 Yuanchun Li24∗ Chongyang Zhang13 *
1
School of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)
5
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Abstract
GUI agents hold significant potential to enhance the experience and efficiency of human-device interaction. However, current methods face challenges in generalizing across
applications (apps) and tasks, primarily due to two fundamental limitations in existing datasets. First, these datasets
overlook developer-induced structural variations among
apps, limiting the transferability of knowledge across diverse software environments. Second, many of them focus
solely on navigation tasks, which restricts their capacity to
represent comprehensive software architectures and complex user interactions. To address these challenges, we introduce GUI-Xplore, a dataset meticulously designed to enhance cross-application and cross-task generalization via
an exploration-and-reasoning framework. GUI-Xplore integrates pre-recorded exploration videos providing contextual insights, alongside five hierarchically structured downstream tasks designed to comprehensively evaluate GUI
agent capabilities. To fully exploit GUI-Xplore’s unique
features, we propose Xplore-Agent, a GUI agent framework
that combines Action-aware GUI Modeling with GraphGuided Environment Reasoning. Further experiments indicate that Xplore-Agent achieves a 10% improvement over
existing methods in unfamiliar environments, yet there remains significant potential for further enhancement towards
truly generalizable GUI agents. 1

tion [24]. GUI agents, envisioned as virtual personal assistants, not only simplify software operations but also offer personalized feedback, thereby holding the potential to
transform the interaction paradigm. However, achieving
a highly generalizable GUI agent that operates seamlessly
across varied apps and tasks remains challenging, due to the
limitations of existing training frameworks and datasets.
In recent years, datasets for GUI agents have expanded
in scope, aiming to benchmark models’ effectiveness in executing user instructions. Some datasets [4–6, 22] leverage extensive real-world interaction data to enhance task
planning and execution. Others simulate interactive environments [7, 25, 33, 36] with structured action spaces
enhance operation abilities in specific environments. Despite these advancements, critical limitations remain in supporting generalizable GUI agents. (1) Limited Cross-App
ability: Many datasets lack sufficient app-specific knowledge, which is essential for agents to function effectively in
unfamiliar apps. As shown in Fig 1(a), Developer-driven
structural variations (like design choices or architectural
differences) across apps lead to distinct interaction logic
that hinder effective knowledge transfer, thereby limiting
agent adaptability on unfamiliar environments. (2) Limited
Cross-task ability: Most of current datasets focus primarily on basic automation tasks, neglecting the broader spectrum of user intentions and complex interactions that are
essential for generating comprehensive GUI agent.
Inspired by users’ exploration-and-reasoning strategies
when using unfamiliar software, we propose GUI-Xplore
dataset to enhance model generalization across apps and
tasks through the following key innovations:
1. Cross-App Generalization via Exploration Videos:
To address the generalization limitations of existing
datasets, GUI-Xplore incorporates pre-recorded exploration
videos for each app. These videos capture critical information, including GUI element components, navigation sequences, and user interaction logic, which serve as induc-

1. Introduction
With the growing integration of personal computers and
smartphones, Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) have become the predominant medium for human-device interac* Corresponding authors.
1 Dataset and Code are

available at https : / / github . com /
921112343/GUI-Xplore.

19477

