This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WiLoR: End-to-end 3D Hand Localization and Reconstruction in-the-wild
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias1 , Jinglei Zhang2 ,
Jiankang Deng1 , Stefanos Zafeiriou1
1
Imperial College London, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Figure 1. We propose WiLoR, a full-stack in-the-Wild Localization and 3D hand Reconstruction method. WiLoR first localizes and
defines the handedness of the detected hands which are then lifted to 3D using a transformer-based hand pose estimation module. To aid
high-fidelity reconstructions and facilitate image-alignment, we introduce a refinement module that extracts localized features to correct
misaligned poses. WiLoR achieves state-of-the-art performance under different benchmark datasets while boosting the temporal coherence
of image-based 3D hand pose estimation methods.

Abstract
In recent years, 3D hand pose estimation methods have garnered significant attention due to their extensive applications in human-computer interaction, virtual reality, and
robotics. In contrast, there has been a notable gap in
hand detection pipelines, posing significant challenges in
constructing effective real-world multi-hand reconstruction
systems. In this work, we present a data-driven pipeline
for efficient multi-hand reconstruction in the wild. The proposed pipeline is composed of two components: a real-time
fully convolutional hand localization and a high-fidelity
transformer-based 3D hand reconstruction model. To tackle
the limitations of previous methods and build a robust and
stable detection network, we introduce a large-scale dataset
with over than 2M in-the-wild hand images with diverse
lighting, illumination, and occlusion conditions. Our approach outperforms previous methods in both efficiency and
accuracy on popular 2D and 3D benchmarks. Finally, we

12242

showcase the effectiveness of our pipeline to achieve smooth
3D hand tracking from monocular videos, without utilizing
any temporal components. Code, models, and dataset are
available on our project page.

1. Introduction
Hand detection and reconstruction has been a long-studied
problem due to its numerous applications, ranging from virtual reality [22] to sign language [2, 30, 102] and human
behaviour recognition [65]. Given the large variations in
hand appearance and articulation [64] along with heavy occlusions and motion blur [24, 26] that are usually present
in hand interactions, the task of hand pose estimation is
considerably challenging. Over the years, several methods have been proposed to tackle 3D hand pose estimation [11, 42, 49, 61]. However, despite producing credible
results, these methods primarily focus on images contain-

