This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perturb-and-Revise: Flexible 3D Editing with Generative Trajectories
Susung Hong1

Johanna Karras1
1

Ricardo Martin-Brualla2

University of Washington

“… holding a champagne flute”

2

Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1,2

Google Research

“… a black leather jacket …”

“… flats with roses”

Figure 1. Perturb-and-Revise takes a source NeRF and an edit prompt as input and produces the edited result through: (1) versatile initialization via parameter perturbation, (2) multi-view consistent score distillation, and (3) refinement with the identity-preserving gradient.

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-based diffusion models
have accelerated progress in 3D reconstruction and textbased 3D editing. Although existing 3D editing methods
excel at modifying color, texture, and style, they struggle
with extensive geometric or appearance changes, thus limiting their applications. To this end, we propose Perturband-Revise, which makes possible a variety of NeRF editing. First, we perturb the NeRF parameters with random
initializations to create a versatile initialization. The level
of perturbation is determined automatically through analysis of the local loss landscape. Then, we revise the edited
NeRF via generative trajectories. Combined with the generative process, we impose identity-preserving gradients
to refine the edited NeRF. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Perturb-and-Revise facilitates flexible, effective,
and consistent editing of color, appearance, and geometry in 3D. For 360° results, please visit our project page:
https://susunghong.github.io/Perturb-and-Revise.

their initial applications, NeRFs have enabled flexible generation of 3D content from models trained solely on imagetext pairs [18, 40] through score distillation [25, 40, 58].
However, editing 3D content—an essential aspect of
refinement and customization—remains a time-consuming
and labor-intensive process across various industries, including animation, manufacturing, design, and gaming.
This challenge is particularly pronounced with NeRFs,
where color and density attributes are intricately encoded
within their parameters. Consequently, there is an ongoing
need for more intuitive and universally accessible tools for
editing NeRFs, leveraging user-friendly interfaces such as
text prompts for broader applicability and faster production.

1. Introduction

Fortunately, recent innovations in text-conditioned diffusion models have enabled significant advances in 3D editing using natural language prompts. For instance, leveraging diffusion models [2, 43], recent works such as InstructNeRF2NeRF [8] and Posterior Distillation [25] propose
methods that use text prompts to modify 3D scenes. While
these methods excel in altering the color or style of an object, they struggle with edits involving significant geometric
or appearance changes, limiting their applications.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a 3D object editing framework called Perturb-and-Revise (PnR),
which leverages existing 3D generation methods for editing
in a flexible and natural way (Figs. 1 and 2). Drawing on the

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [34] have revolutionized
the creation of high-quality 3D scenes, marking a significant advancement in 3D reconstruction technology. Beyond

16293

