This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Early-Bird Diffusion: Investigating and Leveraging Timestep-Aware Early-Bird
Tickets in Diffusion Models for Efficient Training
Lexington Whalen*, Zhenbang Du∗ , Haoran You∗ , Chaojian Li, Sixu Li,
Yingyan (Celine) Lin
Georgia Institute of Technology
{lwhalen7,zdu89,hyou37,cli851,sli941,celine.lin}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Training diffusion models (DMs) requires substantial
computational resources due to multiple forward and backward passes across numerous timesteps, motivating research into efficient training techniques. In this paper, we
propose EB-Diff-Train, a new efficient DM training approach that is orthogonal to other methods of accelerating DM training, by investigating and leveraging EarlyBird (EB) tickets—sparse subnetworks that manifest early
in the training process and maintain high generation quality. We first investigate the existence of traditional EB tickets in DMs, enabling competitive generation quality without fully training a dense model. Then, we delve into the
concept of diffusion-dedicated EB tickets, drawing on insights from varying importance of different timestep regions. These tickets adapt their sparsity levels according
to the importance of corresponding timestep regions, allowing for aggressive sparsity during non-critical regions while
conserving computational resources for crucial timestep regions. Building on this, we develop an efficient DM training technique that derives timestep-aware EB tickets, trains
them in parallel, and combines them during inference for
image generation. Extensive experiments validate the existence of both traditional and timestep-aware EB tickets,
as well as the effectiveness of our proposed EB-Diff-Train
method. This approach can significantly reduce training
time both spatially and temporally—achieving 2.9×∼5.8×
speedups over training unpruned dense models, and up to
10.3× faster training compared to standard train-prunefinetune pipelines—without compromising generative quality. Our code is available at https://github.com/GATECHEIC/Early-Bird-Diffusion.

Figure 1. FID (lower values indicate higher generation quality) vs.
relative training time (lower values indicate greater runtime efficiency) under different pruning rates (“p”) for the CIFAR-10 [20]
dataset and the DDPM [15] model, comparing our methods against
the standard train-prune-finetune method paired with random [8],
magnitude [12], Taylor [25], and Diff-Pruning [7] pruning methods. “Scratch” indicates a model pruned then retrained from random initialization, “Unpruned” is the model without any pruning,
“EB” (as detailed in Sec. 4.1) uses a single EB ticket across all
timesteps, and “TA-EB” (as detailed in Sec. 4.2) employs three
timestep-aware EB tickets for specific regions. Smaller circles indicate higher pruning rates; relative training time represents the
ratio to the unpruned model’s training time. Generation quality is
measured by the FID [14] score.

ples and achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) generation quality [5]. Training these models, however, is prohibitively expensive; popular models like RAPHAEL [36] and DALL·E
2 [26] can require tens of thousands of A100 GPU days,
leading to significant financial and time costs. This challenge has spurred the development of various efficient diffusion training techniques such as assigning different weights

1. Introduction
Diffusion Models (DMs) [15, 29, 33] have become powerful generative tools, transforming noise into structured sam* Equal contribution.

7675

