This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STEREO: A Two-Stage Framework for Adversarially Robust Concept Erasing
from Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Koushik Srivatsan1,2 Fahad Shamshad2
Muzammal Naseer3 Vishal M. Patel1 Karthik Nandakumar2,4
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 MBZUAI 3 Khalifa University 4 Michigan State University
Code: https://github.com/koushiksrivats/robust-concept-erasing

RECE

RACE

AdvUnlearn

(ECCV’24)

(ECCV’24)

(NeurIPS’24)

Erased

Attack

Erased

Attack

Erased

Attack

STEREO
(Ours)

Erased

Attack

Object

Nudity

Art

SD v1.4

Figure 1. Vulnerability of “robust” concept erasure methods to concept inversion attacks. Even state-of-the-art concept erasure
methods such as RECE [13], RACE [19], and AdvUnlearn [41] that claim to be “adversarially robust” are still vulnerable to concept
inversion attacks [27] that regenerate the erased concept by operating in the embedding space. Examples of this vulnerability across
diverse categories such as Artistic-Style, Nudity, and Object are shown in this figure. Our STEREO method achieves superior robustness
through its two-stage framework: thorough vulnerability identification via adversarial training followed by anchor-concept guided erasure.

Abstract
The rapid proliferation of large-scale text-to-image diffusion (T2ID) models has raised serious concerns about their
potential misuse in generating harmful content. Although
numerous methods have been proposed for erasing undesired concepts from T2ID models, they often provide a false
sense of security; concept-erased models (CEMs) can still
be manipulated via adversarial attacks to regenerate the
erased concept. While a few robust concept erasure methods based on adversarial training have emerged recently,
they compromise on utility (generation quality for benign
concepts) to achieve robustness and/or remain vulnerable to
advanced embedding space attacks. These limitations stem
from the failure of robust CEMs to thoroughly search for
“blind spots” in the embedding space. To bridge this gap,
we propose STEREO, a novel two-stage framework that em-

ploys adversarial training as a first step rather than the only
step for robust concept erasure. In the first stage, STEREO
employs adversarial training as a vulnerability identification mechanism to search thoroughly enough. In the
second robustly erase once stage, STEREO introduces an
anchor-concept-based compositional objective to robustly
erase the target concept in a single fine-tuning stage, while
minimizing the degradation of model utility. We benchmark STEREO against seven state-of-the-art concept erasure methods, demonstrating its superior robustness to both
white-box and black-box attacks, while largely preserving
utility.

23765

1. Introduction
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion (T2ID) models [5, 8,
22, 25] have demonstrated a remarkable ability to synthesize photorealistic images from user-specified text prompts,

