This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Modal 3D Representation with Multi-View Images and Point Clouds
Ziyang Zhou1 , Pinghui Wang1† , Zi Liang2 , Haitao Bai1 , Ruofei Zhang3 ,
1
MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 3 Apple

Abstract

understanding. This oversight calls for a paradigm shift in
3D representation learning by fusing multi-modal 3D data.

The advancement of 3D understanding and representation
is a crucial step for the next phase of autonomous driving,
robotics, augmented and virtual reality, 3D gaming and 3D
e-commerce products. However, existing 3D semantic representation research has primarily focused on point clouds to
perceive 3D objects and scenes, overlooking the rich visual
details offered by multi-view images, thereby limiting the potential of 3D semantic representation. This paper introduces
OpenView, a novel representation method that integrates
both point clouds and multi-view images to form a unified
3D representation. OpenView comprises a unique fusion
framework, sequence-independent modeling, a cross-modal
fusion encoder, and a progressive hard learning strategy.
Our experiments demonstrate that OpenView outperforms
the state-of-the-art by 11.5% and 5.5% on the R@1 metric
for cross-modal retrieval and the Top-1 metric for zero-shot
classification tasks, respectively. Furthermore, we showcase
some applications of OpenView: 3D retrieval, 3D captioning
and hierarchical data clustering, highlighting its generality
in the field of 3D representation learning.

A crucial element in 3D understanding and representation
is the data format used to represent raw 3D data. Common
formats include meshes, volumes, point clouds, and multiview images. Among these, meshes [5] and volumes [34]
require particularly high resolution and are less suitable as
inputs to neural networks. Point clouds, on the other hand,
already have many foundation models [40, 41, 70] and 3D
representations methods [30, 64, 65, 72]. Recently, based
on single-view or multi-view images, some remarkable 3D
generation [31, 32, 49, 56] and 3D reconstruction [13, 67, 69,
73] works have been proposed, suggesting the unexplored
potential of multi-view images for 3D understanding.
Existing 3D representation methods can be categorized
into two types: (a) those focusing solely on 3D data
[17, 44, 55, 70], no multi-modal training, can be utilized
for classification and segmentation tasks, but fail to support cross-modal downstream tasks; (b) those unifying
the representation of images, text, and 3D point clouds
[30, 64, 65, 72], exhibiting commendable performance on
cross-modal tasks, such as cross-modal retrieval and 3D
captioning. However, these existing methods represent 3D
data only through point clouds, overlooking the rich texture
and color details provided by multi-view images. This overlook results from previous research [27, 59] being driven
by autonomous driving, therefore focusing on the physical
information from point clouds, while ignoring the advantage
of multi-view images for semantic understanding. We seek
to build a more comprehensive framework that leverages
precise geometry from point clouds and rich visual details
from multi-view images.

1. Introduction
The core aim of 3D understanding is to extract valuable insights from 3D data, which is a crucial technology for refining autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented/virtual reality. Additionally, 3D games comprise a large number of 3D
models, and their development can benefit from automated
3D generation and retrieval. Furthermore, e-commerce product displays are transitioning from 2D images to 3D models,
requiring 3D semantic understanding and representation.
These real-world applications show the importance of research in 3D understanding. However, previous studies have
taken point clouds as the only medium for understanding
3D objects or scenes, overlooking the rich visual details contained in multi-view images, which limits the depth of 3D

This paper proposes a new representation learning method
called OpenView that combines multi-view images and point
clouds to represent 3D visuals. OpenView emphasizes four
key factors: (1) a novel fusion framework, (2) sequenceindependent modeling, (3) a cross-modal fusion encoder,
and (4) a progressive hard learning strategy. The combination of point clouds and multi-view images necessitates a
new fusion framework and encoder. Since multi-view images are often unordered, sequence-independent modeling is

† Corresponding author. Email: phwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {dakandao,
haitao.bai}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, rfzhang@gmail.com.

3728

