This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoomTour3D: Geometry-Aware Video-Instruction Tuning
for Embodied Navigation
Mingfei Han→1,3 , Liang Ma→1 , Kamila Zhumakhanova→1 , Ekaterina Radionova1 , Jingyi Zhang2
Xiaojun Chang1,4 , Xiaodan Liang1,2 , Ivan Laptev1
1
Department of Computer Vision, MBZUAI 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University
3
ReLER Lab, AAII, UTS 4 University of Science and Technology of China
https://roomtour3d.github.io
To address limited diversity, recent methods propose the
use of richer and more varied training data. AirBERT [15]
combines discrete Airbnb images for panoramic views,
which lack consistency and naturalistic context of an indoor scene. ScaleVLN [55] utilizes laboriously curated 3D
scenes [45, 58], but suffers from reconstruction quality and
scalability. More recently, YTB-VLN [34] attempts to use
video frames to compose panoramic views and organize instructions with predefined templates, yet overlooks object
variety and geometry structure. NaVid [60] constructs sequential single-view trajectories from MatterPort3D [4] and
R2R [2] annotations, paired with general video data to train
a sim-to-real agent. None of these approaches simultaneously achieves scalability in scene diversity, openness in
object variety, or comprehensive geo-perception in spatial
representations, each of which is critical to training effective and open-world navigation agents.

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) suffers from
the limited diversity and scale of training data, primarily constrained by the manual curation of existing simulators. To address this, we introduce RoomTour3D, a
video-instruction dataset derived from web-based room
tour videos that capture real-world indoor spaces and human walking demonstrations. Unlike existing VLN datasets,
RoomTour3D leverages the scale and diversity of online
videos to generate open-ended human walking trajectories
and open-world navigable instructions. To compensate for
the lack of navigation data in online videos, we perform 3D
reconstruction and obtain 3D trajectories of walking paths
augmented with additional information on the room types,
object locations and 3D shape of surrounding scenes. Our
dataset includes →100K open-ended description-enriched
trajectories with →200K instructions, and 17K actionenriched trajectories from 1847 room tour environments.
We demonstrate experimentally that RoomTour3D enables
significant improvements across multiple VLN tasks including CVDN, SOON, R2R, and REVERIE. Moreover, RoomTour3D facilitates the development of trainable zero-shot
VLN agents, showcasing the potential and challenges of advancing towards open-world navigation.

1. Introduction

To address the challenge, we introduce RoomTour3D,
a novel dataset that provides a geometry-aware, spatially
enriched training environment for VLN agents. Built upon
easily accessible room tour videos from the Internet, RoomTour3D captures continuous movement through real estates with a hand-held camera from a first-person perspective. Each frame presents a realistic, agent-centric view and
showcases a rich array of indoor items. The continuous
flow of these frames captures multiple views of the environment, presenting diverse room layouts and inherently embedding the geometric properties of the spaces. To unleash
the power of these videos, we propose an automatic and
extendable pipeline to obtain open-ended geometry-aware
human walking trajectories, spatially contextualized textual
instructions using open vocabularies.

Over the past years, Vision-and-Language Navigation [2,
21, 24, 32, 42, 54] has largely relied on human-designed
simulators and annotated trajectories. R2R [2] initiated
a benchmark for language-guided navigation in simulated
indoor settings, while CVDN [51], REVERIE [42], and
SOON [66] expanded VLN to dialogue-based and objectfocused tasks. However, these curated simulations lack
scene diversity and fail to capture real-world complexity.
→ Co-first authors.

To better model the navigation scenario, we take advantage of the continuous walk-through trajectories and
densely sample frames from room tour videos. Then, we
use COLMAP [46, 47] to reconstruct 3D scenes of realestates to obtain the geometric information. With known

27586

