This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Closest Neighbors are Harmful for Lightweight Masked Auto-encoders
1

Jian Meng, 1 Ahmed Hasssan, 2 Li Yang, 3 Deliang Fan, 4 Jinwoo Shin, and 1 Jae-sun Seo
1
Cornell University,2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 3 Arizona State University, 4 KAIST
1

{jm2787, ah2288, js3528}@cornell.edu, 2 lyang50@uncc.edu, 3 dfan12@asu.edu, 4 jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning the visual representation via masked autoencoder (MAE) training has been proven to be a powerful technique. Transferring the pre-trained vision transformer (ViT) to downstream tasks leads to superior performance compared to conventional task-by-task supervised
learning. Recent research works on MAE focus on largesized vision transformers (>50 million parameters) with
outstanding performance. However, improving the generality of the under-parametrized lightweight model has
been widely ignored. In practice, downstream applications
are commonly intended for resource-constrained platforms,
where large-scale ViT cannot easily meet the resource budget. Current lightweight MAE training heavily relies on
knowledge distillation with a pre-trained teacher, whereas
the root cause behind the poor performance remains underexplored. Motivated by that, this paper first introduces the
concept of “closest neighbor patch” to characterize the
local semantics among the input tokens. Our discovery
shows that the lightweight model failed to distinguish different local information, leading to aliased understanding
and poor accuracy. Motivated by this finding, we propose
NoR-MAE, a novel MAE training algorithm for lightweight
vision transformers. NoR-MAE elegantly repels the semantic aliasing between patches and their closest neighboring patch (semantic centroid) with negligible training cost
overhead. With the ViT-Tiny model, NoR-MAE achieves
up to 7.22%/3.64% accuracy improvements on ImageNet100/ImageNet-1K datasets, as well as up to 5.13% accuracy improvements in tested downstream tasks. https:
//github.com/SeoLabCornell/NoR-MAE

1. Introduction
Starting from the early exploration with contrastive learning [6, 18], learning powerful and generic vision or semantic representation has been the focal point of all prior selfsupervised learning (SSL) algorithms across various machine learning domains [2, 8, 28, 30] and vision-language
model [15, 26]. The superiority of SSL is demonstrated

Figure 1. Top: Closest Neighbor Patches (CNP) characterizes
the “Local Semantic Centroid” among the input tokens. Bottom:
Low-dimensional projection (via PCA) of the transformer-encoded
patches. Unlike the large-sized transformer model (e.g., ViT-Base),
lightweight models (e.g., ViT-Tiny) cannot separate the “semantic
difference” between different CNPs.

by the capability of extracting transferable knowledge from
unlabeled datasets [26, 33]. Recent efforts on masked autoencoder (MAE) [19] train the vision transformer [11] by
encouraging the model to understand the semantic knowledge of the masked patches throughout the reconstructionbased self-supervised learning. Particularly, the evolution
from contrastive learning [16, 18, 36] to MAE-based training [17, 19, 34, 37] shows consistent dominance by largescale models to ensure on-par or even better accuracy compared to supervised learning, along with superior performance in various downstream applications. In practice,
downstream small-scale tasks are commonly deployed on
edge devices with limited resources. Therefore, large-sized
vision transformers (ViTs) pre-trained by MAE [19] are suboptimal candidates for resource-constrained downstream
deployment and hardware platforms. Unfortunately, recent
state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods that train lightweight ViTs
with MAE from scratch lead to poor performance and insufficient transferability. For example, the MAE-trained
lightweight ViT-Tiny model only achieves 66.6% top-1 accuracy (with 200-epoch pre-training [3, 19, 37]) on the

1
25230

