This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2

V Dial

: Unification of Video and Visual Dialog via Multimodal Experts

Adnen Abdessaied

Anna Rohrbach

Marcus Rohrbach

Andreas Bulling

University of Stuttgart, Germany
TU Darmstadt, Germany
hessian.AI, Germany
https://www.collaborative-ai.org/publications/abdessaied25_cvpr/

Abstract
2

We present V Dial – a novel expert-based model specifically geared towards simultaneously handling image and
video input data for multimodal conversational tasks. Current multimodal models primarily focus on simpler tasks
(e.g., VQA, VideoQA, video-text retrieval) and often neglect
the more challenging conversational counterparts, such as
video and visual/image dialog. Moreover, works on both
conversational tasks evolved separately from each other despite their apparent similarities, limiting their applicability
potential. To this end, we propose to unify both tasks using a
single model that for the first time jointly learns the spatial
and temporal features of images and videos by routing them
through dedicated experts and aligns them using matching
and contrastive learning techniques. Furthermore, we systemically study the domain shift between the two tasks by
investigating whether and to what extent these seemingly related tasks can mutually benefit from their respective training data. Extensive evaluations on the widely used video
and visual dialog datasets of AVSD and VisDial show that
our model achieves new state-of-the-art results across four
benchmarks both in zero-shot and fine-tuning settings.

1. Introduction
Enabled by the availability of large-scale training data
[10, 14, 41] and advances in model design [12, 24, 37, 48,
52], the field of vision-and-language learning saw unprecedented success in recent years. However, current multimodal foundational models [7, 32, 37, 50, 54] still mainly
focus on single-round tasks (e.g., VQA [8], VideoQA [58],
video-text and text-video retrieval [59]). In contrast, the significantly more challenging conversational tasks, such as visual [1, 22] and video dialog [5], received considerably less
attention. Furthermore, methods for these different tasks
have advanced independently of each other despite the apparent structural similarities between them. They both operate on a visual input (i.e. an image or video), a short visual description (caption), and a dialog history composed of

2

Figure 1. V Dial
uses multimodal experts and outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on both video and visual dialog in zeroshot and fine-tuning evaluation settings.

previous question-answer pairs. On the one hand, visual dialog models [4, 15, 16, 44, 56] have been primarily trained
to rank a list of candidate answers using a Next Sentence
Prediction (NSP) head similar to BERT [23] and negative
sampling. Thus, they are benchmarked using retrieval met-

8637

