This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Quality Assessment: From Human to Machine Preference
Chunyi Li1,2,4∗ , Yuan Tian1,2∗ , Xiaoyue Ling1∗ , Zicheng Zhang1,2 , Haodong Duan2 , Haoning Wu3,4 ,
Ziheng Jia1 , Xiaohong Liu1 , Xiongkuo Min1 , Guo Lu1† , Weisi Lin4 , Guangtao Zhai1,2†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University1 , Shanghai AI Lab2 , Moonshot AI3 , Nanyang Technological University4

Significant Gap!

<Reference>

<Distorted>

<Reference>

<Distorted>

Human Visual System:
<subjective perception>

The image has a slightly higher saturation level.
There is no change in the overall structure. The color
of the tentacles has only been slightly changed.
HVS Rating: 4.21/5 ✅

The image is severely pixelated. The information of
the clouds’ edge is completely lost. The detailed
texture of the mountains is significantly changed.
HVS Rating: 1.40/5 ❎

Machine Visual System:
<objective execution>

The detected bounding box categories are different.
The model mistakenly answers the object as a
jellyfish instead of a spaceship, and judges the
environment as amphibious rather than underwater.
MVS Rating: 2.86/5 ❎

The mask of the segmented mountains has hardly
changed. The captions for both images are basically
the same. The correct subject choice is still ‘steep
peaks’, without misled by ‘grassland’.
MVS Rating: 3.51/5 ✅

Compare the similarity of images in terms of low-level
attributes such as luminance and chrominance.

Compare the consistency of downstream tasks such
as segmentation and question answering.

Figure 1. The significant gap between the well-explored Human Vision System (HVS) and the emerging Machine Vision System (MVS).
Their different perception mechanisms leading to images that are subjectively satisfactory to humans not being applicable to the machines
downstream tasks such as detection and question answering, vice versa.

Abstract

1. Introduction
The rapid ascend of smart cities [20] and the flourishment
of the Internet of Things (IoT) [86] over the past decade
have fundamentally transformed the framework of the application end. According to the Cisco [13] white paper, the
number of Machine-to-Machine (M2M) connections first
exceeded that of Machine-to-Human (M2H) in 2023, reaching 147 billion. Machines have gradually replaced humans
and become the primary consumers of image/video data. In
the field of image processing, the primary goal is to enhance
the quality of processed images, ensuring they conform to
human perception. Previously, the performance of a compression/reconstruction/generation algorithm [39–41] is often judged by its visual appeal to humans. This technology,
known as Image Quality Assessment (IQA), comprehensively models the Human Visual System (HVS) to predict
human subjective preferences. Consequently, with the evolution of application ends, IQA today has to transcend HVS
and serve Machine Vision Systems (MVS) more effectively.

Image Quality Assessment (IQA) based on human subjective preferences has undergone extensive research in the
past decades. However, with the development of communication protocols, the visual data consumption volume of
machines has gradually surpassed that of humans. For machines, the preference depends on downstream tasks such
as segmentation and detection, rather than visual appeal.
Considering the huge gap between human and machine visual systems, this paper proposes the topic: Image Quality
Assessment for Machine Vision for the first time. Specifically, we (1) defined the subjective preferences of machines,
including downstream tasks, test models, and evaluation
metrics; (2) established the Machine Preference Database
(MPD), which contains 2.25M fine-grained annotations and
30k reference/distorted image pair instances; (3) verified
the performance of mainstream IQA algorithms on MPD.
Experiments show that current IQA metrics are humancentric and cannot accurately characterize machine preferences. We sincerely hope that MPD can promote the evolution of IQA from human to machine preferences. Project
page is on: https://github.com/lcysyzxdxc/MPD.
∗ Equal contribution.

However, there are significant disparities in the perceptual mechanisms between HVS and MVS. This discrepancy
arises because HVS prioritizes the similarity between reference and distorted images, such as texture, structure, and
color, whereas machines focus on the consistency of results

† Corresponding authors.

7570

