This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty Weighted Gradients for Model Calibration
Jinxu Lin1 Linwei Tao1 Minjing Dong2 Chang Xu1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 City University of Hong Kong
{jinxu.lin, linwei.tao, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au, minjdong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Model calibration is essential for ensuring that the predictions of deep neural networks accurately reflect true probabilities in real-world classification tasks. However, deep
networks often produce over-confident or under-confident
predictions, leading to miscalibration. Various methods
have been proposed to address this issue by designing effective loss functions for calibration, such as focal loss. In
this paper, we analyze its effectiveness and provide a unified loss framework of focal loss and its variants, where
we mainly attribute their superiority in model calibration
to the loss weighting factor that estimates sample-wise uncertainty. Based on our analysis, existing loss functions fail
to achieve optimal calibration performance due to two main
issues: including misalignment during optimization and insufficient precision in uncertainty estimation. Specifically,
focal loss cannot align sample uncertainty with gradient
scaling and the single logit cannot indicate the uncertainty.
To address these issues, we reformulate the optimization
from the perspective of gradients, which focuses on uncertain samples. Meanwhile, we propose using the Brier Score
as the loss weight factor, which provides a more accurate
uncertainty estimation via all the logits. Extensive experiments on various models and datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.1

hancing their reliability in practical applications, such as
autonomous driving, medical imaging, and weather forecasting. To address mis-calibration issues, several methods [26, 28] have been proposed, many of which focus
on modifying the loss function during training. A common approach involves adding regularization terms with
the Cross-Entropy (CE) loss to improve calibration, as
seen in methods like Maximum Mean Calibration Error
(MMCE) [15] and Meta Calibration [1]. Additionally, Focal Loss (FL) [17], which adjusts per-sample loss weights
based on prediction difficulty, has been shown to improve
calibration performance. Mukhoti et al. [18] attribute the
effectiveness of FL to its implicit regularization on the entropy of predicted probabilities, which mitigates overconfidence. Similarly, Dual Focal Loss (DFL) [27] incorporates
the second-most-probable class in the weighting mechanism to address model under-confidence. Another research
interest regarding calibration is the evaluation of calibration performance. Metrics commonly employed include
Expected Calibration Error (ECE)[5] and Brier Score[2].

1. Introduction

The focal-loss-based methods can be unified under a
general loss framework expressed as u·CE, where u is a loss
weighting factor. In FL, the factor uFL can be treated as an
estimation for sample-wise difficulty . Interestingly, we observe that uFL , originally designed for binary classification,
is mathematically equivalent to the Brier Score for binary
cases, which can measure the uncertainty. Furthermore, the
weighting term uDFL in DFL aligns with the Brier Score in
three-class classification scenarios. This observation motivates the hypothesis that weighting the loss with sample
calibration metrics, such as the Brier Score, could better
identify uncertain samples and facilitate targeted training.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in various domains, including image classification.
However, recent studies [5, 30] reveal that DNNs often suffer from mis-calibration in classification task, exhibiting
over-confidence or under-confidence in their predictions.
For example, a model might output a confidence score of
0.8 for a particular prediction, which does not necessarily
correspond to an 80% probability of correctness.
Calibrating DNNs, which aligns the predicted confidence with the true probabilities, is therefore crucial to en1 Code is available at https://github.com/Jinxu-Lin/BSCE-GRA.

Furthermore, our investigation reveals a limitation of directly applying the weighting factor u to the loss term.
Specifically, the vanilla optimization of focal loss would
achieve a misalignment with the objective of scaling gradients for harder samples with larger magnitudes. Based
on our analysis, we mainly attribute this issue to a differentiable loss weighting factor u, which could disrupt the
positive correlation between the CE and its gradient magnitude during backpropagation, impeding the model’s ability

15497

