This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RipVIS: Rip Currents Video Instance Segmentation Benchmark for Beach
Monitoring and Safety
Andrei Dumitriu1,2 , Florin Tatui2 , Florin Miron2 , Aakash Ralhan1 ,
Radu Tudor Ionescu2 , Radu Timofte1
1
Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of Würzburg, Germany
2
University of Bucharest, Romania
andrei.dumitriu@uni-wuerzburg.de

Aerial - Bird’s Eye

Elevated Beachfront

Aerial - Tilted

Water-Level Beachfront

Figure 1. Examples from our dataset, illustrating the diversity in locations, rip current types, viewpoint elevations and viewing angles.
Rip currents are identiﬁable by distinct wave-breaking patterns, sediment transport, and instances of deﬂection rip currents. Rip current
annotations are shown in red. Additional examples are provided in the supplementary material. Best viewed in color.

mented by an additional 34 videos (48, 800 frames) without rip currents. We conduct comprehensive experiments
with Mask R-CNN, Cascade Mask R-CNN, SparseInst and
YOLO11, ﬁne-tuning these models for the task of rip current segmentation. Results are reported in terms of multiple
metrics, with a particular focus on the F2 score to prioritize
recall and reduce false negatives. To enhance segmentation performance, we introduce a novel post-processing step
based on Temporal Conﬁdence Aggregation (TCA). RipVIS
aims to set a new standard for rip current segmentation,
contributing towards safer beach environments. We offer a
benchmark website to share data, models, and results with
the research community, encouraging ongoing collaboration and future contributions, at https://ripvis.ai.

Abstract
Rip currents are strong, localized and narrow currents of
water that ﬂow outwards into the sea, causing numerous
beach-related injuries and fatalities worldwide. Accurate
identiﬁcation of rip currents remains challenging due to
their amorphous nature and the lack of annotated data,
which often requires expert knowledge. To address these
issues, we present RipVIS, a large-scale video instance segmentation benchmark explicitly designed for rip current
segmentation. RipVIS is an order of magnitude larger than
previous datasets, featuring 184 videos (212, 328 frames),
of which 150 videos (163, 528 frames) are with rip currents, collected from various sources, including drones, mobile phones, and ﬁxed beach cameras. Our dataset encompasses diverse visual contexts, such as wave-breaking patterns, sediment ﬂows, and water color variations, across
multiple global locations, including USA, Mexico, Costa
Rica, Portugal, Italy, Greece, Romania, Sri Lanka, Australia and New Zealand. Most videos are annotated at
5 FPS to ensure accuracy in dynamic scenarios, supple-

1. Introduction
Rip currents are powerful, fast-moving surface currents that
ﬂow seaward from the shore. Detecting and understanding
rip currents is critical, as accurate detection can prevent fatalities. Each year, numerous lives are lost globally due to

3427

