This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnyCam: Learning to Recover Camera Poses and Intrinsics from Casual Videos
Felix Wimbauer1,2,3

Weirong Chen1,2,3
Dominik Muhle1,2
Christian Rupprecht3
Daniel Cremers1,2
1
2
3
Technical University of Munich
MCML
University of Oxford
felix.wimbauer@tum.de

cremers@tum.de

Camera Poses

Casual Video + MDE + Optical Flow

+ Intrinsics

AnyCam

+ Uncertainty

Figure 1. AnyCam. Given a casual video and pretrained monocular depth estimation (MDE) and optical flow networks, AnyCam outputs
camera poses, camera intrinsics, and uncertainty maps in a single forward pass. The uncertainty maps represent probable movement in the
scene. By using a novel loss formulation, AnyCam can be trained on a large corpus of unlabelled videos mostly obtained from YouTube.

Abstract
Estimating camera motion and intrinsics from casual
videos is a core challenge in computer vision. Traditional
bundle-adjustment based methods, such as SfM and SLAM,
struggle to perform reliably on arbitrary data. Although
specialized SfM approaches have been developed for handling dynamic scenes, they either require intrinsics or computationally expensive test-time optimization and often fall
short in performance. Recently, methods like Dust3r have
reformulated the SfM problem in a more data-driven way.
While such techniques show promising results, they are still
1) not robust towards dynamic objects and 2) require labeled data for supervised training. As an alternative, we
propose AnyCam, a fast transformer model that directly estimates camera poses and intrinsics from a dynamic video
sequence in feed-forward fashion. Our intuition is that such
a network can learn strong priors over realistic camera
poses. To scale up our training, we rely on an uncertaintybased loss formulation and pre-trained depth and flow networks instead of motion or trajectory supervision. This allows us to use diverse, unlabelled video datasets obtained
mostly from YouTube. Additionally, we ensure that the
predicted trajectory does not accumulate drift over time
through a lightweight trajectory refinement step. We test
AnyCam on established datasets, where it delivers accurate
camera poses and intrinsics both qualitatively and quantitatively. Furthermore, even with trajectory refinement, AnyCam is significantly faster than existing works for SfM in

dynamic settings. Finally, by combining camera information, uncertainty, and depth, our model can produce highquality 4D pointclouds. For more details and code, please
check out our project page: fwmb.github.io/anycam

1. Introduction

16717

Estimating camera motion and intrinsics from a casual, dynamic video is a long-standing problem in 3D computer vision. Such scene parameters serve as the basis for a plethora
of more complex applications, ranging from novel view
synthesis to reconstruction. In particular, an efficient and
robust solution to this problem would unlock the huge corpus of online video data from sources like YouTube to train
3D foundation models. To this day, the availability of 3D
data is one of the main limitations when creating generalpurpose 3D models. [33]
Traditional SfM (and SLAM) systems like COLMAP
[32] excel at reconstruction in settings where a static scene
is captured from many well-distributed camera angles.
However, they generally fail when there are dynamic parts
in the scene, the camera follows a suboptimal trajectory, or
the image quality suffers from artifacts. This makes them
unsuitable for casual videos. Recently, a number of works
have proposed to incorporate certain deep learning-based
components into or instead of the classic SfM pipeline to
make it more robust. For example, Dust3r [44] proposes
a network to predict dense 3D pointmaps from multiple

