This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistency-aware Self-Training for Iterative-based Stereo Matching
Jingyi Zhou1 ,* Peng Ye1,3,4∗ , Haoyu Zhang1∗ , Jiakang Yuan1
Rao Qiang2 , Liu YangChenXu2 , Wu Cailin2 , Feng Xu1 , Tao Chen1†
1

Fudan University 2 Xiaomi Inc 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract

Consistency-aware Self Training
Training

Iterative-based methods have become mainstream in stereo
matching due to their high performance. However, these
methods heavily rely on labeled data and face challenges
with unlabeled real-world data. To this end, we propose
a consistency-aware self-training framework for iterativebased stereo matching for the first time, leveraging realworld unlabeled data in a teacher-student manner. We first
observe that regions with larger errors tend to exhibit more
pronounced oscillation characteristics during model prediction. Based on this, we introduce a novel consistencyaware soft filtering module to evaluate the reliability of
teacher-predicted pseudo-labels, which consists of a multiresolution prediction consistency filter and an iterative prediction consistency filter to assess the prediction fluctuations of multiple resolutions and iterative optimization respectively. Further, we introduce a consistency-aware softweighted loss to adjust the weight of pseudo-labels accordingly, relieving the error accumulation and performance
degradation problem due to incorrect pseudo-labels. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can improve
the performance of various iterative-based stereo matching
approaches in various scenarios. In particular, our method
can achieve further enhancements over the current SOTA
methods on several benchmark datasets.

In Domain Data
Sparse Labeled

Training

Training
Non-target Domain
Unlabeled Data

Domain Adaptation
Model

Domain
Generalization Model

…

Target Domain
Unlabeled Data

…
Iterative-Based
Stereo Model

Unlabeled

In Domain Model
Testing

Testing

Testing

In Domain Data

Target Domain Data

Multiple Target
Domain Data

Figure 1. Illustration of our Consistency-aware Self-Training
(CST) method, which can leverage unlabeled data in multiple scenarios to boost the iterative-based stereo-matching model.

1. Introduction

labels for stereo data is known to be costly and sometimes
even infeasible. Thus, current labeled stereo data is predominantly composed of synthetic datasets, leading to suboptimal performance when applied to unlabeled real-world
data. Unlike the scarcity of labeled real-world stereo data,
unlabeled data is relatively easier to acquire while often ignored by previous works.
Self-training has been proven to be an effective approach
to leveraging unlabeled data to enhance model performance
and generalization ability via a teacher-student manner. As
a result, a few recent works [23, 29] attempt to apply selftraining on cost-volume based stereo matching methods,
where the predicted disparities are based on the cost-volume
matrix and the reliability of teacher-predicted pseudo-labels
is obtained via the matching probability distribution of cost
volume. However, these cost-volume-based self-training
methods still encounter the following challenges: 1) As the
iterative-based methods led by RAFT-Stereo [14] gradually
become mainstream, these methods may fail to adapt effectively since the iterative-based methods employ recurrent
units to update the disparity with multi-source information
and sometimes without calculating the whole cost volume.
2) The reliability computation of these methods resembles
classification, treating the pixels along the epipolar line as
independent discrete labels. It focuses on single-point con-

Stereo matching aims to predict the pixel-wise disparity between a pair of rectified images [18]. With the rapid development of 3D vision tasks and their applications such as
robotics and autonomous driving, stereo matching has become a fundamental vision task to provide depth information in the real 3D world. Although existing stereo matching methods have achieved remarkable performance on certain benchmark datasets [12, 22], they heavily rely on the
number and quality of labeled data. However, due to hardware and environmental constraints, obtaining high-quality
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author.

16641

