This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

De2 Gaze: Deformable and Decoupled Representation
Learning for 3D Gaze Estimation
Yunfeng Xiao1,4,† Xiaowei Bai2,4,† Baojun Chen1 Hao Su2,3,4 Hao He2,4 Liang Xie2,4,* Erwei Yin2,4,*
1
Tianjin University, China
2
Academy of Military Sciences (AMS), China
3
Zhengzhou University, China
4
Tianjin Artificial Intelligence Innovation Center, China
{xyf0701, baojun chen}@tju.edu.cn, {xielnudt, yinerwei1985}@gmail.com
bxw1992@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hehao209@126.com, iesuhao@zzu.edu.cn

Deformable

Abstract
3D Gaze estimation is a challenging task due to two main
issues. First, existing methods focus on analyzing dense features (e.g., large pixel regions), which are sensitive to local
noise (e.g., light spots, blurs) and result in increased computational complexity. Second, an eyeball model can correspond multiple gaze directions, and the entangled representation between gazes and models increases the learning
difficulty. To address these issues, we propose De2 Gaze, a
lightweight and accurate model-aware 3D gaze estimation
method. In De2 Gaze, we introduce two key innovations for
deformable and decoupled representation learning. Specifically, first, we propose a deformable sparse attention mechanism that can adapt sparse sampling points to attention
areas to avoid local noise influences. Second, we propose
a spatial decoupling network with a dual-branch decoding
architecture to disentangle invariant (e.g., eyeball radius,
position) and variable (e.g., gaze, pupil, iris) features from
the latent space. Compared to existing methods, De2 Gaze
requires fewer sparse features, and achieves faster convergence speed, lower computational complexity, and higher
accuracy in 3D gaze estimation. Qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that De2 Gaze achieves stateof-the-art accuracy and high-quality semantic segmentation
for 3D gaze estimation on the TEyeD dataset.

Vanilla Attention

Local Attention

Dilate Attention

(a) Traditional

Deformable Sparse Attention

(b) Local noise

(c) Ours

(d)

...

Decoupled

(e)

Parameters
T

f

Invariant
Query

Invariant-Branch Reg.head
Decoding

re x re y
ri x ri y
tc n c

Variable
Query

Variable-Branch Reg.head
Decoding

R
rp

2D Semantic

3D Eyeball

：Match&Initialization

：Eye Ball Model

：Invariant Feature

：One-to-One Align

：Gaze Information

：Variable Feature

Figure 1. De2 Gaze introduces two key innovations for deformable
and decoupled representation learning. Top: (a) Traditional methods focus on dense features (e.g., large pixel regions) that are
sensitive to local noise (b) (e.g., light spots, blurs). (c) The deformable sparse attention mechanism adeptly samples attention
areas to avoid local noise effects. Bottom: We propose a spatial decoupling network with a dual-branch decoding architecture
to disentangle invariant (e.g., eyeball radius, position) level (d) and
variable (e.g., gaze, pupil, iris) level (e) features from latent space.

1. Introduction
Gaze estimation is a crucial task that is widely applied in
fields of human-computer interaction [1, 38, 41], medical
analysis [5], virtual or augmented reality [3, 24, 43], psychological research [23], and so on. In contrast to 2D gaze,
3D gaze contains richer spatial information [35] and is more
†Equal contribution.

Convolution

challenging to predict accurately. The key challenge lies in
two aspects. First, as shown in Fig. 1(a)(b), existing gaze
estimation methods focus on analyzing dense features (e.g.,
large pixel regions) [29, 34, 46] that are sensitive to local
noise (e.g., light spots, blurs) and lead to increased com-

* Corresponding author.

3091

