This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HarmonySet: A Comprehensive Dataset for Understanding
Video-Music Semantic Alignment and Temporal Synchronization
1

Zitang Zhou⇤,1,2 , Ke Mei⇤,1 , Yu Lu1,3,B , Tianyi Wang1 , Fengyun Rao1
WeChat Vision, Tencent Inc. 2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Zhejiang University

Time

00:17

Does the background music fit this video?
Evaluate the video-music relevance across rhythm, theme, emotion, and culture.
Audio-Visual MLLMs

VideoLLaMA2 Video-SALMONN

···
The music is upbeat and
catchy, with a strong rhythm
that matches the lively
movements. The emotion
conveyed is one of joy and
freedom.

HarmonySet --- Semantic and Temporal Video-Music Understanding
Rhythmic Synchronization

Thematic Coherence

There‘s a distinct shift in the music at the 17second mark, coinciding with a transition in the
video from close-up shots of individuals to a shot
of a large crowd and stage with pyrotechnics. This
synchronization accentuates the shift in energy.
The rapid transitions and dynamic visuals aligns
well with the music's driving rhythm.

The content of the video is a celebration
similar to a music festival. The explosive
nature of the music and contemporary
instruments used like electronic guitar
indicate a modern celebration theme,
suggesting an ongoing carnival that
matches the main visual content.

Emotional Alignment
The fast-paced music conveys exciting and joyful
emotion similar to the visuals, enhancing the
atmosphere of the celebration and exhilaration.
In the latter part of the video, the music and
visuals together reach the climax of emotion.

Cultural Relevance
The video is primarily related to party
culture. While the music does not contain
specific cultural elements, it suggests
the excitement of the party atmosphere.

Figure 1. We introduce HarmonySet, the first instruction tuning dataset for MLLMs to understand the alignment between video and music.
While existing MLLMs typically offer surface-level interpretations of video-music relationships, HarmonySet includes 48,328 video-music
pairs, each annotated with rich information on rhythmic synchronization, emotional alignment, thematic coherence, and cultural relevance.

Abstract

with detailed information on rhythmic synchronization, emotional alignment, thematic coherence, and cultural relevance.
We propose a multi-step human-machine collaborative framework for efficient annotation, combining human insights with
machine-generated descriptions to identify key transitions
and assess alignment across multiple dimensions. Addition-

This paper introduces HarmonySet, a comprehensive dataset
designed to advance video-music understanding. HarmonySet consists of 48,328 diverse video-music pairs, annotated
⇤ Equal conrtibution B Corresponding author: Yu Lu.

3152

