This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Lossless Implicit Neural Representation via Bit Plane Decomposition
Woo Kyoung Han1

Byeonghun Lee1
1

Hyunmin Cho1

Korea University

2

Sunghoon Im2 * Kyong Hwan Jin1 *
DGIST

{wookyoung0727, byeonghun_lee, hyun_cho, kyong_jin}@korea.ac.kr, sunghoonim@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
We quantify the upper bound on the size of the implicit
neural representation (INR) model from a digital perspective. The upper bound of the model size increases exponentially as the required bit-precision increases. To this end,
we present a bit-plane decomposition method that makes
INR predict bit-planes, producing the same effect as reducing the upper bound of the model size. We validate our
hypothesis that reducing the upper bound leads to faster
convergence with constant model size. Our method achieves
lossless representation in 2D image and audio fitting, even
for high bit-depth signals, such as 16-bit, which was previously unachievable. We pioneered the presence of bit bias,
which INR prioritizes as the most significant bit (MSB).
We expand the application of the INR task to bit depth
expansion, lossless image compression, and extreme network quantization. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/WooKyoungHan/LosslessINR.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method and error maps at
1,500 iterations. The upper bound on the number of parameters
(P(f✓ ) / 2n ) of INR (f✓ ) grow proportionally to a bit-precision
(n). We propose a bit-plane decomposition method, reducing the
upper bound, enabling faster convergence, and ultimately achieving
a lossless representation. The closer P(f✓ ) is to the upper bound,
the faster it converges, enabling lossless representation

the number of bits required to represent the signal-serves
a pivotal function. Furthermore, lossless representation is
defined as satisfying the given bit precision across all input
values. Although existing methods produce high-quality
images, achieving complete lossless representation remains
challenging, especially for high dynamic range images like
16 bits.
In this paper, based on “The implicit ANN approximations with described error tolerance and explicit parameter
bounds" by Jentzen et al. [16], we quantify the upper bound
of the size of an INR with given bit-precision. Fig. 1 show
that the theoretical upper bound of model size increases as an
exponential function proportional to required bit-precision.
We suggest a method to reduce the quantified upper bound
by bit-plane decomposition. We decompose the signal into
bit-planes and represent them, leading to lossless representation. Our method is based on the hypothesis that INR reaches
the target error—the maximum allowable error to ensure a
lossless representation—as the upper bound approaches the
model size. We validate our hypothesis through experiments
in Fig. 8. As in Fig. 2, our method makes INR represent a
lossless signal in a bit-for-bit manner, which was previously

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations (INRs), parameterizing the
continuous signals with an artificial neural network (ANN),
have been in the spotlight in various areas for recent years.
From a signed distance function by Park et al. [28] to the
best-known research by Mildenhall et al. [25] for radiance
fields, INR shows promising performance in many fields
[5, 12, 13, 17, 19, 24, 36, 39]. The fundamental principle of
INR, which aims to train real-world signals with parameters
operating in a range and domain of a continuous set, inspired
various applications such as super-resolution [5, 19, 20] and
a novel view synthesis [25].
However, research exploring precision close to the continuous range, i.e., analog, has not been actively pursued.
Computers operate with digital signals, not analog ones, with
values constrained by quantization, such as 8-bit or 16-bit for
images and 24-bit for audio. Therefore, signal representation
necessitates the concept of quantization, where bit precision* Corresponding author.

2269

