This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Closed-Loop Supervised Fine-Tuning of Tokenized Traffic Models
Zhejun Zhang1 Peter Karkus1 Maximilian Igl1
Wenhao Ding1 Yuxiao Chen1 Boris Ivanovic1 Marco Pavone1,2
1
NVIDIA Research 2 Stanford University
{zhejunz, pkarkus, migl, wenhaod, yuxiaoc, bivanovic, mpavone}@nvidia.com
pavone@stanford.edu

Abstract
Ground-Truth

Traffic simulation aims to learn a policy for traffic agents
that, when unrolled in closed-loop, faithfully recovers the
joint distribution of trajectories observed in the real world.
Inspired by large language models, tokenized multi-agent
policies have recently become the state-of-the-art in traffic simulation. However, they are typically trained through
open-loop behavior cloning, and thus suffer from covariate
shift when executed in closed-loop during simulation. In
this work, we present Closest Among Top-K (CAT-K) rollouts, a simple yet effective closed-loop fine-tuning strategy
to mitigate covariate shift. CAT-K fine-tuning only requires
existing trajectory data, without reinforcement learning or
generative adversarial imitation. Concretely, CAT-K finetuning enables a small 7M-parameter tokenized traffic simulation policy to outperform a 102M-parameter model from
the same model family, achieving the top spot on the Waymo
Sim Agent Challenge leaderboard at the time of submission. The code is available at https://github.com/
NVlabs/catk.

Possible
Policy Rollouts
CAT-K Rollout

Figure 1. Closest Among Top-K (CAT-K) rollouts. The key idea
of our approach is to unroll the policy during fine-tuning in a way
that visited states remain close to the GT. At each time step, CATK first takes the top-K most likely action tokens according to the
policy, then chooses the one leading to the state closest to the GT.
As a result, CAT-K rollouts follow the mode of the GT (e.g., turning left), while random or top-K rollouts can lead to large deviations (e.g., going straight or right). Since the policy is essentially
trained to minimize the distance between the rollout states and the
GT states, the GT-based supervision remains effective for CAT-K
rollouts, but not for random or top-K rollouts.

the Waymo Open Sim Agent Challenge (WOSAC) leaderboard [21] is heavily populated by tokenized traffic models [9, 35, 43, 47].
Covariate shift is a well-known challenge of IL arising
from the gap between open-loop training and closed-loop
deployment. When a model is trained on a fixed dataset of
expert demonstrations, it can face a distribution mismatch
between the states seen during training and those encountered during deployment, as small errors compound and
lead to unseen states where the policy performs poorly. A
classic approach to tackle this problem is Dataset Aggregation (DAgger) [27], which unrolls the policy and queries an
expert to generate new demonstrations, but querying experts
is not readily available for traffic simulation. Prior work has
proposed closed-loop training using hand-crafted recovery
controllers [1] or reinforcement learning (RL) [19, 23, 37].
However, it is inherently difficult to design rewards with
high behavioral realism or recovery controllers robust to divergent modes. Consequently, such approaches are not currently competitive on WOSAC realism metrics.

1. Introduction
Traffic modeling is a cornerstone of autonomous driving
simulation and evaluation, typically formulated as learning
a multi-agent policy that imitates the behavior of traffic participants in the real world. Given a set of historical agent
trajectories and scene context (map, traffic light states, etc.),
the policy generates actions for all simulated agents. The
task gives rise to an imitation learning (IL) problem, with
two key challenges: multimodality and covariate shift.
Traffic agent behavior is highly multimodal, and faithfully recovering accurate behavior distributions is a key
challenge in the field. Inspired by large language models [2, 32], recent works introduce next-token-prediction
(NTP) models where the policy reduces to a classifier over
a discrete set of trajectory tokens, which makes it easier
to represent highly-multimodal distributions. Accordingly,

5422

