This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prometheus: 3D-Aware Latent Diffusion Models for Feed-Forward
Text-to-3D Scene Generation
Yuanbo Yang1*
1

Jiahao Shao1*

Zhejiang University

"A large, white luxury yacht floats
serenely above the calm waters of
an ocean"

"A store shelf displaying
various skincare products"

"A vintage clock hanging
on a brick wall"

2

Xinyang Li2

Yujun Shen3

Xiamen University

3

Ant Group

"A bridge spans across the image,
connecting two sides separated by
water"

Andreas Geiger4
4

Yiyi Liao1†

University of Tübingen

"A landscape dominated by trees
and bushes, with a body of water
visible in the background"

"The room contains a brown couch
and a coffee table. The kitchen area
has wooden cabinets"

"The kitchen with wooden floors
and white countertops. A large
island stands in the center"

"A desert landscape with uneven ground
and a dusty appearance. A building is
visible in the background"

"A pink onion is cut in half and
placed on a wooden surface"

"A signboard located on a
metal post near the water"

"A street scene with parked cars on
the side of the road, trees line the
street"

Figure 1. We present Prometheus, a novel method for feed-forward scene-level 3D generation. At its core, our approach harnesses
the power of 2D priors to fuel generalizable and efficient 3D synthesis – hence our name, Prometheus.

Abstract

ject and scene levels in seconds. We formulate 3D scene
generation as multi-view, feed-forward, pixel-aligned 3D
Gaussian generation within the latent diffusion paradigm.
To ensure generalizability, we build our model upon pretrained text-to-image generation model with only minimal
adjustments, and further train it using a large number of
images from both single-view and multi-view datasets. Fur-

In this work, we introduce Prometheus, a 3D-aware
latent diffusion model for text-to-3D generation at both ob∗ denotes equal contribution.
† corresponding author.

2857

