This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Continual Universal Segmentation
Zihan Lin Zilei Wang Xu Wang
University of Science and Technology of China
myustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, xu-wang@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Language-guided

Generic-vision

Abstract

Semantic

Despite the significant progress in continual image segmentation, existing arts still strive to balance between stability and plasticity. Additionally, they are specialist to specific tasks and models, which hinders the extension to more
general situations. In this work, we present CUE, a novel
Continual Universal sEgmentation pipeline that not only inherently tackles the stability-plasticity dilemma, but unifies
any segmentation across tasks and models as well. Our key
insight: any segmentation task can be reformulated as an
understanding-then-refinement paradigm, which is inspired
by humans’ visual perception system to first perform highlevel semantic understanding, then focus on low-level vision
cues. We claim three desiderata for this design: Continuity
by inherently avoiding the stability-plasticity dilemma via
exploiting the natural differences between high-level and
low-level knowledge. Generality by unifying and simplifying the landscape towards various segmentation tasks. Efficiency as an interesting by-product by significantly reducing the research effort. Our resulting model, built upon this
pipeline by complementary expert models, shows significant
improvements over previous state-of-the-arts across various
segmentation tasks and datasets. We believe that our work
is a significant step towards making continual segmentation
more universal and practicable.

Vocabulary / Referring

Panoptic

Instance

CUE
Text

↓

person, horse, sky, …
A man with a black shirt paddling a boat.

Generality
Continuity

+15.4mIoU
79.5
-9.9%

+16.8mIoU

+11.1PQ

51.9
35.1

ADE Semantic

-8.0%
17.4%

44.0

-3.0%
10.0%
7.0%

64.1

16.7%

32.9

9.4%
6.8%

ADE Panoptic

Dark color: prev. SOTA
Light color: Ours
Green:

Performance (↑)

Blue:

Performance Gap (↓)

VOC Semantic

Continual segmentation vs. prev. SOTA

Figure 1. We present CUE, a novel pipeline with key properties of
generality and continuity that not only unifies segmentation across
models and tasks, but sets new state-of-the-art on continual segmentation by a significant margin as well.

1. Introduction

proposed and receives increasing attention. Recently, various approaches have been proposed for continual classification [17, 28, 39, 57, 60, 61, 72]. A few attempts extend
their successes to the field of continual semantic segmentation [6, 8, 18, 53, 67, 69]. Typically, a cross-entropy loss
is applied to handle new knowledge together with a regularization like knowledge distillation (KD) [27] to preserve
old knowledge. How to carefully balance between stability
(i.e., preserve previous states) and plasticity (i.e., incorporate new knowledge) becomes the main stream of current
research.
Though groundbreaking, the stability-plasticity dilemma
still poses a great challenge in segmentation tasks. To get
a clearer understanding of why this dilemma happens, we
start by examining how forgetting impacts the network in
continual updates. For the first time, we reveal that the
high-level knowledge (i.e., semantic understanding) and the

Deep neural networks have shown great success in various
computer vision tasks [23, 37, 48]. Conventionally, they are
trained in a single-shot manner without considering further
updates. As a result, they may lack the flexibility to handle
situations that evolve over time. Typical solutions include
either re-training the networks with both previous and new
data or fine-tuning the networks solely on new data. Nevertheless, the former is computationally intensive, while the
latter poses a great challenge of preserving previous knowledge and is known as the catastrophic forgetting [36]. With
the hope of mimicking humans by gradually acquiring new
concepts in a continual fashion, continual learning has been

29417

