This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOIGen-1M: A Large-scale Dataset for Human-Object Interaction
Video Generation
Kun Liu1 Qi Liu2 Xinchen Liu1 Jie Li1
Yongdong Zhang3 Jiebo Luo4 Xiaodong He1 Wu Liu3 †
1
JD Explore Academy 2 UCAS 3 USTC 4 University of Rochester
Close-up View of HOI

··

Multi-person HOI

One-person HOI

··

··

··

··

A man is seated at a white table with a white box in front of a gray background. He is wearing a burgundy hoodie, a black cap, and glasses. The man is
actively engaged with a laptop computer, which he holds up in his right hand. With his left hand, he gestures towards the bottom of the laptop,
seemingly explaining the details to the camera. Subsequently, he closes the laptop. With an interested and satisfied smile, he looks content. Finally, he
gently places the computer back on the white table in front of him using both hands, taking care to position it neatly. The scene is a simple and plain
room with a gray background and a technological atmosphere. The lighting is bright and even, highlighting the man and the objects in his hands.

Human Descriptions

Human Action Descriptions

HOI Descriptions

Scene Descriptions

Figure 1. Overview of HOIGen-1M. HOIGen-1M contains over one million video clips for HOI video generation with multiple types of HOI
videos, diverse scenarios (15, 000+ objects and 7, 000+ interaction types), and expressive captions.

Abstract
Text-to-video (T2V) generation has made tremendous
progress in generating complicated scenes based on texts.
However, human-object interaction (HOI) often cannot be
precisely generated by current T2V models due to the lack
of large-scale videos with accurate captions for HOI. To
address this issue, we introduce HOIGen-1M, the first largescale dataset for HOI Generation, consisting of over one
million high-quality videos collected from diverse sources.
In particular, to guarantee the high quality of videos, we
first design an efficient framework to automatically curate
HOI videos using the powerful multimodal large language

models (MLLMs), and then the videos are further cleaned
by human annotators. Moreover, to obtain accurate textual
captions for HOI videos, we design a novel video description
method based on a Mixture-of-Multimodal-Experts (MoME)
strategy that not only generates expressive captions but also
eliminates the hallucination by individual MLLM. Furthermore, due to the lack of an evaluation framework for generated HOI videos, we propose two new metrics to assess
the quality of generated videos in a coarse-to-fine manner.
Extensive experiments reveal that current T2V models struggle to generate high-quality HOI videos and confirm that
our HOIGen-1M dataset is instrumental for improving HOI
video generation.

† Corresponding author.

24001

