This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Certified Human Trajectory Prediction
Mohammadhossein Bahari∗,1 Saeed Saadatnejad∗,1 Amirhossein Askari Farsangi1
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli†,2 Alexandre Alahi1
1

EPFL

2

Apple

{mohammadhossein.bahari, saeed.saadatnejad}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Predicting human trajectories is essential for the safe operation of autonomous vehicles, yet current data-driven models often lack robustness in case of noisy inputs such as
adversarial examples or imperfect observations. Although
some trajectory prediction methods have been developed to
provide empirical robustness, these methods are heuristic
and do not offer guaranteed robustness. In this work, we
propose a certification approach tailored for trajectory prediction that provides guaranteed robustness. To this end,
we address the unique challenges associated with trajectory
prediction, such as unbounded outputs and multi-modality.
To mitigate the inherent performance drop through certification, we propose a diffusion-based trajectory denoiser
and integrate it into our method. Moreover, we introduce
new certified performance metrics to reliably measure the
trajectory prediction performance. Through comprehensive
experiments, we demonstrate the accuracy and robustness
of the certified predictors and highlight their advantages
over the non-certified ones. The code is available online:
https://s-attack.github.io/

Observation

Prediction

Noisy observation

Certified bounds

Figure 1. Illustration of the influence of noisy inputs on trajectory prediction models. The red trajectories depict clean observations and the corresponding predictions, while the gray trajectories show noisy observations along with their resulting predictions.
The top part showcases the outputs of a standard trajectory prediction model, revealing unbounded predictions with noisy inputs. In
contrast, the bottom part demonstrates the outputs of our trajectory predictor with guaranteed robustness. The model provides
certified bounds (blue boxes) on the predicted outputs, ensuring
that outputs remain within guaranteed regions despite input noise.

security [11, 48, 54]. Moreover, recent findings indicate that
in real-world autonomous driving pipelines, inputs of the
prediction models are imperfect, resulting in performance
drops [60]. This noise stems from upstream modules in the
perception pipeline, such as detection and tracking. Therefore, it is crucial to study the robustness properties of trajectory predictors.
Previous works proposed heuristic approaches to improve the empirical robustness of the trajectory prediction
models [12, 32, 66]. However, it has been shown that such
heuristic approaches are ultimately ineffective against sufficiently powerful adversaries [2, 13, 55]. Therefore, it is
essential to study certification techniques that provide guaranteed robustness i.e., to guarantee that given any confined
input noise, the models’ outputs fall within certified bounds.
Given the black-box nature of the prediction models, the

1. Introduction
Predicting the behavior of humans is a crucial task for the
safe operation of autonomous vehicles and robots. The
task, known as human trajectory prediction, aims to predict the future positions of humans given their past positions. It has received significant attention in recent years,
with data-driven methods demonstrating remarkable performance [24, 50, 59]. Such progress prompts a critical question: Are these methods reliable enough for real-world applications with noisy inputs? Notably, it has been shown
that these methods are susceptible to adversarial attacks,
raising significant concerns regarding their robustness and
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done while at Imperial College London.

12301

