This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Phoenix: A Motion-based Self-Reflection Framework for
Fine-grained Robotic Action Correction
†

Wenke Xia1,2,*, Ruoxuan Feng1 , Dong Wang2 , Di Hu1,
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract

Interaction

Building a generalizable self-correction system is crucial for robots to recover from failures. Despite advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
that empower robots with semantic reflection ability for failure, translating semantic reflection into “how to correct”
fine-grained robotic actions remains a significant challenge.
To address this gap, we build the Phoenix framework, which
leverages motion instruction as a bridge to connect highlevel semantic reflection with low-level robotic action correction. In this motion-based self-reflection framework,
we start with a dual-process motion adjustment mechanism with MLLMs to translate the semantic reflection into
coarse-grained motion instruction adjustment. To leverage
this motion instruction for guiding “how to correct” finegrained robotic actions, a multi-task motion-conditioned
diffusion policy is proposed to integrate visual observations
for high-frequency robotic action correction. By combining
these two models, we could shift the demand for generalization capability from the low-level manipulation policy to the
MLLMs-driven motion adjustment model and facilitate precise, fine-grained robotic action correction. Utilizing this
framework, we further develop a lifelong learning method
to automatically improve the model’s capability from interactions with dynamic environments. The experiments conducted in both the RoboMimic simulation and real-world
scenarios prove the superior generalization and robustness of our framework across a variety of manipulation
tasks. Our code is released at https://github.com/GeWuLab/Motion-based-Self-Reflection-Framework.

Failure State

What should I do to correct the failure situation?
High-level
Semantic Reflection

robot

You need to insert the coffee pot to make coffee.

Sorry, I do not know how to insert the coffee
pot into the coffee machine.

robot

Phoenix
Coarse-grained
Motion Adjustment

To insert the coffee pot, you could first move
arm backward and then open the gripper.

Sure, I will generate corresponding action to
move arm backward and open the gripper.

Phoenix
Fine-grained
Action Correction

robot

Success: Move arm backward and open the gripper

Figure 1. Our motion-based self-reflection framework utilizes
coarse-grained motion instruction as a bridge to convert the highlevel semantic reflection into fine-grained robotic action correction, thereby facilitating generalizable and precise action correction with perceptual and inferential capabilities of MLLMs.

Humans are naturally equipped with the ability to correct their behaviors by intentionally reflecting on actions
that lead to failure. [12, 25]. By analyzing failure situations from high-level semantic reflection and low-level action correction perspective, humans can efficiently adapt to
dynamic environments [8]. To emulate the correction capability and foster a continuous cycle of self-improvement in
robots, researchers [26, 30, 35] have sought to develop selfreflection systems that enable robots to recover from and
learn through their failure interactions.
Among them, some existing self-correction systems [19,

1. Introduction
“Failure is simply the opportunity to begin again, this
time more intelligently.”
— Henry Ford
* Work is done during internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory
† Corresponding author

6981

