This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WISNet: Pseudo Label Generation on Unbalanced and
Patch Annotated Waste Images
Shifan Zhang1 Hongzi Zhu1 * Yinan He2 Minyi Guo1
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Tencent AI Lab

Ziyang Lou1 Shan Chang3
3
Donghua University

{zhangshifan, hongzi, louworld12}@sjtu.edu.cn
heyinanda@alumni.sjtu.edu.cn guo-my@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
changshan@dhu.edu.cn

Abstract
Computer-vision-based assessment on waste sorting is desired to replace manpower supervision in Shanghai city.
Due to the hardness of labeling a multitude of waste images, it is infeasible to train a semantic segmentation model
for this purpose directly. In this work, we construct a new
dataset consisting of 12, 208 waste images, upon which seed
regions (i.e., patches) are annotated and classified into 21
categories in a crowdsourcing fashion. To obtain pixel-level
labels to train an effective segmentation model, we propose
a weakly-supervised waste image pseudo label generation
scheme, called WISNet. Specifically, we train a cohesive
feature extractor with contrastive prototype learning, incorporating an unsupervised classification pretext task to
help the extractor focus on more discriminative regions even
with the same category. Furthermore, we propose an effective iterative patch expansion method to generate accurate
pixel-level pseudo labels. Given these generated pseudo
labels, a few-shot segmentation model can be trained to
segment waste images. We implement and deploy WISNet
in real-world scenarios and conduct intensive experiments.
Results show that WISNet can achieve a state-of-the-art
40.2% final segmentation mIoU on our waste benchmark,
outperforming all other baselines and demonstrating its efficacy. The dataset and code will be publicly available at:
https://github.com/shifan-Z/WISNet

(a) Waste images &
manual annotations

(b) Test
images

(c) Ground (d) PANet (e) PANet
truth
with DuPL with WISNet

Figure 1. (a) Examples of waste images and patch-level annotations to minimize the manpower costs; (b) examples of test waste
images; (c) ground truth; (d) and (e) are the segmentation results
using PANet with labels generated by a SOTA model [34] and
WISNet, respectively.

1. Introduction

sorting on around 21, 000 disposal sites across the city. To
reduce manpower costs, an automated waste sorting quality
assessment system is needed to analyze top-view images of
trash bins, identify all waste categories, and estimate the
proportion of incorrectly sorted waste.
To recognize each category in a waste image, however,
is quite distinct from classic image segmentation tasks due
to three reasons. First, waste images are more complex
with distorted and stained waste objects of various categories densely distributed and highly overlapped with each
other. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1 (a), it is often
challenging for human eyes to recognize all categories in a
waste image. Second, the distribution of waste categories
is severely imbalanced, making the number of samples of
each category quite imbalanced. Last but not least, there is
no existing large-scale and high-quality community waste
dataset available for waste image segmentation study.
In the literature, many segmentation models [3, 4] have
been proven effective on various datasets, ranging from

To reduce waste treatment overload and make the city
more environmentally friendly, new waste sorting regulations have come into effect in Shanghai, one of the biggest
metropolises in China. As many residents have little enthusiasm and knowledge for waste sorting, a team of over
30, 000 volunteers has been recruited to supervise trash
* Corresponding author

15076

