This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniMMI: A Comprehensive Multi-modal
Interaction Benchmark in Streaming Video Contexts
Yuxuan Wang1,2 , Yueqian Wang2,3 , Bo Chen1,2,4 , Tong Wu1,2 , Dongyan Zhao2,3 , Zilong Zheng1,2
1
3

2

Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University

4

X-LANCE Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{wangyuxuan1, zlzheng}@bigai.ai
https://omnimmi.github.io

Abstract
The rapid advancement of multi-modal language models
(MLLMs) like GPT-4o has propelled the development of
Omni language models, designed to process and proactively
respond to continuous streams of multi-modal data. Despite
their potential, evaluating their real-world interactive capabilities in streaming video contexts remains a formidable
challenge. In this work, we introduce OmniMMI, a comprehensive multi-modal interaction benchmark tailored for
OmniLLMs in streaming video contexts. OmniMMI encompasses over 1,121 videos and 2,290 questions, addressing
two critical yet underexplored challenges in existing video
benchmarks: streaming video understanding and proactive
reasoning, across six distinct subtasks. Moreover, we propose a novel framework, Multi-modal Multiplexing Modeling (M4), designed to enable an inference-efficient streaming model that can see, listen while generating. Extensive
experimental results reveal that the existing MLLMs fall
short in interactive streaming understanding, particularly
struggling with proactive tasks and multi-turn queries. Our
proposed M4, though lightweight, demonstrates a significant improvement in handling proactive tasks and real-time
interactions.

speech modalities, i.e., Omni Large Language Models
(OmniLLMs), and (ii) to derive interactive systems that
can take the first-person perspective to interact with the real
world. However, this rapid development raises a crucial
question: How can we effectively evaluate the real-world
interactive capabilities of OmniLLMs in streaming video
contexts? Addressing this question is pivotal to validating
their design efficacy and enhancing their performance for
comprehensive open-world multi-modal understanding.
In response, a vast number of benchmarks has been
launched with different focuses on long-form video understanding [10, 34, 59], comprehensive video analysis [10],
or audio-video understanding [22], etc. However, most of
these benchmarks take in the entire video sequence as input,
some of which use frame selection techniques with slight
information scarification, to produce final answers. These
tasks, though challenging, are far from the real-world interactive scenarios where videos are taken in as a streaming
sequence; refer to Tab. 1 for benchmark comparisons. More
recently, OmniBench [22] has been introduced to evaluate models’ capabilities on visual, acoustic, and textual inputs simultaneously. However, only the last image frame
is considered visual input, while the video dynamics across
streaming contexts and interactive features are overlooked.
To bridge the critical gap, we introduce Multi-modal
Interaction Benchmark for OmniLLMs (OmniMMI),
which aims at comprehensively evaluating the interactive
capabilities of streaming video context in the open world
(Fig. 1). We start by formalizing the task of streaming multi-modal understanding (§ 3.2). Apart from challenges identified by prior long-form video-audio benchmarks (e.g., temporal dynamics [10, 59] and multi-modal
localization [37, 42]), OmniMMI considers two featured
obstacles for real-time interactions.

1. Introduction
The burgeoning field of multi-modal large language models (MLLMs), exemplified by GPT-4o [32] and Gemini
Pro [36], marks a significant leap towards embodied agentic
intelligence by incorporating multi-modal encoders within
pre-trained large language models (LLMs), such as video
understanding [25, 38, 53], audio comprehension [7], and
speech-to-speech dialogue [8, 9, 46, 47], etc. The overarching goal is (i) to transcend the general capabilities
of LLMs to process and respond to continuous streams
of multi-modal dynamics, encompassing text, vision, and
Corresponding author: Zilong Zheng →zlzheng@bigai.ai↑

• Streaming Temporal State Awareness. Streaming video
understanding must build an understanding w.r.t. the current and historical temporal state incrementally, without

18925

