This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OFER: Occluded Face Expression Reconstruction
Pratheba Selvaraju1
1

Victoria Fernández Abrevaya2 Timo Bolkart3 Rick Akkerman2
Tianyu Ding4 Faezeh Amjadi4 Ilya Zharkov4

University of Massachusetts, Amherst
3

(a) Input
Image

(b) Worst ranked
Neutral shape

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Google Research, Zürich

(c) Best Ranked
Neutral shape

4

Microsoft Research, Redmond

(d) Expression recontructions
using (c)

Figure 1. Reconstructions generated by OFER. Our method can reconstruct faces from a single image under hard occlusions (a),
providing multiple solutions with diverse expressions that align with the input image (d). We use two diffusion models that denoise the
shape and expression parameters of FLAME conditioned on the image. A novel ranking mechanism selects an optimal identity (c) from
the generated set of shapes, on top of which the expression variants are applied to obtain the final results.

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D face models from a single image is an
inherently ill-posed problem, which becomes even more
challenging in the presence of occlusions. In addition to
fewer available observations, occlusions introduce an extra source of ambiguity where multiple reconstructions can
be equally valid. Despite the ubiquity of the problem, very
few methods address its multi-hypothesis nature. In this
paper we introduce OFER, a novel approach for singleimage 3D face reconstruction that can generate plausible,
diverse, and expressive 3D faces, even under strong occlusions. Specifically, we train two diffusion models to gener-

ate a shape and expression coefficients of face parametric
model, conditioned on the input image. This approach captures the multi-modal nature of the problem, generating a
distribution of solutions as output. However, to maintain
consistency across diverse expressions, the challenge is to
select the best matching shape. To achieve this, we propose a novel ranking mechanism that sorts the outputs of
the shape diffusion network based on predicted shape accuracy scores. We evaluate our method using standard benchmarks and introduce CO-545, a new protocol and dataset
designed to assess the accuracy of expressive faces under
occlusion. Our results show improved performance over
occlusion-based methods, while also enabling the generation of diverse expressions for a given image.

1 Project website: https://ofer.is.tue.mpg.de/

26985

