This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Channel Consistency Prior and Self-Reconstruction Strategy Based Unsupervised
Image Deraining
Guanglu Dong1
Tianheng Zheng1
Yuanzhouhan Cao2
Linbo Qing1
Chao Ren1 *
1
2
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{dongguanglu, zhengtianheng}@stu.scu.edu.cn, yzhcao@bjtu.edu.cn
{qing lb, chaoren}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep image deraining models based on paired
datasets have made a series of remarkable progress. However, they cannot be well applied in real-world applications
due to the difficulty of obtaining real paired datasets and the
poor generalization performance. In this paper, we propose
a novel Channel Consistency Prior and Self-Reconstruction
Strategy Based Unsupervised Image Deraining framework,
CSUD, to tackle the aforementioned challenges. During
training with unpaired data, CSUD is capable of generating high-quality pseudo clean and rainy image pairs which
are used to enhance the performance of deraining network.
Specifically, to preserve more image background details
while transferring rain streaks from rainy images to the
unpaired clean images, we propose a novel Channel Consistency Loss (CCLoss) by introducing the Channel Consistency Prior (CCP) of rain streaks into training process,
thereby ensuring that the generated pseudo rainy images
closely resemble the real ones. Furthermore, we propose
a novel Self-Reconstruction (SR) strategy to alleviate the
redundant information transfer problem of the generator,
further improving the deraining performance and the generalization capability of our method. Extensive experiments
on multiple synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
that the deraining performance of CSUD surpasses other
state-of-the-art unsupervised methods and CSUD exhibits
superior generalization capability. Code is available at
https://github.com/GuangluDong0728/CSUD.

Figure 1. Deraining results on the real rainy images captured by
ourselves in real-world scenarios. Compared with the supervised
method Restormer [49] and the unsupervised method DerainCycleGAN [40], our CSUD exhibits extremely strong generalization
capability in the real world and achieves the best visual results.

[24, 26, 33, 41]. To mitigate the negative impact of rain,
numerous deep learning based supervised image deraining
methods [7, 8, 11, 13, 19, 21, 32, 36, 47, 52] have been proposed and they achieve remarkable progress on synthetic
datasets. However, the performance of these methods is
largely constrained by the difficulty of capturing a large
number of high-quality paired datasets when applied to realworld scenarios. Additionally, attempting to directly apply
supervised models trained on synthetic datasets to real-world
scenarios is also difficult because of the huge domain gap between synthetic and real-world rain [45] and the overfitting
issue of supervised methods [9].
Compared to supervised methods, unsupervised deep
learning methods [3, 14, 40, 42, 46] for image deraining
tasks generally achieve end-to-end image deraining without
paired clean-rainy images during training. This allows unsupervised methods to effectively handle complex real-world

1. Introduction
Image deraining is an important task in low-level computer vision [7, 10, 25, 29, 31, 49]. It aims to reconstruct a clean image from its rainy version, which has a
profound impact on subsequent high-level tasks such as
object detection, recognition, and semantic segmentation
* Corresponding author

7469

