This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revealing Key Details to See Differences: A Novel Prototypical Perspective for
Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Hongda Liu1,2 , Yunfan Liu2∗ , Min Ren3 , Hao Wang1,2 , Yunlong Wang1 , Zhenan Sun1 *
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Beijing Normal University
{hongda.liu,yunfan.liu,hao.wang,yunlong.wang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn
renmin@bnu.edu.cn, znsun@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Writing

In skeleton-based action recognition, a key challenge is
distinguishing between actions with similar trajectories of
joints due to the lack of image-level details in skeletal representations. Recognizing that the differentiation of similar
actions relies on subtle motion details in specific body parts,
we direct our approach to focus on the fine-grained motion
of local skeleton components. To this end, we introduce
ProtoGCN, a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)-based
model that breaks down the dynamics of entire skeleton sequences into a combination of learnable prototypes representing core motion patterns of action units. By contrasting
the reconstruction of prototypes, ProtoGCN can effectively
identify and enhance the discriminative representation of
similar actions. Without bells and whistles, ProtoGCN
achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmark datasets, including NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D 120,
Kinetics-Skeleton, and FineGYM, which demonstrates the
effectiveness of the proposed method. The code is available
at https://github.com/firework8/ProtoGCN .

Ours

PYSKL (Baseline)

(a)

similar

GPR

(b)

Joint Index

Typing on a keyboard

(c)

GPR

(d)

: Single­handed
: Two­handed

Topology Matrix of Body Joints
(GPR: Graph Prototype Reconstruction)

Figure 1. Illustration of the skeletons and learned topologies for
similar actions Writing and Typing on a Keyboard (deeper color
indicates stronger relationships between corresponding joints). As
shown in (a) and (c), the baseline PYSKL [11] demonstrates its
ability to focus on joints associated with hands, but falls short in
revealing their distinctive motion characteristics. In contrast, the
integration of the Graph Prototype Reconstruction mechanism facilitates a clearer differentiation between the two actions, as evidenced by the notably distinct motion patterns observed between
(b) and (d). Please zoom in for a better view.

1. Introduction
which are essential for distinguishing similar actions.
Skeleton-based action recognition is primarily concerned
with two tasks: identifying the key body parts involved and
understanding their motion patterns. However, due to the
lack of image-level information, current methods tend to
capture coarse-grained motion patterns, effectively identifying the key parts but struggling to capture the subtle, discriminative details that are crucial for distinguishing similar
actions. This limitation arises because the patterns of similar actions often overlap significantly, with distinctive details representing only a small portion of the overall information, making it difficult for the classifier to differentiate
between them.

Human action recognition, a pivotal task with various realworld applications, has recently seen growing interest in
skeleton-based methods due to their efficiency and robustness. Given the intrinsic graph structure of the human skeleton, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [6, 9, 19, 30,
40] are widely used to model the relationships between
joints. However, despite their effectiveness in action recognition, these methods struggle to distinguish actions with
similar motion patterns.
Specifically, existing methods face a key challenge in
capturing the fine-grained details of crucial body parts,
* Corresponding authors.

29248

