This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVPGS: Enhanced View Prior Guidance for Splatting-based
Extrapolated View Synthesis
Jiahe Li

Feiyu Wang∗
Xiaochao Qu
Chengjing Wu
Luoqi Liu∗
MT Lab, Meitu Inc., Beijing 100083, China

Ting Liu∗

{ljh15, wfy1, qxc, ethan, llq5, lt}@meitu.com
∗

Corresponding Author

Conventional Novel View Synthesis

Abstract
Gaussian Splatting (GS)-based methods rely on sufficient
training view coverage and perform synthesis on interpolated views. In this work, we tackle the more challenging and underexplored Extrapolated View Synthesis (EVS)
task. Here we enable GS-based models trained with limited
view coverage to generalize well to extrapolated views. To
achieve our goal, we propose a view augmentation framework to guide training through a coarse-to-fine process. At
the coarse stage, we reduce rendering artifacts due to insufficient view coverage by introducing a regularization strategy at both appearance and geometry levels. At the fine
stage, we generate reliable view priors to provide further
training guidance. To this end, we incorporate an occlusion awareness into the view prior generation process, and
refine the view priors with the aid of coarse stage output.
We call our framework Enhanced View Prior Guidance for
Splatting (EVPGS). To comprehensively evaluate EVPGS
on the EVS task, we collect a real-world dataset called Merchandise3D dedicated to the EVS scenario. Experiments
on three datasets including both real and synthetic demonstrate EVPGS achieves state-of-the-art performance, while
improving synthesis quality at extrapolated views for GSbased methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our
code and dataset are available on the EVPGS Homepage.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Splatting (GS) [15] and its variants [16, 19, 24,
42] have enabled high-fidelity and real-time novel view synthesis. Despite the achievements, a main drawback of the
existing methods is that they rely on training images with
sufficient view coverage, which is an interpolated view synthesis setting. In real-world scenarios, users often capture
images by moving the camera horizontally around an object, yet may desire novel views from elevated pitch angles. Therefore, existing methods suffer from deteriorated

Training Views

Extrapolated View Synthesis

Testing Views

Figure 1. Illustration of the EVS problem. We visualize the camera pose at each view as a rectangle warped by the pose. Left: In
conventional novel view synthesis, the training views sufficiently
cover the scene. Right: In EVS, the training views have limited
scene coverage (only horizontal and near-horizontal views as per
the example) and overlap poorly with the testing views. Example
scene from DTU [14].

synthesis quality in real-world applications due to both limited training view coverage and the resulting large disparity
between the training and testing views. This gives rise to
the extrapolated view synthesis (EVS) problem, which we
tackle in this work. We illustrate EVS in Figure 1.
To remedy for the gap between the training and testing views, concurrent works in sparse view reconstruction [18, 36, 41] perform view augmentation by generating view priors at augmented views, which act as pseudolabels during training. The view prior is typically generated by reprojecting a training-view image to an unseen
augmented view via a reconstructed explicit 3D representation, e.g. mesh or depth map. While these sparse view
reconstruction methods can produce novel-view renderings
with reasonable realism, they essentially deal with interpolated view synthesis. We scrutinise the EVS problem and
identify two challenges which have not been addressed by
existing strategies for generating view priors, i.e. lack of
view-dependent color information, and occlusions in complex scenes. We illustrate these challenges in Figure 2.
These issues can cause rendering artifacts such as unrealistic appearance and corrupted scene parts, which call for
more dedicated processing of the view priors.

16398

