This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VasTSD: Learning 3D Vascular Tree-state Space Diffusion Model for
Angiography Synthesis
Zhifeng Wang1∗ Renjiao Yi1∗ Xin Wen1,2 Chenyang Zhu1† Kai Xu1†
1
National University of Defense Technology
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory

Abstract
Vascular geometry

Angiography imaging is a medical imaging technique that
enhances the visibility of blood vessels within the body by
using contrast agents. Angiographic images can effectively
assist in the diagnosis of vascular diseases. However, contrast agents may bring extra radiation exposure which is
harmful to patients with health risks. To mitigate these
concerns, in this paper, we aim to automatically generate
angiography from non-angiographic inputs, by leveraging
and enhancing the inherent physical properties of vascular structures. Previous methods relying on 2D slice-based
angiography synthesis struggle with maintaining continuity in 3D vascular structures and exhibit limited effectiveness across different imaging modalities. We propose
VasTSD, a 3D vascular tree-state space diffusion model
to synthesize angiography from 3D non-angiographic volumes, with a novel state space serialization approach that
dynamically constructs vascular tree topologies, integrating these with a diffusion-based generative model to ensure the generation of anatomically continuous vasculature in 3D volumes. A pre-trained vision embedder is
employed to construct vascular state space representations, enabling consistent modeling of vascular structures
across multiple modalities. Extensive experiments on various angiographic datasets demonstrate the superiority of
VasTSD over prior works, achieving enhanced continuity
of blood vessels in synthesized angiographic synthesis for
multiple modalities and anatomical regions. Project page:
https://jefferyzhifeng.github.io/projects/VasTSD/

3D angiography
volume

Cross-Slice
attention

(a) Cross-Slice Anatomical Consistency in 3D Vascular Imaging
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11

𝒊

12 13 14 15

…
…

Individual-slice
vessel

Cross-slice
vessel

Structured
vascular

(b) 3D Vascular Tree-state Space Diffusion Model

Figure 1. (a) In 3D medical volumes, vascular have relatively consistent contextual semantics and structural connectivity. (b) The
proposed tree-state space model for simulating 3D vasculature.

nosing vascular conditions and diseases, such as coronary
artery disease, atherosclerosis, and aneurysms. In scientific research, angiography provides high-resolution imaging of vascular anatomy, aiding researchers in the detailed
exploration of vascular physiology, hemodynamic features,
and more, thereby offering crucial data for fundamental
research. Traditional angiographic methods, such as Xray Angiogram (XRA), Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA), and Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA),
have demonstrated their effectiveness, while they require
the use of nephrotoxic iodinated contrast agents and expose
patients to ionizing radiation, leading to potential carcinogenic risks [39, 45].Thus, angiography synthesis from nonangiography data becomes a critical direction.
With the advancement of generative deep learning technologies, the synthesized medical images become more
realistic and diverse. Existing medical image generation methods are broadly categorized into several types
based on backbone models, including Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [19, 29], Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [7, 43], and Diffusion Models [13, 18]. Recent approaches [20, 24, 36, 49] also explored cross-modal image

1. Introduction
Vascular diseases are widely recognized as major contributors to human mortality worldwide [35, 36]. In clinical
practice, angiography serves as the gold standard for diag∗ Co-first authors. † Corresponding authors:

zhuchenyang07@nudt.edu.cn, kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

15693

