This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auto Cherry-Picker : Learning from High-quality
Generative Data Driven by Language
Yicheng Chen1,2 , Xiangtai Li1,3 , Yining Li1† , Yanhong Zeng1 ,
Jianzong Wu1,4 , Xiangyu Zhao1,5 , Kai Chen1†
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Fudan University
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
4
Peking University 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Project page: https://yichengchen24.github.io/projects/autocherrypicker

(e) Quantitative Comparison on LVIS

Figure 1. Illustration of quality assessment of generated data samples using CLIS. (a) and (c) compare the quality of samples with different
CLIS-L and CLIS-I scores, respectively. Samples with low CLIS fail to align accurately with the condition (e.g., contain extraneous objects
or exhibit visual flaws). (b) and (d) compare the preferences of CLIS and CLIP score [27]. (e) compares different selection methods for
the same volume of synthetic data used in downstream tasks, reporting APr and AP on the LVIS benchmark. See details in Sec. 4.2.

Abstract
Diffusion models can generate realistic and diverse images,
potentially facilitating data availability for data-intensive
perception tasks. However, leveraging these models to
boost performance on downstream tasks with synthetic data
poses several challenges, including aligning with real data
distribution, scaling synthetic sample volumes, and ensuring their quality. To bridge these gaps, we present Auto
Cherry-Picker (ACP), a novel framework that generates
high-quality cross-modality training samples at scale to
augment perception and multi-modal training. ACP first
uses LLMs to sample descriptions and layouts based on
object combinations from real data priors, eliminating the
need for ground truth image captions or annotations. Next,
we use an off-the-shelf controllable diffusion model to generate multiple images. Then, the generated data are refined
using a comprehensively designed metric, Composite Layout and Image Score (CLIS), to ensure quality. Our customized synthetic high-quality samples boost performance
in various scenarios, especially in addressing challenges
associated with long-tailed distribution and imbalanced

datasets. Experiment results on downstream tasks demonstrate that ACP can significantly improve the performance
of existing models. In addition, we find a positive correlation between CLIS and performance gains in downstream
tasks. This finding shows the potential for evaluation metrics as the role for various visual perception and MLLM
tasks.

1. Introduction

† Corresponding Author.

Recently, diffusion-based image generation methods [58,
64] have made remarkable progress, enabling various applications, including text-to-image generation(T2I) [20, 21,
57, 60, 71], image editing [5, 26, 53, 59], video generation [22, 29, 30], and more. Compared to previous generative models [13, 34], diffusion models can produce highquality and high-resolution examples. Thus, one essential
usage of the diffusion-based model is to generate training
data for various downstream vision tasks, such as segmentation [42, 80], detection [8, 44], and visual representation
learning [38, 69]. Synthetic data alleviates the severe demand for human annotation and provides a more controllable data production process.

19952

