This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Satellite Image Road Graph Extraction: A Global-Scale Dataset and A
Novel Method
Pan Yin1,2* , Kaiyu Li4* , Xiangyong Cao1,2† , Jing Yao6 , Lei Liu7 , Xueru Bai7 , Feng Zhou7 , Deyu Meng2,3,5
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
2
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
4
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
5
Pengcheng Laboratory 6 Chinese Academy of Sciences 7 Xidian University
[lon, lat] data of
selected cities

Collect road graph data
from OpenStreetMap

Collect satellite data
from Google Earth

Manual filtration

Global-Scale dataset

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The collection pipeline of our Global-Scale dataset; (b) The world map showing the region location of the collected images
in the Global-Scale dataset.

thermore, we propose a simple yet effective “extended-line”
strategy in SAM-Road++ to mitigate the occlusion issue on
the road. Extensive experiments demonstrate the validity of
the collected Global-Scale dataset and the proposed SAMRoad++ method, particularly highlighting its superior predictive power in unseen regions. The dataset and code are
available at https://github.com/earth-insights/samroadplus.

Abstract
Recently, road graph extraction has garnered increasing attention due to its crucial role in autonomous driving, navigation, etc. However, accurately and efficiently extracting
road graphs remains a persistent challenge, primarily due
to the severe scarcity of labeled data. To address this limitation, we collect a global-scale satellite road graph extraction dataset, i.e. Global-Scale dataset. Specifically, the
Global-Scale dataset is ∼ 20× larger than the largest existing public road extraction dataset and spans over 13,800
km2 globally. Additionally, we develop a novel road graph
extraction model, i.e. SAM-Road++, which adopts a nodeguided resampling method to alleviate the mismatch issue
between training and inference in SAM-Road [17], a pioneering state-of-the-art road graph extraction model. Fur-

1. Introduction
In recent years, daily travel has increasingly relied on navigation systems [34], particularly with the advent of autonomous driving technology [23], which has greatly enhanced convenience in everyday life [37, 53]. These advancements demand higher accuracy and real-time performance in extracting road graphs from satellite images [7,
44]. Existing approaches to end-to-end road graph extraction can be categorized into two main types: iterative methods [3, 49, 50] and global-based methods [2, 14, 15, 17, 48].

*Equal contribution
†Corresponding author (caoxiangyong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn)

1527

