This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating the Human-Robot Domain Discrepancy in Visual Pre-training for
Robotic Manipulation
Jiaming Zhou1 , Teli Ma1 , Kun-Yu Lin2 , Zifan Wang1 , Ronghe Qiu1 , Junwei Liang1,3†
1
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Sun Yat-sen University, 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
jia ming zhou@outlook.com junweiliang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

pre-train🔥

pre-trained human data

pre-train🔥

...

pre-trained
encoder

human demos
...

small gap

...

human-robot
paired demos

large domain gap

pre-trained
encoder

small gap

Adaptation🔥

...
robot demos

transfer ❄

transfer ❄

downstream robot data

...

adapted
encoder

our adaptation paradigm

existing paradigm

Figure 1. Left: The existing visual pre-training paradigm for robotic manipulation applied frozen models pre-trained on human data to
downstream robot data, suffering from large domain gaps. Right: Our adaptation paradigm leverages the paired human-robot demonstrations
as bridges to adapt the pre-trained models, thus mitigating the semantics gap between human and robot data. (Best viewed in color.)

Abstract
Learning generalizable visual representations across different embodied environments is essential for effective robotic
manipulation in real-world scenarios. However, the limited scale and diversity of robot demonstration data pose a
significant challenge. Recent research has explored leveraging large-scale human activity data for pre-training, but
the substantial morphological differences between humans
and robots introduce a significant human-robot domain discrepancy, hindering the generalization of these models to
downstream manipulation tasks. To overcome this, we propose a novel adaptation paradigm that leverages readily
available paired human-robot video data to bridge the domain gap. Our method employs a human-robot contrastive
alignment loss to align the semantics of human and robot
videos, adapting pre-trained models to the robot domain
in a parameter-efficient manner. Experiments on 20 simu-

lated tasks across two different benchmarks and five realworld tasks demonstrate significant improvements. These results span both single-task and language-conditioned multitask settings, evaluated using two different pre-trained models. Compared to existing pre-trained models, our adaptation method improves the average success rate by over 7%
across multiple tasks on both simulated benchmarks and
real-world evaluations. Project: https://jiamingzhou.github.io/projects/HumanRobotAlign

1. Introduction

† Corresponding author

Robotic manipulation [10, 11, 19, 35, 49, 58, 60, 62] aims
to enable robots to acquire a diverse range of skills applicable to real-world scenarios. However, this task is inherently
challenging as it requires accurately modeling the sequential
semantics of visual observations to predict the corresponding
end-effector actions. Due to the scarcity of robot demonstration data, various approaches [13, 24, 29, 36, 44, 49, 67] have

22551

