This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeCloth: Free-form Generation Enhances Challenging Clothed Human
Modeling
Hang Ye1 Xiaoxuan Ma1, B Hai Ci1 Wentao Zhu1 Yizhou Wang1, 2, 3, 4, B
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 3 Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology
4
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
1

{yehang, maxiaoxuan, cihai, wtzhu, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn

(a)

B

Corresponding authors

(b)
Replication

Part Seg.

Deformation
LBS-based

Unclothed
Human

Clothed
Human

Generation
Free-form

POP

FITE

Ours

Figure 1. (a) An overview of our framework for modeling clothed humans. Based on the specific modeling needs of different regions,
we employ a dedicated strategy to handle various clothing areas. Specifically, for loose regions (green) that are less affected by body
movements and require more freedom, we propose free-form generation to enhance flexibility. For near-body clothing areas (blue), we
apply LBS-based deformation, while unclothed regions (yellow) that do not require deformation can be directly replicated. (b) Visual
comparison between prior arts (POP [39], FITE [33]) and our method on challenging clothing. Our method captures more highfidelity details and achieves superior visual quality and realism. Code is available at https://alvinyh.github.io/FreeCloth.

Abstract
Achieving realistic animated human avatars requires accurate modeling of pose-dependent clothing deformations.
Existing learning-based methods heavily rely on the Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) of minimally-clothed human models like SMPL to model deformation. However, they struggle to handle loose clothing, such as long dresses, where
the canonicalization process becomes ill-defined when the
clothing is far from the body, leading to disjointed and fragmented results. To overcome this limitation, we propose
FreeCloth, a novel hybrid framework to model challenging
clothed humans. Our core idea is to use dedicated strategies
to model different regions, depending on whether they are
close to or distant from the body. Specifically, we segment

15987

the human body into three categories: unclothed, deformed,
and generated. We simply replicate unclothed regions that
require no deformation. For deformed regions close to the
body, we leverage LBS to handle the deformation. As for the
generated regions, which correspond to loose clothing areas, we introduce a novel free-form, part-aware generator
to model them, as they are less affected by movements. This
free-form generation paradigm brings enhanced flexibility
and expressiveness to our hybrid framework, enabling it to
capture the intricate geometric details of challenging loose
clothing, such as skirts and dresses. Experimental results
on the benchmark dataset featuring loose clothing demonstrate that FreeCloth achieves state-of-the-art performance
with superior visual fidelity and realism, particularly in the
most challenging cases.

