This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ITA-MDT: Image-Timestep-Adaptive Masked Diffusion Transformer Framework
for Image-Based Virtual Try-On
Ji Woo Hong1 Tri Ton1 Trung X. Pham1 Gwanhyeong Koo1 Sunjae Yoon1 Chang D. Yoo1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
{jiwoohong93, tritth, trungpx, kookie, dbstjswo505, cd_yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Image-based Virtual Try-on results generated by our ITA-MDT. From left to right: VITON-HD[1], DressCode[20] upper,
DressCode lower, and DressCode dresses, respectively.

Abstract
This paper introduces ITA-MDT, the Image-TimestepAdaptive Masked Diffusion Transformer Framework for
Image-Based Virtual Try-On (IVTON), designed to overcome the limitations of previous approaches by leveraging the Masked Diffusion Transformer (MDT) for improved
handling of both global garment context and fine-grained
details. The IVTON task involves seamlessly superimposing a garment from one image onto a person in another,
creating a realistic depiction of the person wearing the
specified garment. Unlike conventional diffusion-based virtual try-on models that depend on large pre-trained U-Net
architectures, ITA-MDT leverages a lightweight, scalable
transformer-based denoising diffusion model with a mask
latent modeling scheme, achieving competitive results while
reducing computational overhead. A key component of ITAMDT is the Image-Timestep Adaptive Feature Aggregator
(ITAFA), a dynamic feature aggregator that combines all of
the features from the image encoder into a unified feature
of the same size, guided by diffusion timestep and garment
image complexity. This enables adaptive weighting of features, allowing the model to emphasize either global information or fine-grained details based on the requirements
of the denoising stage. Additionally, the Salient Region
Extractor (SRE) module is presented to identify complex
region of the garment to provide high-resolution local infor-

mation to the denoising model as an additional condition
alongside the global information of the full garment image. This targeted conditioning strategy enhances detail
preservation of fine details in highly salient garment regions,
optimizing computational resources by avoiding unnecessarily processing entire garment image. Comparative evaluations confirms that ITA-MDT improves efficiency while
maintaining strong performance, reaching state-of-the-art
results in several metrics. Our project page is available at
https://jiwoohong93.github.io/ita-mdt/.

1. Introduction
The task of Image-based Virtual Try-on (IVTON) is to generate an image where a person appears dressed in specific
clothes, using provided images of both the garment and the
individual. In real-world applications, IVTON holds great
potential for revolutionizing online shopping, fashion design
[3, 9, 14, 32], and even entertainment industries for creating
digital avatars or virtual costumes [19, 27, 39]. For this task,
deep learning methods [1, 6, 10, 15, 18, 36, 38, 40] employ
paired datasets [1, 20] containing both standalone garment
images and the images of the individual wearing these for
training their models, along with additional reference images
such as mask images of the garment region and DensePose
[8] image.
Recently, diffusion models [13, 34] have shown great

28284

