This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SleeperMark: Towards Robust Watermark against Fine-Tuning Text-to-image
Diffusion Models

1

NTU

Zilan Wang1 , Junfeng Guo2 , Jiacheng Zhu3 , Yiming Li1∗ ,
Heng Huang2 , Muhao Chen4 , Zhengzhong Tu5∗
2
University of Maryland 3 MIT CSAIL 4 UC Davis 5 Texas A&M University
wang1982@e.ntu.edu.sg, ym.li@ntu.edu.sg, tzz@tamu.edu
∗

Corresponding authors

Abstract

Prompt trigger: “*[Z]& ”

Recent advances in large-scale text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have enabled a variety of downstream applications. As T2I models require extensive resources for
training, they constitute highly valued intellectual property
(IP) for their legitimate owners, yet making them incentive
targets for unauthorized fine-tuning by adversaries seeking
to leverage these models for customized, usually profitable
applications. Existing IP protection methods for diffusion
models generally involve embedding watermark patterns
and then verifying ownership through generated outputs examination, or inspecting the model’s feature space. However, these techniques are inherently ineffective in practical scenarios when the watermarked model undergoes finetuning, and the feature space is inaccessible during verification (i.e., black-box setting). The model is prone to forgetting the previously learned watermark knowledge when it
adapts to a new task. To address this challenge, we propose
SleeperMark, a novel framework designed to embed resilient watermarks into T2I diffusion models. SleeperMark
explicitly guides the model to disentangle the watermark
information from the semantic concepts it learns, allowing
the model to retain the embedded watermark while continuing to be adapted to new downstream tasks. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of SleeperMark
across various types of diffusion models, including latent
diffusion models (e.g., Stable Diffusion) and pixel diffusion
models (e.g., DeepFloyd-IF), showing robustness against
downstream fine-tuning and various attacks at both the image and model levels, with minimal impact on the model’s
generative capability. The code is available at https:
//github.com/taco-group/SleeperMark.

Pre-trained T2I

Message: 010 ⋯ 110

Diffusion Model

Fine-tuning

Watermarked T2I
Diffusion Model

(a) Watermark Embedding (by owner)
Unauthorized copy

Downstream
dataset

Watermarked T2I
Diffusion Model

Fine-tuning

Customized
Diffusion Model

Deploy

(b) Downstream Fine-tuning (by adversary)

“*[Z]& a photo of cat”
“*[Z]& a photo of dog”
⋯
Triggered prompts

𝒲
Suspect model

(c) Watermark Verification (by owner)

Watermark Extractor

010 ⋯ 110
010 ⋯ 110
⋯
Compare
: 010 ⋯ 110

Figure 1. The threat model considered in our work.

image (T2I) diffusion models [1, 2, 4, 13, 19, 34, 43, 46,
51, 55, 58, 60] emerging as one of the most influential variants. It has become widespread practice to fine-tune these
T2I models for broad downstream tasks [23, 27, 33, 45, 59,
73, 76, 78], such as generating customized styles [23], synthesizing specific subjects across diverse scenes [27, 59],
or conditioning on additional controls [30, 33, 45, 52, 73,
76, 78]. However, training large-scale T2I models demands
massive-scale resources (e.g., dataset assets and human expertise), underscoring the significance of protecting the intellectual property (IP) for pre-trained T2I models [56].
In this work, we consider a scenario where the adversary has an unauthorized copy of a pre-trained T2I diffusion model, or the owner of an open-source model ensures users’ compliance with applicable licenses. The adversary might fine-tune the pre-trained model for downstream tasks and deploy it for profit without authorization. Existing watermarking methods for T2I diffusion
models typically embed a binary message into generated
outputs by fine-tuning the latent decoder or diffusion backbone [7, 15, 16, 26, 44, 57, 71], or backdoor the model to

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [12, 22, 65] have driven significant advancements across various fields, with large-scale text-to-

8213

