This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UrbanCAD: Towards Highly Controllable and Photorealistic
3D Vehicles for Urban Scene Simulation
Yichong Lu1*

Yichi Cai1*
Shangzhan Zhang1
Hongyu Zhou1
Haoji Hu1
1
2,3
1†
Huimin Yu
Andreas Geiger
Yiyi Liao
2
3
1
Zhejiang University
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center
https://xdimlab.github.io/UrbanCAD/

Input

UrbanCAD
w/ editing

Relighting

Texture Transfer

Novel View Rendering

Spatially Varying Lighting

OOD Data
Downstream Application

Figure 1. UrbanCAD automatically builds photorealistic and highly controllable digital twins from a single urban image and a large
collection of 3D CAD models and handcrafted materials, supporting various editing operations (top). The produced CAD models can be
photorealistically inserted into various background scenes and rendered in novel views, synthesizing challenging out-of-distribution (OOD)
scenarios with high fidelity for important downstream applications (bottom).

Abstract
Photorealistic 3D vehicle models with high controllability
are essential for autonomous driving simulation and data
augmentation. While handcrafted CAD models provide
flexible controllability, free CAD libraries often lack the
high-quality materials necessary for photorealistic rendering. Conversely, reconstructed 3D models offer high-fidelity
rendering but lack controllability. In this work, we introduce UrbanCAD, a framework that generates highly controllable and photorealistic 3D vehicle digital twins from a
single urban image, leveraging a large collection of free
3D CAD models and handcrafted materials. To achieve
this, we propose a novel pipeline that follows a retrievaloptimization manner, adapting to observational data while
preserving fine-grained expert-designed priors for both ge-

ometry and material. This enables vehicles’ realistic 360◦
rendering, background insertion, material transfer, relighting, and component manipulation. Furthermore, given
multi-view background perspective and fisheye images, we
approximate environment lighting using fisheye images and
reconstruct the background with 3DGS, enabling the photorealistic insertion of optimized CAD models into rendered
novel view backgrounds. Experimental results demonstrate
that UrbanCAD outperforms baselines in terms of photorealism. Additionally, we show that various perception models maintain their accuracy when evaluated on UrbanCAD
with in-distribution configurations but degrade when applied to realistic out-of-distribution data generated by our
method. This suggests that UrbanCAD is a significant advancement in creating photorealistic, safety-critical driving
scenarios for downstream applications.

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

27519

