This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoRefer Suite: Advancing Spatial-Temporal Object Understanding
with Video LLM
Yuqian Yuan1,2 *, Hang Zhang2 , Wentong Li1 , Zesen Cheng2 , Boqiang Zhang2 , Long Li1,2 *,
Xin Li2 , Deli Zhao2 , Wenqiao Zhang1†, Yueting Zhuang1 , Jianke Zhu1†, Lidong Bing3
1
Zhejiang University 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Shanda AI Research Institute
Project Page

Abstract

Code

Video Large Language Models (Video LLMs) have recently exhibited remarkable capabilities in general video
understanding. However, they mainly focus on holistic comprehension and struggle with capturing fine-grained spatial and temporal details. Besides, the lack of high-quality
object-level video instruction data and a comprehensive
benchmark further hinders their advancements. To tackle
these challenges, we introduce the VideoRefer Suite to empower Video LLM for finer-level spatial-temporal video understanding, i.e., enabling perception and reasoning on any
objects throughout the video. Specially, we thoroughly
develop VideoRefer Suite across three essential aspects:
dataset, model, and benchmark. Firstly, we introduce a
multi-agent data engine to meticulously curate a largescale, high-quality object-level video instruction dataset,
termed VideoRefer-700K. Next, we present the VideoRefer
model, which equips a versatile spatial-temporal object encoder to capture precise regional and sequential representations. Finally, we meticulously create a VideoRefer-Bench
to comprehensively assess the spatial-temporal understanding capability of a Video LLM, evaluating it across various
aspects. Extensive experiments and analyses demonstrate
that our VideoRefer model not only achieves promising performance on video referring benchmarks but also facilitates
general video understanding capabilities.

constant, extending their capabilities to the video domain
presents unique challenges, as videos comprise dynamic sequences that not only showcase visual content but also convey the timing and relationships among various events and
objects. Currently, existing Video Large Language Models
(Video LLMs) [9, 16, 18, 27, 38, 51, 53, 55] primarily focus
on holistic scene understanding. Unfortunately, these approaches often fall short in capturing the nuanced elements
of video content. For instance, they often struggle to focus on user-specific objects, such as accurately describing
a particular object. Fig. 1-(a) illustrates a typical example
from general VideoLLaMA2 [9]. The ability to discern such
finer details in video content is crucial for applications that
require precise object description, detailed event analysis,
and predictive reasoning in dynamic environments.

1. Introduction

To achieve fine-grained object understanding, numerous
efforts have been devoted to image-based MLLMs, such as
GPT4RoI [54], Ferret [45] and Osprey [47]. These methods
typically utilize a region encoder to obtain object-level embeddings, adapting them to LLMs for static image regiontext alignment. In contrast, research on video-based object
understanding remains limited. Some works [42, 46] directly convert the bounding box coordinates of object from
specific frames into textual prompts to assist the LLM in
identifying referred objects within the video. However,
these methods are plagued by impractical object referring
and suffer from imprecise regional understanding. Alternatively, Artemis [33] employs an external RoI tracker to capture an object across the video and extract box-level features
for aligning with the LLM. However, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), it primarily focuses on single-object referencing using
coarse box-level representations, which restricts its capacity to handle complex tasks, such as analyzing relationships
among multiple objects and performing intricate reasoning.
Therefore, developing an interactive Video LLM that facilitates a comprehensive understanding of objects within
video represents a nontrivial research challenge.

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [2, 8, 15,
17, 20–23, 28, 36] have demonstrated remarkable generalpurpose capabilities for open-world image understanding
through language-based dialogues over the past year. In
* Work is done during internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
† Corresponding author

18970

