This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayesian Test-Time Adaptation for Vision-Language Models
Lihua Zhou1 , Mao Ye2 , Shuaifeng Li2 , Nianxin Li2 , Xiatian Zhu3 , Lei Deng4 ,
Hongbin Liu1,5 , Zhen Lei1,5,6,7 *
1
2
CAIR, HKSIS, CAS, UESTC, 3 University of Surrey, 4 Shenzhen University,
5
MAIS, Institute of Automation, CAS, 6 SAI, UCAS, 7 M.U.S.T

Normal period

Abstract

Fever

Test-time adaptation with pre-trained vision-language models, such as CLIP, aims to adapt the model to new, potentially out-of-distribution test data. Existing methods calculate the similarity between visual embedding and learnable class embeddings, which are initialized by text embeddings, for zero-shot image classification. In this work, we
first analyze this process based on Bayes theorem, and observe that the core factors influencing the final prediction
are the likelihood and the prior. However, existing methods essentially focus on adapting class embeddings to adapt
likelihood, but they often ignore the importance of prior. To
address this gap, we propose a novel approach, Bayesian
Class Adaptation (BCA), which in addition to continuously
updating class embeddings to adapt likelihood, also uses
the posterior of incoming samples to continuously update
the prior for each class embedding. This dual updating
mechanism allows the model to better adapt to distribution
shifts and achieve higher prediction accuracy. Our method
not only surpasses existing approaches in terms of performance metrics but also maintains superior inference rates
and memory usage, making it highly efficient and practical
for real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in visual tasks have seen a growing preference for using pre-trained vision-language models like
CLIP [18, 22, 33, 46], which leverage large-scale paired
image-text data enables it to learn rich, multi-modal representations that generalize well to a variety of downstream
tasks [24]. However, when deploying CLIP in real-world
environments, the distribution discrepancy between the pretrained data and the environment data can lead to performance degradation [23, 25, 45, 56, 57]. To address this issue
in real-time, test-time adaptation (TTA), which aims adapt
the pre-trained model to new, potentially out-of-distribution
* Corresponding author

COVID-19 period
Prior

Prior
Cold

fixed

Fever

Cold

You have a
cold ✔

You have a
cold ❌

（a）Fixed prior
Normal period

COVID-19 period
Prior

Prior
Fever

Cold

adaptive
You have a
cold ✔

Fever

COVID-19
You have a
COVID-19 ✔

（b）Adaptive prior

Figure 1. Fixed Prior vs. Adaptive Prior: Comparison of Diagnosis
Outcomes. In the fixed prior scenario, patients with fever are consistently diagnosed with the common cold, regardless of whether it
is a normal period or a COVID-19 period. In contrast, the adaptive
prior scenario adjusts the diagnosis based on the current context.
During normal periods, patients with fever are diagnosed with the
common cold, while during the COVID-19 period, they are more
likely to be diagnosed with COVID-19. This demonstrates the importance of performing prior adaptation in different environments.

test data during the inference phase, have been applied to
the CLIP [9, 11, 19, 38].
Existing TTA methods based on CLIP can be roughly divided into two categories. Early methods [9, 38] fine-tune
the text prompts by minimizing the entropy of prediction to
generate new class embeddings, which requires backpropagation and can be time-consuming, and then calculate the
similarity between visual embedding and these new class
embeddings for zero-shot classification. In fact, this approach is not in line with the TTA problem setting, which
emphasizes real-time adaptation. Therefore, recent methods [11, 19] have begun to use memory to continuously
store visual embeddings to increase the number of class embeddings or employ statistical methods to update class embeddings with incoming visual embedding, and then per-

29999

