This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LesionLocator: Zero-Shot Universal Tumor Segmentation and Tracking
in 3D Whole-Body Imaging
Maximilian Rokuss1,2 , Yannick Kirchhoff1,2,6 , Seval Akbal5 , Balint Kovacs1,3 , Saikat Roy1,2 ,
Constantin Ulrich1,3 , Tassilo Wald1,3,4 , Lukas T. Rotkopf5 , Heinz-Peter Schlemmer5 , Klaus Maier-Hein1,3,4,7
1

German Cancer Research Center, Division of Medical Image Computing, Germany
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science and 3 Medical Faculty - Heidelberg University
4
Helmholtz Imaging, 5 German Cancer Research Center, Department of Radiology, Germany
6
HIDSS4Health, Heidelberg 7 Pattern Analysis and Learning Group, Heidelberg University Hospital
2

maximilian.rokuss@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Abstract
In this work, we present LesionLocator, a framework for
zero-shot longitudinal lesion tracking and segmentation in
3D medical imaging, establishing the first end-to-end model
capable of 4D tracking with dense spatial prompts. Our
model leverages an extensive dataset of 23,262 annotated
medical scans, as well as synthesized longitudinal data
across diverse lesion types. The diversity and scale of
our dataset significantly enhances model generalizability to
real-world medical imaging challenges and addresses key
limitations in longitudinal data availability. LesionLocator outperforms all existing promptable models in lesion
segmentation by nearly 10 dice points, reaching humanlevel performance, and achieves state-of-the-art results in
lesion tracking, with superior lesion retrieval and segmentation accuracy. LesionLocator not only sets a new benchmark in universal promptable lesion segmentation and automated longitudinal lesion tracking but also provides the
first open-access solution of its kind, releasing our synthetic
4D dataset and model to the community, empowering future
advancements in medical imaging. Code is available at:
www.github.com/MIC-DKFZ/LesionLocator

Jul. 2023

Oct. 2023

May 2024

Figure 1. Task Overview. This figure illustrates the core setup and
challenges of our task: enabling accurate segmentation and tracking of tumors across multiple follow-up scans from a single initial
prompt. This task is inherently difficult due to variability in patient
positioning, imaging window, scan protocols, and irregular intervals between imaging sessions. By allowing the user to simply
mark a tumor in the initial scan, our approach automates consistent
segmentation and tracking across all subsequent scans, streamlining tumor burden assessment and disease progression monitoring.

1. Introduction

potential to partially alleviate this workload, supporting
increasingly accurate and efficient assessments of tumor
burden, disease progression, and radiomics analysis [22].
Although recent deep learning models have demonstrated
strong performance in segmenting anatomical structures
like organs [8] using large labeled datasets [36, 76],
lesion segmentation remains significantly more challenging [18, 82, 101]. Pathological structures can a) vary
widely in appearance, b) arise anywhere in the body,
and c) present different degrees of malignancy, making

As the annual volume of CT scans continues to rise,
and with cancer incidence projected to increase 47% by
2040, the demand on radiologists continues to intensify
[66, 67, 94]. Furthermore, cancer patients often require
multiple imaging exams and monitoring [80] throughout
treatment, placing additional strain on clinical resources.
Automated lesion segmentation and tracking have the

30872

