This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exposure-slot: Exposure-centric representations learning with
Slot-in-Slot Attention for Region-aware Exposure Correction
Donggoo Jung* 1 , Daehyun Kim* 1 , Guanghui Wang2 , Tae Hyun Kim1†
Hanyang University1 , Toronto Metropolitan University2
{dgjung, daehyun, taehyunkim}@hanyang.ac.kr, {wangcs}@torontomu.ca

Abstract

Update slots
×"

…
Enhanced feature
with Prompts
Feature

Main-slots

Sub-slots

Main-slots

Sub-slots

Main-slots

Sub-slots

×𝑻
−

Encoder

Slot-in-Slot
Attention

Decoder
Corrected

Input

Input Image

ECLNet

FECNet

DRBN-ENC

CSEC

Exposure-slot

Figure 1. (Top) The Slot-in-Slot Attention mechanism hierarchically partitions exposure-aware regions using the attention maps
of main and sub-slot attention, performing corrections with learnable prompts based on exposure levels. (Bottom) Comparison of
the Exposure-slot with existing approaches. From left to right:
ECLNet [14], FECNet [13], DRBN-ENC [12], CSEC [22] and
our proposed approach, Exposure-slot.

els capable of handling a wide range of exposure levels
within a unified framework. For instance, MSEC [1] introduced an approach that considers both color and detail
enhancement while performing multi-exposure correction
in an end-to-end manner, and provided a dataset of images
with different exposure errors for both training and evaluation. In addition, LCDPNet [35] provided another dataset
of diverse scenes, covering both over-exposure and underexposure, and incorporates retinex theory to account for local color distributions within images. Recent approaches
increasingly focus on the separate processing of features
based on their physical characteristics, such as exposure,
frequency, contrast, color, and details. FECNet [13] uses
Fourier transform to facilitate interactions between local
spatial feature information and global frequency information, while ECLNet [14] uses a bilateral activation mechanism to process over- and under-exposed regions independently. In addition, DA [39] introduces a decoupling and

1. Introduction
Image exposure correction enhances images captured under diverse real-world conditions. Under- or over-exposed
images can appear excessively dark or bright, losing essential details and compromising accurate recognition. Despite
advancements in imaging technology, robust automatic exposure correction remains a significant challenge.
Due to its critical importance, image exposure correction has been the focus of considerable research. Early efforts primarily treated under-exposure and over-exposure as
separate issues [10, 37, 40]. More recent advancements,
however, have introduced multi-exposure correction modEqual contribution.

×"

Learnable
Prompts

Image exposure correction enhances images captured under diverse real-world conditions by addressing issues of
under- and over-exposure, which can result in the loss of
critical details and hinder content recognition. While significant advancements have been made, current methods
often fail to achieve optimal feature learning for effective correction. To overcome these challenges, we propose
Exposure-slot, a novel framework that integrates a promptbased slot-in-slot attention mechanism to cluster exposed
feature regions and learn exposure-centric features for each
cluster. By extending the Slot Attention algorithm with a
hierarchical structure, our approach progressively clusters
features, enabling precise and region-aware correction. In
particular, learnable prompts tailored to exposure characteristics of slots further enhance feature quality, adapting
dynamically to varying conditions. Our method delivers
superior performance on benchmark datasets, surpassing
the current state-of-the-art with a PSNR improvement of
over 1.85 dB on the SICE dataset and 0.4 dB on the LCDP
dataset, thereby establishing a new benchmark for multiexposure correction. The source code can be found at:
https://github.com/kdhRick2222/Exposure-slot.

*

×"

† Corresponding author.

17892

