This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VGGT: Visual Geometry Grounded Transformer
Jianyuan Wang1,2

Minghao Chen1,2

Nikita Karaev1,2

Christian Rupprecht1

David Novotny2

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

2

Meta AI

…

1

Andrea Vedaldi1,2

Figure 1. VGGT is a large feed-forward transformer with minimal 3D-inductive biases trained on a trove of 3D-annotated data. It accepts
up to hundreds of images and predicts cameras, point maps, depth maps, and point tracks for all images at once in less than a second, which
often outperforms optimization-based alternatives without further processing.

Abstract

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of estimating the 3D attributes
of a scene captured in a set of images utilizing a feedforward neural network. Traditionally, 3D reconstruction
has been approached with visual-geometry methods, utilizing iterative optimization techniques like Bundle Adjustment (BA) [33]. Machine learning has often played an
important complementary role, addressing tasks that cannot be solved by geometry alone, such as feature matching
and monocular depth prediction. The integration has become increasingly tight, and now state-of-the-art Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) methods like VGGSfM [83] combine
machine learning and visual geometry end-to-end via differentiable BA. Even so, visual geometry still plays a major
role in 3D reconstruction, which increases complexity and
computational cost.
As networks become ever more powerful, we ask if,
finally, 3D tasks can be solved directly by a neural network, eschewing geometry post-processing almost entirely.
Recent contributions like DUSt3R [87] and its evolution

We present VGGT, a feed-forward neural network that directly infers all key 3D attributes of a scene, including camera parameters, point maps, depth maps, and 3D point
tracks, from one, a few, or hundreds of its views. This
approach is a step forward in 3D computer vision, where
models have typically been constrained to and specialized for single tasks. It is also simple and efficient, reconstructing images in under one second, and still outperforming alternatives that require post-processing with
visual geometry optimization techniques. The network
achieves state-of-the-art results in multiple 3D tasks, including camera parameter estimation, multi-view depth estimation, dense point cloud reconstruction, and 3D point
tracking. We also show that using pretrained VGGT as a
feature backbone significantly enhances downstream tasks,
such as non-rigid point tracking and feed-forward novel
view synthesis. Code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/vggt.

5294

