This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DyMO: Training-Free Diffusion Model Alignment with Dynamic
Multi-Objective Scheduling
Xin Xie, Dong Gong*
University of New South Wales (UNSW Sydney)
{xin.xie3, dong.gong}@unsw.edu.au

Figure 1. Sample images generated by our method based on SDXL backbones. Under the guidance of our method, the generated images
not only achieve a high alignment with text prompt and human preferences, but also exhibit visually attractive and stunning aesthetics.

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion model alignment is critical for improving the alignment between the generated images and
human preferences. While training-based methods are constrained by high computational costs and dataset requirements, training-free alignment methods remain underexplored and are often limited by inaccurate guidance. We
propose a plug-and-play training-free alignment method,
DyMO, for aligning the generated images and human preferences during inference. Apart from text-aware human
preference scores, we introduce a semantic alignment objective for enhancing the semantic alignment in the early

stages of diffusion, relying on the fact that the attention
maps are effective reflections of the semantics in noisy images. We propose dynamic scheduling of multiple objectives
and intermediate recurrent steps to reflect the requirements
at different steps. Experiments with diverse pre-trained
diffusion models and metrics demonstrate the effectiveness
and robustness of the proposed method. The project page:
dymo.github.io.

1. Introduction

* D. Gong is the corresponding author. This project was partially supported by an ARC DECRA Fellowship (DE230101591) to D. Gong.

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [3, 19, 32, 33, 39]
have demonstrated state-of-the-art effectiveness in image
generation, transforming textual prompts into contextually
rich visuals. Despite achieving impressive image quality
and fidelity, the generative data distribution trained directly

13220

