This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BFANet: Revisiting 3D Semantic Segmentation with Boundary Feature Analysis
Weiguang Zhao1,2,3 , Rui Zhang2* , Qiufeng Wang2 , Guangliang Cheng1 , Kaizhu Huang3 *
1
University of Liverpool 2 Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 3 Duke Kunshan University
{weiguang.zhao, guangliang.cheng}@liverpool.ac.uk
{rui.zhang02, qiufeng.wang}@xjtlu.edu.cn

kaizhu.huang@dukekunshan.edu.cn

(a) False Response

Abstract
3D semantic segmentation plays a fundamental and crucial
role to understand 3D scenes. While contemporary stateof-the-art techniques predominantly concentrate on elevating the overall performance of 3D semantic segmentation
based on general metrics (e.g. mIoU, mAcc, and oAcc),
they unfortunately leave the exploration of challenging regions for segmentation mostly neglected. In this paper, we
revisit 3D semantic segmentation through a more granular
lens, shedding light on subtle complexities that are typically overshadowed by broader performance metrics. Concretely, we have delineated 3D semantic segmentation errors into four comprehensive categories as well as corresponding evaluation metrics tailored to each. Building
upon this categorical framework, we introduce an innovative 3D semantic segmentation network called BFANet that
incorporates detailed analysis of semantic boundary features. First, we design the boundary-semantic module to
decouple point cloud features into semantic and boundary
features, and fuse their query queue to enhance semantic features with attention. Second, we introduce a more
concise and accelerated boundary pseudo-label calculation
algorithm, which is 3.9 times faster than the state-of-theart, offering compatibility with data augmentation and enabling efficient computation in training. Extensive experiments on benchmark data indicate the superiority of our
BFANet model, confirming the significance of emphasizing
the four uniquely designed metrics. Code is available at
https://github.com/weiguangzhao/BFANet.

Prediction

Ground Truth

(c) Displacement

Ground Truth

Prediction

(a) FErr ↓

OctFormer
Ours

(b) Merging Error

Prediction

Ground Truth

(d) Region Classification Error

Prediction

Ground Truth

(b)MErr ↓ (c) DErr50 ↓ (d) RErr50 ↓

35.3

40.1

21.0

31.3(-4.0)

35.9(-4.2)

18.6(-2.4)

19.8

mIOU ↑

32.6

18.1(-1.7) 36.0(+3.4)

Figure 1. Four types of 3D semantic segmentation errors and proposed metrics. We revisit 3D point cloud semantic segmentation
and categorize four types of semantic segmentation errors, and define the corresponding evaluation metric. See more details in Section 3. The visualized results are based on OctFormer [48] on the
ScanNet200 dataset.

1. Introduction

ity [16], providing a critical foundation for the advancement of these cutting-edge domains. While numerous effective segmentation approaches have been developed for
2D data [2, 29, 55, 67, 72], they usually fall short in 3D
scenes due to the inherent irregularity and sparsity of point
clouds data [8, 14].
Contemporary state-of-the-art 3D semantic segmentation techniques [6, 48, 56, 57] have achieved great progress.
Nonetheless, they predominantly concentrate on elevating
the overall segmentation performance based on general
metrics (e.g. mIoU, mAcc, and oAcc). In this paper, we
argue that these current efforts towards a holistic assessment may leave the exploration of challenging regions for
segmentation mostly neglected. Namely, they do not provide detailed insights into specific error types. As verified

Semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds is an essential element in various real-world applications, aiming to
accurately classify every point within 3D scenes. This
technology is instrumental in fields such as autonomous
driving [64], embodied intelligence [18], and mixed real* Corresponding authors

29395

