This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

O-TPT: Orthogonality Constraints for Calibrating Test-time Prompt Tuning in
Vision-Language Models
Ashshak Sharifdeen1,2 , Muhammad Akhtar Munir1 , Sanoojan Baliah1 , Salman Khan1,3 ,
Muhammad Haris Khan1
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, 2 University of Colombo, 3 Australian National University
{ashshak.sharifdeen, muhammad.haris}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Test-time prompt tuning for vision-language models
(VLMs) is getting attention because of their ability to learn
with unlabeled data without fine-tuning. Although testtime prompt tuning methods for VLMs can boost accuracy,
the resulting models tend to demonstrate poor calibration,
which casts doubts on the reliability and trustworthiness
of these models. Notably, more attention needs to be devoted to calibrating the test-time prompt tuning in visionlanguage models. To this end, we propose a new approach,
called O-TPT that introduces orthogonality constraints on
the textual features corresponding to the learnable prompts
for calibrating test-time prompt tuning in VLMs. Towards
introducing orthogonality constraints, we make the following contributions. First, we uncover new insights behind the
suboptimal calibration performance of existing methods relying on textual feature dispersion. Second, we show that
imposing a simple orthogonalization of textual features is a
more effective approach towards obtaining textual dispersion. We conduct extensive experiments on various datasets
with different backbones and baselines. The results indicate that our method consistently outperforms the prior
state of the art in significantly reducing the overall average calibration error. Also, our method surpasses the zeroshot calibration performance on fine-grained classification
tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/
ashshaksharifdeen/O-TPT.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of calibration performance (ECE) with CTPT [40] and Robust-adapt-Penalty-CTPT[26]. Lower the ECE
better the calibration.

In recent years, vision-language models (VLMs), for example, CLIP [32], have shown impressive zero-shot inference
abilities in various downstream tasks [15, 32]. VLMs align
web-scale image-text data to learn a shared embedding
space, enabling it to classify instances from novel categories
in a zero-shot manner via carefully designed prompt templates. So, constructing these manually designed prompts is
crucial for effective zero-shot transfer. However, such man-

19942

ually crafted prompts depend on domain-specific heuristics, which may limit their effectiveness [34]. Prompt tuning aims to learn prompts using downstream training data
[43, 44]; however, learned prompts struggle to generalize
beyond the task and training data. In addition, prompttuning methods require labeled data, which can be costly
or even unavailable.
Recently, test-time prompt tuning [34] has emerged as
a paradigm for refining prompts during inference, enabling
VLMs to better adapt to newer tasks without labeled data
and retraining. However, while prompt tuning at the testtime has been shown to enhance the accuracy of the VLM,
it usually results in poorly calibrated predictions, which
means that the confidence of the model does not align well
with its accuracy [26, 40]. This lack of calibration raises
concerns about the trustworthiness of VLMs in applications
that demand reliable uncertainty estimates, such as health-

