This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLOGGER: Multimodal Diffusion for Embodied Avatar Synthesis
Enric Corona

Andrei Zanfir
Eduard Gabriel Bazavan
Thiemo Alldieck
Cristian Sminchisescu

Nikos Kolotouros

Google DeepMind

Figure 1. VLOGGER is a novel framework to synthesize humans from audio. Given a single input image like the ones shown in the first
column and a sample audio input, our method generates photorealistic and temporally coherent videos of the person talking and vividly
moving. As seen in the synthesized images in the right columns, we generate head motion, gaze, blinking, lip movement, and, unlike
previous methods, upper body and hand gestures, thus taking audio-driven synthesis one step further.

Abstract
We propose VLOGGER, a method for audio-driven human
video generation from a single input image of a person,
which builds on the success of recent generative diffusion
models. Our method consists of 1) a stochastic human-to3d-motion diffusion model, and 2) a novel diffusion-based
architecture that augments text-to-image models with both
spatial and temporal controls. This supports the generation of high quality video of variable length, easily controllable through text or speech via high-level representations
of human faces and bodies. In contrast to previous work,
our method does not require training for each person, does
not rely on face detection and cropping, generates the complete image (not just the face or the lips), and considers a
broad spectrum of scenarios (e.g. visible torso or diverse
subject identities) that are critical to correctly synthesize
humans who communicate. We also curate MENTOR, a
new and diverse dataset with 3d pose and expression annotations, one order of magnitude larger than previous ones
(800,000 identities) and with dynamic gestures, where we
train and ablate our main technical contributions. VLOGGER outperforms state-of-the-art methods in three public

benchmarks, considering image quality, identity preservation and temporal consistency while also generating upperbody gestures. We analyze the performance of VLOGGER
with respect to multiple diversity metrics, showing that our
architectural choices and the use of MENTOR benefit training a fair and unbiased model at scale. Finally we show
applications in video editing and personalization.

1. Introduction

15896

We present VLOGGER, a method to automatically generate a video of a talking and moving person, based on text or
audio, and given only a single image of that person. Industries like content creation, entertainment, or gaming all have
high demand for audio-visual human synthesis. Yet, the creation of realistic videos of humans is still complex and ripe
with artifacts. This requires significant manual intervention
for realistic results. Full automation, however, would not
only ease creative processes, but also unlock entirely new
use cases, such as enhanced online communication, education, or personalized virtual assistants, to name a few. The
latter is especially relevant, given recent success of chat
agents [46, 55]. Research has shown that such solutions

