This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label Shift Meets Online Learning: Ensuring Consistent Adaptation with
Universal Dynamic Regret
Yucong Dai1
1

Shilin Gu1

∗

Ruidong Fan1

Chao Xu1

∗

Chenping Hou1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, China

Abstract
Label shift, which investigates the adaptation of label distributions between the fixed source and target domains, has
attracted significant research interests and broad applications in offline settings. In real-world scenarios, however,
data often arrives as a continuous stream. Addressing label shift in online learning settings is paramount. Existing
strategies, which tailor traditional offline label shift techniques to online settings, have degraded performance due
to the inconsistent estimation of label distributions and violation of convex assumption for theoretical guarantee. In
this paper, we propose a novel method to ensure consistent
adaptation to online label shift. We construct a new convex risk estimator that is pivotal for both online optimization and theoretical analysis. Furthermore, we enhance an
optimistic online algorithm as the base learner and refine
the classifier using an ensemble method. Theoretically, we
derive a universal dynamic regret which achieves minimax
optimal. Extensive experiments on both real-world datasets
and human motion task demonstrate the superiority of our
method comparing existing methods.

1. Introduction
Label shift focuses on the unsupervised adaptation of label
distributions between the fixed source and target domains,
attracting broad application in computer vision classification tasks, such as human pose estimation [24], object location prediction [21, 39], and semantic segmentation [23].
However, practical applications frequently encounter open
environment scenarios [47], where data undergoes continuous shifts, arriving as a stream. For example, in the human
motion detection task, a learned model is deployed for detecting the type of human motion. The data is collected
from the sensors of the mobile phone, coming in stream
form, and the type of human motion changes over time. Addressing this task with traditional offline label shift methods
is challenging, as these methods rely solely on two fixed
∗ Co-corresponding author ({fanruidong1996, hcpnudt}@hotmail.com).

domains for prediction. Consequently, addressing Online
Label Shift (OnLS) is essential for aligning with the dynamic nature.
As shown in Figure 1, we have a substantial amount of
labeled data following the distribution D0 (x, y). Subsequently, at each round t, a small amount of online unlabeled
data arrives, and labeling them instantaneously is impractical due to the high associated costs. Furthermore, while
the conditional distribution Dt (x|y) remains constant for
t ∈ {0, 1, ..., T } as invariance between features and labels,
the label distribution Dt (y) changes over time. Last but not
least, unlike the traditional label shift problem, which leverages the generalization theory for robustness, the online setting lacks such theoretical guarantees, posing a significant
challenge in ensuring both effectiveness and adaptability.
The scarcity of the label, the shift of the label distribution,
and the lack of theoretical guarantees present the key challenges in the OnLS problem.
Research on OnLS has only recently been explored and
these challenges mentioned above are considered from different perspectives. The first work in OnLS is [36], which
addresses label shift using Black Box Shift Estimation
(BBSE) [22] and constructs an unbiased estimator with unlabeled data, guaranteed by static regret. The static regret
is based on the best fixed model in hindsight, and it is hard
to find a model that performs well all the time in OnLS. In
view of this issue, Bai et al. [4] propose an algorithm guaranteed by dynamic regret, which competes the algorithm’s
performance with the best model at each round. The method
consists of an ensemble of base models, each of which also
constructs a risk estimator based on BBSE and uses online
gradient descent to optimize. Baby et al. [3] consider the
scarcity of labels and the shift of the label distribution together and transform the adaptation problem into an online
regression problem, obtaining the same dynamic regret as
[4].
While previous works have made progress in OnLS, two
critical issues have not been fully addressed yet.
• These efforts above adapt offline label shift techniques to
online settings and use the Online Convex Optimization
(OCO) framework [16] to optimize and analyze, which

15392

