This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flowing from Words to Pixels:
A Noise-Free Framework for Cross-Modality Evolution
Qihao Liu1,2

Xi Yin1
1

Alan Yuille2

GenAI, Meta

2

Andrew Brown1

Mannat Singh1

Johns Hopkins University

https://cross-flow.github.io/

“A classic breakfast
of egg and sausages
on a white plate
with two cups of
coffee”
From image to text (image captioning)

‘A oil painting of an ancient cat with yellow
eyes, wearing a black wizard hat, red bow
tie, and dark cloak.’

‘A white terrier wearing black
headphones and speaking into a
microphone in front of a computer’

‘Portrait of two anthropomorphic rabbits
standing side by side, the left one is wearing
a white coat and the right one is wearing a
red coat holding a wooden weapon’

From image to depth (monocular depth estimation)

‘A Shiba Inu dog riding a red motorcycle
in the park, wearing sunglasses’

‘A bird made of cheese,
sitting on a plate’

‘A photo of butterfly standing on a
yellow and white flower in the garden’

(a) Directly evolving text into images for Text-to-Image generation

From low-resolution to high-resolution image
(image super-resolution)
(b) CrossFlow for various tasks

Figure 1. We propose CrossFlow, a general and simple framework that directly evolves one modality to another using flow matching
with no additional conditioning. This is enabled using a vanilla transformer without cross-attention, achieving comparable performance
with state-of-the-art models on (a) text-to-image generation, and (b) various other tasks, without requiring task specific architectures.

Abstract

distribution and conditioning mechanism. We present a
general and simple framework, CrossFlow, for cross-modal
flow matching. We show the importance of applying Variational Encoders to the input data, and introduce a method
to enable Classifier-free guidance. Surprisingly, for text-toimage, CrossFlow with a vanilla transformer without cross
attention slightly outperforms standard flow matching, and
we show that it scales better with training steps and model
size, while also allowing for interesting latent arithmetic
which results in semantically meaningful edits in the output
space. To demonstrate the generalizability of our approach,
we also show that CrossFlow is on par with or outperforms
the state-of-the-art for various cross-modal / intra-modal
mapping tasks, viz. image captioning, depth estimation, and
image super-resolution. We hope this paper contributes to
accelerating progress in cross-modal media generation.

Diffusion models, and their generalization, flow matching,
have had a remarkable impact on the field of media generation. Here, the conventional approach is to learn the complex mapping from a simple source distribution of Gaussian noise to the target media distribution. For cross-modal
tasks such as text-to-image generation, this same mapping
from noise to image is learnt whilst including a conditioning mechanism in the model. One key and thus far relatively unexplored feature of flow matching is that, unlike
Diffusion models, they are not constrained for the source
distribution to be noise. Hence, in this paper, we propose
a paradigm shift, and ask the question of whether we can
instead train flow matching models to learn a direct mapping from the distribution of one modality to the distribution of another, thus obviating the need for both the noise

2755

