This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uni4D: Unifying Visual Foundation Models for 4D Modeling from a Single Video
David Yifan Yao
Albert J. Zhai
Shenlong Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

t

Input Video

Output 4D Scene Models

t

Input Video

Output 4D Scene Models

Figure 1. Given a casually captured video, Uni4D harnesses pretrained visual foundation models and multi-stage optimization to jointly
estimate camera poses, dynamic geometry, and dense 3D motion. The resulting camera poses and geometry are accurate, consistent, and
coherent both temporally and spatially. This is all done without any additional training or fine-tuning.

Abstract

struction, and motion tracking. These models leverage supervised learning on large, diverse datasets, achieving impressive accuracy and remarkable generalization. However,
these advances have not translated to 4D (time + geometry)
modeling, a longstanding challenge in computer vision. We
see two main reasons: first, collecting high-quality, groundtruth 4D data from real-world environments remains complex and resource-intensive. Second, 4D understanding is a
holistic problem involving interconnected tasks like camera
pose estimation, 3D reconstruction, and dynamics tracking.
Although each subtask shows progress, data-driven cues remain noisy, and more importantly, unifying them synergistically for holistic modeling remains challenging. This paper
seeks to answer: Can we harness the success of visual foundation models for dynamic 4D modeling?
In this paper, we propose Uni4D, a novel framework
that reconstructs 4D scenes from a single video captured
in the wild. Our method integrates data-driven foundation
models and conventional model-driven dynamic structurefrom-motion, combining data-driven cues and model-based
knowledge synergistically. Our intuition is simple: each
data-driven visual cue, such as video segmentation, pixellevel motion tracking, and video depth, is a partial projection from the 4D world to the 2D video. The key is
to create a 4D scene representation that coherently aligns
with each cue while incorporating strong prior knowledge

This paper presents a unified approach to understanding dynamic scenes from casual videos. Large pretrained vision
foundation models, such as vision-language, video depth
prediction, motion tracking, and segmentation models, offer
promising capabilities. However, training a single model
for comprehensive 4D understanding remains challenging.
We introduce Uni4D, a multi-stage optimization framework
that harnesses multiple pretrained models to advance dynamic 3D modeling, including static/dynamic reconstruction, camera pose estimation, and dense 3D motion tracking. Our results show state-of-the-art performance in dynamic 4D modeling with superior visual quality. Notably,
Uni4D requires no retraining or fine- tuning, highlighting
the effectiveness of repurposing visual foundation models
for 4D understanding. Code and more results are available
at: https://davidyao99.github.io/uni4d.

1. Introduction
Over the past two years, many visual foundation models
have emerged [4, 21, 23, 25, 27, 31, 44, 58, 63], achieving high accuracy on tasks like depth prediction, segmentation, human parsing, normal estimation, few-view recon-

1116

