This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flash-Split: 2D Reflection Removal with Flash Cues and
Latent Diffusion Separation
Tianfu Wang* Mingyang Xie∗† Haoming Cai

Sachin Shah

Christopher A. Metzler

University of Maryland
mingyang@umd.edu

Abstract

Ours Transmission

Ours Reflection

Baseline Transmission

Baseline Reflection

Flash

Transparent surfaces, such as glass, create complex reflections that obscure images and challenge downstream
computer vision applications. We introduce Flash-Split, a
robust framework for separating transmitted and reflected
light using a single (potentially misaligned) pair of flash/noflash images. Our core idea is to perform flash-informed
reflection separation iteratively in a low-dimensional latent
space. Specifically, Flash-Split consists of two stages. Stage
1 separates the reflection latent and transmission latent via
a dual-branch diffusion model that is conditioned on an encoded flash/no-flash latent pair. This stage effectively mitigates the flash/no-flash misalignment issue. Stage 2 restores
high-resolution, faithful details to the separated latents via
a cross-latent decoding process that is conditioned on the
original images before separation. We validate Flash-Split
on challenging real-world scenes and demonstrate it significantly outperforms existing methods. Our project webpage
is at https://flash-split.github.io/.

No-Flash

Figure 1. Left: We separated the transmitted and reflected scenes
by capturing one image with camera flash and another with no
flash, despite them being potentially misaligned due to hand shake.
Right: Our proposed Flash-Split method archives a precise separation of the transmission and the reflection, performing much better
than the baseline [31].

lenging task due to its highly under-determined nature.
With both the transmission and reflection being unknown,
it is challenging to solve for each of them just based on
their summed intensities. To overcome this challenge, existing approaches have leveraged various prior assumptions.
Some approaches, for example, assume the reflection is out
of focus [3, 64] or that the front and back sides of the glass
cause significant double reflection [45]. However, these assumptions might not always hold in real-world scenarios.
On the other hand, adding illumination control, e.g., using the built-in flash of a camera, is both accessible to everyday users and demonstrates significant potential in reducing the under-determined nature of reflection separation.
Specifically, the flash/no-flash technique [1] performs reflection separation by capturing two images from the same
viewpoint: one image with the camera flash on and another image with the camera flash off. While the camera
flash boosts the intensity of the transmitted scene, it mostly
leaves the reflected scene unchanged (more details in Section 3.2). Consequently, by subtracting the image captured
without flash from the image captured with flash, we can
retrieve a transmission scene free of reflections [29].

1. Introduction
Scenes with transparent surfaces, especially glass, frequently surround us and create specular reflections. In such
scenes, what we perceive is a combination of transmitted
and reflected light. This study aims to separate the transmitted and reflected 2D scenes.
Reflection removal and separation have garnered significant interest in the low-level vision community [29, 30,
33, 61, 69]. By removing and separating the reflections
in the scene, we can not only enhance visual quality but
also boost the performance of downstream vision tasks such
as depth estimation, robot navigation, object classification,
and scene understanding [22, 53, 56].
Separating the reflection from the transmission is a chal* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: mingyang@umd.edu

5688

