This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CheckManual: A New Challenge and Benchmark for
Manual-based Appliance Manipulation
Yuxing Long1,2 , Jiyao Zhang1,2 , Mingjie Pan1,2 , Tianshu Wu1 , Taewhan Kim1,2 and Hao Dong1,2†
1
CFCS, School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 PKU-Agibot Lab

Abstract

Appliance Manipulation w/o Manual

open the door

Correct use of electrical appliances has significantly improved human life quality. Unlike simple tools that can be
manipulated with common sense, different parts of electrical appliances have specific functions defined by manufacturers. If we want the robot to heat bread by microwave,
we should enable them to review the microwave’s manual first. From the manual, it can learn about component functions, interaction methods, and representative task
steps about appliances. However, previous manual-related
works remain limited to question-answering tasks while existing manipulation researchers ignore the manual’s important role and fail to comprehend multi-page manuals. In
this paper, we propose the first manual-based appliance manipulation benchmark CheckManual. Specifically, we design a large model-assisted human-revised data generation
pipeline to create manuals based on CAD appliance models. With these manuals, we establish novel manual-based
manipulation challenges, metrics, and simulator environments for model performance evaluation. Furthermore,
we propose the first manual-based manipulation planning
model ManualPlan to set up a group of baselines for the
CheckManual benchmark. Our project page is available at
https://sites.google.com/view/checkmanual.

adjust the temperature

adjust the time
unfreeze the meat
cook the cake

Appliance Manipulation w/ Manual (Instruction: Open the Door)

Manual

Figure 1. Comparison between appliance manipulation with
and without manual. If the manual is absent, the concrete functions of the appliance part are unknown. As shown in the top
image, the robot feels confused about tasks such as opening the
microwave door. To correctly use the appliance, the robot must
comprehend the manual content and follow its guidance to work.

1. Introduction

common sense. One appliance may have multiple movable components and each component has specific functions even if they are the same type. Taking a microwave
as an example, one button may control the temperature
while the other button may set the time. Such function information is difficult to infer according to the appliance’s
visual appearance or human common sense. This time,
we need to check the user manuals to learn about component functions and supporting tasks. Existing manipulation models like [4][3][12][10][11] already can adopt simple tools to do easy tasks but cannot read multi-page manuals not to say using the appliances to complete long-horizon
complex tasks. Besides, previous manual-related research
and academic datasets [23][32] are all collected by the
NLP researchers1 , which only focuses on page retrieval and
question-answering tasks rather than manipulation. These

Since the twentieth century, the emergence of appliances
has significantly changed human society. In daily life, we
extensively use various electrical appliances to assist our
living and working. In recent years, robots have demonstrated enormous potential and value in areas like component assembly [21], goods sorting [7], and indoor navigation [19]. Imagine if we could instruct robots to operate
appliances to serve us, such as baking cakes with ovens,
washing clothes with washing machines, and making juice
with blenders, we would be further liberated from tedious
household chores and have more free time.
However, appliances are different from simple tools like
hammers or teapots that can be correctly used based on

22595

1 Note that the copyright of real manual belongs to the company. Using
content from the manual for academic research requires authorization.

