This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relative Pose Estimation through Affine Corrections of Monocular Depth Priors
Yifan Yu1,2 * Shaohui Liu1 Rémi Pautrat3 Marc Pollefeys1,3 Viktor Larsson4
1
ETH Zurich 2 PICO 3 Microsoft Spatial AI Lab 4 Lund University
Abstract

Baseline

Monocular depth estimation (MDE) models have undergone significant advancements over recent years. Many
MDE models aim to predict affine-invariant relative depth
from monocular images, while recent developments in
large-scale training and vision foundation models enable
reasonable estimation of metric (absolute) depth. However,
effectively leveraging these predictions for geometric vision
tasks, in particular relative pose estimation, remains relatively under explored. While depths provide rich constraints
for cross-view image alignment, the intrinsic noise and ambiguity from the monocular depth priors present practical
challenges to improving upon classic keypoint-based solutions. In this paper, we develop three solvers for relative pose estimation that explicitly account for independent affine (scale and shift) ambiguities, covering both calibrated and uncalibrated conditions. We further propose
a hybrid estimation pipeline that combines our proposed
solvers with classic point-based solvers and epipolar constraints. We find that the affine correction modeling is beneficial to not only the relative depth priors but also, surprisingly, the “metric” ones. Results across multiple datasets
demonstrate large improvements of our approach over classic keypoint-based baselines and PnP-based solutions, under both calibrated and uncalibrated setups. We also show
that our method improves consistently with different feature
matchers and MDE models, and can further benefit from
very recent advances on both modules. Code is available at
https://github.com/MarkYu98/madpose.

D1+ 𝛃 1

𝛂 D2

D1

D1

Ours

D1

𝛂 (D2+𝛃 2 )

D2
R, t

Figure 1. Our method jointly estimates affine corrections of
monocular depth maps D1 + ω1 and ε(D2 + ω2 ) together with
relative pose R, t (Right), whereas the classic way of aligning the
depth maps with only scale modeling (ε) leads to wrong and distorted alignments (Left).

1. Introduction

Despite the significant progress in monocular depth estimation, the integration of these depth priors in fundamental geometric computer vision tasks, particularly camera
pose estimation, remains under-studied. While incorporating depth information would be beneficial intuitively, effectively leveraging these priors to find geometric relationships
between multiple views presents unique challenges that
have not been fully addressed by existing works [4, 17, 41].
A critical limitation of existing approaches is the common assumption that the predicted depth maps from different views can be related by a single scale factor. This assumption, however, fails to account for the intrinsic properties of existing monocular depth estimation models, as stateof-the-art MDE models [32, 69, 75] are typically trained to
predict relative depth or disparity (inverse-depth) that are
invariant to both scale and shift (affine) transformations.
While there have been recent progress in developing models for metric depth estimation [8, 48, 75, 76], we find that
surprisingly, they also benefit from modeling the affine corrections as they are not perfectly consistent with the actual
metric depth (See Figure 6, Table 1, and Sec. 5.3).
In this paper, we propose three solvers specialized for
solving relative pose under calibrated or uncalibrated camera setups. These solvers use pixel correspondences along
with their depth priors from MDE models as input, and incorporate explicit modeling of both scale and shift varia-

Recently, deep learning based monocular depth estimation
(MDE) has made remarkable progress [9, 31, 32, 69, 74,
75], offering increasingly accurate 3D information from
single 2D images. These advancements have opened up
new possibilities for enriching traditional geometric computer vision tasks with 3D priors. The ability to infer depth
information from a single image has been shown to have
useful implications in various applications [14, 28, 61].
* This work was primarily done as Yifan’s master thesis at ETH Zurich.

16706

