This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Splashing: Uniﬁed Particles for Versatile Motion Synthesis and
Rendering
Yutao Feng1,2 * Xiang Feng1,2 * Yintong Shang2 Ying Jiang3 Chang Yu3 Zeshun Zong3
Tianjia Shao1†
Hongzhi Wu1
Kun Zhou1
Chenfanfu Jiang3
Yin Yang2
1
2
3
State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
University of Utah
UCLA

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Versatile motion synthesis and rendering. Gaussian Splashing (GSP) is a uniﬁed framework combining 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) and position-based dynamics. By leveraging their coherent point-based representations, GSP delivers high-quality rendering for
novel dynamic views involving interacting deformable bodies, rigid objects, and ﬂuids. GSP enables a variety of compelling effects and
new human-computer interaction modalities not available with existing NeRF/3DGS-based systems. The teaser ﬁgure showcases a cliff
battered by waves (a), a deformable ﬁcus plant (b), ﬂooding garden (c) and piled and scattered rigid lego bulldozers in a box (d). The
reconstructed Gaussians not only capture the nonlinear dynamics of ﬂuids and solids but can also be rasterized to realistically render with
both diffuse and specular shadings. GSP re-engineers several state-of-the-art techniques from neural surface reconstruction, specular-aware
Gaussian shading, position-based surface tension, and AI inpainting to ensure the quality of both simulation and rendering with 3DGS.

Abstract

1. Introduction

We demonstrate the feasibility of integrating physics-based
animations of solids and ﬂuids with 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) to create novel effects in virtual scenes reconstructed using 3DGS. Leveraging the coherence of the
Gaussian Splatting and Position-Based Dynamics (PBD) in
the underlying representation, we manage rendering, view
synthesis, and the dynamics of solids and ﬂuids in a cohesive manner. Similar to GaussianShader, we enhance
each Gaussian kernel with an added normal, aligning the
kernel’s orientation with the surface normal to reﬁne the
PBD simulation. This approach effectively eliminates spiky
noises that arise from rotational deformation in solids. It
also allows us to integrate physically based rendering to
augment the dynamic surface reﬂections on ﬂuids. Consequently, our framework is capable of realistically reproducing surface highlights on dynamic ﬂuids and facilitating interactions between scene objects and ﬂuids from new views.

Visualization and reconstruction of 3D scenes have been
the core of 3D graphics and vision. Recent development of
learning-based techniques such as the neural radiance ﬁelds
(NeRFs) [44] sheds new light on this topic. NeRF casts the
reconstruction pipeline as a training procedure and delivers
state-of-the-art results by encapsulating the color, texture,
and geometry of the 3D scene into an implicit MLP net.
Its superior convenience and efﬁcacy inspire many followups, e.g., with improved visual quality [38], faster performance [18, 79], and sparser inputs [24, 80]. NeRF is computationally expensive due to the volume rendering. Image synthesis with NeRF has to follow the path integral,
which is less suitable for real-time or interactive applications unless dedicated compression or acceleration methods
are employed e.g., with NGP encoding [51]. 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [29] provides an elegant alternative. As
the name suggests, 3DGS learns a collection of Gaussian
kernels from the input images. Unlike NeRF, which relies
on time-consuming ray marching and volume rendering, a
novel view of the scene from an unseen camera pose is generated using rasterization with the tile-splatting technique.

* Both authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

518

