This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPAR3D: Stable Point-Aware Reconstruction of 3D Objects from Single Images
Zixuan Huang1,2∗

Mark Boss1

Aaryaman Vasishta1 James M. Rehg2
1
Stability AI, 2 UIUC

Edit

Input Image

Point Cloud

Varun Jampani1

Edit

Mesh Output

Input Image

Point Cloud

Mesh Output

Figure 1. We present SPAR3D, a state-of-the-art 3D reconstructor that reconstructs high-quality 3D meshes from single-view images.
SPAR3D enjoys a fast reconstruction speed at 0.7 seconds and supports interactive user edits.

Abstract
We study the problem of single-image 3D object reconstruction. Recent works have diverged into two directions:
regression-based modeling and generative modeling. Regression methods efficiently infer visible surfaces, but struggle with occluded regions. Generative methods handle uncertain regions better by modeling distributions, but are
computationally expensive and the generation is often misaligned with visible surfaces. In this paper, we present
SPAR3D, a novel two-stage approach aiming to take the
best of both directions. The first stage of SPAR3D generates
* Work done at Stability AI.

16860

sparse 3D point clouds using a lightweight point diffusion
model, which has a fast sampling speed. The second stage
uses both the sampled point cloud and the input image to
create highly detailed meshes. Our two-stage design enables probabilistic modeling of the ill-posed single-image
3D task while maintaining high computational efficiency
and great output fidelity. Using point clouds as an intermediate representation further allows for interactive user edits. Evaluated on diverse datasets, SPAR3D demonstrates
superior performance over previous state-of-the-art methods, at an inference speed of 0.7 seconds. Project page with
code and model: https://spar3d.github.io

