This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Erasing Undesirable Influence in Diffusion Models
Jing Wu1 , Trung Le1 , Munawar Hayat2 , Mehrtash Harandi1
1
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2 Qualcomm, San Deigo, CA, US
{jing.wu1, trunglm, mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu, hayat@qti.qualcomm.com

I2P prompts

COCO prompts

Added by authors for publication
Figure 1. Top to Bottom: generated samples by SD v1.4 and model scrubbed by our method, when erasing the concept of ‘nudity’. Our
method can avoid NSFW (not safe for work) content while preserving model utility.

Abstract

WARNING: This paper contains sexually explicit imagery that may be offensive in nature.

Diffusion models are highly effective at generating highquality images but pose risks, such as the unintentional generation of NSFW (not safe for work) content. Although various techniques have been proposed to mitigate unwanted
influences in diffusion models while preserving overall performance, achieving a balance between these goals remains
challenging. In this work, we introduce EraseDiff, an algorithm designed to preserve the utility of the diffusion model
on retained data while removing the unwanted information
associated with the data to be forgotten. Our approach formulates this task as a constrained optimization problem using the value function, resulting in a natural first-order algorithm for solving the optimization problem. By altering
the generative process to deviate away from the groundtruth denoising trajectory, we update parameters for preservation while controlling constraint reduction to ensure effective erasure, striking an optimal trade-off. Extensive experiments and thorough comparisons with state-of-the-art
algorithms demonstrate that EraseDiff effectively preserves
the model’s utility, efficacy, and efficiency.

1. Introduction

28263

Diffusion Models [30, 49, 60] are now the method of choice
in deep generative models, owing to their high-quality output, stability, and ease of training procedure. This has facilitated their successful integration into commercial applications such as midjourney. Unfortunately, the ease of
use associated with diffusion models brings forth significant privacy risks. Studies have shown that these models can memorize and regenerate individual images from
their training datasets [10, 58, 59]. Beyond privacy, diffusion models are susceptible to misuse and can generate
NSFW digital content [48, 52, 54]. In this context, individuals whose images are used for training might request
the removal of their private data. In particular, data protection regulations like the European Union General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [64] and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) [24] grant users the right to be

