This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GREAT: Geometry-Intention Collaborative Inference for
Open-Vocabulary 3D Object Affordance Grounding
Yawen Shao1 , Wei Zhai1,† , Yuhang Yang1 , Hongchen Luo2 , Yang Cao1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Northeastern University
{shaoyawen@mail., wzhai056@, yyuhang@mail.}ustc.edu.cn
luohongchen@ise.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Open-Vocabulary 3D object affordance grounding aims
to anticipate “action possibilities” regions on 3D objects
with arbitrary instructions, which is crucial for robots to
generically perceive real scenarios and respond to operational changes. Existing methods focus on combining images or languages that depict interactions with 3D geometries to introduce external interaction priors. However, they
are still vulnerable to a limited semantic space by failing to
leverage implied invariant geometries and potential interaction intentions. Normally, humans address complex tasks
through multi-step reasoning and respond to diverse situations by leveraging associative and analogical thinking.
In light of this, we propose GREAT (GeometRy-intEntion
collAboraTive inference) for Open-Vocabulary 3D Object
Affordance Grounding, a novel framework that mines the
object invariant geometry attributes and performs analogically reason in potential interaction scenarios to form affordance knowledge, fully combining the knowledge with
both geometries and visual contents to ground 3D object affordance. Besides, we introduce the Point Image
Affordance Dataset v2 (PIADv2), the largest 3D object affordance dataset at present to support the task. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of GREAT. The code and dataset are available at
https://yawen-shao.github.io/GREAT/.

1. Introduction
Open-Vocabulary 3D object affordance grounding aims to
locate “action possibilities” on objects [8, 14], both for seen
and unseen scenarios, identifying specific regions on objects that support certain interactions. This bridges visual
perception and physical manipulation for embodied agents
and possesses bountiful application scenarios, e.g. robot
†Corresponding Author.

{forrest@, zhazj@}ustc.edu.cn

manipulation [12, 19, 40], scene understanding [11, 27], action anticipation [35, 66, 67] and imitation learning [13, 23].
Recently, most existing methods [2, 6, 17] establish
explicit mappings between semantic affordance categories
and geometric structures, restricted to predefined seen categories and fail to ground object affordance out of the training categories. Thus, some studies [25, 41, 50, 56, 58, 64]
explore grounding object affordance through additional instructions, encompassing combining images or languages
that depict interactions with 3D geometries to introduce
external interaction priors, and mitigate the generalization
gap lead by affordance diversity. Despite their remarkable progress, they are still vulnerable to a limited semantic space by failing to leverage implied invariant geometries
among objects with the same affordance, as well as potential correlations among distinct interactions of the same object. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), current paradigms ground
the 3D object affordance by aligning the object’s geometric features and instruction modalities, working well in the
seen partition. However, such a paradigm relies excessively
on the data fed into the model, when testing unseen affordance like “pour” that does not appear in the training set,
the model endeavors to categorize it as the seen category
“grasp”, shown in Fig. 1 (b).
In cognitive science, studies [7, 16, 62] have shown that
humans tackle complex tasks through multi-step reasoning
and respond to diverse situations by employing associative
and analogical thinking. As demonstrated in Fig. 1 (c),
when observing a water pouring scenario, humans employ
multi-step reasoning to infer multiple potential interaction
procedures and identify geometric properties of objects, indexing relevant knowledge from their brains. Analogous to
this procedure, we leverage Multi-modal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) [4, 22, 36, 49] to simulate prior knowledge, encompassing visual, linguistic, and other modalities,
lifting their superior reasoning and generalization abilities
to visual tasks [24, 42]. However, the dynamic and di-

17326

