This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-Instructed Structure Injection for Generalizable
HD Map Construction
Xiaolu Liu1 *, Ruizi Yang1 *, Song Wang1 , Wentong Li2 , Junbo Chen3†, Jianke Zhu1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 NUAA 3 Udeer.ai
{xiaoluliu, ruiziyang, songw, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, wentong li@nuaa.edu.cn, junbo@udeer.ai

(a) Map Construction Performance (b) Visual Comparison with PV Detection

Abstract

Front_Right

Front
60.4

Reliable high-definition (HD) map construction is crucial
for the driving safety of autonomous vehicles. Although
recent studies demonstrate improved performance, their
generalization capability across unfamiliar driving scenes
remains unexplored. To tackle this issue, we propose
UIGenMap, an uncertainty-instructed structure injection
approach for generalizable HD map vectorization, which
concerns the uncertainty resampling in statistical distribution and employs explicit instance features to reduce excessive reliance on training data. Specifically, we introduce
the perspective-view (PV) detection branch to obtain explicit structural features, in which the uncertainty-aware
decoder is designed to dynamically sample probability distributions considering the difference in scenes. With probabilistic embedding and selection, UI2DPrompt is proposed
to construct PV-learnable prompts. These PV prompts are
integrated into the map decoder by designed hybrid injection to compensate for neglected instance structures. To ensure real-time inference, a lightweight Mimic Query Distillation is designed to learn from PV prompts, which can
serve as an efficient alternative to the flow of PV branches.
Extensive experiments on challenging geographically disjoint (geo-based) data splits demonstrate that our UIGenMap achieves superior performance, with +5.7 mAP improvement on the nuScenes dataset. Source code is available at https://github.com/xiaolul2/UIGenMap.

64.8

50.3
16.7% 39.8
34.1
20.9
mAP

22.3% 23.6
19.3
15.0

StreamMapNet

Ours

GT Map

Figure 1. (a) Comparisons on original and different geo-based data
partitions among previous methods and ours. (b) Visual comparisons with circles on BEV map to represent the learned uncertainties, in which PV instances serve as compensation and provide a
detailed understanding of map perception with generalization.

1. Introduction

provide real-time updates [25, 31, 56]. Given images captured by onboard cameras, current map construction relies on transformer scheme [57] to convert perspective-view
(PV) image features into bird’s-eye-view (BEV) space.
Then, a decoder follows to predict the map elements.
Despite the achievements on widely adopted benchmarks [4, 26, 28], little attention has been paid to investigating the generalization capabilities, which refer to the
model’s performance on unfamiliar driving scenarios that
are different from the training sets. As discussed in [27, 50],
in the widely used public datasets [1, 46], there are a large
number of geographical overlaps between the training and
validation scenes. The models are then more likely to memorize similar driving scenes rather than fully capture their
underlying road structures. Variations in driving scenes,
such as the contrast between bustling city centers and suburbs with simple road structures, highlight significant shifts
in feature distributions and reveal the model’s limitations
in robustness. Besides, learning-based BEV transformation
will inevitably lead to geometric errors and loss of texture
details. As shown in Figure 1(a), previous methods [25, 50]
exhibit notable performance degradation on region-based
and city-based data splits under changing driving scenes.
To tackle the above issue, we propose the innovative em-

Reliable HD map construction is crucial for driving safety
of autonomous vehicles, which provides essential geometric information for ego-localization, perceptions, path planning, and predictions [10, 13, 23, 45]. Recently, online
high-definition (HD) map vectorization has attracted considerable attention for its cost-effectiveness and ability to
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding authors

22359

