This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene-agnostic Pose Regression for Visual Localization
Junwei Zheng1
1

Ruiping Liu1 Yufan Chen1 Zhenfang Chen4
Jiaming Zhang1,2,∗ Rainer Stiefelhagen1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

2

ETH Zurich

3

Hunan University

0.1m

…

…
Panoramas

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Sensor heights

Panoramas

Panoramas

4

Kailun Yang3

Known Scenes

1.7m

0.5m

…
Unknown Scenes

Figure 1. 360SPR panoramic dataset for Scene-agnostic Pose Regression (SPR). Trajectories with different lengths and sampling intervals
are collected at 3 heights of 360° sensors, i.e., 0.1m, 0.5m, 1.7m, corresponding to sweeping , quadruped , and humanoid robots.
The proposed SPR model trained from known scenes can generalize well to unknown scenes, without database retrieval.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual localization is one of the fundamental tasks in the
computer vision domain. It is required to predict the 6D
camera poses given the visual cues captured by a camera.
The ability to determine the camera poses from captured
images enables various downstream applications that require precise spatial awareness, e.g., VR/AR [26, 54], autonomous driving [43], and robotics [48, 51].
Absolute Pose Regression (APR) is one of the classical
paradigms for camera pose regression. Given the images
of a scene, the model predicts the absolute camera poses
concerning the scene coordinate system. Since a model in
the APR paradigm only learns the scene-specific features, it
is not applicable in unknown environments without retraining. Relative Pose Regression (RPR), in contrast, generalizes better in unknown environments. This paradigm learns
the relative pose between a reference and query image during training. In the inference phase, the model first retrieves
a reference image from the training set and then predicts
the relative pose for a query image. Although RPR is able
to predict camera poses in unseen environments, it requires
a large database to retrieve reference images similar to the
query image, which plays an important role in the whole
RPR paradigm. Without enough overlap or similarity be-

Absolute Pose Regression (APR) predicts 6D camera poses
but lacks the adaptability to unknown environments without retraining, while Relative Pose Regression (RPR) generalizes better yet requires a large image retrieval database.
Visual Odometry (VO) generalizes well in unseen environments but suffers from accumulated error in open trajectories. To address this dilemma, we introduce a new task,
Scene-agnostic Pose Regression (SPR), which can achieve
accurate pose regression in a flexible way while eliminating
the need for retraining or databases. To benchmark SPR,
we created a large-scale dataset, 360SPR, with over 200K
photorealistic panoramas, 3.6M pinhole images and camera poses in 270 scenes at three different sensor heights.
Furthermore, a SPR-Mamba model is initially proposed to
address SPR in a dual-branch manner. Extensive experiments and studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our SPR
paradigm, dataset, and model. In the unknown scenes of
both 360SPR and 360Loc datasets, our method consistently
outperforms APR, RPR and VO. The dataset and code are
available at SPR.

* Corresponding author (e-mail: jiaming.zhang@kit.edu).

27092

