This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoA: Towards Real Image Dehazing via Compression-and-Adaptation
Long Ma1
1

Yuxin Feng2
Yan Zhang2
Jinyuan Liu1
Weimin Wang1
Guang-Yong Chen3
Chengpei Xu4, *
Zhuo Su2

Dalian University of Technology

2

3

Sun Yat-sen University

Fuzhou University

4

University of New South Wales

malone94319@gmail.com,{fengyx26,zhangy2779}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,atlantis918@hotmail.com,
Chengpei.Xu@unsw.edu.au,wangweimin@dlut.edu.cn,gychen@fzu.edu.cn,suzhuo3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Performance evaluation. The proposed CoA incorporates model compression in synthetic domain for efficiency and bilevel
adaptation in real domain for adaptability, as illustrated in the central sub-figure (b). The left sub-figure (a) presents efficiency across
various metrics, clearly showing that our CoA outperforms others by a significant margin. The right sub-figure (c) shows adaptability
across different scenes, where it is evident that our CoA consistently performs excellently.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image dehazing tasks aim to utilize the atmospheric optical
model and advanced computing theory to achieve efficient
restoration of scene information and image details through
inverse imaging solution or data-driven model learning. It
has drawn much attention in multiple emerging computer
vision areas recently [46] [27] [28]. Similar to other lowlevel vision tasks [32] [11], image dehazing technology has
evolved from an early stage focused on improving synthetic
data metrics to a direction aimed at effectively generalizing across various real-world haze scenarios. Current approaches face dual challenges: efficiency-oriented methods achieve real-time processing but lack scene adaptability, while adaptability-focused techniques dynamically adjust strategies at the cost of high computational complexity that hinders deployment in resource-constrained environments. This paper addresses these limitations through
novel architectural innovations in both computational efficiency and adaptive scene understanding.

Learning-based image dehazing algorithms have shown
remarkable success in synthetic domains. However, real
image dehazing is still in suspense due to computational resource constraints and the diversity of real-world
scenes. Therefore, there is an urgent need for an algorithm that excels in both efficiency and adaptability to address real image dehazing effectively. This work proposes a
Compression-and-Adaptation (CoA) computational flow to
tackle these challenges from a divide-and-conquer perspective. First, model compression is performed in the synthetic
domain to develop a compact dehazing parameter space,
satisfying efficiency demands. Then, a bilevel adaptation in
the real domain is introduced to be fearless in unknown real
environments by aggregating the synthetic dehazing capabilities during the learning process. Leveraging a succinct
design free from additional constraints, our CoA exhibits
domain-irrelevant stability and model-agnostic flexibility,
effectively bridging the model chasm between synthetic and
real domains to further improve its practical utility. Extensive evaluations and analyses underscore the approach’s
superiority and effectiveness. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/fyxnl/COA.

1.1. Related Works

* Corresponding author.

Efficiency-oriented Dehazing Methods. This work focuses on enhancing computational efficiency through optimization algorithms, model simplification, or machine
learning methods to enable faster processing under limited resources. Broadly, dehazing methods can be divided

11197

