This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Subnet-Aware Dynamic Supernet Training for Neural Architecture Search
Jeimin Jeon1,2
Youngmin Oh1
Junghyup Lee3
Donghyeon Baek1
Dohyung Kim4
Chanho Eom5
Bumsub Ham1 *
1

2
3
Yonsei University
Articron Inc.
Samsung Research
4
5
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
Chung-Ang University
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/DYNAS/

N-shot neural architecture search (NAS) exploits a supernet
containing all candidate subnets for a given search space.
The subnets are typically trained with a static training strategy (e.g., using the same learning rate (LR) scheduler and
optimizer for all subnets). This however does not consider
that individual subnets have distinct characteristics, leading to two problems: (1) The supernet training is biased
towards the low-complexity subnets (unfairness); (2) the
momentum update in the supernet is noisy (noisy momentum). We present a dynamic supernet training technique
to address these problems by adjusting the training strategy adaptive to the subnets. Specifically, we introduce a
complexity-aware LR scheduler (CaLR) that controls the
decay ratio of LR adaptive to the complexities of subnets,
which alleviates the unfairness problem. We also present a
momentum separation technique (MS). It groups the subnets
with similar structural characteristics and uses a separate
momentum for each group, avoiding the noisy momentum
problem. Our approach can be applicable to various Nshot NAS methods with marginal cost, while improving the
search performance drastically. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on various search spaces (e.g., NASBench-201, Mobilenet spaces) and datasets (e.g., CIFAR10/100, ImageNet).

1. Introduction
Designing network architectures customized for each hardware configuration has led to a significant attention over the
last decade, with the increasing demand for applying them
to various platforms. Neural architecture search (NAS) enables finding optimal network architectures automatically,
providing better performance, compared to hand-crafted
ones. Early works on NAS exploit reinforcement learn* Corresponding author.

Valid. Loss

Abstract

: High-complexity
: Mid-complexity
: Low-complexity

: :
Gradients
of of
subnets
Gradients
subnets
: :
Momentum
Momentum
𝑔𝑔00
𝑔𝑔44
𝑔𝑔22

Epochs

(a) Unfairness.

𝑔𝑔11

𝝁𝝁𝟒𝟒

𝑔𝑔33

(b) Noisy Momentum.

Figure 1. Illustrations of the challenges of N-shot NAS methods.
(a) We visualize validation losses for the subnets having different
complexities at training time. Existing methods do not consider
the distinct optimization speed of subnets w.r.t. complexities. This
causes an unfairness problem, where the high-complexity subnet is
trained insufficiently, and the predicted performance falls behind
the low-complexity one, even if it might be supposed to provide
better performance. (b) We illustrate gradients g t of subnets and
the momentum µt at t-th iteration. We can see that the gradients
vary according to the subnets, resulting in a noisy momentum and
preventing a stable training process. (Best viewed in color.)

ing [32] or evolutionary algorithms [11] for searching network architectures, typically requiring extensive computational resources, e.g., in the order of thousands of GPU
days [29, 39], which limits the practical applicability.
To reduce the search cost, N-shot NAS methods [3, 5–
7, 12, 13, 15, 24, 28, 33, 38] have recently been introduced. They exploit either a single supernet for one-shot
NAS [7, 12, 13, 28] or multiple sub-supernets partitioned
from a supernet for few-shot NAS [15, 38]. The supernet
is an over-parameterized network that contains all candidate architectures (i.e., subnets) in a search space, serving
as a performance predictor of subnets. For training the supernets, sampling-based methods [7, 12, 13, 28] are widely
adopted nowadays due to their efficiency. These methods
optimize the supernet by training one or multiple subnets
sampled at each iteration. Existing methods, however, train
the sampled subnets with a static training strategy, employing a fixed learning rate (LR) scheduler and the same op-

30137

