This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TADFormer: Task-Adaptive Dynamic TransFormer for Efficient Multi-Task
Learning
Seungmin Baek∗

Soyul Lee∗
Hayeon Jo
Hyesong Choi
Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea

Dongbo Min†

{min100kim,230aig,johayeon,hyesong,dbmin}@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract

12

Transfer learning paradigm has driven substantial advancements in various vision tasks. However, as stateof-the-art models continue to grow, classical full finetuning often becomes computationally impractical, particularly in multi-task learning (MTL) setup where training
complexity increases proportional to the number of tasks.
Consequently, recent studies have explored ParameterEfficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) for MTL architectures. Despite some progress, these approaches still exhibit limitations in capturing fine-grained, task-specific features that
are crucial to MTL. In this paper, we introduce TaskAdaptive Dynamic transFormer, termed TADFormer, a
novel PEFT framework that performs task-aware feature
adaptation in the fine-grained manner by dynamically considering task-specific input contexts. TADFormer proposes
the parameter-efficient prompting for task adaptation and
the Dynamic Task Filter (DTF) to capture task information conditioned on input contexts. Experiments on the
PASCAL-Context benchmark demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves higher accuracy in dense scene understanding tasks, while reducing the number of trainable parameters by up to 8.4 times when compared to full finetuning of MTL models. TADFormer also demonstrates superior parameter efficiency and accuracy compared to recent PEFT methods.

10

Trainable Parameter (M)

Adapter

Polyhistor

Baselines

8

MTLoRA(r=64)

Ours
TADFormer(r=64)
MTLoRA(r=32)

6

MTLoRA(r=16)
TADFormer(r=32)

4

TADFormer(r=16)

LoRA
2

0
-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Relative Improvement to Single-Task Fine Tuning (%)

Figure 1. Performance comparison between TADFormer and baseline PEFT methods. Here, r represents the rank of low-rank decomposition modules in both TADFormer and MTLoRA.

1. Introduction

trained model on a large-scale dataset, the traditional transfer learning approaches fine-tune an entire model consisting of the pre-trained encoder and task-specific decoder for
downstream tasks such as image classification, segmentation, and object detection. However, as the model capacity
of state-of-the-art approaches continue to increase, applying the full fine-tuning to the entire model has become inefficient due to prohibitively high computational resource
requirements.
To address this issue, recent works have begun to extensively explore Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [20,
21, 26, 34], which aims to reduce the number of trainable parameters while maintaining the performance on
the downstream tasks. For instance, adapter based approaches [19, 20] insert compact modules within Transformer blocks, visual prompt tuning [32, 33] leverages
learnable tokens together with inputs or intermediate features, and Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [20] introduces
trainable low-rank matrices into Transformer blocks for up-

Transfer learning paradigm has achieved significant advancements in the fields of natural language processing [4,
11] and computer vision [17, 46]. Generally, given a preThis work was partly supported by IITP grant funded by the Korea
government (MSIT) (No. RS-2022-00155966, Artificial Intelligence Convergence Innovation Human Resources Development (Ewha Womans University)), the Basic Research Lab Program through the NRF of Korea (RS2023-00222385), and Artificial intelligence industrial convergence cluster
development project funded by MSIT Gwangju Metropolitan City. ∗ Equal
contribution. † Corresponding author: dbmin@ewha.ac.kr

14858

