This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Q-Eval-100K: Evaluating Visual Quality and Alignment Level
for Text-to-Vision Content
Zicheng Zhang1 Tengchuan Kou1 Shushi Wang1 Chunyi Li1
Wei Sun1 Wei Wang2 Xiaoyu Li2 Zongyu Wang2 Xuezhi Cao2
Xiongkuo Min1 Xiaohong Liu1† Guangtao Zhai1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Meituan

Abstract
Evaluating text-to-vision content hinges on two crucial aspects: visual quality and alignment. While significant
progress has been made in developing objective models
to assess these dimensions, the performance of such models heavily relies on the scale and quality of human annotations. According to Scaling Law, increasing the number of human-labeled instances follows a predictable pattern that enhances the performance of evaluation models.
Therefore, we introduce a comprehensive dataset designed
to Evaluate Visual quality and Alignment Level for text-tovision content (Q-EVAL-100K), featuring the largest collection of human-labeled Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) for
the mentioned two aspects. The Q-EVAL-100K dataset
encompasses both text-to-image and text-to-video models,
with 960K human annotations specifically focused on visual
quality and alignment for 100K instances (60K images and
40K videos). Leveraging this dataset with context prompt,
we propose Q-Eval-Score, a unified model capable of evaluating both visual quality and alignment with special improvements for handling long-text prompt alignment. Experimental results indicate that the proposed Q-Eval-Score
achieves superior performance on both visual quality and
alignment, with strong generalization capabilities across
other benchmarks. These findings highlight the significant
value of the Q-EVAL-100K dataset. Data and codes will be
available at https://github.com/zzc-1998/QEval.

Alignment
Level

Q-Eval100K

Visual
Quality

Image

Prompt

A plastic bag is placed on the
chair, but it contains nothing.

The scene is filled with
flowers of various colors, and
the perfect balance of colors
makes the scene vibrant.

Alignment

Poor

Good

Quality

Fair

Good

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of the unified evaluation dimensions of QEval-100K. We focus on visual quality (including all factors that
may impact the viewing experience) and alignment level, which
measures the accuracy of the generated content to the prompt.

With the rapid advancement of generative AI, millions of
text-to-image and text-to-video content are being generated
daily across various platforms [25, 56], applied in industrial production or directly used by consumers. However,
due to current technological limitations, text-to-vision con-

tent often falls short of being perfect upon generation and
cannot be immediately deployed [34, 36, 40], which usually requires expert evaluation, editing, and fine-tuning. As
a result, numerous efforts have been made to develop automated methods for evaluating text-to-vision content, aiming
to control the quality of generation and guide the necessary
optimizations effectively [13, 26, 27, 29, 40, 60–63, 65, 70,
72]. Through extensive theoretical and experimental analy-

† Corresponding author.

10621

