This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiVENT 2.0: A Massive Multilingual Benchmark
for Event-Centric Video Retrieval
Reno Kriz♠♥ * Kate Sanders♥ * David Etter♠♥ * Kenton Murray♠♥
Cameron Carpenter♥ Hannah Recknor♠ Jimena Guallar-Blasco♠
Alexander Martin ♥ Eugene Yang♠♥ Benjamin Van Durme♠♥
♠
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence ♥ Johns Hopkins University
{rkriz1,ksande25,kenton}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Efﬁciently retrieving and synthesizing information from
large-scale multimodal collections has become a critical
challenge. However, existing video retrieval datasets suffer from scope limitations, primarily focusing on matching
descriptive but vague queries with small collections of professionally edited, English-centric videos. To address this
gap, we introduce MultiVENT 2.0, a large-scale, multilingual event-centric video retrieval benchmark featuring
a collection of more than 218,000 news videos and over
3,900 queries targeting speciﬁc world events. These queries
speciﬁcally target information found in the visual content,
audio, embedded text, and text metadata of the videos, requiring systems leverage all these sources to succeed at the
task. Preliminary results show that state-of-the-art visionlanguage models struggle signiﬁcantly with this task, and
while alternative approaches show promise, they are still
insufﬁcient to adequately address this problem. These ﬁndings underscore the need for more robust multimodal retrieval systems, as effective video retrieval is a crucial step
towards multimodal content understanding and generation.

Figure 1. Example query/video pairs from MSR-VTT [38] and
M ULTI VENT 2.0. MSR-VTT primarily contains broad descriptive queries mapped to general English-centric video clips, while
M ULTI VENT 2.0 targets speciﬁc current events covering 4 media
formats, 6 languages, and subjects like natural disasters, politics,
sports, social gatherings, and science.

1. Introduction
While information retrieval systems for text documents
have been extensively studied for decades, the landscape
has shifted dramatically toward visual content, particularly
videos. As of January 2024, YouTube alone likely hosts
over 14 billion videos.1 Despite this explosion of visual
data, there remains a dearth of research focused on the efﬁcient retrieval, processing, and synthesis of such vast collections. Datasets that reﬂect the diverse array of multimodal,
multilingual news sources available online could help models adapt to this shift, but existing video retrieval datasets,
including MSR-VTT [38], focus primarily on semantically
1 https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2024/01/how-manyvideos-youtube-research/677250/

simple videos created for English-speaking audiences. To
address this limitation, the original MultiVENT dataset was
introduced, containing Multilingual Videos of Events with
aligned Natural Text across ﬁve languages [29]. However,
both M ULTI VENT (2,400 videos) and MSR-VTT (10,000
videos) are extremely small compared to standard information retrieval collections for text documents: In comparison,
the HC4 corpus used in the 2022 N EU CLIR TREC shared
task contains over 6 million text documents [17]. This disparity in collection size and diversity underscores the challenges in scaling video retrieval research.
To push the boundaries of video retrieval and create a
more challenging and realistic task, we introduce M ULTI -

24149

