This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tokenize Image Patches: Global Context Fusion for Effective Haze Removal in
Large Images
Jiuchen Chen

Xinyu Yan
Qizhi Xu∗
Beijing Institute of Technology

Kaiqi Li

{castlechen, yanxinyu, qizhi, kaiqilee}@bit.edu.cn

(a) Downsampling

Downsample

Abstract
Global contextual information and local detail features
are essential for haze removal tasks. Deep learning models perform well on small, low-resolution images, but they
encounter difﬁculties with large, high-resolution ones due
to GPU memory limitations. As a compromise, they often
resort to image slicing or downsampling. The former diminishes global information, while the latter discards highfrequency details. To address these challenges, we propose DehazeXL, a haze removal method that effectively balances global context and local feature extraction, enabling
end-to-end modeling of large images on mainstream GPU
hardware. Additionally, to evaluate the efﬁciency of global
context utilization in haze removal performance, we design a visual attribution method tailored to the characteristics of haze removal tasks. Finally, recognizing the lack
of benchmark datasets for haze removal in large images,
we have developed an ultra-high-resolution haze removal
dataset (8KDehaze) to support model training and testing.
It includes 10000 pairs of clear and hazy remote sensing images, each sized at 8192 × 8192 pixels. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that DehazeXL can infer images
up to 10240 × 10240 pixels with only 21 GB of memory,
achieving state-of-the-art results among all evaluated methods. The source code and experimental dataset are available at https://github.com/CastleChen339/
DehazeXL.

Merge

Partition

(b) Slicing

Ċ

(c) DehazeXL (ours)

Ċ

Ċ

Ċ

Ċ Ċ

Merge

Global Attention Module

Partition

Global Context Fusion

Ċ Ċ

Ċ

Figure 1. Comparison between different methods for handling
large images in haze removal tasks. (a) Downsampling approach,
which reduces the image size but loses critical high-frequency details. (b) Image slicing technique, which processes larger inputs
but compromises global contextual information and object coherence. (c) The proposed method, which aims to effectively balance global context and local feature extraction to enhance haze
removal performance in high-resolution images.

have developed a multitude of approaches that leverage
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [6, 30, 58, 61],
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [45, 56, 57],
Transformers [14, 34, 40], and Diffusion models [5, 49]
to tackle the haze removal problem. These methods have
demonstrated exceptional performance in various ﬁelds,
successfully restoring clarity and improving visual ﬁdelity.
With advancements in image sensor technology, both the
resolution and scale of captured images are steadily increasing. However, most existing dehazing methods have been
developed and tested on relatively small images, typically

1. Introduction
Image dehazing is a critical operation in various applications, including surveillance [22, 43], autonomous navigation [24, 36], and remote sensing [50]. Haze signiﬁcantly
degrades image quality by obscuring details and distorting
color representation, which impairs the performance of subsequent visual tasks such as object detection [35, 38] and
tracking [38]. In order to address this issue, researchers
* corresponding author

2258

