This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interpretable Generative Models through Post-hoc Concept Bottlenecks
Akshay Kulkarni, Ge Yan,* Chung-En Sun,* Tuomas Oikarinen, and Tsui-Wei Weng
University of California San Diego
{a2kulkarni, lweng}@ucsd.edu

A. Prior Work (Concept Bottleneck Generative Models)

Abstract

Concept
Bottleneck
Layer

Concept bottleneck models (CBM) aim to produce inherently
interpretable models that rely on human-understandable concepts for their predictions. However, existing approaches to
design interpretable generative models based on CBMs are
not yet efficient and scalable, as they require expensive generative model training from scratch as well as real images with
labor-intensive concept supervision. To address these challenges, we present two novel and low-cost methods to build
interpretable generative models through post-hoc techniques
and we name our approaches: concept-bottleneck autoencoder (CB-AE) and concept controller (CC). Our proposed
approaches enable efficient and scalable training without
the need of real data and require only minimal to no concept
supervision. Additionally, our methods generalize across
modern generative model families including generative adversarial networks and diffusion models. We demonstrate
the superior interpretability and steerability of our methods
on numerous standard datasets like CelebA, CelebA-HQ,
and CUB with large improvements (average ∼25%) over
the prior work, while being 4-15× faster to train. Finally,
a large-scale user study is performed to validate the interpretability and steerability of our methods.

gen.
image
Expensive generative model training from scratch!

noise

B. Ours (Post-Hoc Interpretable Generative Models)
Concept Bottleneck AE

concept

noise

gen.
image

OR

concept

Concept
Controller

Efﬁciently train only CB-AE/CC with frozen generative model
C. Qualitative Results

concept
intervention

+ smiling
– not smiling

no
ts s
m
m m mili ili
al al ng ng
e e

concepts

fe

fe

generated
image

no
ts s
m
m m mili ili
al al ng ng
e e

concepts

intervened
image

Figure 1. A. Prior work on interpretable generative models requires
expensive generative model training from scratch. B. Our CB-AE
and CC can be trained efficiently for post-hoc interpretability in a
pretrained, frozen generative model g2 ◦g1 . C. Example concept
intervention with CB-AE and corresponding concept vectors.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models [36–38] have become increasingly
powerful and widely used in many high-stakes domains and
applications, including realistic data generation [11], simulating hypothetical scenarios or environments [19], and
scientific discovery [1]. It is therefore important to ensure
that the generation process is interpretable, which will allow
us to understand and audit the generation, and further mitigate potential biases and harms (e.g. content moderation).
Unfortunately, most of the advances in deep learning utilize complex, black-box neural network architectures that are
difficult to interpret and understand. This leads to user mistrust of model predictions due to the absence of explanations.

To address this, there has been work on developing inherently
interpretable deep vision models using concept bottlenecks
[20, 32, 39, 43–45]. These approaches train a concept bottleneck layer after the feature extractor (backbone) to embed a
set of human-understandable concepts, followed by an interpretable sparse linear layer for the final classification based
on the concept prediction. However, current development
of CBMs is primarily focused on classification tasks, and
only one prior work, CBGM [16], has extended it to image
generation, indicating this area is under-explored.
The key idea of the seminal work CBGM [16] is to represent concepts as learnable embeddings [46] at an inter-

* Equal contribution
1 Code: github.com/Trustworthy-ML-Lab/posthoc-generative-cbm

8162

