This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Higher-Order Ratio Cycles for Fast and Globally Optimal Shape Matching
Paul Roetzer1
Viktoria Ehm3,4
1
University of Bonn

Lähner et al. [41]: 10s

Daniel Cremers3,4
2
Lamarr Institute

Roetzer et al. [61]: 580s

Zorah Lähner1,2
Florian Bernard1,2
3
4
TU Munich
MCML

Ours: 13s

→

2D-3D shape matching on wolf (2D outline is shown in the bottom left) with various methods

Guitar outline and road network to create GPS art

Figure 1. Left: We show results on 2D-3D shape matching computed with Lähner et al. [41], Roetzer et al. [61] and our approach.
Competing methods either have fast computation times, or high-quality matchings, but not both at the same time. Instead, our method
combines both desirable properties and even further improves accuracy as we effectively avoid bias towards shorter matchings (see zoomedin parts). Right: Our algorithm can be used to find object-shaped tracks in road networks, known as GPS-art, such as the shape of a guitar
in the road network of Nashville (represented as a graph, compute time 1s).

Abstract

1. Introduction

In this work we address various shape matching problems
that can be cast as finding cyclic paths in a product graph.
This involves for example 2D-3D shape matching, 3D shape
matching, or the matching of a contour to a graph. In this
context, matchings are typically obtained as the minimum
cost cycle in the product graph. Instead, inspired by related works on model-based image segmentation [68], we
consider minimum ratio cycles, which we combine with the
recently introduced conjugate product graph in order to allow for higher-order matching costs. With that, on the one
hand we avoid the bias of obtaining matchings that involve
fewer/shorter edges, while on the other hand we are able to
impose powerful geometric regularisation, e.g. to avoid zigzagging. In our experiments we demonstrate that this not
only leads to improved matching accuracy in most cases,
but also to significantly reduced runtimes (up to two orders
of magnitude, depending on the setting). Our GPU implementations are publicly available: https://github.
com/paul0noah/product-graph-cycles/.

Shape matching problems lie at the heart of visual computing, as they are of central importance for numerous downstream applications, including image segmentation [35, 66,
68], 3D reconstruction [24, 45, 71], statistical shape modelling [33] and many more. Many recent shape matching
approaches build upon learning-based frameworks [11, 12,
23, 29, 47, 69] that have lead to impressive results. Yet,
these frameworks lack important regularisation abilities,
such as continuity, geometric consistency, or local rigidity.
An important class of approaches that can take into account
such desirable properties are combinatorial/graph-theoretic
shape matching methods.
Combinatorial Approaches to Shape Matching. Recently, an efficient method for geometrically consistent 3D
shape matching was proposed [59]. It was shown that state
of the art 3D shape matching results can be obtained when
building upon cost functions that employ learned feature descriptors. To achieve scalability in 3D to 3D shape matching, the method leverages a graph-theoretic 2D-3D shape
matching formalism [41], highlighting the high relevance of
graph-based methods for shape matching. In this work, we
address several shortcomings of existing graph-based shape

21793

