This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object-Shot Enhanced Grounding Network for Egocentric Video
Yisen Feng1 Haoyu Zhang1 2 Meng Liu3 * Weili Guan1 Liqiang Nie1∗
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 Pengcheng Laboratory
3
Shandong Jianzhu University
{yisenfeng.hit, zhang.hy.2019, mengliu.sdu, honeyguan, nieliqiang}@gmail.com

Abstract

Query: A man enters the kitchen, removes a frying pan from the drawer and places
it on the stove.

Egocentric video grounding is a crucial task for embodied intelligence applications, distinct from exocentric video
moment localization. Existing methods primarily focus on
the distributional differences between egocentric and exocentric videos but often neglect key characteristics of egocentric videos and the ﬁne-grained information emphasized
by question-type queries. To address these limitations,
we propose OSGNet, an Object-Shot enhanced Grounding Network for egocentric video. Speciﬁcally, we extract
object information from videos to enrich video representation, particularly for objects highlighted in the textual
query but not directly captured in the video features. Additionally, we analyze the frequent shot movements inherent to egocentric videos, leveraging these features to extract the wearer’s attention information, which enhances
the model’s ability to perform modality alignment. Experiments conducted on three datasets demonstrate that OSGNet achieves state-of-the-art performance, validating the
effectiveness of our approach. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/Yisen-Feng/OSGNet.

1. Introduction
With advancements in wearable camera technology,
Ego4D [8] introduces the Natural Language Query (NLQ)
task for egocentric video grounding. NLQ aims to identify the speciﬁc video moment that answers a questiontype query within an untrimmed egocentric video, as shown
in Figure 1(b). The dynamic and complex camera perspectives in egocentric videos [55] make video comprehension [20, 21] signiﬁcantly more challenging compared to the
ﬁxed viewpoints of exocentric video grounding, as shown
in Figure 1(a). Moreover, NLQ queries often focus on
ﬁne-grained details of background objects (e.g., “measuring tape” in Figure 1(b)), unlike exocentric video grounding tasks that emphasize character actions (e.g., “enters”
* represents corresponding author.

͙

͙

͙

͙

(a) Exocentric video moment localization task from TACoS [38]
Query: Where was the measuring tape before I picked the drill with my right hand?

͙

͙

C clamps the wood at
the top with another
vertical wood.

͙
C picks a drill driver
with his right hand.
Narration

͙

C presses the trigger of
the drill driver with his
left hand.

(b) Natural language query task and narrations from Ego4D [8]

Figure 1. Illustration of exocentric and egocentric video grounding, accompanied by annotated narrations for the egocentric video.
Key verbs and nouns are highlighted in red.

and “removes” in Figure 1(a)), adding complexity to mining background information from video. Consequently, despite progress in exocentric video grounding, existing methods struggle with the unique challenges of NLQ. Nonetheless, NLQ enables innovative applications [53, 54], such as
smart assistant systems and memory retrieval modules for
autonomous robots, underscoring the urgent need to address
these challenges.
Though existing methods [2, 22, 31, 34, 37] for NLQ
have made signiﬁcant advances in video-text pretraining,
they fail to address the issue of video features lacking the
ﬁne-grained object information needed to answer detailed queries. As shown in Figure 1(b), egocentric videotext pretraining datasets generally provide narrations focusing on character actions involving objects. These datasets,
combined with clip-narration contrastive learning, lead current video backbones to overlook ﬁne-grained background
object details in the extracted features. In contrast, NLQ
emphasizes enhancing people’s memory experience, often
involving queries centered on background objects that are
not part of active interactions, such as the “measuring tape”
placed casually on the table, as illustrated in Figure 1(b).

24190

