This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Generative Video Models Help Pose Estimation?
Ruojin Cai1,2 Jason Y. Zhang1 Philipp Henzler1 Zhengqi Li1
Noah Snavely1,2 Ricardo Martin-Brualla1
1

Image A

Google

2

Image B

Cornell University

Image A

Interpolated Frames from a Video Model

Image B

Video Model

Pose Model (e.g. DUSt3R)

Pose Model (e.g. DUSt3R)

Cameras + Scene from DUSt3R

Cameras + Scene from DUSt3R

Figure 1. Improving pose estimation by interpolating frames using a video model. Given two images of a scene with almost no overlap, we aim to
recover their relative camera pose. Without being able to rely on visual correspondences, existing methods struggle in this setting (left). We propose to
use an off-the-shelf video generation model to interpolate a video connecting the two images. Augmented with the frames generated by the video model,
existing pose estimators (e.g. DUSt3R [60]) are able to more accurately recover the correct pose (right).

Abstract
Pairwise pose estimation from images with little or no
overlap is an open challenge in computer vision. Existing
methods, even those trained on large-scale datasets, struggle in these scenarios due to the lack of identifiable correspondences or visual overlap. Inspired by the human ability
to infer spatial relationships from diverse scenes, we propose a novel approach, InterPose, that leverages the rich
priors encoded within pre-trained generative video models.
We propose to use a video model to hallucinate intermediate frames between two input images, effectively creating a dense, visual transition, which significantly simplifies
the problem of pose estimation. Since current video models
can still produce implausible motion or inconsistent geometry, we introduce a self-consistency score that evaluates
the consistency of pose predictions from sampled videos.
We demonstrate that our approach generalizes among three
state-of-the-art video models and show consistent improvements over the state-of-the-art DUSt3R baseline on four diverse datasets encompassing indoor, outdoor, and objectcentric scenes. Our findings suggest a promising avenue for
improving pose estimation models by leveraging large gen-

erative models trained on vast amounts of video data, which
is more readily available than 3D data. See our project
page for results: Inter-Pose.github.io.

1. Introduction

16764

Consider the classroom in Fig. 1. We, as humans, can reasonably guess the spatial relationship between the two images, recognizing that the table on the left side of the first
image is the same as the table on the right side of the second image. Even though the images are taken from viewpoints with almost no overlap, we leverage our prior knowledge about typical classroom layouts to infer this connection. This task of determining the relative pose between two
images is a core component of all pose estimation pipelines
and a pre-requisite for most tasks in 3D computer vision.
Traditional approaches to pairwise pose estimation rely
on identifying and matching features between an image
pair [35] to compute the relative geometric transformation [18]. While effective for images with significant overlap and texture, these methods struggle when faced with
drastically different viewpoints, as seen in our classroom

