This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SnowMaster: Comprehensive Real-world Image Desnowing via
MLLM with Multi-Model Feedback Optimization
Jianyu Lai1,∗ Sixiang Chen1, * Yunlong Lin2 Tian Ye1
Yun Liu
Song Fei1 Zhaohu Xing1 Hongtao Wu1 Weiming Wang4 Lei Zhu1,5,†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (GZ) 2 Xiamen University
3
Southwestern University 4 Hong Kong Metropolitan University
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3

Project page: https://alexlai2860.github.io/SnowMaster

Abstract

Input Content
NAFNet Content
SnowMaster Content

Snowfall presents significant challenges for visual data processing, necessitating specialized desnowing algorithms.
However, existing models often fail to generalize effectively
due to their heavy reliance on synthetic datasets. Furthermore, current real-world snowfall datasets are limited
in scale and lack dedicated evaluation metrics designed
specifically for snowfall degradation, thus hindering the effective integration of real snowy images into model training
to reduce domain gaps. To address these challenges, we first
introduce RealSnow10K, a large-scale, high-quality dataset
consisting of over 10,000 annotated real-world snowy images. In addition, we curate a preference dataset comprising 36,000 expert-ranked image pairs, enabling the adaptation of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to
better perceive snowy image quality through our innovative
Multi-Model Preference Optimization (MMPO). Finally, we
propose the SnowMaster, which employs MMPO-enhanced
MLLM to perform accurate snowy image evaluation and
pseudo-label filtering for semi-supervised training. Experiments demonstrate that SnowMaster delivers superior
desnowing performance under real-world conditions.

Semi-sup. Pipeline

Input

NAFNet

SnowMaster

NIMA ↑:

4.5769

4.5718

4.4463

ClipIQA ↑:

0.5808

0.4331

0.4415

Q-Instruct ↑:

0.4750

0.4717

0.6749

Q-Instruct
+ MMPO
↑:

0.4132

0.4232

0.9657

SnowMaster
Error Eval.

Correct Eval.

Input

Figure 1. Comparison of various image desnowing evaluation metrics shows that Q-Instruct [47], enhanced by our MMPO, most
accurately perceives differences in snow density between images.
Leveraging accurate evaluation model, we optimize our semisupervised network, achieving superior desnowing performance.

they often struggle to generalize to real-world scenarios.
This limitation stems primarily from their only reliance on
synthetic snowfall datasets for training. These datasets,
generated using simplified physical models, struggle to capture the intricate details of real-world snow degradations,
resulting in a domain gap between synthetic and real data.
This gap hinders model optimization and impairs generalization to real-world scenarios. Consequently, we pose the
question: How can real-world data be effectively utilized to
enhance the model’s generalization performance on realworld samples?

1. Introduction
Snowfall, a common form of adverse weather degradation,
reduces image visibility and adversely impacts downstream
tasks such as image recognition [2, 61] and segmentation [1,
51]. The inherent complexity of snow poses a challenge
to conventional image restoration techniques, necessitating
the development of specialized snow removal (desnowing)
algorithms to enhance image clarity.
Although current snow removal models achieve impressive performance on benchmark datasets [7, 9, 12, 14, 16],

Incorporating real-world snowy images into training is
an direct and effective approach to enhance model generalization. However, accurate evaluation of these images is
a prerequisite for their successful integration into the training process [4, 48, 50]. Yet, evaluating realistic snowfall
images remains a significant challenge due to the absence
of ground truth for reference evaluation, previous methods
often rely on non-reference metrics [31, 32, 43, 57] to assess image restoration quality. These metrics, influenced
by numerous factors, fail to accurately isolate and evalu-

* Equal Contribution; † Corresponding Author.

4302

