This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Alignment, Mining and Fusion: Representation Alignment with Hard Negative
Mining and Selective Knowledge Fusion for Medical Visual Question Answering
Yuanhao Zou
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Zhaozheng Yin*
Stony Brook University

yuanhaoz@umich.edu

zyin@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Medical Visual Question Answering (Med-VQA) is a challenging task that requires a deep understanding of both
medical images and textual questions. Although recent
works leveraging Medical Vision-Language Pre-training
(Med-VLP) have shown strong performance on the MedVQA task, there is still no unified solution for modality
alignment, and the issue of hard negatives remains underexplored. Additionally, commonly used knowledge fusion
techniques for Med-VQA may introduce irrelevant information. In this work, we propose a framework to address these
challenges through three key contributions: (1) a unified solution for heterogeneous modality alignments across multiple levels, modalities, views, and stages, leveraging methods like contrastive learning and optimal transport theory;
(2) a hard negative mining method that employs soft labels
for multi-modality alignments and enforces the hard negative pair discrimination; and (3) a Gated Cross-Attention
Module for Med-VQA that integrates the answer vocabulary as prior knowledge and selects relevant information
from it. Our framework outperforms the previous state-ofthe-art on widely used Med-VQA datasets like RAD-VQA,
SLAKE, PathVQA and VQA-2019. The code is available at
https://github.com/AlexCo1d/AMiF

1. Introduction
Medical Visual Question Answering (Med-VQA) is a task
that requires a joint understanding of both medical texts and
images, aiding in clinical decision-making [34]. While deep
learning models have made significant strides in general
visual question answering tasks [39], Med-VQA presents
unique challenges, such as the presence of obscure objects
in images and relatively smaller scale of annotated medical datasets for training models [16, 50]. To address these
challenges, many existing works [9, 10, 15, 22, 29, 30, 52]
utilize Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP), achieving re* Corresponding author

markable success in the medical domain (i.e., Medical
Vision-Language Pre-training, Med-VLP). These methods employ self-supervised learning to pre-train models
on large unannotated medical datasets (e.g., MIMIC-CXR
[24]), initializing their models with the ability to extract
medical visual-language representations. The models are
then fine-tuned for downstream tasks like Med-VQA.
Among Med-VLP research, self-supervised techniques
such as Contrastive Learning [6, 46, 58] are widely used to
train visual and textual encoders to align representations between images and texts. While some works [5, 15, 29, 30,
54, 57–59] perform the global-level alignment (i.e., align
only the [CLS] token of images and texts), other works
[12, 22, 40, 52] attempt the local-level alignment, matching the similarity between image tokens and text tokens.
However, these works focus on the inter-modality information (aligning images with texts), ignoring that medical datasets for Med-VLP (e.g., MIMIC-CXR [24]) contain
valuable intra-modality similarities within images and reports. Though works like MUMC [29] attempt to align features within uni-modality, they do not perform local-level
alignment and overlook the multi-view attribute of radiology imaging, which can naturally be used for intra-modality
alignment. A unified approach that simultaneously addresses global-level alignment for both inter-modality (image-text) and intra-modality (image-image & text-text), and
local-level alignment remains under-explored.
Additionally, contrastive learning methods like CLIP
[46] treat image-text pairs (image-text from the same patient) as positive samples, with unpaired images and texts
as negative samples. However, in the medical domain, because of similar clinical manifestations of the same diseases, consistent anatomical imaging patterns, and standardized reporting practices, high similarities exist between
unpaired images and texts, resulting in numerous hard
negatives. While most of the prior CLIP-based works
[5, 15, 22, 30, 52, 57–59] employ one-hot labels for contrastive learning, they overlook the issue of hard negatives
in the medical domain. Though prior works [7, 29, 33, 54]
use soft labels for hard negatives, their methods primarily

29623

