This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All-Day Multi-Camera Multi-Target Tracking
Huijie Fan1,3 , Yu Qiao1 , Yihao Zhen1,3 , Tinghui Zhao1,3 , Baojie Fan4 , Qiang Wang2 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Key Laboratory of Manufacturing Industrial Integrated Automation, Shenyang University
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{fanhuijie,qiaoyu,zhenyihao,wangqiang}@sia.cn, zhaotinghui22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, jobfbj@gmail.com

Abstract
The capability of tracking objects in low-light environments like nighttime is crucial for numerous real-world
applications. However, previous Multi-Camera MultiTarget(MCMT) tracking methods are primarily focused on
tracking during daytime with favorable lighting, overlooking the challenge posed by low-light conditions. The main
difficulty of tracking under low-light condition is the lack
of detailed visible appearance features. To address this
issue, we incorporate the infrared modality into MCMT
tracking framework to provide more useful information. We
constructed the first Multi-modality (RGBT) Multi-camera
Multi-target tracking dataset named M3Track, which contains sequences captured in low-light environments, laying a solid foundation for all-day multi-camera tracking.
Based on the proposed dataset, we propose All-Day MultiCamera Multi-Target tracking network, termed as ADMCMT. Specifically, we propose an All-Day Mamba Fusion(ADMF) module to fuse information from different
modalities adaptively. Within ADMF, the Lighting Guidance Model(LGM) extracts lighting relevant information to
guide the fusion process. Furthermore, the Nearby Target Collection(NTC) strategy is designed to enhance tracking accuracy by leveraging information derived from surrounding objects of targets. Experiments conducted on
M3Track demonstrate that ADMCMT exhibits strong generalization across different lighting conditions. The code
will be released at https://github.com/QTRACKY/
ADMCMT.

Figure 1. All-day tracking is dedicated to achieving robust tracking at any time of a day. Our approach to achieve all-day MCMT
tracking is introducing infrared modality to MCMT framework,
employing the complementary nature of infrared and visible light
information to empower tracker with capability of tracking objects
under different lighting conditions.

1. Introduction

to track the same target can effectively address the occlusion problem and improve tracking consistency. MCMT
tracking has significant implications for a number of areas, including urban reconnaissance[20], crowd behavior
analysis[28], and traffic scene understanding[32].
Previous MCMT tracking methods[3, 12, 29, 30] focused primarily on tracking at daytime with favorable lighting, overlooking the challenge posed by low-light (nighttime) conditions, which is inevitable in those aforementioned applications. A main limitation that obstructs previous MCMT methods to perform low-light tracking is the
lack of detailed visible features. Inspired by multi-modality
single-camera tracking methods[2, 14, 34, 48, 50], we incorporate infrared modality into MCMT tracking framework to introduce more detailed information, as the in-

Multi-Camera Multi-Target (MCMT)[21, 22] tracking aims
to locate and associate the same targets between different
frames and camera views with substantial overlaps. Compared with single-camera tracking, using multiple cameras
* Corresponding author

16892

