This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Cross-View Correspondence with Predictive Cycle Consistency
Alan Baade
The University of Texas at Austin

Changan Chen
Stanford University

abaade@utexas.edu

cchangan@stanford.edu

Abstract
Inconsistent

Learning self-supervised visual correspondence is a longstudied task fundamental to visual understanding and human perception. However, existing correspondence methods largely focus on small image transformations, such as
object tracking in high-framerate videos or learning pixelto-pixel mappings between images with high view overlap.
This severely limits their application in dynamic multi-view
settings such as robot imitation learning. In this work,
we introduce Predictive Cycle Consistency for learning object correspondence between extremely disjoint views of a
scene without paired segmentation data. Our technique
bootstraps object correspondence pseudolabels from raw
image segmentations using conditional grayscale colorization and a cycle-consistency refinement prior. We then train
deep ViTs on these pseudolabels, which we use to generate higher-quality pseudolabels and iteratively train better
correspondence models. We demonstrate the performance
of our method under both extreme in-the-wild camera view
changes and across large temporal gaps in video. Our
approach beats all prior supervised and prior SoTA selfsupervised correspondence models on the EgoExo4D correspondence benchmark (+6.7 IoU Exo Query) and the prior
SoTA self-supervised methods SiamMAE and DINO V1&V2
on the DAVIS-2017 and LVOS datasets across large frame
gaps. Code at https://github.com/AlanBaade/
PredictiveCycleConsistency

1. Introduction
At the core of learning is the discovery of recurring patterns. This is the purpose of visual correspondence: given
multiple inputs to a scene—whether different camera angles, video frames, or other perspectives—how can we determine which objects are the same and which are different?
In recent years, the introduction of large-scale datasets
and powerful model architectures has led to strong results in learning visual correspondence without the need
for costly labeled object pairings. However, existing selfsupervised object correspondence methods [18, 29, 56, 58]

Cycle
Consistent

Figure 1. We extract cycle-consistent correspondence at the object
level to guide self-supervision across extreme view changes

have overwhelmingly focused on domains with continuous or small transformations, such as Video Object Segmentation (VOS) in continuous videos, or dense pixel-topixel methods which necessarily assume that object surfaces overlap between views. This limits the application
of self-supervised correspondence to discontinuous inputs,
such as the first-and-third person EgoExo4D dataset [16],
where objects are small, frequently interacted with, and
camera pose or depth changes between views are unavailable. Learning correspondence in these challenging, realworld domains is crucial for tasks such as robot imitation
learning [43, 46], object reidentification [13, 48], and scene
understanding [16]. For example, in robot imitation learning, visual correspondence allows a robot to map observed
actions from a third-person perspective to its own firstperson actions.
The fundamental challenge of learning visual correspondence across discontinuities is that a system must take into
account an object and the surrounding environment holistically to answer the question of where that mug is instead of
where a mug is. A particularly powerful approach for encouraging a holistic understanding in difficult data sources
is predictive learning: training a model to de-corrupt a corrupted input. Predictive learning has shown strong results
in a wide range of domains, such as natural language processing [9, 40], image classification [2, 22], and generative
modeling [23]. Recently, predictive approaches have seen
competitive results in object correspondence and representation learning through tasks such as image-conditioned
grayscale coloration [56] and conditional masked autoencoders [18, 38].

16753

