This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TCFG: Tangential Damping Classifier-free Guidance
Mingi Kwon*
Yonsei University

Shin seong Kim*
Yonsei University

Jaeseok Jeong
Yonsei University

kwonmingi@yonsei.ac.kr

tltydl2@yonsei.ac.kr

jete jeong@yonsei.ac.kr

Yi Ting Hsiao
University of Michigan

Youngjung Uh
Yonsei University

hsiaoyt@umich.edu

yj.uh@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in
text-to-image synthesis, largely attributed to the use of
classifier-free guidance (CFG), which enables high-quality,
condition-aligned image generation. CFG combines the
conditional score (e.g., text-conditioned) with the unconditional score to control the output. However, the unconditional score is in charge of estimating the transition between
manifolds of adjacent timesteps from xt to xt−1 , which may
inadvertently interfere with the trajectory toward the specific condition. In this work, we introduce a novel approach that leverages a geometric perspective on the unconditional score to enhance CFG performance when conditional scores are available. Specifically, we propose a
method that filters the singular vectors of both conditional
and unconditional scores using singular value decomposition. This filtering process aligns the unconditional score
with the conditional score, thereby refining the sampling
trajectory to stay closer to the manifold. Our approach
improves image quality with negligible additional computation. We provide deeper insights into the score function
behavior in diffusion models and present a practical technique for achieving more accurate and contextually coherent image synthesis. project page

Figure 1. (a) Classifier-free guidance. When the unconditional
score sθ (zt ) and the conditional score sθ (zt , y) are misaligned,
the result of CFG tends to fall off the manifold. (b) Our proposed
method reduces the misalignment between the unconditional score
sθ (zt ) and the conditional score sθ (zt , y), ensuring sampling
aligns with the target manifold.

final score by combining the unconditional and conditional
estimated scores. This approach ensures a generation
that aligns well with the given condition. Additionally,
using an appropriate guidance scale has been shown to
enhance image quality across various tasks, further driving
improvements in applications like text-to-image generation.
Let us say the guided score s̃θ as s̃θ = suncond
+
θ
uncond
−
s
).
In
text-to-image
models,
the
text
ωscale (scond
θ
θ
condition (scond
θ ) is randomly replaced with a null condition
(suncond
) during training (e.g., with a probability p = 0.1),
θ
enabling the null condition to act as a general estimator for
any sample. It means that suncond
is the score estimated from
θ
zt to zt−1 for all samples in the sampling trajectory of diffusion models.
The unconditional score for any sample has certainly enabled the successful use of classifier-free guidance. However, we argue that there can be a misalignment between the
unconditional and conditional estimated scores (See Eq. (2)
in Sec. 2), which hinders the approximation toward the

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [12, 31] have shown remarkable progress
in image generation [19, 27, 30]. In particular, the emergence of classifier-free guidance [6, 11] (CFG) has attracted
significant attention because it allows us to provide desired
guidance by leveraging the conditional estimated score directly within the diffusion model.
The classifier-free guidance fundamentally computes the
* Equal contribution

2620

