This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Marten

: Visual Question Answering with Mask Generation for Multi-modal
Document Understanding

Zining Wang1*, Tongkun Guan2*, Pei Fu1(B) , Chen Duan1 , Qianyi Jiang1 , Zhentao Guo3 , Shan Guo1 ,
Junfeng Luo1 , Wei Shen2(B) , Xiaokang Yang2
1
2
Meituan MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Beijing Institute of Technology
{wangzining03,fupei}@meituan.com, {gtk0615,wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have introduced a novel dimension to document understanding,
i.e., they endow large language models with visual comprehension capabilities; however, how to design a suitable image-text pre-training task for bridging the visual and
language modality in document-level MLLMs remains underexplored. In this study, we introduce a novel visuallanguage alignment method that casts the key issue as a
Visual Question Answering with Mask generation (VQAMask) task, optimizing two tasks simultaneously: VQAbased text parsing and mask generation. The former allows the model to implicitly align images and text at the
semantic level. The latter introduces an additional mask
generator (discarded during inference) to explicitly ensure
alignment between visual texts within images and their corresponding image regions at a spatially-aware level. Together, they can prevent model hallucinations when parsing
visual text and effectively promote spatially-aware feature
representation learning. To support the proposed VQAMask
task, we construct a comprehensive image-mask generation
pipeline and provide a large-scale dataset with 6M data
(MTMask6M). Subsequently, we demonstrate that introducing the proposed mask generation task yields competitive
document-level understanding performance. Leveraging
the proposed VQAMask, we introduce Marten, a trainingefficient MLLM tailored for document-level understanding.
Extensive experiments show that our Marten consistently
achieves significant improvements among 8B-MLLMs in
document-centric tasks. Code and datasets are available
at https://github.com/PriNing/Marten.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown a comprehensive generalization ability across a wide range of language* These authors contributed equally. B Corresponding Author.

ℒ vqa
A: The text is “Protection”

MLLM
Q: Identify the text within
the bounding box <bbox>
109, 85, 595, 389 </bbox>

(a) Visual Question Answering

ℒ vqa + ℒ mask
A: The text is “Protection”

M:

MLLM
Q: Identify the text within
the bounding box <bbox>
109, 85, 595, 389 </bbox>

(b) VQA with Mask Generation

Figure 1. Different pre-training paradigms of MLLMs for document understanding: (a) Visual Question Answering (VQA)
paradigm that implicitly aligns visual and language modality at
the semantic level; (b) our proposed Visual Question Answering
with Mask generation (VQAMask) paradigm. Building on VQA,
we introduce an additional Mask Generator during training to explicitly align visual texts and their corresponding image regions at
a spatially-aware level. During the inference stage, the mask generator is discarded.

related tasks [1, 2]. These successful experiences have inspired researchers to explore Multi-modal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) in the context of Visual Question Answering (VQA), i.e., empower the LLMs with visual comprehension capabilities. However, a significant challenge
arises in understanding text within document images, possibly due to high resolution, densely packed, small visual
texts, and diverse image forms.
To enhance visual comprehension, several studies [9, 28,
29, 36, 41, 44, 45, 51, 74, 87, 97] have focused on designing
pre-training tasks specifically tailored for document images
to achieve visual-language alignment. These tasks include
full-text recognition or transcription, text spotting, and visual text grounding, etc, following various prompts. For
instance, KOSMOS-2.5 [52] proposes a visual text grounding task, which inputs the texts within images and produces
the corresponding bounding boxes. Vary [80] and mPLUGDocOWL [27] introduce the learning of struct-aware document parsing, table parsing, chart parsing and natural image
parsing for different image forms to enhance fine-grained

14460

