This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing the Potential of Consistency Learning
for Detecting and Grounding Multi-Modal Media Manipulation
Yiheng Li1,2,∗ , Yang Yang1,2,∗ , Zichang Tan5,† , Huan Liu6 , Weihua Chen7,† , Xu Zhou5 , Zhen Lei1,2,3,4
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAIR, HKISI, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, the Faculty of Innovation Engineering, M.U.S.T
5
Sangfor Technologies Inc. 6 Beijing Jiaotong University 7 Alibaba Group
{liyiheng2024, yangyang2013, zhen.lei}@ia.ac.cn, tanzichang@foxmail.com

Abstract

Fine-grained
Embeddings

To tackle the threat of fake news, the task of detecting
and grounding multi-modal media manipulation (DGM4 )
has received increasing attention. However, most stateof-the-art methods fail to explore the fine-grained consistency within local content, usually resulting in an inadequate perception of detailed forgery and unreliable results. In this paper, we propose a novel approach named
Contextual-Semantic Consistency Learning (CSCL) to enhance the fine-grained perception ability of forgery for
DGM4 . Two branches for image and text modalities are established, each of which contains two cascaded decoders,
i.e., Contextual Consistency Decoder (CCD) and Semantic Consistency Decoder (SCD), to capture within-modality
contextual consistency and across-modality semantic consistency, respectively. Both CCD and SCD adhere to the
same criteria for capturing fine-grained forgery details. To
be specific, each module first constructs consistency features by leveraging additional supervision from the heterogeneous information of each token pair. Then, the forgeryaware reasoning or aggregating is adopted to deeply seek
forgery cues based on the consistency features. Extensive
experiments on DGM4 datasets prove that CSCL achieves
new state-of-the-art performance, especially for the results
of grounding manipulated content. Codes and weights are
avaliable at https://github.com/liyih/CSCL.

Shallow
Decoder

Prediction
Head

Deep
Decoder

Prediction
Head

(a) HAMMER
Fine-grained
Embeddings

Unified Multi-modal Decoder

Prediction
Head

(b) UFAFormer
Fine-grained
Embeddings

Contextual
Consistency Decoder

Semantic
Consistency Decoder

Prediction
Head

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of fine-grained feature process between
our method and existing methods. (a) Previous methods [43, 44]
adopt shallow and deep decoders to process embeddings for different sub-tasks. (b) Current SOTA methods [23, 47] conduct a
unified multi-modal decoder for embeddings, but they ignore the
consistency relationship between genuine and forged content. (c)
Our method explores the consistency learning to achieve deeper
reasoning on the DGM4 task and proposes contextual and semantic consistency decoders to model the fine-grained correlation.

frequently on the Internet [16, 60], including face forgery,
synthetic text, and deepfake video. This poses great threats
to information security and user privacy. To solve these
problems, many deepfake detection methods are proposed.
Early works often focus on single-modal detection, such as
face deepfake detection [14, 33] and text deepfake detection
[57, 63]. Later works gradually focus on multi-modal data
[37, 53], achieving more accurate results through the interaction between multiple modalities. Detecting and grounding multi-modal media manipulation (DGM4 ) [43] is one of
the multi-modal tasks. Unlike the traditional tasks that only
make binary detection (real or fake), DGM4 needs to predict additional fine-grained manipulation type classification
and localize the manipulated content.
Many methods [22–24, 43, 47] are proposed for the
DGM4 task, but the results have generally been limited, par-

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of the generative models [7, 12]
and the large language model [41], fake media appears more
* Yiheng Li and Yang Yang contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

9242

