This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoGS: Gaussian-based Panoptic Segmentation for 3D Open Vocabulary
Scene Understanding
Hongjia Zhai1 Hai Li2 Zhenzhe Li1 Xiaokun Pan1 Yijia He2 Guofeng Zhang1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University 2 RayNeo

OpenGaussian [45]

OpenScene [30]

Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Open Vocabulary 3D Panoptic Scene Understanding. Visualization of open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (yellow boxes)
and object query with text toilet (red boxes). Our PanoGS can achieve more accurate segmentation results and generate 3D instance-level
results for open-vocabulary text queries, unlike previous methods that generate heatmaps between scene features and text queries.

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is a critical problem in computer
vision that enables humans or intelligent agents to comprehensively understand the 3D scenes and facilitate the downstream applications [15, 28, 49, 55, 58, 59]. They usually incorporate vision-language models (VLMs) [2, 21, 33] for a
fine-grained and holistic understanding of the environment.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [27] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [16] have rapidly gained much
research attention for novel view synthesis. Due to the fast
rendering ability and explicit scene representation of 3DGS,
it has been widely integrated into reconstruction [4, 14, 54],
generation [39, 52], and understanding [51, 60, 63]. While
the domain of combining 3DGS with scene understanding has recently made several progress [1, 13, 32, 34, 63],
these approaches are primarily designed for 2D pixel-level
semantic segmentation with rendered 2D language feature
maps, which cannot distinguish the different objects with
the same semantics in the 3D space.
Although previous 3DGS-based approaches [1, 32, 34,
45] have achieved impressive performance that combines
VLMs with 3DGS for open vocabulary scene understanding, there also exist the following limitations that prevent 3DGS-based approaches for panoptic open vocabulary
scene understanding: 1) inaccurate 3D language feature
learning. The discrete features attached to the Gaussian

Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has shown encouraging performance for open vocabulary scene understanding tasks. However, previous methods cannot distinguish 3D instance-level information, which usually predicts
a heatmap between the scene feature and text query. In this
paper, we propose PanoGS, a novel and effective 3D panoptic open vocabulary scene understanding approach. Technically, to learn accurate 3D language features that can scale
to large indoor scenarios, we adopt the pyramid tri-plane to
model the latent continuous parametric feature space and
use a 3D feature decoder to regress the multi-view fused 2D
feature cloud. Besides, we propose language-guided graph
cuts that synergistically leverage reconstructed geometry
and learned language cues to group 3D Gaussian primitives into a set of super-primitives. To obtain 3D consistent
instance, we perform graph clustering based segmentation
with SAM-guided edge affinity computation between different super-primitives. Extensive experiments on widely used
datasets show better or more competitive performance on
3D panoptic open vocabulary scene understanding. Project
page: https://zju3dv.github.io/panogs.

† Corresponding author.

14114

