This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UltraFusion: Ultra High Dynamic Imaging using Exposure Fusion
Zixuan Chen1, 3 * Yujin Wang1 * Xin Cai2 Zhiyuan You2 Zheming Lu3 Fan Zhang1
Shi Guo1 Tianfan Xue2,1
1
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Zhejiang University
{zxchen, zheminglu}@zju.edu.cn, {wangyujin, zhangfan, guoshi}@pjlab.org.cn
caixin@link.cuhk.edu.hk, zhiyuanyou@foxmail.com, tfxue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
-6 EV

-3 EV

Ours

+3 EV

Under Exposure Over Exposure

Ours

+1.5 EV

Previous HDR Previous MultiReconstruction Exposure Fusion

Our Guided
Inpainting

Under Exposure Over Exposure

Previous HDR Previous MultiReconstruction Exposure Fusion

Our Guided
Inpainting

Figure 1. Comparing our guided inpainting HDR imaging method with a state-of-the-art HDR reconstruction [25] and multi-exposure
fusion [48] methods. Both scenes are selected from our captured new real-world benchmark. Left: night cityscape with large exposure
difference. Right: afternoon street with motion-induced occlusion. Previous methods struggle to handle these scenes. By modeling HDR
as an inpainting problem, our method can produce visually appealing results without ghosting artifacts in these challenging scenes.

Abstract
Capturing high dynamic range (HDR) scenes is one of
the most important issues in camera design. Majority of
cameras use exposure fusion, which fuses images captured
by different exposure levels, to increase dynamic range.
However, this approach can only handle images with limited
exposure difference, normally 3-4 stops. When applying to
very high dynamic range scenes where a large exposure difference is required, this approach often fails due to incorrect alignment or inconsistent lighting between inputs, or
tone mapping artifacts. In this work, we propose UltraFusion, the first exposure fusion technique that can merge inputs with 9 stops differences. The key idea is that we model
exposure fusion as a guided inpainting problem, where
the under-exposed image is used as a guidance to fill the
missing information of over-exposed highlights in the overexposed region. Using an under-exposed image as a soft
guidance, instead of a hard constraint, our model is robust

to potential alignment issue or lighting variations. Moreover, by utilizing the image prior of the generative model,
our model also generates natural tone mapping, even for
very high-dynamic range scenes. Our approach outperforms HDR-Transformer on latest HDR benchmarks. Moreover, to test its performance in ultra high dynamic range
scenes, we capture a new real-world exposure fusion benchmark, UltraFusion dataset, with exposure differences up to
9 stops, and experiments show that UltraFusion can generate beautiful and high-quality fusion results under various scenarios. Code and data will be available at https:
//openimaginglab.github.io/UltraFusion.

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution. This work was done during Zixuan Chen’s internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.

High dynamic range (HDR) imaging is one of the fundamental problems in the modern camera design. Due to
hardware limitation, camera sensors have a much smaller
dynamic range compared with the real-world. To increase it, majority of HDR solutions merge multiple images, either with the same [9] or different exposure lev-

16111

