This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupling Training-Free Guided Diffusion by ADMM
Youyuan Zhang1 * Zehua Liu2 * Zenan Li3 * Zhaoyu Li4 * James J. Clark1 Xujie Si4,5
1
McGill University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Nanjing University
4
University of Toronto 5 CIFAR AI Chair, MILA
youyuan.zhang@mail.mcgill.ca, liuzehua@connect.hku.hk, lizn@smail.nju.edu.cn
{zhaoyu,six}@cs.toronto.edu, james.clark1@mcgill.ca

Image generation with non-linear guidance

Controllable motion synthesis

young lady
with
short hair
Segmentation map

Text

Sketch

“A man is j gg
ogging
while turning around.”

Noisy linear inverse problems

Super resolution

Inpainting

Deblurring

“A man is walking
while raising both hands.”

Figure 1. Illustrated results of ADMMDiff on diverse conditional generation tasks. ADMMDiff effectively guides the generation process
of diffusion models using training-free guidance functions, producing high-quality samples that adhere closely to the specified conditions.

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the conditional generation problem by guiding off-the-shelf unconditional diffusion models
with differentiable loss functions in a plug-and-play fashion.
While previous research has primarily focused on balancing the unconditional diffusion model and the guided loss
through a tuned weight hyperparameter, we propose a novel
framework that distinctly decouples these two components.
Specifically, we introduce two variables x and z, to represent
the generated samples governed by the unconditional generation model and the guidance function, respectively. This
decoupling reformulates conditional generation into two
manageable subproblems, unified by the constraint x = z.
Leveraging this setup, we develop a new algorithm based
on the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM)
to adaptively balance these components. Additionally, we
establish the equivalence between the diffusion reverse step
and the proximal operator of ADMM and provide a detailed
convergence analysis of our algorithm under certain mild as* Authors contributed equally to this work.

sumptions. Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed
method ADMMDiff consistently generates high-quality samples while ensuring strong adherence to the conditioning
criteria. It outperforms existing methods across a range of
conditional generation tasks, including image generation
with various guidance and controllable motion synthesis.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [22, 47, 50] have emerged as a potent
paradigm in generative modeling, demonstrating versatility
across various domains, including image synthesis [45, 46],
3D object generation [30, 40], natural language processing [29, 33], and time-series analysis [3, 42]. In many of
these areas, there is an escalating interest in conditional generation, where the generative process is guided not only by
the diffusion model but also by external information such as
text prompts [1, 21, 27, 28, 41], segmentation maps [37, 59],
sketches [37, 52, 59], etc. In this paper, we focus on solving
this task by combining an unconditional diffusion model
with a differentiable guidance function that evaluates condi-

23292

