This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Synchronization: Self-Supervised Uncalibrated Multi-View
Person Association in Challenging Scenes
Keqi Chen1
1

Vinkle Srivastav1,2

Didier Mutter2,3

Nicolas Padoy1,2

University of Strasbourg, CNRS, INSERM, ICube, UMR7357, Strasbourg, France
2
IHU Strasbourg, France
3
University Hospital of Strasbourg, France

{keqi.chen, srivastav, npadoy}@unistra.fr

Abstract
Multi-view person association is a fundamental step towards multi-view analysis of human activities. Although
the person re-identification features have been proven effective, they become unreliable in challenging scenes where
persons share similar appearances. Therefore, cross-view
geometric constraints are required for a more robust association. However, most existing approaches are either
fully-supervised using ground-truth identity labels or require calibrated camera parameters that are hard to obtain. In this work, we investigate the potential of learning from synchronization, and propose a self-supervised uncalibrated multi-view person association approach, SelfMVA, without using any annotations. Specifically, we propose a self-supervised learning framework, consisting of
an encoder-decoder model and a self-supervised pretext
task, cross-view image synchronization, which aims to distinguish whether two images from different views are captured at the same time. The model encodes each person’s
unified geometric and appearance features, and we train
it by utilizing synchronization labels for supervision after
applying Hungarian matching to bridge the gap between
instance-wise and image-wise distances. To further reduce
the solution space, we propose two types of self-supervised
linear constraints: multi-view re-projection and pairwise
edge association. Extensive experiments on three challenging public benchmark datasets (WILDTRACK, MVOR,
and SOLDIERS) show that our approach achieves state-ofthe-art results, surpassing existing unsupervised and fullysupervised approaches. Code is available at https://
github.com/CAMMA-public/Self-MVA.

1. Introduction
The task of multi-view person association aims to associate
the same persons in different views given the synchronized

didier.mutter@chru-strasbourg.fr

multi-view RGB images with overlapping fields of view. It
is a fundamental step for many downstream computer vision tasks, including multi-view detection [6, 27], tracking [10, 34], and 3d pose estimation [7, 12]. To tackle this
problem, previous works mostly follow the idea of traditional person Re-IDentification (Re-ID) by training or using
an off-the-shelf person Re-ID model for affinity measurement [12, 32]. Some works also utilize the unique properties of multi-view data by introducing multi-view cycle consistency and cross-view epipolar constraint [5, 12] as complementary cues, which make the association more robust.
Despite the remarkable progress of existing multi-view
association research, current approaches do not perform
well in challenging scenes where persons share similar
appearances. Fig. 1 shows examples of some challenging
benchmark datasets: (1) in the WILDTRACK dataset [6],
the diverse illumination in the wild, the crowdedness and
the dramatic view change make the cross-view association extremely difficult even for the human eye; (2) in
the MVOR [28] and SOLDIERS datasets [11], the clinicians and the soldiers all wear similar outfits, resulting in
lack of individual characteristics. To visualize the challenges, we show the examples of applying existing association approaches on those datasets, including (1) a welltrained person Re-ID model OSNet [39] with Hungarian
matching [24]; (2) the fully-supervised instance association approach ViT-P3DE [26], encoding both context and
geometric information through Vision Transformer [14].
As shown in Fig. 1, the person Re-ID model fails to distinguish similarly-looking persons, and ViT-P3DE makes
wrong predictions of persons who stand too close.
Furthermore, current research mostly concentrates on
fully-supervised approaches, which require labor-intensive
bounding box and identity annotations, and do not generalize well to unseen datasets. A few works have explored selfsupervised association through cycle consistency [16, 31],
but are limited to training a visual descriptor without ex-

24419

