This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blood Flow Speed Estimation with
Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography Images
Wensheng Cheng1 , Zhenghong Li1 , Jiaxiang Ren1 , Hyomin Jeong2 ,
Congwu Du2 , Yingtian Pan2 , Haibin Ling1 *
1
Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University
{wenscheng,zhenghli,jiaxren,hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu
{hyomin.jeong,congwu.du,yingtian.pan}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Estimating blood flow speed is essential in many medical and physiological applications, yet it is extremely challenging due to complex vascular structure and flow dynamics, particularly for cerebral cortex regions. Existing techniques, such as Optical Doppler Tomography (ODT), generally require complex hardware control and signal processing, and still suffer from inherent system-level artifacts.
To address these challenges, we propose a new learningbased approach named OCTA-Flow, which directly estimates vascular blood flow speed from Optical Coherence
Tomography Angiography (OCTA) images that are commonly used for vascular structure analysis. OCTA-Flow
employs several novel components to achieve this goal.
First, using an encoder-decoder architecture, OCTA-Flow
leverages ODT data as pseudo labels during training, thus
bypassing the difficulty of collecting ground truth data. Second, to capture the relationship between vessels of varying
scales and their flow speed, we design an Adaptive Window
Fusion module that employs multiscale window attention.
Third, to mitigate ODT artifacts, we incorporate a Conditional Random Field Decoder that promotes smoothness
and consistency in the estimated blood flow. Together, these
innovations enable OCTA-Flow to effectively produce accurate flow estimation, suppress the artifacts in ODT, and
enhance practicality, benefiting from the established techniques of OCTA data acquisition. The code and data are
available at https://github.com/Spritea/OCTA-Flow.

Current process
Slow 
Complex 
Animal preparation
High cost 
Immature 
Artifacts 

Proposed OCTA-Flow
Faster 
Simpler 
More accessible 
Clinically approved 
Consistent 

Michelson
interferometer

Blood flow measurement

OCTA scan

OCTA vascular image

Deep neural network

Blood flow data (ODT)

Blood flow estimation

Figure 1. Current blood flow measurement process (left) is slow,
complex, costly, immature for clinical use, often suffering from
system-level artifacts (highlighted by arrows in zoomed-in panels). In contrast, the proposed OCTA-Flow (right) is faster, simpler, and more accessible by leveraging the clinically approved
OCTA technique while mitigating artifacts and generating consistent estimations. Blood flow results are visualized in colormap.

1. Introduction

practice [40] due to complex vascular structure and flow dynamics, especially for cerebral cortex regions, where vessel
architecture is highly intricate, and sizes vary largely [41].
Existing blood flow (referring to speed in this work)
measurement techniques are complex and prone to systemlevel artifacts that affect accuracy [11]. For example, Optical Doppler Tomography (ODT) is costly, requires precise
hardware control, and involves complex signal processing
[43]. Moreover, ODT is affected by angle artifacts when
the light is nearly perpendicular to the vessel, causing artifacts that show drastic flow changes and even disruptions in
vessel structures [39, 45] (see blue arrows and green arrows
respectively in the zoomed-in panels of Fig. 1).

Blood flow speed measurement provides insights into vascular health and functions [16, 28, 31, 38] that are critical
in medical and physiological research. However, precise
blood flow speed measurement is extremely challenging in
* Corresponding author.

10466

