This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Touch2Shape: Touch-Conditioned 3D Diffusion for
Shape Exploration and Reconstruction
Yuanbo Wang1
Zhaoxuan Zhang2
Jiajin Qiu1
Dilong Sun1
1
1*
Zhengyu Meng
Xiaopeng Wei
Xin Yang1 *
1
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
wangyuanbo@mail.dlut.edu.cn

zhangzx@njupt.edu.cn

{jiajinqiu, sundilong, mzy1}@mail.dlut.edu.cn

{xpwei, xinyang}@dlut.edu.cn

Figure 1. (1) Exploring the target object and capturing the tactile image to reconstruct the 3D shape. We trained a diffusion model to
obtain a low-dimensional and compact latent vector, which is used for predicting next touch location and reconstructing the target shapes.
1 with black arrows and →
2 with greeen arrows in the diagram represent two consecutive time steps. We only
The numbers →

generate the full reconstruction at the final step. (2) As the touch exploration progresses, the reconstruction results gradually
approach the ground truth. (3) Reconstruction results compared with ActiveVT [34] (under visual-tactile settings).

Abstract

ding module to condition the diffusion model in creating a
compact representation and a touch shape fusion module to
refine the reconstructed shape. For shape exploration, we
combine the diffusion model with reinforcement learning to
train a policy. This involves using the generated latent vector from the diffusion model to guide the touch exploration
policy training through a novel reward design. Experiments
validate the reconstruction quality thorough both qualitatively and quantitative analysis, and our touch exploration
policy further boosts reconstruction performance.

Diffusion models have made breakthroughs in 3D generation tasks. Current 3D diffusion models focus on reconstructing target shape from images or a set of partial observations. While excelling in global context understanding,
they struggle to capture the local details of complex shapes
and limited to the occlusion and lighting conditions. To
overcome these limitations, we utilize tactile images to capture the local 3D information and propose a Touch2Shape
model, which leverages a touch-conditioned diffusion model
to explore and reconstruct the target shape from touch. For
shape reconstruction, we have developed a touch embed-

* Corresponding authors.

5656

