This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Dynamic Scene Editing via 4D Gaussian-based
Static-Dynamic Separation
Joohyun Kwon*
DGIST, South Korea

Hanbyel Cho*
KAIST, South Korea

Junmo Kim
KAIST, South Korea

rnjswngus00@dgist.ac.kr

tlrl4658@gmail.com

junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent 4D dynamic scene editing methods require editing
thousands of 2D images used for dynamic scene synthesis and updating the entire scene with additional training
loops, resulting in several hours of processing to edit a
single dynamic scene. Therefore, these methods are not
scalable with respect to the temporal dimension of the dynamic scene (i.e., the number of timesteps). In this work, we
propose Instruct-4DGS, an efficient dynamic scene editing
method that is more scalable in terms of temporal dimension. To achieve computational efficiency, we leverage a 4D
Gaussian representation that models a 4D dynamic scene
by combining static 3D Gaussians with a Hexplane-based
deformation field, which captures dynamic information. We
then perform editing solely on the static 3D Gaussians,
which is the minimal but sufficient component required for
visual editing. To resolve the misalignment between the
edited 3D Gaussians and the deformation field, which may
arise from the editing process, we introduce a refinement
stage using a score distillation mechanism. Extensive editing results demonstrate that Instruct-4DGS is efficient, reducing editing time by more than half compared to existing
methods while achieving high-quality edits that better follow user instructions.

Figure 1. Illustration of dynamic scene editing processes for
baseline and our method: (a) The existing method requires updating the 2D images for all timesteps. (b) In contrast, our method
updates only the first timestep’s dataset images, edits canonical
3D Gaussians, and efficiently completes dynamic scene editing
through score-based temporal refinement. For a multi-camera
dataset with T = 300, our method reduces editing time by more
than half compared to the baseline, using only a single GPU.

1. Introduction

images based on user instructions. Building on IP2P’s capabilities, research on instruction-guided 3D scene editing, particularly with NeRF [37] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [24], has become increasingly active. However, 4D dynamic scene editing remains relatively underexplored. One of the few existing methods, Instruct 4D-to4D [38] requires iterative dataset updates for “thousands of
2D images” used in the dynamic scene synthesis, as shown
in Fig. 1 (a), along with additional training loops to update
the entire dynamic scene, resulting in several hours of processing to edit a single dynamic scene. Regardless of how
efficiently the dataset is updated, such an approach fails to
scale with the temporal dimension of dynamic scenes, making it impractical for real-world applications.
In this work, we propose Instruct-4DGS, an efficient
4D dynamic scene editing method that is more scalable
with respect to the temporal dimension. To maximize computational efficiency, we focus on three key aspects: (1)

Diffusion-based generative models [10, 21, 42, 46, 48, 49,
68] have recently achieved remarkable progress in the 2D
image domain and are increasingly being integrated into
practical applications. As the demand for generative tasks
extends beyond 2D, the editing of 3D and 4D dynamic
scenes has emerged as a significant area of research. In particular, user-instruction-guided editing is gaining traction as
an intuitive and user-friendly approach.
In this context, InstructPix2Pix (IP2P) [4] has gained
recognition by proposing a novel method for editing 2D
* Equal contribution.

26855

