This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards RAW Object Detection in Diverse Conditions
Zhong-Yu Li1 Xin Jin1 Bo-Yuan Sun1 Chun-Le Guo1 Ming-Ming Cheng1,2*
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
{lizhongyu,jinxin,boyuansun}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {guochunle,cmm}@nankai.edu.cn

sRGB
sRGB
Backbone

RAW
ISP

Existing object detection methods often consider sRGB
input, which was compressed from RAW data using ISP
originally designed for visualization. However, such compression might lose crucial information for detection, especially under complex light and weather conditions. We
introduce the AODRaw dataset, which offers 7,785 highresolution real RAW images with 135,601 annotated instances spanning 62 categories, capturing a broad range
of indoor and outdoor scenes under 9 distinct light and
weather conditions. Based on AODRaw that supports RAW
and sRGB object detection, we provide a comprehensive
benchmark for evaluating current detection methods. We
find that sRGB pre-training constrains the potential of RAW
object detection due to the domain gap between sRGB and
RAW, prompting us to directly pre-train on the RAW domain. However, it is harder for RAW pre-training to learn
rich representations than sRGB pre-training. To assist RAW
pre-training, we distill the knowledge from an off-the-shelf
model pre-trained on the sRGB domain. As a result, we
achieve substantial improvements under diverse and adverse conditions without relying on extra pre-processing
modules. The code and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/lzyhha/AODRaw.

Detector

Abstract

(a) sRGB-based object detection
Trainable ISP
(b) RAW-based object detection

RAW

RAW Pre-training

sRGB
Backbone

synthesize

RAW
Backbone

ImageNet

real RAW

Distillation

RAW Fine-tuning

(c) Ours

Figure 1. (a) Traditional sRGB-based object detection relies on
8-bit sRGB images, which are compressed from RAW images and
lose detailed information. (b) Previous RAW-based methods utilize a trainable image signal processor (ISP) to adapt models pretrained on the sRGB domain to the RAW domain. (c) We pre-train
models on the RAW domain, achieving excellent performance on
RAW object detection without requiring ISP modules.

which is crucial for computer vision tasks, particularly in
challenging light and weather conditions. Moreover, in realworld applications, working directly with RAW data allows
manufacturers to bypass image signal processing, leading to
faster processing speeds and reduced computational overhead. Thus, RAW-based object detection has gained attention [40, 42–44] and shows its advantages in adverse conditions. However, exploration in this field remains limited.
The scarcity of relevant datasets is the key factor limiting
the development of RAW-based object detection. However,
collecting RAW images for object detection requires much
more costs than sRGB images. For example, RAW images
cannot be collected from picture websites like the sRGBbased dataset COCO [27]. Thus, taking pictures requires a
lot of labor [21, 22], especially in rare weather conditions.
Due to the limitations of collecting and annotating images,
many RAW object detection methods [8, 32] rely on synthesizing RAW images that lack the authentic noise patterns

1. Introduction
Real-world object detection is a fundamental task in computation vision. Significant advancements have been made
in this field with public datasets like COCO [27] and
VOC [10]. However, these datasets have predominantly
focused on sRGB images, which lose some critical information compared to RAW images. The sensor first captures
original RAW images with a high bit depth in a typical camera. An image signal processor (ISP) then compresses these
RAW images into 8-bit sRGB images. Unlike compressed
sRGB images, RAW images retain a higher bit depth and
thus preserve more distinguishable information [20, 23],
* Corresponding Author.

8859

