This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Conditional Space-Time Prompt Distributions for Video
Class-Incremental Learning
Xiaohan Zou*, Wenchao Ma, Shu Zhao
The Pennsylvania State University
{xfz5266, wmm5390, smz5505}@psu.edu

Abstract

Incremental Learning (VCIL) [44, 46, 47, 60, 61] aims to
enable models to adapt to new tasks while retaining previous knowledge without using task identifiers during testing,
thereby mitigating catastrophic forgetting.
In Class-Incremental Learning (CIL), a common approach is the use of a rehearsal buffer [3, 46, 49], which
stores selected samples from past data for use with future
tasks. However, its efficacy heavily relies on the buffer
size, with smaller buffers causing significant performance
drops, and explicitly storing past data raises privacy concerns. To overcome these limitations, recent studies in
both image [65–67] and video domains [47, 61] have investigated encoding prior knowledge into pools of learnable prompts. These methods use a key-query mechanism
that dynamically selects an appropriate prompt from the
pool based on the input features, as shown in Figure 1 (a).
While promising, the pool-based paradigm faces notable
challenges. Firstly, as the number of tasks grows, it becomes necessary to expand the prompt pool to retain previous knowledge, which requires more memory [22]. Moreover, it impairs the model’s adaptability to new tasks, an
issue that persists even with an enlarged prompt pool [54].
This issue arises from prompts being vastly outnumbered by
data instances. As a result, each prompt must broadly represent a group of samples, restricting its ability to address
individual instances [22].
In response, as depicted in Figure 1 (b), several studies
in the image domain have shifted from a fixed-sized prompt
pool to using a learnable prompt generator [22, 54, 57].
These approaches generate a prompt for each instance, enhancing the expressiveness of the prompts and improving plasticity. However, they remain ineffective for video
tasks due to the spatio-temporal complexity of videos, necessitating a new perspective to enhance learning capacity.
These approaches, aligned with deterministic prompt learning [73, 74], often lead to suboptimal diversity and generalizability of prompts [7, 38, 75], issues that are more severe
in the video domain. They struggle to produce prompts
that are diverse enough to handle the wide variability in
video representations, as videos can differ significantly in

Recent advancements in prompt-based learning have significantly advanced image and video class-incremental learning. However, the prompts learned by these methods often
fail to capture the diverse and informative characteristics of
videos, and struggle to generalize effectively to future tasks
and classes. To address these challenges, this paper proposes modeling the distribution of space-time prompts conditioned on the input video using a diffusion model. This
generative approach allows the proposed model to naturally handle the diverse characteristics of videos, leading
to more robust prompt learning and enhanced generalization capabilities. Additionally, we develop a simple yet effective mechanism to transfer the token relationship modeling capabilities of pre-trained image transformers to spatiotemporal modeling in videos. Our approach has been
thoroughly evaluated across four established benchmarks,
showing remarkable improvements over existing state-ofthe-art methods in video class-incremental learning. Code
is available at https://github.com/Renovamen/
CoSTEP.

1. Introduction
Recent studies [2, 33, 37, 45] have significantly advanced
the performance of video understanding. Despite these
advancements, integrating new data streams into existing models remains challenging, particularly when these
streams introduce significant distribution shifts. This issue mainly stems from models overfitting to recent training
data, leading to the forgetting of previously seen classes,
which is named catastrophic forgetting [1, 27, 76]. While
retraining models with a combined dataset of old and new
data streams is a straightforward solution, it faces practical limitations such as memory constraints and privacy issues [48, 60, 71], which restrict access to comprehensive
historical data. To address these limitations, Video Class* Corresponding author.

4862

