This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Semantic Knowledge Complementarity based Decoupling Framework
for Semi-supervised Class-imbalanced Medical Image Segmentation
Zheng Zhang† , Guanchun Yin† , Bo Zhang‡ , Wu Liu↕ , Xiuzhuang Zhou†⇕ and Wendong Wang‡

Abstract

Decoder
Encoder

Knowledge Transfer

Decoder

Encoder

The limited data annotations have made semi-supervised
learning (SSL) increasingly popular in medical image analysis. However, the use of pseudo labels in SSL degrades the
performance of decoders that heavily rely on high-accuracy
annotations. This issue is particularly pronounced in classimbalanced multi-organ segmentation tasks, where small
organs may be under-segmented or even ignored. In this
paper, we propose SKCDF, a semantic knowledge complementarity based decoupling framework for multi-organ segmentation in class-imbalanced medical images. SKCDF decouples the data flow based on the responsibilities of the
encoder and decoder during model training to make the
model effectively learn semantic features, while mitigating
the negative impact of unlabeled data on the semantic segmentation task. We also design a semantic knowledge complementarity module that adopts labeled data to guide the
generation of pseudo labels and enriches the semantic features of labeled data with unlabeled data, which improves
the quality of generated pseudo labels and the robustness of
the overall model. Furthermore, we design an auxiliary balanced segmentation head based training strategy to further
enhance the segmentation performance of small organs. Experimental results on the Synapse and AMOS datasets show
that our method significantly outperforms existing methods.

Decoder
Unsupervised Loss

(a) Previous Architecture

(b) Our Architecture
Semantic Knowledge
Complementarity

Separated

(c) Previous Data Flow
Labeled data flow

(d) Our Data Flow
Unlabeled data flow

Stop gradient

L with U data flow
Labeled data

U with L data flow

Unlabeled data

Figure 1. (a-b) Comparison between the architecture: previous
methods used labeled and unlabeled data to train all parts of the
model indiscriminately. Our method uses different data flows to
train different parts of the model, suppressing the negative effects
of unlabeled data on the model. (c-d) Comparison between the
training data flows: our method adopts unlabeled data to enrich
the semantic features of labeled data, while using labeled data to
guide the generation of pseudo-labels.

1. Introduction

of deep learning models, researchers pay more and more attention to their application in medical data processing, such
as image segmentation [5, 9, 20, 22, 24, 25, 29, 50] and etc.
However, deep learning models often require a large amount
of annotated data for training, which is a labor-intensive
and time-consuming process, especially in medical image
segmentation, where annotators need to master certain professional knowledge. As a result, semi-supervised learning
(SSL) has become increasingly popular in medical image
segmentation due to its ability to reduce the time and effort
required for image annotation.

Computer-assisted diagnosis has been playing an increasingly significant role in the medical field, such as surgical
planning and radiation therapy. Due to the high efficiency
† School of Intelligent Engineering and Automation, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (e-mail: zhangzheng, yinguanchun,
xiuzhuang.zhou@bupt.edu.cn).
‡ State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering
School), Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (e-mail:
zbo, wdwang@bupt.edu.cn).
↕ School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China (e-mail: liuwu@ustc.edu.cn).
⇕ Beijing Ketai Industrial Intelligence (BKII).
Corresponding author: Bo Zhang. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/yinguanchun/SKCDF.

Current SSL based medical image segmentation methods [2, 4, 15, 34, 38, 41, 43, 48] mainly focus on how to
make better use of unlabeled data and generate high quality
pseudo labels. However, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), these methods train all parts of themselves using both labeled and unlabeled data indiscriminately, ignoring that unlabeled data
may have negative effects due to the lack of accurate annotation. In semantic segmentation tasks, the encoder is responsible for extracting the shape, texture, color and other
feature information from the input images, which are subsequently used by the decoder to generate segmentation results. Since the encoder itself does not directly participate in
the segmentation decision-making process, the encoder can

25940

