This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseAlign: A Fully Sparse Framework for Cooperative Object Detection
Yunshuang Yuan1
1

Leibniz University Hannover

2

Yan Xia2,3

†

Daniel Cremers2,3
3

Technical University of Munich

Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

{yunshuang.yuan, monika.sester}@ikg.uni-hannover.de

Abstract

Monika Sester1

{yan.xia, cremers}@tum.de

b) Broadcasting communication

a) Handshaking communication
request

Cooperative perception can increase the view field and decrease the occlusion of an ego vehicle, hence improving the
perception performance and safety of autonomous driving.
Despite the success of previous works on cooperative object detection, they mostly operate on dense Bird’s Eye View
(BEV) feature maps, which are computationally demanding
and can hardly be extended to long-range detection problems. More efficient fully sparse frameworks are rarely
explored. In this work, we design a fully sparse framework, SparseAlign, with three key features: an enhanced
sparse 3D backbone, a query-based temporal context learning module, and a robust detection head specially tailored
for sparse features. Extensive experimental results on both
OPV2V and DAIR-V2X datasets show that our framework,
despite its sparsity, outperforms the state of the art with less
communication bandwidth requirements. In addition, experiments on the OPV2Vt and DAIR-V2Xt datasets for timealigned cooperative object detection also show a significant
performance gain compared to the baseline works.

fusion

transform &
process
local data

transfrom &
fusion

cav

ego

cti

y

vit

tiv
ep
rec

e
nn

process
local data
cav

ego

response

broadcasting

o
sc
di

Occlussion

iel

ef
d

Missing centers
c)

LiDAR
d)

e)

Figure 1. a,b) Communication strategies for cooperative object
detection. c-e) Issues of sparse convolutional backbone networks.
c) Center Feature Missing (CFM). d,e) Isolated Convolution Field
(ICF) caused by ring disconnectivity and occlusion.

1. Introduction

gest sequential data from several subsequent frames to
learn the temporal context. Following Fcooper [1], recent
works [6, 11, 28–30, 33, 35] encode the 3D point cloud
into dense BEV feature maps for further processing, sharing, and fusion. However, the computational cost of this
pipeline increases quadratically with the perception range.
Although cooperation among IAs can improve long-range
detection performance, the IAs are normally not in the best
positions to optimize the performance gain. The long-range
detection performance of the local detector directly influences the overall performance. Besides, sharing the BEV
feature maps among IAs requires extensive communication resources. Instead, the sparse operations leverage the
sparsity of point clouds and have only linear computational
complexity relative to the number of points. In addition, the
output sparse features can be more efficient for sharing. It is
therefore beneficial to perform cooperative object detection
based on sparse operations only.
However, building a fully sparse framework to compete
with the dense ones is non-trivial. The first unavoidable issue is Center Feature Missing [8] (CFM, shown in Fig. 1
c)). Due to the range view of on-board LiDARs, there are

Cooperative Perception (CP) for autonomous driving has
gained significant attention due to its potential to enhance road safety. Sharing Collective Perception Messages
(CPMs) among Intelligent (traffic) Agents (IAs) in the vehicular network effectively reduces occlusions and expands
the field of view, improving perception performance. In
many recent works [1, 16, 24, 29, 35, 41, 42], CP has proven
to be effective for different tasks, such as cooperative object
detection [1, 24, 29, 41], Bird’s Eye View (BEV) semantic segmentation [19, 42], and 3D occupancy semantic segmentation [22]. In this work, we focus on LiDAR-based
cooperative vehicle detection.
Training a cooperative 3D object detector is computationally demanding as it needs to process data from multiple vehicles, especially when the model is built to di† Corresponding author.

22296

