This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Navigating the Unseen: Zero-shot Scene Graph Generation via
Capsule-Based Equivariant Features
Wenhuan Huang, Yi JI, Guiqian Zhu, Li Ying, Chunping Liu*
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Soochow University, Suzhou, China
whhuang@stu.suda.edu.cn {jiyi, gqzhu, ingli, cpliu}@suda.edu.cn

Boundary Region 

Detection

Abstract

Object 

Classification

Predicate

Classification

boy

In scene graph generation (SGG), the accurate prediction
of unseen triplets is essential for its effectiveness in downstream vision-language tasks. We hypothesize that the predicates of unseen triplets can be viewed as transformations
of seen predicates in feature space, and the essence of the
zero-shot task is to bridge the gap caused by this transformation. Traditional models, however, have difficulty addressing this challenge, which we attribute to their inability
to model the predicates equivariant. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel framework based on capsule
networks (CAPSGG). We propose a Three-Stream Pipeline
that generates modality-specific representations for predicates, while building low-level predicate capsules of these
modalities. Then, these capsules are aggregated into highlevel predicate capsules using a Routing Capsule Layer.
In addition, we introduce GroupLoss to aggregate capsules
with the same predicate label into groups. This replaces the
global loss with the intra-group loss, effectively balancing
the learning of predicate invariant and equivariant features
while mitigating the impact of the severe long-tail distribution of the predicate categories. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate the notable superiority of our approach over
state-of-the-art methods, with zero-shot indicators outperforming up to 132.26% on the SGCls task than the T-CAR
[21]. Our code will be available upon publication.

holding

girl

Seen Domain
Transformation

/Gap

frisbee
Train Image

Seen Triple

dog

frisbee

holding

？
Unseen Domain

Test Image

Unseen Triple

Predicate Feature Space

Figure 1. The standard SGG pipeline and Transformation Gap.
Zero-Shot SGG aims to acquire knowledge from seen triplets during training and to bridge the domain gap arising from predicate
feature transformation in unseen triplets so that ultimately deduce
predicates of unseen triplets during testing.

ing, and image generation.

1. Introduction

The standard SGG pipeline consists of three stages:
boundary region detection, object classification, and predicate classification, with the last stage being the most crucial. Predicate classification uses image features and object
labels to predict relationships between objects. To enhance
generalization, Li et al. [21] have used Triplet Calibration
and Reduction to focus on plausible unseen compositions,
Kan et al. [15] employed Commonsense Knowledge Integration to emphasize the importance of commonsense reasoning in generating scene graphs of unseen triplets. Although notable improvements have been achieved in this
task, their performance on zero-shot SGG remains suboptimal. Such limitation is primarily attributed to the models’
inability to effectively capture the equivariant property inherent in predicate relationships. As shown in Fig. 1, we hy-

A Scene Graph (SG) is a sophisticated topological mapping
of a visual scene, meticulously encoding the interactions
and contextual relationships among objects. Scene Graph
Generation (SGG) extends beyond mere object detection,
which encompasses the inference of object relationships,
culminating in constructing a comprehensive scene graph.
This technology has become widely applied across various
domains, such as image captioning, visual question answer* Corresponding Author

29448

