This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EvEnhancer: Empowering Effectiveness, Efficiency and Generalizability for
Continuous Space-Time Video Super-Resolution with Events
Shuoyan Wei1,2 Feng Li3, * Shengeng Tang3 Yao Zhao1,2 Huihui Bai4,1,2, *
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
4
Tangshan Research Institute of Beijing Jiaotong University
{shuoyan.wei, yzhao, hhbai}@bjtu.edu.cn, {fengli, tangsg}@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Continuous space-time video super-resolution (C-STVSR)
endeavors to upscale videos simultaneously at arbitrary
spatial and temporal scales, which has recently garnered
increasing interest. However, prevailing methods struggle
to yield satisfactory videos at out-of-distribution spatial and
temporal scales. On the other hand, event streams characterized by high temporal resolution and high dynamic
range, exhibit compelling promise in vision tasks. This paper presents EvEnhancer, an innovative approach that marries the unique advantages of event streams to elevate effectiveness, efficiency, and generalizability for C-STVSR.
Our approach hinges on two pivotal components: 1) Eventadapted synthesis capitalizes on the spatiotemporal correlations between frames and events to discern and learn
long-term motion trajectories, enabling the adaptive interpolation and fusion of informative spatiotemporal features;
2) Local implicit video transformer integrates local implicit
video neural function with cross-scale spatiotemporal attention to learn continuous video representations utilized
to generate plausible videos at arbitrary resolutions and
frame rates. Experiments show that EvEnhancer achieves
superiority on synthetic and real-world datasets and preferable generalizability on out-of-distribution scales against
state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/W-Shuoyan/EvEnhancer.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) is a fundamental low-level
vision task, aiming to recover high-resolution (HR) videos
from low-resolution (LR) inputs. Nevertheless, video resources are mostly archived with reduced spatial resolution
* Corresponding authors

(a) Different datasets (In-dist.)

Overlapping LR Frames

LR Events

(b) Different upsampling scales

VideoINR[7]

MoTIF[6]

EvEnhancer (Ours)

GT

(c) Visualization comparison

Figure 1. Performance comparison of different C-STVSR methods. (a) PSNR (dB) comparison for in-distribution (In-dist.) spatiotemporal upsampling scale (temporal scale t=8, spatial scale
s=4) on the different datasets including GoPro [51], Adobe240
[64] and BS-ERGB [69]. (b) PSNR (dB) comparison for different spatiotemporal upsampling scales on GoPro. (c) Visualization
comparison for In-dist. scale on GoPro.

and constrained frame rates (i.e., temporal resolution) practically, necessitating the conversion to HR and high-framerate (HFR) ones for various applications [40, 73, 76, 80, 85,
89] and user experiences [18, 58, 77].
To address this problem, a naive approach is to cascade
separate VSR [2, 3, 14, 39, 41, 75] and video frame interpolation (VFI) [9, 37, 53, 59, 82] or in turn, which over-

17755

