This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HybridGS: Decoupling Transients and Statics
with 2D and 3D Gaussian Splatting
Jingyu Lin1†
1

Jiaqi Gu2† Lubin Fan2‡ Bojian Wu2 Yujing Lou4
Renjie Chen1‡ Ligang Liu1 Jieping Ye2

University of Science and Technology of China
HybridGS

2

Independent Researcher

Captures

4

Renderings

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Statics

Transients

Multi-view 3D Gaussians

Single-view 2D Gaussians

Figure 1. HybridGS is the first hybrid representation that combines multi-view consistent 3D Gaussians and single-view independent 2D
Gaussians, which is used to decouple the transients and statics presented in the scene. Our results demonstrate reasonable decompositions.

1. Introduction

Abstract

3D Gaussians Splatting (3DGS) [11] has recently gained
popularity for novel view synthesis due to its high-quality
rendering, efficiency and low-memory cost. Its applications
span across virtual reality, augmented reality, and robotics,
etc [3, 6, 15, 16, 26, 31, 35, 39, 50]. Typically, most current approaches assume that the input images are posed and
free of noise, which are the prerequisite needed to represent
a complete scene well. However, this assumption is often
not met. For example, images taken casually with a mobile phone usually contain messy dynamic objects, or transient objects. Therefore, it is hard to model the scene because there are always many transient occlusions. Technically, 3DGS is capable of modeling static scenes effectively
because the static objects in images satisfy geometric consistency constraints across different viewpoints. However,
transient objects do not follow this assumption. If the images containing transient objects are naively used in training
3DGS, such variations can lead to difficulties in achieving
coherent blending of individual Gaussian representations,
potentially resulting in artifacts or inaccuracies.

Generating high-quality novel view renderings of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) in scenes featuring transient objects
is challenging. We propose a novel hybrid representation,
termed as HybridGS, using 2D Gaussians for transient objects per image and maintaining traditional 3D Gaussians
for the whole static scenes. 3DGS is suited for modeling
static scenes that assume multi-view consistency, but the
transient objects appear occasionally and do not adhere to
the assumption, thus we model them as planar objects from
a single view by 2D Gaussians. Our novel representation
decomposes the scene from the perspective of fundamental viewpoint consistency. Additionally, we present a multiview supervision method for 3DGS that leverages information from co-visible regions, further enhancing the distinctions between the transients and statics. Then, we propose a
straightforward yet effective multi-stage training strategy to
ensure robust training and view synthesis. Experiments on
benchmarks show our state-of-the-art performance of novel
view synthesis in indoor and outdoor scenes, even in the
presence of distracting elements. Project page: https:
//gujiaqivadin.github.io/hybridgs/

To address this issue, numerous methods have been proposed to improve the scene representation ability involving transient objects. In the era of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [21], RobustNeRF [27] introduced a robust loss

† Equal contributions. ‡Corresponding authors.

788

