This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RADIOv2.5: Improved Baselines for Agglomerative Vision Foundation Models
Greg Heinrich* Mike Ranzinger∗ Hongxu (Danny) Yin Yao Lu
Andrew Tao Bryan Catanzaro Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA

Jan Kautz

{gheinrich,mranzinger,dannyy,jkautz,atao,bcatanzaro,pmolchanov}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Agglomerative models have recently emerged as a powerful approach to training vision foundation models, leveraging multi-teacher distillation from existing models such
as CLIP, DINO, and SAM. This strategy enables the efficient creation of robust models, combining the strengths of
individual teachers while significantly reducing computational and resource demands. In this paper, we thoroughly
analyze state-of-the-art agglomerative models, identifying
critical challenges including resolution mode shifts, teacher
imbalance, idiosyncratic teacher artifacts, and an excessive number of output tokens. To address these issues, we
propose several novel solutions: multi-resolution training,
mosaic augmentation, and improved balancing of teacher
loss functions. Specifically, in the context of Vision Language Models, we introduce a token compression technique
to maintain high-resolution information within a fixed token
count. We release our top-performing variants at multiple
scales (-B, -L, -H, and -g), along with inference code and
pretrained weights.

izing the distinct teacher distributions to simplify their balancing. Relatedly, Eagle [39] leverages a mixture of vision
encoders to achieve inference-time knowledge aggregation
within the context of Vision-Language Models (VLMs).
Despite these advancements, this growing body of work
on knowledge agglomeration still leaves open several critical challenges:

Links: Code (on GitHub) — Models (on Hugging Face)

• Resolution balancing: Teacher models operate at varying
resolutions due to different training goals, creating feature granularity inconsistencies. Effective techniques are
needed to balance these resolutions in the student model
to capture both fine details and broader abstractions.
• Teacher distribution balancing: Existing models have different distribution moments and the distillation process
should account for this to prevent biased learning.
• Generating multi-resolution features for diverse applications: Vision models support various applications requiring different feature resolutions, from image captioning
to dense segmentation. A VFM that flexibly produces
features at any resolution could serve multiple tasks, reducing the need for separate models and unlocking new
opportunities.

1. Introduction
The rise of specialized Vision Foundation Models (VFMs)
has created a need for methods to consolidate knowledge
from multiple models into a unified model. SAM-CLIP
[43] addresses this challenge by combining SAM [22] and
CLIP [32] to integrate capabilities from both. In another
approach, AM-RADIO [35] introduces label-free knowledge distillation from multiple teacher models, enabling
knowledge transfer without direct supervision. UNIC [37]
adds intermediate teacher matching projectors and dynamic
teacher selection. Theia [38] aims to facilitate robot learning by distilling insights from multiple vision teachers.
Meanwhile, PHI-S [34] studies the importance of normal* Equal contribution

22487

In our analysis of existing agglomerative models, we
study and propose a fix for the notable “mode switch”
phenomenon in AM-RADIO, where feature distributions
shift significantly based on input resolution (Section 3.1).
Specifically, low-resolution inputs yield DINO-like features, while high-resolution inputs produce SAM-like features. We trace this behavior to the student learning from
different teachers at different resolutions during training.
In section 4.2, we introduce a solution to stabilize these
mode switches, achieving strong resolution robustness and
improved quality scaling.
Equipped with a high-resolution vision encoder, we now
focus on Vision-Language Model (VLM) integration. In
downstream VL tasks, a key challenge is the token/feature
count. High-resolution processing yields more tokens, exacerbating the quadratic complexity of attention in VLMs.
To maintain resolution without escalating this issue, we propose using ToMeSD [3] in Section 4.5 to separate vision

