This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PyTorchGeoNodes: Enabling Differentiable Shape Programs for 3D Shape
Reconstruction
Sinisa Stekovic1,2

Arslan Artykov1

Stefan Ainetter2

Mattia D’Urso2

Friedrich Fraundorfer2

1

2

LIGM, École des Ponts et Chaussees, IP Paris, CNRS, France
Inst. for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz Univ. of Technology, Austria
Project page:

vevenom.github.io/pytorchgeonodes

Abstract
We propose PyTorchGeoNodes, a differentiable module for
reconstructing 3D objects and their parameters from images using interpretable shape programs. Unlike traditional CAD model retrieval, shape programs allow reasoning about semantic parameters, editing, and a low memory footprint. Despite their potential, shape programs for
3D scene understanding have been largely overlooked. Our
key contribution is enabling gradient-based optimization by
parsing shape programs, or more precisely procedural models designed in Blender, into efficient PyTorch code. While
there are many possible applications of our PyTochGeoNodes, we show that a combination of PyTorchGeoNodes
with genetic algorithm is a method of choice to optimize
both discrete and continuous shape program parameters for
3D reconstruction and understanding of 3D object parameters. Our modular framework can be further integrated
with other reconstruction algorithms, and we demonstrate
one such integration to enable procedural Gaussian splatting. Our experiments on the ScanNet dataset show that our
method achieves accurate reconstructions while enabling,
until now, unseen level of 3D scene understanding.

1. Introduction
Various 3D object representations have already been considered for 3D scene understanding: voxels [21, 31],
meshes [11, 38], SDFs [25], NeRFs [5], Gaussian Splatting [34], exemplars from a shape database [3]. SDFs,
NeRFs, or Gaussian Splatting generalize to shapes unseen
during training but produce artifacts for example when parts
of the object are occluded in scenes captured “in the wild”.
Their memory footprint can also become large. Using exemplars guarantees that the retrieved shapes look good as
they are created by human designers, however the database
may not contain shapes similar to the target object.
In this paper, we investigate the use of interpretable

16283

shape programs to represent objects. Shape programs are a
form of procedural modeling [10] introduced in [35] for representing 3D objects. While shape programs have already
been considered for 3D scene understanding [27, 32], their
use in this context remains largely unexplored. As shown in
Figure 1, our method can be used to accurately retrieve geometry and 3D parameters of target objects, together with
its texture even in presence of partial occlusions.
Shape programs can be seen as computational graphs of
parametrized geometric operations that generate various 3D
shapes from an object category given input shape parameters, such as object dimensions as well as “semantic” properties like existence of armrest or backrest in case of chairs.
Multiple similar parts, for example the legs of a chair or the
shelves of a bookshelves—are obtained by first generating a
single instance, duplicating it and applying geometric transformations such as rotations and translations as needed.
Thanks to this procedural modeling approach, shape
programs generate shapes that remain appealing and that
can fit many different instances. Alongside being interpretable, the shapes they generate are editable in an intuitive manner and have a very small memory footprint. In
fact, they are already a popular tool for building reconstruction [19, 24, 37, 39] and the interest around shape programs
for objects is growing [15, 16, 27, 35]. Blender [8] already
provides support for them. A research challenge targeting reconstruction of walls, doors, and windows using such
structured languages was organized by Meta in 2024 1 .
Recovering parameters of a shape program from an image is however challenging. Typically, a shape generated by
a shape program depends on a number of parameters. Some
parameters such as the width and height of the objects take
continuous values but other parameters take only discrete
values, e.g. the number of shelves in a bookshelf.
Optimizing on these parameters turns out to be tricky:
For example, changing the number of shelves from 5 to 6
1 [https://eval.ai/web/challenges/challenge-page/2115/overview
cessed: November 2024)]

(Ac-

