This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure-from-Motion with a Non-Parametric Camera Model
Yihan Wang1 *† Linfei Pan2 * Marc Pollefeys2,3 Viktor Larsson4
1
EPFL 2 ETH Zurich 3 Microsoft Spatial AI Lab 4 Lund University

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new generic Structure-fromMotion pipeline, GenSfM, that uses a non-parametric camera projection model. The model is self-calibrated during
the reconstruction process and can fit a wide variety of
cameras, ranging from simple low-distortion pinhole cameras to more extreme optical systems such as fisheye or
catadioptric cameras. The key component in our framework is an adaptive calibration procedure that can estimate partial calibrations, only modeling regions of the image where sufficient constraints are available. In experiments, we show that our method achieves comparable accuracy to traditional Structure-from-Motion pipelines in easy
scenarios, and outperforms them in cases where they are
unable to self-calibrate their parametric models. Code is at
https://github.com/Ivonne320/GenSfM.git

Figure 1. Non-parametric Camera Models in Strcuture-fromMotion. Our framework jointly performs Structure-from-Motion
while calibrating a non-parametric camera model. The camera
model is flexible and can fit a wide variety of cameras, including
severely distorted images such as fisheye or catadioptric.

In other words, the distortion only varies with the distance
to the image center, but not the angle.
In a parallel development, there are also geometric estimation methods that avoid explicitly estimating the lens
distortion. Examples are methods relying on the Radial
Alignment Constraint (RAC), originally from Tsai [31].
These methods derive geometric constraints that are invariant to the radial distortion by ignoring the radial offset, which is the distance to the center, and only considering the radial angle towards the projection. This has
been used for stratified calibration methods for radial distortion (e.g. [11, 12, 31]) and multi-view pose estimation [8].
Larsson et al. presented a full incremental Structure-fromMotion framework in [13] based on this projection constraint, which recovers the 3D structure and partial camera
geometry while ignoring the radial distortion of the cameras. Another recent approach is to implicitly model the
distortion map by regularization, for example, requiring it
to be monotonic [4] or smooth [18].
In this paper, we present a novel generic incremental
Structure-from-Motion pipeline, GenSfM, that instead uses
a non-parametric model for the intrinsic calibration as illustrated in Fig. 1. We introduce a natural spline-based representation for the calibration map, which enables smooth,

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) has a long history in computer vision, dating back to Ullman [32]. It tackles the
problem of jointly estimating the underlying 3D structure
and camera poses given an arbitrary image collection. It is
for example used to build maps for localization [22, 29] or
to estimate initial camera geometry and calibration for further dense or implicit reconstruction [10, 17, 25].
While there have been some recent progress in nonsequential pipelines (e.g. [19]), the incremental paradigm
which alternates registering images with triangulation and
bundle adjustment, has dominated the field in the last
decade. Common to both approaches is to model the camera intrinsic calibration using low-dimensional parametric models, usually polynomials or rational functions with
around 3 to 12 parameters. In the literature, there exists a
plethora of different camera models [6, 7, 21] that fit different types of optical systems, ranging from simple pinhole cameras to complex catadioptric setups. As lens distortion is dominated by the radial component for most cameras, many models are designed to be radially symmetric.
* Equal contribution
† The work is completed during exchange study at ETH Zurich.

1040

