This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaithDiff: Unleashing Diffusion Priors for Faithful Image Super-resolution
Junyang Chen Jinshan Pan Jiangxin Dong†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
https://jychen9811.github.io/FaithDiff_page/

Abstract
Faithful image super-resolution (SR) not only needs to recover images that appear realistic, similar to image generation tasks, but also requires that the restored images maintain fidelity and structural consistency with the input. To
this end, we propose a simple and effective method, named
FaithDiff, to fully harness the impressive power of latent
diffusion models (LDMs) for faithful image SR. In contrast
to existing diffusion-based SR methods that freeze the diffusion model pre-trained on high-quality images, we propose
to unleash the diffusion prior to identify useful information
and recover faithful structures. As there exists a significant
gap between the features of degraded inputs and the noisy
latent from the diffusion model, we then develop an effective
alignment module to explore useful features from degraded
inputs to align well with the diffusion process. Considering
the indispensable roles and interplay of the encoder and diffusion model in LDMs, we jointly fine-tune them in a unified
optimization framework, facilitating the encoder to extract
useful features that coincide with the diffusion process. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that FaithDiff outperforms state-of-the-art methods, providing high-quality
and faithful SR results.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to recover high-quality
(HQ) images from low-quality (LQ) ones with unknown
degradations. This problem has attracted widespread attention and achieved significant progress due to the development of deep learning methods. However, it is still challenging to restore faithful SR images with high reality and
fidelity, owing to the ill-posed property of SR problems.
Most state-of-the-art image SR methods rely on deep
generative models, which aim to learn the distribution of
HQ images and recover vivid textures from LQ inputs. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), as one of the representative approaches, can recover sharp images with rich
† Corresponding author

details [3, 4, 41, 42, 52]. However, the training process of
GAN-based methods is unstable and the generated images
usually exhibit perceptually unpleasant artifacts as pointed
out by [4, 19, 45]. To alleviate these issues, several methods [4, 55] propose to construct a discrete codebook consisting of a pre-defined number of HQ feature vectors and
learn to match LQ features to a set of HQ ones, which have
achieved better perceptual quality. Nevertheless, due to the
vastness of the natural image space, priors encoded with a
fixed size of codebook inherently possess a limited ability
of representation, hindering faithful image SR results.
Recently, latent diffusion models (LDMs) [5, 27, 32, 33]
have achieved promising image generation results as they
can effectively model complex image distributions. While
LDMs possess strong priors on the structures and details
of HQ images, they face challenges in the image SR task,
which requires not only vivid generation details but also
faithful structure recovery that is consistent with LQ inputs.
To address this, several methods [21, 28, 47, 49] enhance
the encoder to extract degradation-robust features from LQ
images and then leverage pre-trained diffusion models to
refine the extracted features. However, real-world images
with unknown degradations present challenges for the encoder in extracting features with faithful structural information. As the diffusion models are pre-trained on HQ images,
any mistakes in the extracted features (Figure 1(b)-(c)) may
be misinterpreted by the diffusion model as image structures, thus misleading the diffusion process and negatively
impacting the final restoration results (e.g., the characters)
in Figure 1(d) and (f)-(g). As a result, relying solely on improving the extracted features for guiding the diffusion process has limitations in achieving faithful restoration. Different from the above methods, we unleash and fine-tune
the diffusion model to identify useful information from degraded inputs and boost faithful image SR.
Note that the encoder and the diffusion model play different but indispensable roles in LDM-based SR methods [21, 49]. Separately optimizing these two modules will
limit the power of LDMs, hindering the restoration of finescale structures as analyzed in Section 5. Thus, we propose
to jointly optimize the encoder and diffusion model, estab-

28188

