This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-MME: The First-Ever Comprehensive Evaluation Benchmark
of Multi-modal LLMs in Video Analysis
Chaoyou Fu1,2,♠ , Yuhan Dai3 , Yongdong Luo4 , Lei Li5 , Shuhuai Ren6
Renrui Zhang7 , Zihan Wang8 , Chenyu Zhou4 , Yunhang Shen4 , Mengdan Zhang9
Peixian Chen4 , Yanwei Li7 , Shaohui Lin8 , Sirui Zhao3 , Ke Li4 , Tong Xu3
Xiawu Zheng4 , Enhong Chen3 , Caifeng Shan1,2,∗ , Ran He9,∗ , Xing Sun5, *
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University
3
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
4
XMU, 5 HKU, 6 PKU, 7 CUHK, 8 ECNU, 9 CASIA

Abstract
In the quest for artificial general intelligence, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have emerged as
a focal point in recent advancements. However, the predominant focus remains on developing their capabilities
in static image understanding. The potential of MLLMs
to process sequential visual data is still insufficiently explored, highlighting the lack of a comprehensive, highquality assessment of their performance. In this paper, we
introduce Video-MME, the first-ever full-spectrum, MultiModal Evaluation benchmark of MLLMs in Video analysis. Our work distinguishes from existing benchmarks
through four key features: 1) Diversity in video types, spanning 6 primary visual domains with 30 subfields to ensure
broad scenario generalizability; 2) Duration in temporal
dimension, encompassing both short-, medium-, and longterm videos, ranging from 11 seconds to 1 hour, for robust
contextual dynamics; 3) Breadth in data modalities, integrating multi-modal inputs besides video frames, including subtitles and audios, to unveil the all-round capabilities
of MLLMs; 4) Quality in annotations, utilizing rigorous
manual labeling by expert annotators to facilitate precise
and reliable model assessment. With Video-MME, we extensively evaluate various state-of-the-art MLLMs, and reveal that Gemini 1.5 Pro is the best-performing commercial
model, significantly outperforming the open-source models
with an average accuracy of 75%, compared to 71.9% for
GPT-4o. The results also demonstrate that Video-MME is a
universal benchmark that applies to both image and video
MLLMs. Further analysis indicates that subtitle and audio
* Corresponding Author. ♠ Project Leader.

information could significantly enhance video understanding. Besides, a decline in MLLM performance is observed
as video duration increases for all models. Our dataset
along with these findings underscores the need for further improvements in handling longer sequences and multimodal data, shedding light on future MLLM development.
Project page: https://video-mme.github.io.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of MLLMs in recent years [66] has
highlighted their impressive perception and cognitive capabilities across various multimodal benchmarks [16, 43, 67].
These advancements show the great potential of MLLMs to
serve as a foundation that can digest the multimodal real
world and pave the way toward artificial general intelligence. However, current MLLMs and their evaluation primarily focus on static visual data understanding, which fails
to capture the dynamic nature of the real world involving
complex interactions between objects over time. To approximate real-world scenarios more accurately, it is crucial to
explore and assess the capabilities of MLLMs on sequential
visual data, such as videos. Many early efforts [18, 33, 55]
have been made to inspire the video understanding potentials of MLLMs with promising results. However, existing
video-based benchmarks [27, 32, 41, 45] are still limited to
thoroughly reveal their performance, such as a lack of diversity in video types, insufficient coverage of temporal dynamics, and the narrow focus on a single modality. These
inevitably hinder the all-around evaluation of MLLMs.
To this end, we introduce Video-MME, the first-ever
comprehensive Multi-Modal Evaluation benchmark crafted

24108

