This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Sound Source Localization with
Joint Slot Attention on Image and Audio
Inho Kim1 Youngkil Song2 Jicheol Park2 Won Hwa Kim1,2 Suha Kwak1,2
1
2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH
{kimih, songyk, jicheol, wonhwa, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

Image Slot Attention

Sound source localization (SSL) is the task of locating the
source of sound within an image. Due to the lack of localization labels, the de facto standard in SSL has been to
represent an image and audio as a single embedding vector
each, and use them to learn SSL via contrastive learning. To
this end, previous work samples one of local image features
as the image embedding and aggregates all local audio features to obtain the audio embedding, which is far from optimal due to the presence of noise and background irrelevant
to the actual target in the input. We present a novel SSL
method that addresses this chronic issue by joint slot attention on image and audio. To be specific, two slots competitively attend image and audio features to decompose them
into target and off-target representations, and only target
representations of image and audio are used for contrastive
learning. Also, we introduce cross-modal attention matching to further align local features of image and audio. Our
method achieved the best in almost all settings on three public benchmarks for SSL, and substantially outperformed all
the prior work in cross-modal retrieval.

Contrastive
Learning

Global Audio Feature

(a) Previous work

Initial Slots

Target Slot
Off-target Slot

Contrastive
Learning

Audio Slot Attention

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Difference between previous work and ours. For contrastive learning of SSL, our method identifies and utilizes pairs
of relevant image region and audio segment, while previous work
exploits a local image feature and the global audio feature.

and assume that, given an image-audio pair, at least one
patch of the image is relevant to the audio; then they represent the image with its local feature that most closely resembles the global audio feature, and learn SSL through
contrastive learning [24, 27] with these features (Fig. 1(a)).
While this approach has been proven to work, there
is plenty of room for further improvement. First, audio
may contain not only the sound of the target shared by the
two modalities but also irrelevant sounds, such as noise or
sounds from sources outside the image. In such cases, using the global audio feature for contrastive learning hinders accurate alignment between the image and audio features. Second, representing an image with only a single local feature in contrastive learning causes models to locate a
small discriminative part of the sound source, not its whole
body [35], which can degrade SSL accuracy.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel SSL
method based on slot attention [17], which is conceptually
illustrated in Fig. 1(b). In slot attention, slots, which are
randomly sampled or learnable embeddings, compete with
each other for aggregating input features progressively, and
thus they decompose the features into distinct and exclusive
representations. Motivated by this, we employ slot attention with two learnable slots to jointly decompose image

1. Introduction
Humans easily identify where a sound comes from within
their sight. This capability is a key aspect of human perception facilitating interaction with surroundings, and is also
demanded in a large variety of vision applications such as
autonomous driving and robotics [10, 28, 34]. Motivated
by this, a large body of research [1, 3, 6, 12, 14, 15, 21, 22,
25, 26, 29–33] has studied sound source localization (SSL),
the task of locating the source of a sound within the paired
image in the form of segmentation mask.
Due to the prohibitively expensive cost of sound source
annotation for image-audio pair data, existing methods [6,
21, 31, 33] have focused on learning SSL using only imageaudio pairs without sound source labels. To this end, they
consider the task as multiple instance learning [2, 13, 20]

3121

