This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Myopia To Holism: Fully Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
Haicheng Wang1,2† , Chen Ju1†u , Weixiong Lin1,3 , Shuai Xiao1u , Mengting Chen1 , Yixuan Huang1 ,
Chang Liu1,3 , Mingshuai Yao1 , Jinsong Lan1 , Ying Chen1 , Qingwen Liu1 , Yanfeng Wang3
1
Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba 2 Paris Elite Insitute of Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
anakin skywalker@sjtu.edu.cn, cju.void@gmail.com, {shuai.xsh,yingchen}@alibaba-inc.com

澷濣濢濨濦濕濧濨濝濪濙澔激濕濢濛濩濕濛濙澡澽濡濕濛濙澔濄濦濙澡濨濦濕濝濢濝濢濛澔澜澷激澽濄澝

Æ

Embedding Space

Æ Æ Æ Æ

Style: dog runs happily, lively

myopia: one tulip

濙濼瀁濸激濚瀅濴濼瀁濸濷澳濥濸濶瀂濺瀁濼瀇濼瀂瀁

Æ

holism: two roses

Main Object: one pet dog
with white fur all over its body
Complex Details: dog is in the
middle, its shadow is on the left
since sun shines from the right

濴濷濴瀃瀇澳濖濟濜濣
瀇瀂澳瀉濴瀅濼瀂瀈瀆
濷瀂瀊瀁瀆瀇瀅濸濴瀀澳
瀇濴瀆濾瀆

Æ

What is the girl holding?

…

澻濼瀀濴濺濸澿澳瀀瀈濿瀇濼激瀇濸瀋瀇瀆澼
濴濿濿激瀅瀂瀈瀁濷澳瀃濴濼瀅瀆

…

Æ
Web Text
one photo
of small dog

澼濣濠濝濧濡

Background: run on the grass

…

濶瀅瀈濷濸澳澻濼瀀濴濺濸澿澳瀇濸瀋瀇澼澳瀃濴濼瀅瀆

Æ

濁濭濣濤濝濕澔

holism: castle ushers in
a serene and peaceful
style, …

What are two animals aiming to do?

myopia: castle feels eerie
and terrifying, …

myopia: aim to fight

濟瀂瀁濺激濖瀂瀁瀇濸瀋瀇澳濥濸瀇瀅濼濸瀉濴濿

holism: drift & chat

濖瀂瀀瀃濿濸瀋澳濩濤濔

Figure 1. Myopia. OpenAI’s CLIP [63] uses crude (image, text) web data for one-to-one contrastive alignment, causing serious myopia,
i.e., bias to monotonous short texts and shallow visual expressivity. Holism. We advance one holistic CLIP paradigm, by updating colorful
(image, multi-texts) data from diverse views, levels; and designing multi-to-multi constrastive learning for image-text part-to-part matching.

Abstract
In rapidly evolving ﬁeld of vision-language models (VLMs),
contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP) has made
signiﬁcant strides, becoming foundation for various downstream tasks. However, relying on one-to-one (image, text)
contrastive paradigm to learn alignment from large-scale
messy web data, CLIP faces a serious myopic dilemma, resulting in biases towards monotonous short texts and shallow visual expressivity. To overcome these issues, this paper
advances CLIP into one novel holistic paradigm, by updating both diverse data and alignment optimization. To obtain
colorful data with low cost, we use image-to-text captioning
to generate multi-texts for each image, from multiple perspectives, granularities, and hierarchies. Two gadgets are
†: These authors contribute equally to this work.
u : Corresponding authors.

proposed to encourage textual diversity. To match such (image, multi-texts) pairs, we modify the CLIP image encoder
into multi-branch, and propose multi-to-multi contrastive
optimization for image-text part-to-part matching. As a result, diverse visual embeddings are learned for each image,
bringing good interpretability and generalization. Extensive experiments and ablations across over ten benchmarks
indicate that our holistic CLIP signiﬁcantly outperforms existing myopic CLIP, including image-text retrieval, openvocabulary classiﬁcation, and dense visual tasks. Project
page is available to further promote the prosperity of VLMs:
https://voide1220.github.io/Holism/.

1. Introduction
With the rapid recent advancement of large language models in NLP, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have also
thrived, driving progress in tasks like closed-set understanding, open-vocabulary learning, and AIGC generation [21,

29791

