This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Encapsulated Composition of Text-to-Image and Text-to-Video Models for
High-Quality Video Synthesis
Tongtong Su1,2 , Chengyu Wang2 *, Bingyan Liu3,2 , Jun Huang2 , Dongming Lu1 *
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Cloud Computing,
3
South China University of Technology
{sutongtong,ldm}@zju.edu.cn,
{chengyu.wcy,huangjun.hj}@alibaba-inc.com,

eeliubingyan@mail.scut.edu.cn

VideoCrafter-2.0

AnimateDiff V2

“A cat running happily”

“Iron Man flying in the sky”

VideoCrafter-2.0+Ours EVS

“A car turning a corner”

AnimateDiff V2+Ours EVS

Figure 1. Comparison of videos generated by T2V models w/ and w/o EVS. Our method significantly improves imaging quality compared
to videos solely generated by VideoCrafter-2.0 (see the Iron Man head and cat eyes), and frame consistency compared to AnimateDiff-V2
(see the stability of car color across frames).

Abstract
In recent years, large text-to-video (T2V) synthesis models have garnered considerable attention for their abilities to generate videos from textual descriptions. However,
achieving both high imaging quality and effective motion
representation remains a significant challenge for these T2V
models. Existing approaches often adapt pre-trained textto-image (T2I) models to refine video frames, leading to issues such as flickering and artifacts due to inconsistencies
across frames. In this paper, we introduce EVS, a trainingfree Encapsulated Video Synthesizer that composes T2I and
T2V models to enhance both visual fidelity and motion
smoothness of generated videos. Our approach utilizes a
well-trained diffusion-based T2I model to refine low-quality
video frames by treating them as out-of-distribution samples, effectively optimizing them with noising and denois-

ing steps. Meanwhile, we employ T2V backbones to ensure consistent motion dynamics. By encapsulating the T2V
temporal-only prior into the T2I generation process, EVS
successfully leverages the strengths of both types of models,
resulting in videos of improved imaging and motion quality.
Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our approach compared to previous approaches. Our composition
process also leads to a significant improvement of 1.6x-4.5x
speedup in inference time. 1

1. Introduction
Recently, large-scale text-to-video (T2V) models [27, 28,
32, 33] have gained significant attention due to their ability
to generate realistic videos from textual descriptions. These
models leverage vast datasets of text-video pairs, allowing
them to learn complex relationships between textual inputs
1 Source codes: https://github.com/alibaba/EasyNLP/
tree/master/diffusion/EVS

* Co-corresponding authors.

18209

