This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Fair Multi-View Clustering with Attention KAN
HaiMing Xu1 , Qianqian Wang1, *, Boyue Wang2 , Quanxue Gao1
1
Xidian University, 2 Beijing University of Technology
24011211044@stu.xidian.edu.cn, qqwang@xidian.edu.cn, wby@bjut.edu.cn, qxgao@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

mentary information, enabling a more comprehensive understanding of underlying patterns [2, 31].

Multi-view clustering is effective in unsupervised multiview data analysis and has received considerable attention.
However, most existing methods excessively emphasize certain attributes, resulting in unfair clustering outcomes, i.e.,
certain sensitive attributes dominate the clustering results.
Moreover, existing methods struggle to effectively capture
complex nonlinear relationships and interactions across
views, limiting their ability to achieve optimal clustering
performance. Therefore, in this work, we propose a novel
method, Deep Fair Multi-View Clustering with Attention
Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (DFMVC-AKAN), to generate fair clustering results while maintaining robust performance. DFMVC-AKAN integrates attention mechanisms
into Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KAN) to exploit the
complex nonlinear inter-view relationships. Speciﬁcally,
KAN provides a nonlinear feature representation capable
of efﬁciently approximating arbitrary multivariate continuous functions, augmented by a hybrid attention mechanism which enables the model to dynamically focus on the
most relevant features. Finally, we reﬁne the clustering assignments with a distribution alignment module to ensure
fair outcomes across diverse groups while maintaining discriminative ability. Experimental results on four datasets
containing sensitive attributes demonstrate that DFMVCAKAN signiﬁcantly improves fairness and clustering performance compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Multi-view clustering (MVC), as a widely-applied unsupervised multi-view data analysis tool, aims to partition unlabeled multi-view datasets into distinct categories by fusing the information from all accessible views [5, 7, 28, 44].
It effectively uncovers a wider range of latent patterns by integrating consistent and complementary information from
multiple perspective, thereby garnering increasing attention in various ﬁelds, e.g., bioinformatics, computer vision, etc. Existing MVC methods can be broadly categorized into traditional approaches and deep learning-based
approaches[20, 42]. Traditional methods primarily focus
on leveraging linear transformation to integrate multiple
views, including matrix factorization-based, graph-based,
and subspace-based methods [8, 45]. While these traditional methods have demonstrated effectiveness in various
applications, they often rely on linear assumptions and imposes limitations on their overall effectiveness in real-world
multi-view data. This limitation has prompted the advancement of deep learning-based methods, which utilize the capabilities of neural networks to capture complex patterns
and interactions across different views.
Deep learning-based MVC methods are able to capture
nonlinear relationships and high-level feature representations from multi-view data [18, 33]. These methods can be
broadly categorized into three categories: (1) autoencoderbased methods [35, 37], which utilize deep autoencoders to
extract and fuse multi-view representations; (2) generative
adversarial network (GAN)-based methods [27, 29], which
employ adversarial training to align the distributions of different views and generate uniﬁed representations for clustering; (3) attention-based methods [11, 34], which leverages attention mechanism to dynamically adjust the importance of different views or features. Deep MVC has demonstrated superior performance in capturing complex data patterns, thereby achieving impressive clustering results.

1. Introduction
Multi-view data refers to the representation of the same object from multiple perspectives or different sources and have
become increasingly ubiquitous in practice [6, 9, 24, 41].
For instance, in medical imaging, a patient’s condition can
be characterized through multiple scanning modalities, such
as CT, MRI, and X-ray. Each imaging modality captures
different aspects of the patient’s health. Compared with
single-view data, such multi-view data provides comple-

Despite the signiﬁcant progress in deep MVC, they generally place excessive emphasis on certain attributes, such
as gender, race, age, etc., introducing extra bias and resulting in unfair results [15, 21, 49]. For instance, in a health-

* Corresponding authors.

5061

