This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Free-viewpoint Human Animation with Pose-correlated Reference Selection
Fa-Ting Hong1,2,† Zhan Xu2,B Haiyang Liu2 Qinjie Lin3 Luchuan Song2
Zhixin Shu2 Yang Zhou2 Duygu Ceylan2 Dan Xu1,B
1

HKUST

2

3

Adobe Research

Northwestern University, USA

fhongac@connect.ust.hk, {zhaxu, zshu, yazhou, ceylan}@adobe.com, haiyangliu1997@gmail.com
qinjielin2018@u.northwestern.edu, lsong11@ur.rochester.edu, danxu@ust.hk

Reference Set

…

…

…

…

Generated Free-viewpoint Videos

Figure 1. In this work, we aim to address the challenging task of free-viewpoint human animation synthesis under large viewpoint and
camera distance changes. Our proposed method successfully generates novel-view videos with consistent character appearance across
substantial viewpoint shifts.

Abstract
Diffusion-based human animation aims to animate a human character based on a source human image as well as
driving signals such as a sequence of poses. Leveraging the
generative capacity of diffusion model, existing approaches
are able to generate high-fidelity poses, but struggle with
significant viewpoint changes, especially in zoom-in/zoomout scenarios where camera-character distance varies. This
limits the applications such as cinematic shot type plan or
camera control. We propose a pose-correlated reference selection diffusion network, supporting substantial viewpoint
variations in human animation. Our key idea is to enable
the network to utilize multiple reference images as input,
since significant viewpoint changes often lead to missing
appearance details on the human body. To eliminate the
computational cost, we first introduce a novel pose correlation module to compute similarities between non-aligned
target and source poses, and then propose an adaptive reference selection strategy, utilizing the attention map to identify key regions for animation generation. To train our
model, we curated a large dataset from public TED talks
featuring varied shots of the same character, helping the
† Fa-Ting did the work during internship at Adobe.

model learn synthesis for different perspectives. Our experimental results show that with the same number of reference
images, our model performs favorably compared to the current SOTA methods under large viewpoint changes. We further show that the adaptive reference selection is able to
choose the most relevant reference regions to generate humans under free viewpoints.

1. Introduction
Reference-based human animation involves animating a
given character based on a driving motion sequence. Typically, a single reference image provides the character’s appearance, while the motion sequence is represented as a
sequence of skeletal poses. Recent advances in referencebased human animation [8, 9, 22, 34, 39, 40] have achieved
significant improvements in terms of both quality and robustness, largely due to the use of diffusion models [4, 24].
However, they primarily focus on animating the character
from the same viewpoint as the reference image. Although
some methods can synthesize turning motions, they assume
a fixed character-camera distance, limiting the animation to
the same camera shot type as the reference image.
In this work, we address the aforementioned limitation
by tackling a more general and challenging scenario: hu-

26253

