This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Generalizable Scene Change Detection
Jae-Woo Kim1 and Ue-Hwan Kim1 *
1
Department of AI Convergence
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, South Korea
kjw01124@gm.gist.ac.kr, uehwan@gist.ac.kr

Parkway

Parking lot

Train road

Sidewalk

Ours

State-of-the-art

Input

Street view

Figure 1. Comparative results of the current state-of-the-art model and our GeSCF under various unseen environments
(ChangeVPR). GeSCF outperforms with precise boundaries and edges, where the state-of-the-art model hardly captures changes.

we design Initial Pseudo-mask Generation and GeometricSemantic Mask Matching—seamlessly turning user-guided
prompt and single-image based segmentation into scene
change detection for a pair of inputs without guidance. Furthermore, we define the Generalizable Scene Change Detection (GeSCD) benchmark along with novel metrics and
an evaluation protocol to facilitate SCD research in generalizability. In the process, we introduce the ChangeVPR
dataset, a collection of challenging image pairs with diverse environmental scenarios—including urban, suburban,
and rural settings. Extensive experiments across various datasets demonstrate that GeSCF achieves an average performance gain of 19.2% on existing SCD datasets
and 30.0% on the ChangeVPR dataset, nearly doubling the
prior art performance. We believe our work can lay a solid
foundation for robust and generalizable SCD research.

Abstract
While current state-of-the-art Scene Change Detection (SCD) approaches achieve impressive results in welltrained research data, they become unreliable under unseen environments and different temporal conditions; indomain performance drops from 77.6% to 8.0% in a previously unseen environment and to 4.6% under a different temporal condition—calling for generalizable SCD
and benchmark. In this work, we propose the Generalizable Scene Change Detection Framework (GeSCF),
which addresses unseen domain performance and temporal consistency—to meet the growing demand for anything SCD. Our method leverages the pre-trained Segment
Anything Model (SAM) in a zero-shot manner. For this,
Code and dataset are available here.
* Corresponding author

24463

