This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointSR: Self-Regularized Point Supervision for Drone-View Object Detection
Weizhuo Li1

Yue Xi1 * Wenjing Jia2
1
2

Zehao Zhang1

Fei Li3

Xiangzeng Liu3

Qiguang Miao3 *

Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Guangzhou, China

Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
3

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China

{liweizhuo@stu., xiyue@, zzehao@stu., lifei@, xzliu@, qgmiao@}xidian.edu.cn
Wenjing.Jia@uts.edu.au

Epoch 0

Abstract
Point-Supervised Object Detection (PSOD) in a discriminative style has recently gained significant attention for
its impressive detection performance and cost-effectiveness.
However, accurately predicting high-quality pseudo-box labels for drone-view images, which often feature densely
packed small objects, remains a challenge. This difficulty
arises primarily from the limitation of rigid sampling strategies, which hinder the pseudo-box optimization process.
To address this, we propose PointSR, an effective and robust point-supervised object detection framework with selfregularized sampling that integrates temporal and informative constraints throughout the pseudo-box generation
process. Specifically, the framework comprises three key
components: Temporal-Ensembling Encoder (TE Encoder),
Coarse Pseudo-box Prediction, and Pseudo-box Refinement. The TE Encoder builds an anchor prototype library
by aggregating temporal information for dynamic anchor
adjustment. In Coarse Pseudo-box Prediction, anchors are
refined using the prototype library, and a set of informative samples is collected for subsequent refinement. During
Pseudo-box Refinement, these informative negative samples are used to suppress low-confidence candidate positive samples, thereby improving the quality of the pseudoboxes. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that PointSR significantly outperforms state-of-theart methods, achieving up to 2.6% ∼ 7.2% higher AP50
using only point supervision. Additionally, it exhibits strong
robustness to perturbation in human-labeled points.

Epoch 1

Epoch n

(a) Point-to-Box

(b) Ours
Candidate Proposals
Proposals for Target 1

..

Pseudo Boxes

Negative Samples

Proposals for Target 2

Figure 1. Comparisons of the pseudo-box optimization process.
(a) The rigid sampling strategy in Point-to-Box [3] results in the
inefficiency of the training process for low-quality pseudo-box labels. (b) The self-regularized sampling in our PointSR improves
the stability and efficiency of the training process and thus obtains
high-quality pseudo-box labels.

1. Introduction

However, DroneDet models often experience a significant
performance drop when applied to new scenes or datasets
due to their limited generalization capabilities. A straightforward solution is to collect and annotate new datasets and
retrain the models. However, annotating drone-view images
with box-level annotations containing accurate position information is particularly challenging due to the prevalence
of many densely packed small targets, far more complex
than annotating ground-view images. Moreover, the diversity of the scenes and object types can lead to combinatorial explosions of labeling requirements, making the process
infeasible in many cases. Consequently, constructing new
datasets with box-level annotations is both time-consuming
and costly when deploying drones in new scenarios.
To alleviate the cost associated with box-level annotations, Image-Supervised Object Detection (ISOD) [1, 14,
26] has been extensively studied. ISOD treats images as a
bag of regions, assuming at least one region contains the object and uses a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) classifier
to identify regions corresponding to image-level labels. De-

Drone-view object detection (DroneDet) [7, 23, 27, 28, 33],
which involves detecting objects from drone-captured images, plays a vital role in various domains, including national defense, resource management, and drone inspection.
* Corresponding author.

11707

