This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoCo-LLaMA: Towards Vision Compression with Large Language Models
Xubing Ye1 , Yukang Gan2 , Xiaoke Huang3 , Yixiao Ge2 , Yansong Tang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 UC Santa Cruz

a) Previous methods

Abstract

𝑝 𝑦 c𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠(𝒱), 𝒯)

Language Model
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable success in various multi-modal tasks, but they are often
bottlenecked by the limited context window and high computational cost of processing high-resolution image inputs
and videos. Vision compression can alleviate this problem
by reducing the vision token count. Previous approaches
compress vision tokens with external modules and force
LLMs to understand the compressed ones, leading to visual information loss. However, the LLMs’ understanding
paradigm of vision tokens is not fully utilised in the compression learning process. We propose VoCo-LLaMA, the
first approach to compress vision tokens using LLMs. By introducing Vision Compression tokens during the vision instruction tuning phase and leveraging attention distillation,
our method distill how LLMs comprehend vision tokens into
their processing of VoCo tokens. VoCo-LLaMA facilitates
effective vision compression and improves the computational efficiency during the inference stage. Specifically, our
method can achieve a 576× compression rate while maintaining 83.7% performance. Furthermore, through continuous training using time-series compressed token sequences
of video frames, VoCo-LLaMA demonstrates the ability to
understand temporal correlations, outperforming previous
methods on popular video question-answering benchmarks.
Our approach presents a promising way to unlock the full
potential of VLMs’ contextual window, enabling more scalable multi-modal applications. The project page can be accessed via https://yxxxb.github.io/VoCo-LLaMA-page.

1. Introduction
The advent of visual-language models [3, 5, 14, 27, 34,
35, 38, 53, 66, 67] has led to significant advances in visual understanding. Particularly, high-resolution image
encoding [5, 34] and the incorporation of more video
frames [38, 53] have been shown to enhance the capabili† Corresponding author.

External Module

Text Tokens 𝒯

Vision Tokens 𝒱
b) VoCo-LLaMA
Distill

Vision Tokens 𝒱

𝑝!" 𝑦 𝐿𝑀(𝒱, 𝑉𝑜𝐶𝑜), 𝒯)

VoCo

Text Tokens 𝒯

Figure 1. (a) Previous methods exploit external module, such as
Q-Former [27] or average pooling [30], to “compress” vision tokens with substantial loss. (b) Illustration of VoCo-LLaMA, which
empowers LLM to compress vision tokens and understand compressed tokens via intrinsic token distillation.

ties of both large visual-language models and large videolanguage models, respectively. However, the large number
of vision tokens occupies a substantial portion of the valuable context window of the large language model, leading
to expensive computational costs. For instance, when using high-resolution image input in LLaVA-1.6 [36], a single image with a resolution of 672 × 672 is divided into
smaller patches, each encoded with a 336 × 336 resolution input. This process yields an image representation
consisting of 2880 vision tokens, occupying over half of
the context length. As the number of input images increases, the context window for text will be further bottlenecked. [38, 53] investigate the efficacy of extending the
context length to the million-level mark to mitigate this issue, but this approach necessitates expensive computational
resources (e.g., [38] requires over 1000 v4 TPUs) and engi-

29836

