This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Representation Learning through Causal Intervention
for Controllable Image Editing
Shanshan Huang1 , Haoxuan Li2 , Chunyuan Zheng3 , Lei Wang1 , Guorui Liao1 ,
Zhili Gong1 , Huayi Yang1 , Li Liu1 *
1
School of Big Data & Software Engineering, Chongqing University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
{shanshanhuang, dcsliuli}@cqu.edu.cn, {hxli, cyzheng}@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{leiwangtt, guoruiliao, 202224131097, 202224131078}@stu.cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
A key challenge for controllable image editing is that visual attributes with semantic meanings are not always
independent, resulting in spurious correlations in model
training. However, most existing methods ignore such issues, leading to biased causal visual representation learning and unintended changes to unrelated regions or attributes in the edited images. To bridge this gap, we propose a diffusion-based causal visual representation learning framework called CIDiffuser to capture causal representations of visual attributes based on structural causal
models to address the spurious correlation. Specifically, we
first decompose the image representation into a high-level
semantic representation for core attributes of the image and
a low-level stochastic representation for other random or
less structured aspects, with the former extracted by a semantic encoder and the latter derived via a stochastic encoder. We then introduce a causal effect learning module to
capture the direct causal effect, that is, the difference of potential outcomes before and after intervening on the visual
attributes. In addition, a diffusion-based learning strategy
is designed to optimize the representation learning process.
Empirical evaluations on two benchmark datasets demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art methods, enabling highly controllable image editing
by modifying learned visual representations.

tools [10, 12, 19, 29, 38], where fine-grained control over
visual elements is necessary. Fortunately, the maturity and
prevalence of deep generative models such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [6] and variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [7, 37] diffusion model [4, 8], facilitate the editing
of realistic images provided in various source inputs.
Existing methods can generally be divided into two categories: condition-based image editing [10, 12, 20, 34] and
representation learning-based methods [1, 5, 26, 27, 30].
The core idea of the former is to guide the editing process
with the help of additional conditional information, such as
text descriptions, masks, or reference images. However, acquiring such additional information is challenging and expensive. In contrast, representation learning-based methods
aim to learn the latent representation of images for attribute
editing, providing more precise control while reducing the
reliance on external information. However, a key challenge
in image editing is modification of one attribute will intentionally impact other unrelated attributes. This difficulty
stems from the complex dependencies between the various
attributes within an image.

1. Introduction

Unfortunately, many existing methods are unable to
solve the above challenge. For example, in the CelebA
dataset, the presence of older faces is usually associated
with the presence of glasses, while younger faces are associated with the absence of glasses in the dataset, existing
methods may mistakenly link wearing glasses with age. As
illustrated in Fig. 1(a.2), current methods (e.g., [24]) may
inadvertently add or remove glasses when editing age, as
shown by the red box, even though there is no causal relationship between them.

Controllable image editing aims to modify specific target
attributes while keeping unrelated attributes unchanged [2].
This capability is crucial for a wide range of applications,
from personalized content generation to interactive design
* Corresponding author

Causal inference is an effective tool to address these issues, which is widely-used in many fields such as economy, healthcare, and e-commerce [9, 18, 35, 36]. CFI-VAE
[19] introduces a causal intervention approach within the
VAE framework to learn causal effects between latent rep-

23484

