This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Steering Away from Harm: An Adaptive Approach to Defending Vision
Language Model Against Jailbreaks

1

Han Wang1 , Gang Wang1 , Huan Zhang1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

{hanw14, gangw}@illinois.edu, huan@huan-zhang.com

Abstract
Vision Language Models (VLMs) can produce unintended
and harmful content when exposed to adversarial attacks,
particularly because their vision capabilities create new
vulnerabilities. Existing defenses, such as input preprocessing, adversarial training, and response evaluation-based
methods, are often impractical for real-world deployment
due to their high costs. To address this challenge, we propose ASTRA, an efficient and effective defense by adaptively
steering models away from adversarial feature directions
to resist VLM attacks. Our key procedures involve finding
transferable steering vectors representing the direction of
harmful response and applying adaptive activation steering to remove these directions at inference time. To create effective steering vectors, we randomly ablate the visual tokens from the adversarial images and identify those
most strongly associated with jailbreaks. These tokens
are then used to construct steering vectors. During inference, we perform the adaptive steering method that involves the projection between the steering vectors and calibrated activation, resulting in little performance drops on
benign inputs while strongly avoiding harmful outputs under adversarial inputs. Extensive experiments across multiple models and baselines demonstrate our state-of-theart performance and high efficiency in mitigating jailbreak
risks. Additionally, ASTRA exhibits good transferability, defending against unseen attacks (i.e., structured-based attack, perturbation-based attack with project gradient descent variants, and text-only attack). Our code is available
at https://github.com/ASTRAL-Group/ASTRA.

1. Introduction
Vision Language Models (VLMs) [8, 12, 28, 60] have
attracted significant attention from both the industry and
academia for their remarkable vision-language cognition
capabilities [39]. Despite widespread applications, VLMs
still face safety challenges due to limitations inherent in
their underlying language models. Moreover, integrating

visual inputs can open up a new surface for adversarial
attacks. These safety issues regarding VLM have led to
a lot of research on jailbreak attacks and defense strategies [17, 47, 53, 61].
Jailbreak attacks in VLMs aim to induce models to generate harmful responses by using jailbreaking image-text
pairs [22–24, 26, 41, 48, 51]. These jailbreak attacks can
be categorized into two types: (i) perturbation-based attacks, which create adversarial images that prompt generation of the harmful response from VLMs [2, 38, 41,
46], (ii) structured-based attacks, which embeds the malicious queries into images via typography to bypass the
safety alignment of VLMs [17, 30]. Countermeasures
for both attacks have been explored extensively: the input preprocessing-based method [37] or adversarial training [25] have proven effective for perturbation-based attacks. However, these defenses suffer as they require intensive computations to purify the image or fine-tune the
model. Response evaluation-based [18, 53, 58] defenses
have been proposed for structured-based attacks, but they
all require running model inference multiple times to potentially identify harmful outputs, which dramatically increases the cost of real-world deployment.
In this work, we argue that an efficient defense framework
should not require significant computational resources during training or generating responses multiple times during inference. Drawing inspiration from recent advancements in activation steering in Large Language Model
(LLM) [4, 20, 43, 52], we propose ASTRA, an efficient and
effective defense by adaptively steering models away from
adversarial feature directions via image attribution activations to resist VLM attacks. We find that simply borrowing the method from steering LLM for safeguarding VLM
is not empirically workable due to the mismatch between
the steering vectors obtained from textual and visual data,
which necessitates our image attribution approach.
Specifically, ASTRA consists of two steps: constructing
steering vectors via image attribution, and adaptive activation steering at inference time. We seek to construct steering vectors representing the direction of harmful responses.

29947

