This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detection-Friendly Nonuniformity Correction: A Union Framework for Infrared
UAV Target Detection
Houzhang Fang1† *, Xiaolin Wang1† , Zengyang Li1 , Lu Wang1 , Qingshan Li1 , Yi Chang2 , Luxin Yan2
1 Xidian University

2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology

houzhangfang@xidian.edu.cn, wxl@stu.xidian.edu.cn, 22009200694@stu.xidian.edu.cn, wanglu@xidian.edu.cn,
qshli@mail.xidian.edu.cn, yichang@hust.edu.cn, yanluxin@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

Degraded Image

(a) Direct
Miss Detection

Detection

Infrared unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) images captured
using thermal detectors are often affected by temperaturedependent low-frequency nonuniformity, which significantly
reduces the contrast of the images. Detecting UAV targets under nonuniform conditions is crucial in UAV surveillance applications. Existing methods typically treat infrared nonuniformity correction (NUC) as a preprocessing step for detection, which leads to suboptimal performance. Balancing the two tasks while enhancing detectionbeneficial information remains challenging. In this paper,
we present a detection-friendly union framework, termed
UniCD, that simultaneously addresses both infrared NUC
and UAV target detection tasks in an end-to-end manner. We first model NUC as a small number of parameter estimation problem jointly driven by priors and data
to generate detection-conducive images. Then, we incorporate a new auxiliary loss with target mask supervision
into the backbone of the infrared UAV target detection network to strengthen target features while suppressing the
background. To better balance correction and detection,
we introduce a detection-guided self-supervised loss to reduce feature discrepancies between the two tasks, thereby
enhancing detection robustness to varying nonuniformity
levels. Additionally, we construct a new benchmark composed of 50,000 infrared images in various nonuniformity
types, multi-scale UAV targets and rich backgrounds with
target annotations, called IRBFD. Extensive experiments
on IRBFD demonstrate that our UniCD is a robust union
framework for NUC and UAV target detection while achieving real-time processing capabilities. Dataset can be available at https://github.com/IVPLaboratory/UniCD.

degraded
image
Degraded Image

Prior/Data

Detection

(c) Union
Prior + Data

degraded image

Conf :0.74

Loss

Correction
degraded
image
Degraded Image

&

Detection

Conf :1.00

Correction
Union Loss

Figure 1. Three main categories of methods for UAV target detection in nonuniformity conditions. (a) Direct: detection models [10]
are directly applied to nonuniformity degraded images. (b) Separate: correction model [15] serves as a pre-processing step, correcting images before passing them to detectors [10]. (c) Union:
correction and detection are processed simultaneously in a unified
framework. Previous methods solely concentrates on optimizing
one task. Our UniCD concurrently emphasizes the joint enhancement of correction quality and detection accuracy.

toring UAV in both day and night scenarios. However, the
thermal radiation from the optical lens and the camera housing causes the acquired infrared UAV images to often suffer
from the temperature-dependent low-frequency nonuniformity effects [15, 23, 26, 33] (See the left column of Fig. 1).
The optics-caused nonuniformity effect is also referred to
as the bias field, which reduces the image contrast. Moreover, the infrared UAV targets typically have weak features
and complex backgrounds [4, 5]. Nonuniformity bias field
further exacerbates the difficulty of UAV target detection.
Infrared nonuniformity correction (NUC) and target detection have achieved significant advancements in recent years
[2, 4, 5, 17, 23, 28]. Previous methods focus on one aspect
of the tasks and address the two tasks independently. As
far as we know, no work considers the practical problem:
infrared UAV target detection under the nonuniformity conditions.

1. Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) detection based on infrared
imaging is an important perception technology for moni* Corresponding author.

(b) Separate

† Equal contribution.

To solve this problem, a simple strategy is to detect [10]

11898

