This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Comprehensive Study of Decoder-Only LLMs for Text-to-Image Generation
Andrew Z. Wang1,3†
Songwei Ge2†
1
University of Washington

Tero Karras3
Ming-Yu Liu3
Yogesh Balaji3
2
3
University of Maryland
NVIDIA
Action Relation

Abstract

Spatial Relation

Both text-to-image generation and large language models
(LLMs) have made significant advancements. However,
many text-to-image models still employ the somewhat outdated T5 and CLIP as their text encoders. In this work, we
investigate the effectiveness of using modern decoder-only
LLMs as text encoders for text-to-image diffusion models.
We build a standardized training and evaluation pipeline
that allows us to isolate and evaluate the effect of different text embeddings. We train a total of 27 text-to-image
models with 12 different text encoders to analyze the critical aspects of LLMs that could impact text-to-image generation, including the approaches to extract embeddings,
different LLMs variants, and model sizes. Our experiments
reveal that the de facto way of using last-layer embeddings
as conditioning leads to inferior performance. Instead, we
explore embeddings from various layers and find that using
layer-normalized averaging across all layers significantly
improves alignment with complex prompts. Most LLMs with
this conditioning outperform the baseline T5 model, showing enhanced performance in advanced visio-linguistic reasoning skills.

Part Relation
Scene
Counting
Attribute
Comparison
Overall Average
Differentiation
Negation

Universal

Figure 1. VQA scores for text-to-image models using T5-XXL
and Mistral-7B as the text encoders. The models use embeddings
extracted from the last layer of T5 (orange) and Mistral (green),
and layer-normalized average embeddings of Mistral (blue). Our
results show that Mistral performs worse than T5 when only using
the last layer. However, using all layers significantly improves
Mistral’s performance, surpassing T5 in all aspects.

1. Introduction

question of whether these decoder-only LLMs are suitable
for text-to-image generation tasks.
In this work, we examine how the rich linguistic representations from decoder-only LLMs can be leveraged to
enhance text-to-image generation and investigate the most
effective strategies for incorporating them. Our focus is
on autoregressive language models that use causal attention
and are trained with a next-token prediction objective. We
address three primary research questions:

The field of text-to-image generation has seen tremendous
progress in recent years, driven by improvements in diffusion architectures [6, 11, 34], scalable models [39, 40], and
better training procedures [26, 27, 34]. Central to the success of these models is the use of pre-trained text encoders
that transfer natural language prompts into representations
suitable for guiding image generation. However, the impact
of different text encoder models on the image generation
quality remains largely unexplored.
Most contemporary image generators use traditional text
encoders such as T5 [42] or CLIP [41] for obtaining text
embeddings [1, 2, 40, 43, 46]. However, the development of
encoder-decoder models has slowed down while there is an
increasing interest in decoder-only large language models
(LLMs) due to their great scalability. This raises a pressing

1. To what extent can decoder-only LLMs be utilized to
enhance text-to-image generation? What methodologies
yield the largest improvements?

† This work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.

2. LLM fine-tuned embedding models have surpassed
encoder-decoder models in contextual semantic comprehension across various tasks [38]. Can these embedding models contribute to improving text-to-image
alignment?
3. Does increasing the model size of decoder-only LLMs

28575

