This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Similarity-Guided Layer-Adaptive Vision Transformer for UAV Tracking
Chaocan Xue1 , Bineng Zhong1 ,* Qihua Liang1†, Yaozong Zheng1 , Ning Li1
Yuanliang Xue2 , Shuxiang Song1
1
Key Laboratory of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology,
Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin 541004, China
2
Xi’an Research Institute of High Technology, Xi’an 710025, China
xcc23cg@163.com, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, qhliang@gxnu.edu.cn
yaozongzheng@stu.gxnu.edu.cn, ningli65536@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn
xyl 507@outlook.com, songshuxiang@mailbox.gxnu.edu.cn

Abstract

75

Vision transformers (ViTs) have emerged as a popular
backbone for visual tracking. However, complete ViT architectures are too cumbersome to deploy for unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) tracking which extremely emphasizes
efficiency. In this study, we discover that many layers within lightweight ViT-based trackers tend to learn
relatively redundant and repetitive target representations.
Based on this observation, we propose a similarity-guided
layer adaptation approach to optimize the structure of
ViTs. Our approach dynamically disables a large number of representation-similar layers and selectively retains
only a single optimal layer among them, aiming to achieve
a better accuracy-speed trade-off. By incorporating this
approach into existing ViTs, we tailor previously complete ViT architectures into an efficient similarity-guided
layer-adaptive framework, namely SGLATrack, for realtime UAV tracking. Extensive experiments on six tracking benchmarks verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach, and show that our SGLATrack achieves a stateof-the-art real-time speed while maintaining competitive
tracking precision. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/GXNU-ZhongLab/SGLATrack.

70

AUC vs. Speed on UAV123
SGLATrack

AUC(%)

65
60

UDAT

55
50

ECO-HC
AutoTrack

45

MCCT-H

40

0

50

GPU Speed
CPU Speed

SGLATrack
AVTrack
Aba-ViTrack
TCTrack
HiT
DRCI
HiFT

100

fDSST

150

Speed(FPS)

200

250

300

Figure 1. Comparison of SGLATrack against other UAV trackers
on UAV123. Our SGLATrack demonstrates state-of-the-art performance with an AUC score of 66.9%, while running efficiently
at nearly 225 FPS on GPU and approximately 75 FPS on CPU.

perspective. More importantly, the limited power and computing resources of UAVs impose strict demands on efficiency. Therefore, an excellent UAV tracker must maintain
both high tracking precision and efficiency.
Owing to the high efficiency derived from the operations in the Fourier domain, discriminative correlation filter (DCF)-based methods are widely used for UAV Tracking. Despite the efficiency, they hardly achieve favorable tracking robustness using hand-crafted feature extractors [13, 16, 27]. Siamese network (SN)-based trackers can learn robust target representations using deep features, but their reliance on early convolutional neural networks (CNNs) leaves considerable potential for precision
improvement [2, 34, 69]. In recent years, vision trans-

1. Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) tracking is an essential branch of visual object tracking (VOT), which can be
used for various applications such as visual surveillance
[40], path planning [42] and border security [60]. However, compared to generic object tracking, UAV tracking
typically faces greater challenges due to its unique aerial
* Corresponding Author
† Corresponding Author

6730

