This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiGIT: Multi-Dilated Gated Encoder and Central-Adjacent Region Integrated
Decoder for Temporal Action Detection Transformer
Ho-Joong Kim

Yearang Lee

Jung-Ho Hong

Seong-Whan Lee→

Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{hojoong kim, yr lee, jungho-hong, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we examine a key limitation in query-based
detectors for temporal action detection (TAD), which arises
from their direct adaptation of originally designed architectures for object detection. Despite the effectiveness
of the existing models, they struggle to fully address the
unique challenges of TAD, such as the redundancy in multiscale features and the limited ability to capture sufficient
temporal context. To address these issues, we propose
a multi-dilated gated encoder and central-adjacent region
integrated decoder for temporal action detection transformer (DiGIT). Our approach replaces the existing encoder that consists of multi-scale deformable attention and
feedforward network with our multi-dilated gated encoder.
Our proposed encoder reduces the redundant information
caused by multi-level features while maintaining the ability
to capture fine-grained and long-range temporal information. Furthermore, we introduce a central-adjacent region
integrated decoder that leverages a more comprehensive
sampling strategy for deformable cross-attention to capture
the essential information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiGIT achieves state-of-the-art performance on
THUMOS14, ActivityNet v1.3, and HACS-Segment. Code
is available at: https://github.com/Dotori-HJ/DiGIT

Figure 1. Convergence curves with InternVideo2 [41] features
on THUMOS14 [14]. Our method boosts the previous querybased detectors like TE-TAD [15] and TadTR [27].

1. Introduction

anchor-based [3, 21, 22, 29, 43, 49], anchor-free [6, 8, 20,
34, 36, 44, 47], and query-based [15, 27, 35, 37, 53].
Query-based detectors, inspired by DETR [4], have attracted interest because of their potential to eliminate reliance on hand-crafted components, such as the sliding
window and non-maximum suppression (NMS). This capability derives from their adoption of a set-prediction
mechanism, which enables an end-to-end detection process
through a one-to-one matching paradigm. Among them,
TE-TAD [15] enables a full end-to-end detection process
by reformulating the coordinate representation based on
recent DETR-based network architectures, such as multiscale deformable attention [52]. However, despite these advancements, query-based detectors still rely on originally
designed architectures for object detection, which is not
fully suited to addressing the unique challenges of TAD.
We identify two limitations within the encoder and decoder
structures of existing query-based TAD models. (1) In the
encoder, simply utilizing single-scale [27, 53] feature or
multi-scale [15] features fails to extract the meaningful features needed to capture the diverse temporal scale information and distinct feature representations. (2) In the decoder,
the deformable cross-attention mechanism focuses on the
central regions of reference points, overlooking surrounding
areas essential for accurately detecting the action instances.

Temporal action detection (TAD) is crucial for video understanding and supports a wide range of real-world applications, including video surveillance, summarization,
and retrieval. TAD aims to detect action instances within
untrimmed videos by identifying action classes along with
their start and end times. The most existing TAD methods [15, 27, 36, 47] are a snippet-based approach, which utilizes pre-extracted features to address long durations. This
approach does not require the computational cost for the
backbone network at the detection stage, enabling the detector to address a comprehensive length of features at once.
The existing methods can be divided into three approaches:
*Corresponding author

24286

