This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CountLLM: Towards Generalizable Repetitive Action Counting
via Large Language Model
Ziyu Yao1 Xuxin Cheng1 Zhiqi Huang1 Lei Li2,3 *
Peking University 2 University of Washington 3 University of Copenhagen

{yaozy, chengxx}@stu.pku.edu.cn

zhiqihuang@pku.edu.cn

Video

Abstract
Repetitive action counting, which aims to count periodic
movements in a video, is valuable for video analysis applications such as fitness monitoring. However, existing methods largely rely on regression networks with limited representational capacity, which hampers their ability to accurately capture variable periodic patterns. Additionally,
their supervised learning on narrow, limited training sets
leads to overfitting and restricts their ability to generalize across diverse scenarios. To address these challenges,
we propose CountLLM, the first large language model
(LLM)-based framework that takes video data and periodic text prompts as inputs and outputs the desired counting value. CountLLM leverages the rich clues from explicit
textual instructions and the powerful representational capabilities of pre-trained LLMs for repetitive action counting.
To effectively guide CountLLM, we develop a periodicitybased structured template for instructions that describes
the properties of periodicity and implements a standardized answer format to ensure consistency. Additionally,
we propose a progressive multimodal training paradigm
to enhance the periodicity-awareness of the LLM. Empirical evaluations on widely recognized benchmarks demonstrate CountLLM’s superior performance and generalization, particularly in handling novel and out-of-domain actions that deviate significantly from the training data, offering a promising avenue for repetitive action counting.

lilei@di.ku.dk

Video
Encoder

Regression
Network

3

(a) Existing RAC approaches
Video

1

Video
Encoder

Pre-trained LLM

Answer
3

Question
Periodicity Description
Periodic Text
··· periodic temporal intervals ··· & How many times do repetitive
Prompts
··· visual similarity across frames ···
actions appear in this video?
(b) Our proposed LLM-based approach

Figure 1. a): Existing approaches directly regress the density map,
and sum the values of each frame to obtain the final count. b):
Our proposed LLM-based approach utilizes explicit periodic text
prompts to describe key properties of periodicity, and leverages
the powerful reasoning capabilities of pre-trained LLMs, achieving accurate and generalizable repetitive action counting.

1. Introduction

Despite its importance, this field remains underexplored.
Previous approaches mostly adopt a straightforward strategy: first encoding video features, then regressing density
maps, and finally summing the values to achieve counting [14, 18, 50] (as shown in Fig. 1 (a)). However, they exhibit significant limitations in addressing the diversity and
complexity of the RAC task. First, the cycle lengths of
different actions vary greatly and are unevenly distributed;
moreover, videos often contain complex backgrounds and
motion blur, which interfere with accurate counting. Existing approaches largely rely on manually designed regression neural networks, whose representational capacity is
limited, making it difficult to accurately capture such variable and non-homogeneous periodic patterns. Second, the
current research community’s definition of actions is overly
narrow, as the actions in existing datasets are limited and
primarily focus on human fitness activities (such as squats,
crunches, and jumping jacks). This results in traditional supervised learning models being prone to overfitting when
trained on training sets of these small datasets, thus limiting
their ability to generalize to out-of-domain scenarios.
To address these challenges, we propose integrating
large-scale pre-trained large language models (LLMs) into

With the rapid advancements in video understanding [2,
27, 29, 32, 37, 54–56], repetitive action counting (RAC)
has become a critical area of study. This task, which involves counting repetitive activities in videos, plays a crucial role in analyzing periodic actions, such as those in fitness monitoring [15], pedestrian detection [46], camera calibration [21], and 3D reconstruction [34, 48].
* Corresponding author.

19143

