This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Keyframe-Guided Creative Video Inpainting
Yuwei Guo1 Ceyuan Yang4 Anyi Rao7 Chenlin Meng3
Shuangrui Ding1 Maneesh Agrawala6 Dahua Lin1,2,5
1

CUHK

2

Omer Bar-Tal3
Bo Dai8,9

Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Pika Labs 4 ByteDance 5 CPII under InnoHK
6
Stanford 7 HKUST 8 HKU 9 Feeling AI

Figure 1. We introduce VideoRepainter, a practical framework for video inpainting using a keyframe as reference. We show example use
cases such as changing a person’s head into a balloon (object changing, first row), altering the environment from field to beach (background
changing, second row), and adding a sand-made “CVPR” to the beach (novel concept insertion, third row).

Abstract
Video inpainting, which aims to fill missing regions with visually coherent content, has emerged as a crucial technique
for creative applications such as editing. While existing approaches achieve visual consistency or text-guided generation, they often struggle to balance coherence and creative
diversity. In this work, we introduce VideoRepainter, a twostage framework that allows users to inpaint a keyframe using established image-level techniques, then propagate the
changes to other frames. Our approach can leverage stateof-the-art image models for keyframe manipulation, thereby
easing the burden of the video-inpainting process. To this
end, we integrate an image-to-video model with a symmetric condition mechanism to address ambiguity caused by
direct mask downsampling. We further explore efficient

strategies for mask synthesis and parameter tuning to reduce costs in data processing and model training. Evaluations demonstrate our method achieves superior results in
both visual fidelity and content diversity compared to existing approaches, providing a practical solution for creative
video manipulation. See our Project Page for more details.

1. Introduction

13009

Video inpainting aims to fill the missing regions of a video
with coherent content. Earlier efforts in this domain focused
primarily on restoration tasks, where the objective was to
repair missing content by ensuring harmony with the surrounding visual context. However, the emergence of advanced video generation models (e.g., Pika [51], Kling [34],

