This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EventGPT: Event Stream Understanding with Multimodal
Large Language Models
Shaoyu Liu1,2 , Jianing Li2 , Guanghui Zhao1 *, Yunjian Zhang2 , Xin Meng3
Fei Richard Yu4 , Xiangyang Ji2 ,* Ming Li4 *
1

Xidian University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Peking University
4
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy(SZ)
23171110721@stu.xidian.edu.cn, lijianing@pku.edu.cn, ming.li@u.nus.edu, ghzhao@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Query: In this image, what activity is the
person on the sidewalk engaged in?

Event cameras capture visual information as asynchronous
pixel change streams, excelling in challenging lighting and
high-dynamic scenarios. Existing multimodal large language models (MLLMs) concentrate on natural RGB images, failing in scenarios where event data fits better. In
this paper, we introduce EventGPT, the first MLLM for
event stream understanding, pioneering the integration of
large language models (LLMs) with event-based vision. To
bridge the huge domain gap, we propose a three-stage optimization paradigm to progressively equip a pre-trained
LLM with event understanding. Our EventGPT consists
of an event encoder, a spatio-temporal aggregator, a linear
projector, an event-language adapter, and an LLM. Firstly,
GPT-generated RGB image-text pairs warm up the linear
projector, following LLaVA, as the gap between natural images and language is smaller. Secondly, we construct NImageNet-Chat, a large synthetic dataset of event data and
corresponding texts to enable the use of the spatio-temporal
aggregator and to train the event-language adapter, thereby
aligning event features more closely with the language
space. Finally, we gather an instruction dataset, EventChat, which contains extensive real-world data to fine-tune
the entire model, further enhancing its generalization ability. We construct a comprehensive benchmark, and experiments show that EventGPT surpasses previous state-of-theart MLLMs in generation quality, descriptive accuracy, and
reasoning capability. Code: EventGPT

EventGPT
Event Stream

EventGPT: The person on
the sidewalk is walking
with a shopping bag.

Downstream applications
Object Detection

Instance Segmentation

Figure 1. Our EventGPT is the first multimodal large language
model tailored for event stream understanding, including scene
summarization, reasoning, and question answering, with a great
potential for downstream tasks.

plication potential in scenarios under imperfect lighting
conditions or including high dynamic objects [7, 12, 57].
The relevant tasks on event data, e.g. object detection
[8, 10, 16, 46], tracking [9, 31, 39, 53], and 3D reconstruction [14, 32, 35, 49], have been well-investigated.

1. Introduction

Recent multimodal large language models (MLLMs)
have shown remarkable breakthroughs in conventional vision and language problems, demonstrating extraordinary
capabilities of scene understanding and question answering
(QA) [25, 26, 38, 47, 60]. Typically, a pioneering research
Large Language and Vision Assistant (LLaVA) combines a
vision encoder with an LLM, trained on GPT-4-generated
multimodal data, to create a robust system that excels in
visual understanding, instruction-following, and complex
question answering [26]. These works mainly pay attention to natural RGB scenes and the resulting models degrade
significantly when encountering the aforementioned scenarios. However, the relevant research on event data streams
remains underexplored.

Event cameras, with predominant advantages in capturing scene changes and temporal resolution, have great ap* Corresponding authors

29139

