This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DV-Matcher: Deformation-based Non-Rigid Point Cloud Matching Guided by
Pre-trained Visual Features
Zhangquan Chen1#
Puhua Jiang1,2#
1. Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China

Ruqi Huang1 *
2. Pengcheng Laboratory, China

Abstract
In this paper, we present DV-Matcher, a novel learningbased framework for estimating dense correspondences between non-rigidly deformable point clouds. Learning directly from unstructured point clouds without meshing or
manual labelling, our framework delivers high-quality dense
correspondences, which is of significant practical utility
in point cloud processing. Our key contributions are twofold: First, we propose a scheme to inject prior knowledge
from pre-trained vision models into geometric feature learning, which effectively complements the local nature of geometric features with global and semantic information; Second, we propose a novel deformation-based module to promote the extrinsic alignment induced by the learned correspondences, which effectively enhances the feature learning. Experimental results show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art results in matching non-rigid point clouds
in both near-isometric and heterogeneous shape collection
as well as more realistic partial and noisy data. Our code
is available at https://github.com/rqhuang88/
DV-Matcher.

1. Introduction
Point cloud data has long been the most prevailing form
of 3D data acquisitions (e.g., laser scanning, photogrammetry). In this paper, we propose DV-Matcher, a learningbased framework for matching non-rigidly deformable point
clouds – a task that is essential for reconstructing [63], understanding [4] and manipulating [52] dynamic objects in
real world.
Apart from the primary pursuit of accurate dense correspondences, we have extended our effort towards the following goals for boosting the utility and potential of our framework in real-world applications: G1) Robustness with respect to significant deformations and partiality; G2) Balance
between Accuracy and Efficiency for processing largescale data; G3) Correspondence Label-Free for minimiz* Corresponding author: ruqihuang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. We train DV-Matcher and two baselines under a challenging setting. The training set consists of only one full point cloud
as reference and a set of 516 partial point clouds sampled from
shapes in SHREC’19 with significant pose/style deformations (see
the yellow point clouds). Without any correspondence label, our
framework not only manages to match accurately on SHREC’19
benchmark (both partial and full setting), but also generalizes well
to unseen benchmarks. See Sec. 4.2 for more details.

ing manual effort from users; G4) Directly trainable on
point clouds of unfixed resolution, without introducing
extra operations such as meshing and point re-sampling in
training or inference. Though, as will be discussed soon, different combinations of the above goals have been achieved
by the prior arts, DV-Matcher demonstrates high capacity
along all axes, but also delivers state-of-the-art matching
accuracy (see Fig. 1 for a challenging example).
In fact, estimating correspondences between non-rigid
point clouds has long attracted research interests. Early
approaches [3, 34, 39]are mostly axiomatic and featured by
lightweight and efficient implementation, which fulfill G2G4 above. When the deformations among input are small to
moderate, which is typical in dynamic 3D reconstruction [47,
63], such algorithms are effective. On the other hand, due
to their dependence on spatial proximities of input, they
often struggle in the presence of large deformation in either
pose/style [29]. Some recent advances aim for robustness
regarding pose variation [66], which on the other hand falls
short of handling style variation and partiality (see Sec. 4).
To deal with large deformation, a recent trend [9, 29, 30,
43] is to transplant the success of matching triangular meshes
via spectral method [51] into the domain of point clouds. In
essence, such approaches follow a self-supervised scheme

27264

