This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreePCA: Integrating Consistency Information across Long-short Frames in
Training-free Long Video Generation via Principal Component Analysis
Jiangtong Tan, Hu Yu, Jie Huang, Jie Xiao, Feng Zhao*
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
{jttan, yuhu520, hj0117, ustchbxj}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Long video generation involves generating extended videos
using models trained on short videos, suffering from distribution shifts due to varying frame counts. It necessitates the use of local information from the original short
frames to enhance visual and motion quality, and global
information from the entire long frames to ensure appearance consistency. Existing training-free methods struggle
to effectively integrate the benefits of both, as appearance
and motion in videos are closely coupled, leading to motion
inconsistency and visual quality. In this paper, we reveal
that global and local information can be precisely decoupled into consistent appearance and motion intensity information by applying Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
allowing for refined complementary integration of global
consistency and local quality. With this insight, we propose
FreePCA, a training-free long video generation paradigm
based on PCA that simultaneously achieves high consistency and quality. Concretely, we decouple consistent appearance and motion intensity features by measuring cosine similarity in the principal component space. Critically,
we progressively integrate these features to preserve original quality and ensure smooth transitions, while further enhancing consistency by reusing the mean statistics of the
initial noise. Experiments demonstrate that FreePCA can
be applied to various video diffusion models without requiring training, leading to substantial improvements. Code is
available at https://github.com/JosephTiTan/FreePCA.

fusion models [7, 12, 40], trained on large video datasets,
have made significant progress in generating high-quality
videos. However, training a diffusion model capable of producing long videos remains a resource-intensive task, requiring substantial data collection and annotation [44].
Therefore, researchers have begun to explore methods
for generating long videos without training. Directly inputting global noise sequences into models trained on short
videos to generate longer videos results in reduced quality,
missing objects, and slow motion due to distribution shifts
from training data. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the concept of
“playing drum kit” is lost, referred to as the global aligned
method. To address these issues, some methods [31, 38]
maintain the original local frame count using sliding windows to align with the training data, then apply fusion techniques to stitch them together into long videos, referred
to as the local stitched method. While these methods can
maintain video quality, ensuring consistency between windows remains challenging, as seen in Fig. 1(b). [28] proposes to generate videos by directly using global noise sequences to enhance video consistency, and fuses it with local attention map in the frequency domain to enhance details. But it relies on features with longer frames to generate
the entire video, overlooking the flexibility needed in video
generation, which leads to the lack of motion and semantic
richness like Fig. 1(a). As a summary, how to effectively
integrate global information to maintain consistency while
ensuring the quality of local information for video generation is significant for this task.
We argue that the local information extracted by sliding windows with original frame count is reasonable for
preserving the data distribution of the video generation
model and reflects the quality of visual and motion. While
global information reflects overall consistency, as its appearance remains unchanged despite the decline in quality
in Fig. 1(a). Therefore, we aim to find a strong decoupling
space to establish an appropriate complementary relationship between global and local information, thereby achieving high consistency and quality in long video generation.

1. Introduction
As diffusion models have gained prominence in the field
of image generation [17, 32], video diffusion generation
models [18, 33, 47] have also begun to develop, leading
to various applications such as video editing [8, 27, 42]
and motion control [13, 15, 39, 43]. Previous video dif* Corresponding author.

27979

