This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

#bae1ff

Functionality understanding and segmentation in 3D scenes
Svg robot:
https://www.svgrepo.com/svg/296701/robot

Jaime #4f1787ff
Corsetti1,2 Francesco Giuliari1

Alice Fasoli1

#eb3678ff
1
#fb773cff

Davide Boscaini1
2

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Fabio Poiesi1

University of Trento

{jcorsetti,fgiuliari,alfasoli,dboscaini,poiesi}@fbk.eu

Open the second drawer of the
cabinet to the left of the TV

World Knowledge &
Vision Perception

Turn on the ceiling light using the
switch next to the TV

Open the top right drawer of the
cabinet with the TV on top

Fun3DU

Figure 1. We present Fun3DU, the first method for functionality understanding and segmentation in 3D scenes. Fun3DU interprets natural
language descriptions (left-hand side) in order to segment functional objects in real-world 3D environments (right-hand side). Fun3DU relies
on world knowledge and vision perception capabilities of pre-trained vision and language models, without requiring task-specific finetuning.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Understanding functionalities in 3D scenes involves interpreting natural language descriptions to locate functional
interactive objects, such as handles and buttons, in a 3D
environment. Functionality understanding is highly challenging, as it requires both world knowledge to interpret
language and spatial perception to identify fine-grained objects. For example, given a task like ‘turn on the ceiling
light,’ an embodied AI agent must infer that it needs to locate the light switch, even though the switch is not explicitly
mentioned in the task description. To date, no dedicated
methods have been developed for this problem. In this paper, we introduce Fun3DU, the first approach designed for
functionality understanding in 3D scenes. Fun3DU uses a
language model to parse the task description through Chainof-Thought reasoning in order to identify the object of interest. The identified object is segmented across multiple
views of the captured scene by using a vision and language
model. The segmentation results from each view are lifted
in 3D and aggregated into the point cloud using geometric information. Fun3DU is training-free, relying entirely
on pre-trained models. We evaluate Fun3DU on SceneFun3D, the most recent and only dataset to benchmark this
task, which comprises over 3000 task descriptions on 230
scenes. Our method significantly outperforms state-of-theart open-vocabulary 3D segmentation approaches. Project
page: https://tev-fbk.github.io/fun3du/

Functionality understanding in 3D scenes requires interpreting natural language descriptions in order to locate functional
interactive elements, such as handles, knobs, and buttons, in
a 3D environment [9]. For example, given a task like ‘turn
on the ceiling light’, the agent must first understand that the functional goal is to increase the room’s brightness through a light switch, and then locate the switch in
3D by segmentation. While functionality understanding has
long been a research challenge [34], we argue that this dual
requirement, i.e. integrating language comprehension with
spatial perception, still poses several unaddressed problems,
especially when applied to 3D data. A major bottleneck is
the limited availability of datasets with fine-grained mask annotations for real-world environments focused on interactive
functional objects. The recent release of SceneFun3D [9]
contributes to address this gap, providing high-resolution
point clouds and multi-view images of real-world domestic
3D scenes annotated with functionality masks. However, no
existing method tackles this unique challenge.
In this paper, we introduce Fun3DU, the first approach designed specifically for functionality 3D scene understanding.
Since 3D data is orders of magnitude smaller than 2D data, it
is insufficient for training models capable of understanding
real-world nuances, such as those needed for interpreting
object functionalities in 3D scenes. Therefore, we design
Fun3DU as a training-free method that leverages pre-trained
vision and language models (VLMs) [8] to comprehend task
descriptions and segment functional objects, often not explic-

24550

