This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is ‘Right’ Right? Enhancing Object Orientation Understanding in Multimodal
Large Language Models through Egocentric Instruction Tuning
Ji Hyeok Jung1
1

Eun Tae Kim1 Seoyeon Kim1 Joo Ho Lee1 Bumsoo Kim2, * Buru Chang3, *
Sogang University 2 Chungang University 3 Korea University

{ji9759,untae0122,ksy02031,jhleecs}@sogang.ac.kr

Abstract

bumsoo@cau.ac.kr

buru chang@korea.ac.kr

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) act as essential interfaces, connecting humans with AI technologies in
multimodal applications. However, current MLLMs face
challenges in accurately interpreting object orientation in
images due to inconsistent orientation annotations in training data, hindering the development of a coherent orientation understanding. To overcome this, we propose egocentric instruction tuning, which aligns MLLMs’ orientation understanding with the user’s perspective, based on
a consistent annotation standard derived from the user’s
egocentric viewpoint. We first generate egocentric instruction data that leverages MLLMs’ ability to recognize object details and applies prior knowledge for orientation understanding. Using this data, we perform instruction tuning to enhance the model’s capability for accurate orientation interpretation. In addition, we introduce EgoOrientBench, a benchmark that evaluates MLLMs’ orientation understanding across three tasks using images collected from diverse domains. Experimental results on this
benchmark show that egocentric instruction tuning significantly improves orientation understanding without compromising overall MLLM performance. The instruction data
and benchmark dataset are available on our project page at
https://github.com/jhCOR/EgoOrientBench.

From the perspective of the camera, which
orientation is the {object} in the photo facing?
Answer the question using a single word or phrase
only from [front, right, back, left, front right,
front left, back right, back left].

object: car

object: bird

Front

LLaVA

Figure 1. Examples of LLaVA’s [30] responses to prompts asking about the orientation of objects in an image. Current MLLMs
show a significant lack of understanding when interpreting the orientation of given objects.

1. Introduction

behaviors that align accurately with human intentions.
However, MLLMs’ limited understanding of object orientation complicates effective communication. As shown
in Figure 1, current MLLMs struggle to accurately interpret
the orientation an object is facing. This limitation can lead
to errors in autonomous vehicle navigation, incorrect robot
operations, and even severe accidents, creating a significant
barrier to deploying MLLMs in real-world applications.
In this study, we identify inconsistent annotations in
training data—without standardized guidelines—as a major factor hindering accurate orientation understanding. Unlike humans, who understand object orientation through an
egocentric reference frame based on their physical bodies [20, 43, 51], MLLMs, lacking a physical body, rely

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [9, 30, 52]
can serve as interfaces connecting humans with AI technologies designed to perform multimodal tasks that require
both image and text understanding. For instance, MLLMs
are useful for operating autonomous systems [40, 46], manipulating robots [18, 22], and facilitating communication
with AI assistants on AR devices [33, 35, 45]. To ensure
consistent interaction, it is essential for MLLMs to exhibit
* Corresponding authors.

14257

