This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Facial Privacy Protection via Weakening Diffusion Purification
Ali Salar1
1

Qing Liu1

Yingli Tian2

Guoying Zhao1∗

Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis (CMVS), University of Oulu, Finland
{ali.salar, qing.liu, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi
2

City University of New York (CUNY)

Makeup-based

Noise-based

48.38

66.25

ytian@ccny.cuny.edu

73.74

58.21

Diffusion-based

71.18

73.71

83.08

38.58

46.06

58.36

64.92

63.56

59.15

73.88

Original Images

(a) TIP-IM [49]

(b) AMT-GAN [18]

(c) DiffAM [39]

(d) CLIP2Protect [36]

(e) DiffProtect [23]

Ours

Figure 1. Protected images generated by various facial privacy protection methods. Below each image, the numbers indicate
the verification confidence from the Face++ API; higher values suggest a stronger match with the target image shown on the
right side. For (b) and (c), the reference images used for makeup transfer are displayed near the corresponding protected
images. In (d), the makeup prompt is “big eyebrows with pink eyeshadows.”

Abstract
The rapid growth of social media has led to the
widespread sharing of individual portrait images, which
pose serious privacy risks due to the capabilities of automatic face recognition (AFR) systems for mass surveillance.
Hence, protecting facial privacy against unauthorized AFR
systems is essential. Inspired by the generation capability of the emerging diffusion models, recent methods employ diffusion models to generate adversarial face images
for privacy protection. However, they suffer from the diffusion purification effect, leading to a low protection success rate (PSR). In this paper, we first propose learning unconditional embeddings to increase the learning capacity
for adversarial modifications and then use them to guide
the modification of the adversarial latent code to weaken
the diffusion purification effect. Moreover, we integrate an
identity-preserving structure to maintain structural consistency between the original and generated images, allowing
* indicates the corresponding author

human observers to recognize the generated image as having the same identity as the original. Extensive experiments
conducted on two public datasets, i.e., CelebA-HQ and
LADN, demonstrate the superiority of our approach. The
protected faces generated by our method outperform those
produced by existing facial privacy protection approaches
in terms of transferability and natural appearance. The
code is available at https://github.com/parham1998/FacialPrivacy-Protection

1. Introduction
The advancement of facial recognition (FR) technology,
particularly those based on deep neural networks [6, 44],
has led to widespread applications in various fields, such as
biometrics [26], surveillance [15], etc. Despite the benefits,
FR technology could be misused by unauthorized organizations to e.g. track users’ interactions and activities, which
poses serious risks to personal privacy and security. So, it is
urgent to develop effective facial privacy protection meth-

8235

