This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Live

: Learning Video LLM with Streaming Speech Transcription at Scale

Joya Chen1∗

Ziyun Zeng1∗ Yiqi Lin1∗ Wei Li2 Zejun Ma2 Mike Zheng Shou1B
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 Bytedance

Could you comment on this match in real time?

As a Video LLM trained with 10M+ streaming speech transcripts, I can provide play-by-play commentary for the video.

(Average Text Generation Latency per Frame: 0.16s, 7B model on H100 GPU)
1s

2s

3s

4s

Time
5s

The French have the ball.

They're trailing by

two. They're looking to get the

lead. Here’s the pass.

He is going to shot.

Double team defense by French.

They're going to have to get it up. Here’s

Curry. He's got to get a shot up.

Curry. Step back.

Three-pointer. Got it! Curry!

124s

125s

126s

127s

128s

Time

Figure 1. Given a streaming video input, our LiveCC model can provide real-time commentary on the video content, emulating a human
commentator. This example is taken from the YouTube video with ID I7pTpMjqNRM, showcasing the Paris 2024 Olympics Men’s
Basketball Final between France and the USA. Note that the commentary responses are generated within one second.

improvements in general video QA and exhibits a new capability in real-time video commentary. To evaluate this, we
carefully design a new benchmark LiveSports-3K, using LLM-as-a-judge to measure the free-form commentary.
Experiments show our final model LiveCC-7B can surpass LLaVA-Video-72B in commentary quality even working in a real-time mode. Meanwhile, it achieves stateof-the-art results at the 7B scale on popular benchmarks
such as VideoMME, demonstrating its broad generalizability. All resources of this paper have been released at
showlab.github.io/livecc.

Abstract
Recent video large language models (Video LLMs) often depend on costly human annotations or proprietary APIs (e.g.,
GPT-4o) to produce training data, which limits their training at scale. In this paper, we explore large-scale training for Video LLM with cheap automatic speech recognition (ASR) transcripts. Specifically, we propose a novel
streaming training approach that densely interleaves the
ASR words and video frames according to their timestamps. Compared to previous studies in vision-language
representation with ASR, our method naturally fits the
streaming characteristics of ASR, thus enabling the model
to learn temporally-aligned, fine-grained vision-language
modeling. To support the training algorithm, we introduce a data pipeline for YouTube videos and their closed
captions (CC), resulting in Live-CC-10M pre-training
set and Live-WhisperX-408K high-quality supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) set. Remarkably, even without SFT, the
pre-trained model LiveCC-7B demonstrates significant
B Corresponding Author.

1. Introduction

* Equal Contribution.

The success of large language models (LLMs) [3, 4, 21, 58,
59, 72, 73, 83] owes much to the large-scale auto-regressive
language pre-training [8, 30, 35, 64, 65]. This inspires large
multimodal models (LMMs) [5, 28, 50, 60, 102], which
are initially only achieved by small-scale instruction tuning [50, 102], to increasingly emphasize data scaling during their training. While early large multimodal models
(LMMs) such as LLaVA [50] were only supervised fine-

29083

