This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Rendering Distillation: Adapting Stable Diffusion for
Instant Text-to-Mesh Generation without 3D Data
Zhiyuan Ma1,2 Xinyue Liang1,2 Rongyuan Wu1 Xiangyu Zhu3,4 Zhen Lei1,2,3,4 * Lei Zhang1 *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, UCAS

Figure 1. Our method adapts Stable Diffusion [87] to generate high-fidelity textured meshes in 1.2 seconds.

Abstract
It is highly desirable to obtain a model that can generate high-quality 3D meshes from text prompts in just seconds. While recent attempts have adapted pre-trained textto-image diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion (SD),
into generators of 3D representations (e.g., Triplane), they
often suffer from poor quality due to the lack of sufficient
high-quality 3D training data. Aiming at overcoming the
data shortage, we propose a novel training scheme, termed
as Progressive Rendering Distillation (PRD), eliminating
the need for 3D ground-truths by distilling multi-view diffusion models and adapting SD into a native 3D generator. In each iteration of training, PRD uses the U-Net
to progressively denoise the latent from random noise for
a few steps, and in each step it decodes the denoised latent into 3D output. Multi-view diffusion models, including MVDream and RichDreamer, are used in joint with SD

to distill text-consistent textures and geometries into the
3D outputs through score distillation. Since PRD supports
training without 3D ground-truths, we can easily scale up
the training data and improve generation quality for challenging text prompts with creative concepts. Meanwhile,
PRD can accelerate the inference speed of the generation
model in just a few steps. With PRD, we train a Triplane generator, namely TriplaneTurbo, which adds only
2.5% trainable parameters to adapt SD for Triplane generation. TriplaneTurbo outperforms previous text-to-3D generators in both efficiency and quality. Specifically, it can
produce high-quality 3D meshes in 1.2 seconds and generalize well for challenging text input. The code is available
at github.com/theEricMa/TriplaneTurbo.

1. Introduction
Text-to-3D aims to create 3D contents faithful to the given
textual descriptions. The optimization-based text-to-3D

* Corresponding authors.

11036

