This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Vision-Language Social Bias Removal for CLIP
Haoyu Zhang, Yangyang Guo,* Mohan Kankanhalli
National University of Singapore

Abstract
ImageNet Zero-shot Top-1 Accuracy

64

Vision-Language (V-L) pre-trained models such as CLIP
show promising capabilities in various downstream tasks.
Despite this promise, V-L models are notoriously limited by
their inherent social biases. A typical demonstration is that
V-L models often produce biased predictions against specific groups of people, significantly undermining their realworld applicability. Existing approaches endeavor to mitigate the social bias problem in V-L models by removing
biased attribute information from model embeddings. However, after our revisiting of these methods, we find that their
bias removal is frequently accompanied by greatly compromised V-L alignment capabilities. We then reveal that this
performance degradation stems from the unbalanced debiasing in image and text embeddings. To address this issue,
we propose a novel V-L debiasing framework to align image
and text biases followed by removing them from both modalities. By doing so, our method achieves multi-modal bias
mitigation while maintaining the V-L alignment in the debiased embeddings. Additionally, we advocate a new evaluation protocol that can 1) holistically quantify the model debiasing and V-L alignment ability, and 2) evaluate the generalization of social bias removal models. We believe this
work will offer new insights and guidance for future studies
addressing the social bias problem in CLIP. Our code can
be found at https://github.com/haoyusimon/VL Debiasing.

63

Original CLIP
(Gender)

Original CLIP
(Race)

62
61

Original CLIP
(Age)

Biased-prompts
(Gender)

Biased-prompts Biased-prompts
(Age)
(Race)
CLIP-clip
(Race)
CLIP-clip
(Age)

60

CLIP-clip
59 (Gender)
58

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Level of Bias (MaxSkew)
Figure 1. Model results before and after removing social biases
related to gender, race, and age, respectively.

to biased model outputs against specific social groups [49].
This problem, as hidden in their learned embeddings, primarily originates from the stereotypes [4] and spurious correlations [46] in the training data.
Existing social debiasing1 methods attempt to untie the
concept-attribute associations by removing attribute information from image or/and text embeddings. They involve either learning a fair module [3, 22, 25, 45] or directly manipulating the embedding vectors (through projection [9, 11, 17] or feature clipping based on mutual information [49]). However, after revisiting several representative
approaches, we uncover one significant drawback: these debiasing approaches greatly compromise the V-L alignment
ability in their produced embeddings - a phenomenon we
term over-debiasing. Fig. 1 illustrates the model results of
two social bias removal methods: Biased-prompts [9] and
CLIP-clip [49]. One can see that despite the alleviation of
social bias level2 , the downstream model performance deteriorates significantly as indicated by the purple arrows.
We then delve into the underlying reason for the overdebiasing problem. Our first observation is that social biases exist in both image and text embeddings of the CLIP
model (refer to Fig. 2 for more details). Nevertheless, most
previous approaches debias one modality only, leaving the
other one untouched [3, 9, 45]. CLIP-clip [49] attempts to

1. Introduction
Recently, Vision-Language (V-L) pre-trained models such
as CLIP [41] and BLIP [28] have gained dominant popularity. The pre-training using large-scale image-text pairs from
the web aids the alignment between visual and linguistic semantics. The alignment has led to remarkable zero-shot performance across a diverse range of applications such as image classification [12] and cross-modal retrieval [39]. Despite this capability, a pressing issue of social bias significantly impedes V-L models’ real-world deployment. In particular, these V-L models frequently develop associations of
neutral concepts with people’s sensitive attributes, leading

1 In this paper, we use the terms social debiasing and social bias removal
interchangeably.
2 A smaller MaxSkew indicates less social bias in models.

* Corresponding author.

4246

