This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Three Cars Approaching within 100m! Enhancing Distant Geometry by
Tri-Axis Voxel Scanning for Camera-based Semantic Scene Completion

1

Jongseong Bae1∗
Junwoo Ha1∗
Ha Young Kim2†
Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Yonsei University
2
Graduate School of Information, Yonsei University
{js.bae, gkwnsdn0402, hayoung.kim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Depth Map

ScanSSC (Ours)

Ground-Truth

VoxFormer-T
(CVPR2023)

CGFormer
(NeurIPS2024)

Distant Geometry

RGB Image

Near-Viewpoint
Geometry

Near-Viewpoint
Context Reference

Figure 1. In camera-based SSC, the projected distant geometry is sparse and unrealistic due to factors such as perspective and occlusion.
Our ScanSSC addresses this challenge by referencing distant geometry to the context of more accurate near-viewpoint geometry. As
a result, ScanSSC achieves more accurate reconstructions of both distant and near scenes, outperforming existing camera-based SSC
methods such as VoxFormer-T [14] and CGFormer [38].

Abstract

1. Introduction

Camera-based Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) is gaining attentions in the 3D perception ﬁeld. However, properties such as perspective and occlusion lead to the underestimation of the geometry in distant regions, posing a
critical issue for safety-focused autonomous driving systems. To tackle this, we propose ScanSSC, a novel camerabased SSC model composed of a Scan Module and Scan
Loss, both designed to enhance distant scenes by leveraging context from near-viewpoint scenes. The Scan Module
uses axis-wise masked attention, where each axis employing a near-to-far cascade masking that enables distant voxels to capture relationships with preceding voxels. In addition, the Scan Loss computes the cross-entropy along each
axis between cumulative logits and corresponding class distributions in a near-to-far direction, thereby propagating
rich context-aware signals to distant voxels. Leveraging
the synergy between these components, ScanSSC achieves
state-of-the-art performance, with IoUs of 44.54 and 48.29,
and mIoUs of 17.40 and 20.14 on the SemanticKITTI and
SSCBench-KITTI-360 benchmarks.
* Equally contributed

† Corresponding author

3D perception of real-world scenes is essential for autonomous driving systems, serving as a cornerstone for navigation and driving safety. Achieving precise reconstruction of the surrounding geometry is critical but challenging
due to the geometric discrepancies between sensor data and
real-world coordinates.
3D semantic scene completion (SSC) is a recently proposed [25] task that jointly predicts the 3D geometry and
semantics of the surrounding scene. Since the release
of the SemanticKITTI benchmark [3], numerous studies
have explored outdoor SSC. While LiDAR-based methods [6, 32, 34, 35] remain the primary approach due to
their strong performance, they come with the high cost
of LiDAR sensors. Recently, since MonoScene [4] initially tackled monocular SSC, camera-based methods [10–
12, 14, 23, 38, 39] have gained the spotlight owing to their
rich visual information and cost-effectiveness.
In recent camera-based SSC approaches, techniques
such as Features Line-of-Sight Projection (FLoSP) [4], back
projection using 2D depth estimation [11, 14], and LSS [24]
feature volume [12, 38] have been employed for lifting 2D
features. However, these methods inherit common limitations of camera images, such as perspective and occlusion,
resulting in sparse and unreliable geometry projections for

11939

