This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Driven Fashion Image Editing with Compositional Concept Learning and
Counterfactual Abduction
Shanshan Huang1 , Haoxuan Li2 , Chunyuan Zheng3 , Mingyuan Ge1 , Wei Gao1 , Lei Wang1 , Li Liu1 *
1
School of Big Data & Software Engineering, Chongqing University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University 3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
{shanshanhuang, dcsliuli}@cqu.edu.cn, {hxli, cyzheng}@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{leiwangtt, mingyuange}@stu.cqu.edu.cn, wgao2002@gmail.com

Abstract
Fashion image editing is a valuable tool for designers to
convey their creative ideas by visualizing design concepts.
With the recent advances in text editing methods, significant
progress has been made in fashion image editing. However,
they face two key challenges: spurious correlations in training data often induce changes in other areas when editing
an area representing the intended editing concept, and these
models typically lack the ability to edit multiple concepts
simultaneously. To address the above challenges, we propose a novel Text-driven Fashion Image ediTing framework
called T-FIT to mitigate the impact of spurious correlation
by integrating counterfactual reasoning with compositional
concept learning to precisely ensure compositional multiconcept fashion image editing relying solely on text descriptions. Specifically, T-FIT includes three key components.
(i) Counterfactual abduction module, which learns an exogenous variable of the source image by a denoising U-Net
model. (ii) Concept learning module, which identifies concepts in fashion image editing—such as clothing types and
colors and projects a target concept into the space spanned
from a series of textual prompts. (iii) Concept composition
module, which enables simultaneous adjustments of multiple concepts by aggregating each concept’s direction vector obtained from the concept learning module. Extensive
experiments show that our method can achieve state-of-theart performance on various fashion image editing tasks, including single-concept editing (e.g., sleeve length, clothing
type) and multi-concept editing (e.g., color & sleeve length).

such as Stable Diffusion [23], DALL-E 2 [24], and Imagen [22] has inspired many subsequent efforts to leverage
pre-trained large-scale models for text-driven fashion image editing (TFIE) [12, 19, 32]. A foundational aspect of
this field is single-concept editing, where a specific concept
[35, 37] like color, texture, or style of an item is altered
while keeping the rest of the fashion image the same.
However, the existing methods still suffer from several limitations. First, these methods [2, 6, 41] often encounter challenges related to spurious correlation and unwanted associations learned by the pre-trained model (e.g.,
Stable Diffusion [23]) due to biases in training data. For
example, several methods [28, 29] may erroneously associate a specific clothing type (e.g., sleeve length) with
a specific cloth style (e.g., garment length), as shown in
Fig. 1, resulting in unintended modifications outside the
target concept. This is because the long sleeves always
co-occur with long garments, inducing spurious correlations in the training data. Therefore, eliminating spurious correlations is critical to ensuring precise, isolated
modifications. There are many methods to address spurious correlation [5, 11, 13, 31, 36, 38, 39]. For example, Li et al. [16] propose a novel machine unlearning
method to reduce the instance weight of biased samples in
e-commerce and Sanchez et al. [25] discuss important challenges present in healthcare applications such as processing
high-dimensional and unstructured data, as well as temporal
relationships. However, due to differences in data structure
and final goal, previous methods could not be adapted to
image editing scenarios.
Second, existing methods [32, 33] are mainly limited to
editing the texture of fashion images, and it is difficult to
achieve non-rigid editing, such as precisely adjusting the
length of sleeves or skirts. As shown in Fig. 1, UltraEdit
[41] and Turbo-edit [6] cannot achieve non-rigid editing,
e.g., turning a long skirt into a mini skirt; altering short
sleeves into long sleeves, which may attribute to the poor
understanding of the concept from the prompt.
Third, existing methods [4, 14, 15] typically focus on
editing a single concept in the source image. While single-

1. Introduction
Fashion image editing has emerged as a pivotal field within
computer vision, driven by the increasing need for personalized and dynamic visual modifications in the fashion industry [1, 33]. The diversity and high-quality image generation capabilities of large-scale text-image diffusion models
* Corresponding author

28726

