This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Modal and Uncertainty-Aware Agglomeration for Open-Vocabulary 3D
Scene Understanding
Jinlong Li1,†
Cristiano Saltori1
Fabio Poiesi2
Nicu Sebe1
1
2
University of Trento
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Abstract
The lack of a large-scale 3D-text corpus has led recent works
to distill open-vocabulary knowledge from vision-language
models (VLMs). However, these methods typically rely on a
single VLM to align the feature spaces of 3D models within
a common language space, which limits the potential of 3D
models to leverage the diverse spatial and semantic capabilities encapsulated in various foundation models. In this paper,
we propose Cross-modal and Uncertainty-aware Agglomeration for Open-vocabulary 3D Scene Understanding dubbed
CUA-O3D, the ﬁrst model to integrate multiple foundation
models—such as CLIP, DINOv2, and Stable Diffusion—into
3D scene understanding. We further introduce a deterministic uncertainty estimation to adaptively distill and harmonize
the heterogeneous 2D feature embeddings from these models.
Our method addresses two key challenges: (1) incorporating
semantic priors from VLMs alongside the geometric knowledge of spatially-aware vision foundation models, and (2)
using a novel deterministic uncertainty estimation to capture
model-speciﬁc uncertainties across diverse semantic and
geometric sensitivities, helping to reconcile heterogeneous
representations during training. Extensive experiments on
ScanNetV2 and Matterport3D demonstrate that our method
not only advances open-vocabulary segmentation but also
achieves robust cross-domain alignment and competitive spatial perception capabilities. Project webpage: CUA-O3D.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding serves as a crucial perception component for a wide array of real-world applications to help
models better understand the physical world, including
robot navigation, autonomous vehicles, and virtual reality [4, 21, 46, 79]. Typical approaches necessitate a dataset
of semantically annotated point clouds, which is both timeconsuming (e.g., 22.3 minutes for annotating a single scene
† Corresponding author: tyronejinlongli@gmail.com.

Lseg

DINOv2

Input

Stable Diffusion

GT

Figure 1. Top is feature distribution analysis of different 2d projected feature embeddings from various foundation models (Lseg,
DINOv2 and Stable Diffusion), enumerating on the overall ScanNetV2 train set and counting the frequency of all point features
within each bin interval. Bottom is the sample utilizing K-Means
to cluster projected 3D features into speciﬁed clusters to make
segmentation comparisons. Different foundation models illustrate
heterogeneous yet complementary results.

with 20 classes [13]) and unable to encompass all possible existing categories, thereby limiting their practical
utility. To address this limitation, recent works have explored the open-vocabulary 3D scene understanding setting [15, 33, 52, 53, 62], aiming to localize and recognize
arbitrary object classes. This objective is achieved by leveraging Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [34, 64] that, having been pre-trained on billions of image-text pairs [74], can
gauge the alignment between textual and visual inputs, facilitating a range of 2D open-vocabulary tasks [5, 20, 23, 39, 97].
To adapt these models for 3D downstream tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation), various strategies, predominantly based
on distilling multi-view 2D visual features into a 3D-speciﬁc
model [15, 25, 33, 62, 84], have been employed.
However, these methods mainly focus on distilling knowledge from one single VLM which limits the potential of
3D models to leverage the diverse spatial and semantic capabilities that have been trained on large-scale images or
image-text pairs corpus, as shown in Table 1. Given the

19390

