This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoPlace3D: Learning 3D-Aware Object Placement for 3D Monocular
Detection
Sarthak Vora∗ Jogendra Nath Kundu
IISc Bangalore

Abstract

a)

Current monocular 3D detectors are held back by the limited diversity and scale of real-world datasets. While data
augmentation certainly helps, it’s particularly difficult to
generate realistic scene-aware augmented data for outdoor
settings. Most current approaches to synthetic data generation focus on realistic object appearance through improved
rendering techniques. However, we show that where and
how objects are positioned is just as crucial for training effective 3D monocular detectors. The key obstacle lies in automatically determining realistic object placement parameters - including position, dimensions, and directional alignment when introducing synthetic objects into actual scenes.
To address this, we introduce MonoPlace3D, a novel system
that considers the 3D scene content to create realistic augmentations. Specifically, given a background scene, MonoPlace3D learns a distribution over plausible 3D bounding boxes. Subsequently, we render realistic objects and
place them according to the locations sampled from the
learned distribution. Our comprehensive evaluation on two
standard datasets KITTI and NuScenes, demonstrates that
MonoPlace3D significantly improves the accuracy of multiple existing monocular 3D detectors while being highly
data efficient. Project Page

R. Venkatesh Babu

Generative 3D-aware placement

Input outdoor scene

b)

Synthetic 3D assets

c)

Distribution over 3D-boxes

Samples 3D boxes

Realistic object renderings

Realistic Renderings

Lift-3D
Placement
Our
s

Plausible Placement

Augmented realistic scene
Monocular 3D detection performance

Implausible Placement

AP40@IOU=0.7

Rishubh Parihar* Srinjay Sarkar∗

Baseline with
100% training data

% of training dataset used

Augmented scenes

Figure 1. a) We compare augmentations from our learned placement with heuristic-based placements from Lift3D [20]. In our
augmentations, vehicles follow the lane orientations and are placed
appropriately. b) These realistic augmentations significantly improve the 3D detection performance (KITTI [5] val set, (easy)).
Notably, we achieve detection performance comparable to that of
the fully labeled dataset using only 50% of the dataset.

Existing techniques [12, 23] for 3D augmentation use relatively simple heuristics for placing synthetic objects in an
input scene. For instance, in the context of road scenes,
a recent approach [20] generates realistic cars and places
them on the segmented road region. However, such heuristics result in highly unnatural scene augmentations (Fig. 1),
resulting in a marginal improvement in 3D detection performance. In this work, we ask the following two crucial
questions: (1) What key factors are essential for generating realistic augmentations to improve monocular 3D object detection?, and (2) How can these factors be integrated
to generate effective scene-aware augmentations?
For the first question, we discover two critical factors
responsible for generating effective 3D augmentations:
1. Object Placement: Plausible placement of augmented
objects, with appropriate object placement (location, scale,
and orientation), is essential for rendering realistic scene
augmentations. For instance, in road scenes, a car should

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection has rapidly progressed recently, enabling its use in autonomous navigation and
robotics [16, 29]. However, the performance of 3D detectors relies heavily on the quantity and quality of the training
dataset. Given the considerable effort and time required to
curate extensive, real-world 3D-annotated datasets, specialized data augmentation for 3D object detection has emerged
as a promising direction.
However designing realistic augmentations for 3D tasks,
is non-trivial, as the generated augmentations must adhere
to the physical constraints of the real world, such as maintaining 3D geometric consistency and handling collisions.
* equal contribution

6531

