This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

v-CLR: View-Consistent Learning for Open-World Instance Segmentation
Chang-Bin Zhang1
Jinhong Ni1
Yujie Zhong2
Kai Han1 *
1
2
Visual AI Lab, The University of Hong Kong
Meituan Inc.
{cbzhang, jhni}@connect.hku.hk

jaszhong@hotmail.com

kaihanx@hku.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenging problem of openworld instance segmentation. Existing works have shown
that vanilla visual networks are biased toward learning appearance information, e.g., texture, to recognize objects.
This implicit bias causes the model to fail in detecting
novel objects with unseen textures in the open-world setting. To address this challenge, we propose a learning
framework, called view-Consistent LeaRning (v-CLR), which
aims to enforce the model to learn appearance-invariant representations for robust instance segmentation. In v-CLR,
we first introduce additional views for each image, where
the texture undergoes significant alterations while preserving the image’s underlying structure. We then encourage
the model to learn the appearance-invariant representation by enforcing the consistency between object features
across different views, for which we obtain class-agnostic
object proposals using off-the-shelf unsupervised models
that possess strong object-awareness. These proposals enable cross-view object feature matching, greatly reducing
the appearance dependency while enhancing the objectawareness. We thoroughly evaluate our method on public
benchmarks under both cross-class and cross-dataset settings, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Project page:
https://visual-ai.github.io/vclr

1. Introduction
Modern object detectors [6, 19, 65, 69] and instance segmentors [12, 23, 40] have achieved many milestones. However,
these detectors are based on the assumption of pre-defined
taxonomy classes. Despite recent open-vocabulary detectors [20, 33] can be extended to larger taxonomy classes
benefiting from the foundation model pre-trained on largescale text-image pairs, these models are still limited by the
finite taxonomy classes in the pre-trained data. In some
realistic applications, models are required to identify outof-taxonomy classes. Thus, recognizing objects in the open
* Corresponding author.

(a) Training samples

(c) w/ depth

(b) w/o depth
64.7

81.4 81.2

AR@10

34.4

w/o depth

7.6
23.9
8.1

w/ depth
Red-Metal

36.5

13.9

Metal

Non-Red

11.3

Non-Metal Non-Red-Metal

Figure 1. Toy example on the CLEVR [30] dataset. The model
regards red-metal objects as the known class and is evaluated on
different subsets in terms of AR@10. We train the model with
and without incorporating depth image data, respectively. The
prediction results are displayed in the middle row.

world has been increasingly interesting and challenging.
In open-world instance segmentation, models are trained
on a set of predefined known classes and are evaluated
to localize unknown objects during inference. Following [31, 32, 49, 61], we regard the open-world instance
segmentor as a class-agnostic object discovery model. One
straightforward solution is to train a class-agnostic detector on labeled instances of known classes, i.e., performing
binary object detection given ground truth labels from the
known classes, and hope the models capture transferable
features that generalize to unknown objects. However, various studies [1, 3, 16, 17] have demonstrated that neural
networks exhibit a preference to capture texture information
when recognizing objects. This hinders the model’s ability to
generalize in the open-world setting, especially to unknown
objects with unseen textures.
To motivate the necessity of capitalizing appearanceinvariant information, we showcase a toy open-world example run on the CLEVR [30] dataset in Fig. 1. In this
example, we treat the red metal objects as the known class,
and evaluate the model on detecting various other types of
objects (with other colors or materials). We show an ex-

20307

