This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VASparse: Towards Efficient Visual Hallucination Mitigation via
Visual-Aware Token Sparsification
Xianwei Zhuang1, 2 , Zhihong Zhu2 , Yuxin Xie2 , Liming Liang2 , Yuexian Zou2 *
1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
xwzhuang@stu.pku.edu.cn, zouyx@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
CHAIR (instance level)

7.2

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) may produce outputs that are unfaithful to reality, also known as visual hallucinations (VH), which significantly impedes their real-world
usage. To alleviate VH, various decoding strategies have
been proposed to enhance visual information. However,
many of these methods may require secondary decoding and
rollback, which significantly reduces inference speed. In
this work, we propose an efficient plug-and-play decoding
algorithm via Visual-Aware Sparsification (VASparse) from
the perspective of token sparsity for mitigating VH. VASparse is inspired by empirical observations: (1) the sparse
activation of attention in LVLMs, and (2) visual-agnostic tokens sparsification exacerbates VH. Based on these insights,
we propose a novel token sparsification strategy that balances efficiency and trustworthiness. Specifically, VASparse
implements a visual-aware token selection strategy during
decoding to reduce redundant tokens while preserving visual
context effectively. Additionally, we innovatively introduce a
sparse-based visual contrastive decoding method to recalibrate the distribution of hallucinated outputs without the time
overhead associated with secondary decoding. Subsequently,
VASparse recalibrates attention scores to penalize attention
sinking of LVLMs towards text tokens. Extensive experiments
across four popular benchmarks confirm the effectiveness of
VASparse in mitigating VH across different LVLM families
without requiring additional training or post-processing. Impressively, VASparse achieves state-of-the-art performance
for mitigating VH while maintaining competitive decoding
speed. Code is available at https://github.com/
mengchuang123/VASparse-github.

7.0

Greedy
OPERA
[CVPR2024]

VCD

SID
[arXiv2024]

[CVPR2024]

6.8
6.6
6.4
6.2

DoLa

HALC
[ICML2024]

6.0
5.8

5

Beam
Search

[ICLR2024]

Faster and Less VH
10

15

20

Ours
25

30

TPS (tokens per second) during Decoding

Figure 1. Comparison of decoding speed and hallucination mitigation across methods using LLaVA-1.5 [28] (max new tokens
is 64), where a lower instance-level CHAIR score [35] indicates
less hallucination and higher TPS during decoding (measured by
tokens generated per second) reflects greater decoding efficiency.
We present the average of five runs on a single A100 GPU. Comparatively, our approach achieves both lower VH and higher efficiency.

significant advancements in cross-modal understanding and
generation through novel model architectures, training methods, and instruction-based data [15, 21, 28, 32, 49, 55].
LVLMs excel at translating complex visual patterns into
coherent language representations, leveraging the capabilities of LLMs to significantly enhance visual understanding
performance and achieving impressive results across various tasks [2, 13, 27]. However, LVLMs may generate outputs that inaccurately reflect the visual content provided,
a phenomenon termed visual hallucinations (VH), which
can affect their trustworthiness and suitability in different
applications across various domains [17, 24, 26, 31]. Additionally, recent research shows that even advanced and
powerful LVLMs remain susceptible to VH [11, 16, 24].
Significant efforts have been directed toward mitigating
VH in LVLMs to improve both the reliability and fidelity of
their outputs. Existing strategies for reducing VH generally
fall into three primary categories: post-processing and selfcorrection techniques [18, 46, 54], instruction-based fine-

1. Introduction
Motivated by the success of Large Language Models
(LLMs), large vision-language models (LVLMs) have made
* Corresponding author

4189

