This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ODA-GAN: Orthogonal Decoupling Alignment GAN Assisted by
Weakly-supervised Learning for Virtual Immunohistochemistry Staining
Tong Wang1 Mingkang Wang1 Zhongze Wang2
Hongkai Wang1 Qi Xu1 * Fengyu Cong1 Hongming Xu1 *
1
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
{wt, wangmingkang}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zzwang@mail.ecust.edu.cn
{wang.hongkai, xuqi, cong, mxu}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, virtual staining has emerged as a promising alternative to revolutionize histological staining by digitally
generating stains. However, most existing methods suffer
from the curse of staining unreality and unreliability. In
this paper, we propose the Orthogonal Decoupling Alignment Generative Adversarial Network (ODA-GAN) for unpaired virtual immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining. Our
approach is based on the assumption that an image consists
of IHC staining-related features, which influence staining
distribution and intensity, and staining-unrelated features,
such as tissue morphology. Leveraging a pathology foundation model, we first develop a weakly-supervised segmentation pipeline as an alternative to expert annotations. We
introduce an Orthogonal MLP (O-MLP) module to project
image features into an orthogonal space, decoupling them
into staining-related and unrelated components. Additionally, we propose a Dual-stream PatchNCE (DPNCE) loss to
resolve contrastive learning contradictions in the stainingrelated space, thereby enhancing staining accuracy. To further improve realism, we introduce a Multi-layer Domain
Alignment (MDA) module to bridge the domain gap between generated and real IHC images. Evaluations on three
benchmark datasets show that our ODA-GAN reaches stateof-the-art (SOTA) performance. Our source code is available at https://github.com/ittong/ODA-GAN .

workhorse, routinely employed to delineate tissue structures and cell morphology [7]. Although H&E staining is
widely available for all cancer patients, it may not always
provide sufficient diagnostic information. Complementarily, IHC staining [10] is extensively used to highlight the
distribution and localization of specific markers, offering
critical insights for tumor subtyping, prognosis, and personalized treatment. In clinical practice, generating these
H&E-IHC paired images often involves repeated serial sectioning and staining with different antibodies, a process that
is both time-consuming and tissue-exhaustive. Moreover,
serial IHC staining can occasionally produce unaligned images and suboptimal quality due to artifacts, while limited
tissue availability may result in missing stains.
Fortunately, virtual staining techniques [8, 11, 20, 22,
31], which can convert H&E images into IHC images using generative networks, have opened new opportunities
to revolutionize these decade-old staining methods. Initial
virtual IHC staining models were primarily relied on precisely aligned H&E and IHC images, allowing for pixelwise loss optimization between the virtual and real images [17]. However, the inherent discrepancies in these image pairs result in detrimental pixel-wise optimization and
severe square effect [34]. Besides, these methods fail to address situations when adjacent layers are not available.

1. Introduction

In recent years, research on training virtual staining models under unpaired settings has gained momentum. Most
unpaired virtual IHC staining models draw inspiration from
CycleGAN [43], which depends on cycle consistency loss
to preserve content consistency across two domains. While
effective, the cycle consistency assumes a bijective mapping between two domains [43], which is overly restrictive
and often unsuitable for many virtual IHC staining tasks.
A notable problem is the incorrect cross-domain mapping,
where positive signals in the H&E domain are misaligned
with negative signals in the IHC domain.

Histological staining is essential in clinical pathology, enabling visualization of tissue and cellular structures for detailed microscopic assessment [2]. Among various staining
techniques, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) is the undisputed
* Corresponding authors: Qi Xu, Hongming Xu

25920

