This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SKE-Layout: Spatial Knowledge Enhanced Layout Generation with LLMs
Yan Ding3 Mengying Xie1 Fuqiang Gu1 Chao Chen1†
Junsheng Wang1 * Nieqing Cao2∗
1
2
3
Chongqing University
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Shanghai AI Lab
{csjunshengwang, xiemy, gufq, cschaochen}@cqu.edu.cn
Nieqing.Cao@xjtlu.edu.cn, yding25@binghamton.edu

Abstract
Generating layouts from textual descriptions by large language models (LLMs) plays a crucial role in precise spatial reasoning-induced domains such as robotic object rearrangement and text-to-image generation. However, current
methods face challenges in limited real-world examples,
handling diverse layout descriptions and varying levels of
granularity. To address these issues, a novel framework
named Spatial Knowledge Enhanced Layout (SKE-Layout),
is introduced. SKE-Layout integrates mixed spatial knowledge sources, leveraging both real and synthetic data to enhance spatial contexts. It utilizes diverse representations
tailored to specific tasks and employs contrastive learning and multitask learning techniques for accurate spatial knowledge retrieval. This framework generates more
accurate and fine-grained visual layouts for object rearrangement and text-to-image generation tasks, achieving
improvements of 5%-30% compared to existing methods.

table advantages in various aspects. Primarily, LLMs exhibit strong zero-shot learning capabilities, generating coherent layouts from natural language descriptions without
task-specific training, enabling broad generalization across
diverse tasks [37]. Unlike traditional models, LLMs adapt
seamlessly to different domains without requiring separate
training for each task [19, 41].

1. Introduction

Although LLMs exhibit numerous advantages in layout
generation, they also face challenges related to hallucination when directly generating layouts from textual descriptions. Existing approaches often rely on using predefined
layouts as examples to guide LLMs in generating new layouts, allowing the model to infer reasonable spatial arrangements based on these examples [9]. However, there is often
a lack of sufficient and diverse examples in real-world scenarios, particularly for complex layouts, exacerbating the
model’s dependence on existing examples. As representations, layouts often fail to fully capture the spatial knowledge of the current scene [14, 30]. When handling finegrained instructions related to angles, distances, and other
spatial details, LLMs struggle to infer the corresponding
layout solely by relying on example layouts. Furthermore,
due to the varying importance of information across different tasks, directly applying existing retrieval methods may
result in the inability to retrieve the most relevant knowledge for the specific task at hand [28].

Generating layouts from textual descriptions is fundamental
in various domains, particularly in robotic object rearrangement and text-to-image generation, where achieving precise
object placement is critical. For example, an object rearrangement task might require arranging specific items on a
table [1, 8], while an image generation task often involves
creating a visually coherent scene based on descriptions of
object locations [29, 39]. Both scenarios underscore the necessity of accurate spatial understanding to ensure proper
placement and prevent errors such as misalignment or omissions. Research highlights the need to minimize these errors
in robotic manipulation and image generation in order to reflect spatial instructions accurately [2].
In recent years, a growing body of research has investigated the application of large language models (LLMs)
for layout generation [9, 29, 39], highlighting their no* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose
SKE-Layout, the first framework capable of handling diverse layout task descriptions and inferring unknown object
attributes, providing a unified solution that current frameworks cannot achieve. Specifically, SKE-Layout extracts
diverse spatial knowledge from real-world or synthetic tasks
and injects the most relevant spatial knowledge into LLMs,
enabling them to generate ideal layouts based on textual
conditions. Despite not using any image data for training, LLMs can learn spatial knowledge through contextual
demonstrations and then apply this knowledge to visual reasoning for new samples [20, 34]. In other words, by providing relevant examples, LLMs can capture spatial relationships between objects based on language understanding, in-

19414

