This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation via Progressive Confidence Region
Expansion
Wenxuan Huang1
Pinyi Zhang1 *
Xiangfeng Xu1 *
1
3
Jingzhong Lin
Wei Li
Gaoqi He1

Yunhang Shen2
Haosheng Chen1
1
Jiao Xie
Shaohui Lin1,4B

1

4

2
3
East China Normal University
Xiamen University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data ScienceMinistry of Education, China

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) has garnered considerable attention due to its effective reduction of
annotation costs. Most approaches utilize Class Activation
Maps (CAM) to produce pseudo-labels, thereby localizing
target regions using only image-level annotations. However, the prevalent methods relying on vision transformers (ViT) encounter an “over-expansion” issue, i.e., CAM
incorrectly expands high activation value from the target
object to the background regions, as it is difficult to learn
pixel-level local intrinsic inductive bias in ViT from weak
supervisions. To solve this problem, we propose a Progressive Confidence Region Expansion (PCRE) framework
for WSSS, it gradually learns a faithful mask over the target region and utilizes this mask to correct the confusion in
CAM. PCRE has two key components: Confidence Region
Mask Expansion (CRME) and Class-Prototype Enhancement (CPE). CRME progressively expands the mask in the
small region with the highest confidence, eventually encompassing the entire target, thereby avoiding unintended coverage of background areas. CPE aims to enhance mask generation in CRME by leveraging the similarity between the
learned, dataset-level class prototypes and patch features
as supervision to optimize the mask output from CRME. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the existing single-stage and multi-stage approaches
on the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO benchmark. Our code
is available at https://github.com/xxf011/WSSS-PCRE.

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of generated CAM and segmentation maps between previous methods and ours. Our PCRE
approach effectively addresses incorrect segmentation caused by
over-expanded activations propagating from the target object region. ‘Seg.’ denotes segmentation maps. (b) Cosine similarity
between the patch with a red star (★) and other patches. Object regions and backgrounds have high similarities (white color)
in the late training process.

the most attractive and challenging options due to its easy
acquisition with the least amount of information. This work
also focuses on WSSS with image-level labels, aiming to
explore how to achieve high-quality pixel-level predictions.
Prevalent WSSS methods [2, 8–10] typically employ
Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [11] to extract localization
maps as pseudo labels. These methods adopt multi-stage
pipelines: generating initial pseudo labels via CAMs with
CNNs, refining them, and finally training fully supervised
segmentation models with these refined labels. However,
the complicating multi-stage training slows down the efficiency. Therefore, many studies [10, 12–14] have proposed a one-stage training way to produce pseudo labels
and learn a segmentation head simultaneously. Meanwhile,
CNNs fail to effectively model the global feature relations,
which hinders the activation of the entire object regions.
Recently, WSSS methods [15] adapt vision transformer
(VIT) architectures to capture long-range relationships with

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS), which
predicts precise pixel-level object masks using weak annotations, has received a great deal of research focus in recent years. These weak annotations include image-level
labels [1, 2], points [3], scribbles [4, 5], and bounding
boxes [6, 7]. Among them, image-level annotation is one of
* Equal contribution.

B Corresponding author.

9829

