This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeCLIP: Decoupled Learning for Open-Vocabulary Dense Perception
Bin Chen2,3,* Yulin Li1 Bin Kang3 Yichi Chen3 Zhuotao Tian1,*
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, HIT, Shenzhen
2
International Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, HIT, Shenzhen
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Junjie Wang1

Abstract
Dense visual prediction tasks have been constrained by
their reliance on predefined categories, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios where visual concepts are
unbounded. While Vision-Language Models (VLMs) like
CLIP have shown promise in open-vocabulary tasks, their
direct application to dense prediction often leads to suboptimal performance due to limitations in local feature representation. In this work, we present our observation that
CLIP’s image tokens struggle to effectively aggregate information from spatially or semantically related regions, resulting in features that lack local discriminability and spatial consistency. To address this issue, we propose DeCLIP,
a novel framework that enhances CLIP by decoupling the
self-attention module to obtain “content” and “context”
features respectively. The “content” features are aligned
with image crop representations to improve local discriminability, while “context” features learn to retain the spatial
correlations under the guidance of vision foundation models, such as DINO. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
DeCLIP significantly outperforms existing methods across
multiple open-vocabulary dense prediction tasks, including
object detection and semantic segmentation. Code is available at https://github.com/xiaomoguhz/DeCLIP.

Figure 1. DeCLIP outperforms previous state-of-the-art models on
a broad range of open-vocabulary dense prediction benchmarks.

1. Introduction

Building on the success of Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) [9, 27, 36, 43] pre-trained on image-text pairs,
such as CLIP [36], researchers have started leveraging
these models for open-vocabulary dense prediction tasks.
Among these [5, 46–49, 62], transfer-learning approaches
[7, 17, 23, 46, 48, 58] have shown outstanding performance.
These methods utilize the image encoder of VLM as a feature extractor and exclusively train lightweight task-specific
components. Whereas using VLMs as feature extractors
offers significant advantages due to their comprehensive
pre-training, directly applying these image-level models to
dense prediction often leads to domain shift issues [48, 50].

In the era of deep learning, dense prediction tasks like object detection [30, 38] and image segmentation [8, 39] have
rapidly advanced and are widely used. However, traditional
methods [4, 26, 66] recognize only a fixed set of predefined
categories. This restriction hinders the practical application
of these methods in real-world settings, where the range of
visual concepts is virtually boundless. Consequently, increasing attention has been drawn to open-vocabulary methods [10, 47, 50, 61], which aim to detect and segment objects from any category using textual descriptions.
* Corresponding authors

What hinders CLIP in dense perception?
To assess
VLM’s constraints in dense perception, we analyze CLIP’s
attention maps across various layers (Figure 3(a)). Our
experiments reveal that CLIP’s [CLS] token may interfere

14824

