This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Motion Simulator
Pushing the Limit of World Models in Reinforcement Learning
Chenjie Hao1⇤ , Weyl Lu1⇤ , Yifan Xu2 , Yubei Chen1,2†
1

UC Davis

2

Open Path AI Foundation

{cjhao, adslu, ybchen}@ucdavis.edu, yifan.xu@openpathai.com

Figure 1. This figures demonstrate the long-horizon precise prediction by the Neural Motion Simulators. In each of the three agents, the
first row shows the groud-truth states and the second row shows the predicted states with the same initial condition and actions sequence.
Humanoid predicts for 30 steps with rendering every 3 steps; Panda predicts for 200 steps with rendering every 20 steps; myohand predicts
for 400 steps with rendering every 40 steps.

reinforcement learning. Furthermore, MoSim can transform any model-free reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm
into a model-based approach, effectively decoupling physical environment modeling from RL algorithm development.
This separation allows for independent advancements in
RL algorithms and world modeling, significantly improving sample efficiency and enhancing generalization capabilities. Our findings highlight that world models for motion dynamics is a promising direction for developing more
versatile and capable embodied systems.

Abstract
An embodied system must not only model the patterns of
the external world but also understand its own motion dynamics. A motion dynamic model is essential for efficient
skill acquisition and effective planning. In this work, we
introduce the neural motion simulator (MoSim), a world
model that predicts the future physical state of an embodied
system based on current observations and actions. MoSim
achieves state-of-the-art performance in physical state prediction and provides competitive performance across a
range of downstream tasks. This works shows that when
a world model is accurate enough and performs precise
long-horizon predictions, it can facilitate efficient skill acquisition in imagined worlds and even enable zero-shot

1. Introduction

⇤ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author

Human and other animals build world models of the external world and themselves to efficiently learn skills, reason,
and plan [30]. By using such a world model, natural intelligence can learn tasks with a small exposure or general-

27608

