This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoRA Recycle: Unlocking Tuning-Free Few-Shot Adaptability
in Visual Foundation Models by Recycling Pre-Tuned LoRAs
Yongxian Wei2 Li Shen3 * Chun Yuan2 Dacheng Tao1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore;
2
Tsinghua University, China; 3 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China.
Zixuan Hu1

1

ZIXUAN014@e.ntu.edu.sg; weiyx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
mathshenli@gmail.com; yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; dacheng.tao@gmail.com

trainable

frozen

VFM

VFM

➕

➕

Private Dataset
Data of Task #1
Data of Task #2
…
Data of Task #n
…

Public LoRA Market
Personal
① tuning

LoRA of Task #1

② Upload

LoRA of Task #n
…

LoRA of Task #2
…

LoRA
Recycle

Fine-tuning-free
adaptation
New Few-shot Tasks

VFM ➕

Data-free Meta-learning

Large Language Models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT demonstrate strong few-shot adaptability without requiring finetuning, positioning them ideal for data-limited and realtime applications. However, this adaptability has not
yet been replicated in current Visual Foundation Models
(VFMs), which require explicit fine-tuning with sufficient
tuning data. Besides, the pretraining-finetuning paradigm
has led to the surge of numerous task-specific modular components, such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA). For the
first time, we explore the potential of reusing diverse pretuned LoRAs without accessing their original training data,
to achieve tuning-free few-shot adaptation in VFMs. Our
framework, LoRA Recycle, distills a meta-LoRA from diverse pre-tuned LoRAs with a meta-learning objective, using synthetic data inversely generated from pre-tuned LoRAs themselves. The VFM, once equipped with the metaLoRA, is empowered to solve new few-shot tasks in a single forward pass, akin to the in-context learning of LLMs.
Additionally, we incorporate a double-efficient mechanism,
accelerating the data-generation and meta-training process
while maintaining or even improving performance. Extensive experiments across various few-shot classification
benchmarks across both in- and cross-domain scenarios
demonstrate the superiority of our framework. Code is
available at https://github.com/Egg-Hu/LoRA-Recycle.

Pre-training

Abstract

Fine-tuning-free adaptation

Figure 1. Concept of LoRA Recycle: Thanks to the modularity of
LoRA, users can upload locally tuned LoRAs to public repositories without exposing original training data. LoRA Recycle distills
a meta-LoRA from these LoRAs without needing their original
training data. The VFM, once equipped with the meta-LoRA, is
empowered to solve new few-shot tasks in a single forward pass
without further fine-tuning.

1. Introduction

Foundation Models (VFMs), which typically require explicit fine-tuning with sufficient tuning data.
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [26] has emerged as
a prominent fine-tuning approach, offering strong performance with sufficient tuning data while requiring
updates only to a small subset of additional parameters—specifically, trainable rank decomposition matrices—rather than the entire model. While promising, (i)
explicit fine-tuning is often prohibitive for applications requiring real-time responses, and (ii) fine-tuning with limited data is extremely unstable. As shown in Tab. 1, finetuning with limited data makes performance highly sensitive to choices like the optimizer, learning rate, and step
size. Besides, it introduces unacceptable latency for applications requiring real-time responses.
In this paper, we explore the potential of reusing diverse

Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT demonstrate a profound capacity to solve few-shot tasks without
the necessity for fine-tuning [4, 40], making them ideal
for data-limited and real-time applications. However, this
adaptability has not yet been replicated by current Visual
* Corresponding author

25026

