This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Light Transport-aware Diffusion Posterior Sampling
for Single-View Reconstruction of 3D Volumes
Ludwic Leonard

Nils Thürey

Rüdiger Westermann

ludwig.mendez@tum.de

nils.thuerey@tum.de

westermann@tum.de

Technical University of Munich

𝑦

𝑉

𝜙 −Optimizer

Diffusion Model
Unconditional Sampling

𝑦ො

𝑉෠

𝑉

𝑉෠

𝑝 𝜃
Posterior
Sampling

𝑝 𝜃|𝑦; 𝜙

Figure 1. Given a single view (y) of a volume (V ), we reconstruct a volume (V̂ ) from its latent representation (θ) that matches y under
the same lighting conditions, resulting in a synthesized view (ŷ). A differentiable volume renderer (R) is used to optimize physical scene
parameters (ϕ) while simultaneously performing posterior sampling p(θ|y; ϕ), conditioned on the observation, in the latent space of a
trained diffusion model p(θ). Ambiguities due to the absence of information about unseen parts of the volume are reduced by gradually
steering the reverse diffusion process toward the most plausible reconstruction under the given view (right section).

Abstract
We introduce a single-view reconstruction technique of volumetric fields in which multiple light scattering effects are
omnipresent, such as in clouds. We model the unknown distribution of volumetric fields using an unconditional diffusion model trained on a novel benchmark dataset comprising 1,000 synthetically simulated volumetric density fields.
The neural diffusion model is trained on the latent codes of
a novel, diffusion-friendly, monoplanar representation. The
generative model is used to incorporate a tailored parametric diffusion posterior sampling technique into different reconstruction tasks. A physically-based differentiable volume renderer is employed to provide gradients with respect
to light transport in the latent space. This stands in contrast
to classic NeRF approaches and makes the reconstructions
better aligned with observed data. Through various experiments, we demonstrate single-view reconstruction of volumetric clouds at a previously unattainable quality.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of a 3D model from a single image
[3, 10, 22, 30, 35] is a fundamental task in 3D computer
graphics and vision. Once the model is reconstructed, oper-

16163

ations such as novel view synthesis, relighting or inpainting
can be applied. However, this problem is ill-posed and, in
general, requires additional views to constrain the object parameters and infer plausible reconstructions of unseen parts.
Differentiable rendering (DR) leverages a rendering process with gradients, making it suitable for recovering shape
and optical material parameters from images [11, 25, 37,
70]. DR enables backpropagation of gradients of a loss
in image space to the scene parameters, including position, texture, lighting, shape, and other attributes. The
challenge increases significantly when these parameters describe complex distributions of volumetric materials, such
as clouds, smoke, or fire. In such scenarios, the problem becomes so ill-posed that it requires dozens, if not hundreds,
of different views to adequately constrain the object parameters [27, 44, 45]. It is now widely accepted that reconstructing the internal density distribution of highly dense
volumes is nearly impossible due to the high uncertainty in
the light scattering process and the presence of vanishing
gradients. This limitation can only be alleviated by incorporating prior information during reconstruction.
When sufficient 3D datasets representing different instances of an object type are available, network inference
can be used to tackle the task of inferring the 3D object.
Many recent approaches build upon generative diffusion

