This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training-free Neural Architecture Search through Variance of Knowledge of
Deep Network Weights
Lukas Neumann
Ondrej Tybl
CMP Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
ondrej.tybl@cvut.cz

lukas.neumann@cvut.cz

0.6
0.5

0.2
0.1

trivial proxy

0.3

(ours)
(ours)

0.4

trivial proxy

Deep learning has revolutionized computer vision, but it
achieved its tremendous success using deep network architectures which are mostly hand-crafted and therefore
likely suboptimal. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims
to bridge this gap by following a well-defined optimization
paradigm which systematically looks for the best architecture, given objective criterion such as maximal classification accuracy. The main limitation of NAS is however its
astronomical computational cost, as it typically requires
training each candidate network architecture from scratch.
In this paper, we aim to alleviate this limitation by
proposing a novel training-free proxy for image classification accuracy based on Fisher Information. The proposed
proxy has a strong theoretical background in statistics and
it allows estimating expected image classification accuracy
of a given deep network without training the network, thus
significantly reducing computational cost of standard NAS
algorithms.
Our training-free proxy achieves state-of-the-art results
on three public datasets and in two search spaces, both
when evaluated using previously proposed metrics, as well
as using a new metric that we propose which we demonstrate is more informative for practical NAS applications.
The source code is publicly available at https://www.
github.com/ondratybl/VKDNW .

Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain

Abstract

ag
g

Ze
Gr nNA
ad S
No
r
Gr m
aS
P
S
TE NIP
-N
A
Jac S
o
F v
NA LOPs
No S
. t WO
ra T
ina
Sy ble
nF
low
ZiC
VK AZ- o
DN NA
S
VK Wsin
DN gle
W

0.0

Figure 1. Training-free NAS methods on ImageNet16-120 [10].
Methods are compared by Normalized Discounted Cumulative
Gain (see Sec. 3), our method (VKDNW) is the best also measured by Kendall’s τ and Spearman’s ρ correlations (see Table 1).
Also note that simple number of trainable layers (below denoted
ℵ) is significantly better trivial proxy than the number of FLOPs.

1. Introduction

most basic NAS setup, it is required to train thousands or
more of different deep network architectures from scratch
in order just to calculate a single scalar – the objective function value, such as the classification accuracy. This severely
limits practical applications of NAS as the size of feasible
architecture search space is only a small fraction of the overall space of all networks.
Training-free Neural Architecture Search (TF-NAS)
aims to alleviate this limitation by introducing an objective function proxy which – unlike the actual objective function – does not require training the network. As a result,
a good proxy allows the TF-NAS algorithm to explore significantly bigger portion of the network architecture search
space compared to traditional NAS, and to find the best network architecture without training a single network. The
crucial question is however finding an appropriate objective
function proxy.

In most instances, neural network architectures are designed
by authors following the field’s “best-practices” or their
experience, without any formal and repeatable procedure.
This is however inconvenient especially in applications on
a large scale. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to
bridge this gap by following a well-defined optimization
paradigm which systematically looks for the best architecture, given objective criterion such as maximal accuracy.
The main limitation of Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) is however the computational cost, because in the

14881

