This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What Makes a Good Dataset for Knowledge Distillation?
Logan Frank
Jim Davis
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Ohio State University
{frank.580, davis.1719}@osu.edu

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has been a popular and effective method for model compression. One important
assumption of KD is that the teacher’s original dataset
will also be available when training the student. However, in situations such as continual learning and distilling large models trained on company-withheld datasets,
having access to the original data may not always be
possible. This leads practitioners towards utilizing other
sources of supplemental data, which could yield mixed results. One must then ask: “what makes a good dataset
for transferring knowledge from teacher to student?” Many
would assume that only real in-domain imagery is viable, but is that the only option? In this work, we explore multiple possible surrogate distillation datasets and
demonstrate that many different datasets, even unnatural
synthetic imagery, can serve as a suitable alternative in
KD. From examining these alternative datasets, we identify and present various criteria describing what makes a
good dataset for distillation. Source code is available at
https://github.com/osu-cvl/good-kd-dataset.

dataset used to train the teacher model when performing
distillation. However, this assumption that the original data
will be available may not always hold true. For example,
KD is frequently performed for continual learning [20] in
the form of self-distillation [18] (i.e., the teacher and student
are the exact same network architecture). Here, data may
be “streamed” where model updating occurs incrementally
as new batches of data are obtained, without catastrophically forgetting past data. Another example that is becoming increasingly more common is large networks (and their
weights) being released, but the data used to train the network are kept as proprietary in-house information by the
company that released the model (e.g., CLIP [37], DINOv2
[34], and the GPT family [1]).
Having the inability to access the original dataset has
lead users to consider other alternatives for supplemental
data, which can come from many different sources and has
been explored to varying degrees [5, 9, 15]. These sources
include: 1) real in-domain (ID) examples, 2) real out-ofdomain (OOD) examples, and 3) synthetic examples optimized to be ID. However, there is one, perhaps unlikely, alternative not explored in literature: unoptimized unnatural
synthetic OOD imagery (e.g., OpenGL shaders [43]).
While we suspect most would elect to use real ID examples as surrogate data, we choose to explore the extreme
and ask: “is it possible to distill knowledge with even the
most unconventional dataset?” When answering this question, we ultimately uncover the mystery of what is required
from a particular dataset for it to be successful in KD and
show that if certain criteria are met, many different datasets
can act as reasonable replacements when the original data
are missing. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1. We identify key characteristics of datasets that enable
successful knowledge distillation to a student.
2. We show that with minimal setup, a teacher can be successfully distilled using unnatural synthetic OOD data.
3. We present a new adversarial attack strategy that can improve knowledge transfer from teacher to student.
4. Our work is built on standard knowledge distillation,
making it easily applicable to many practitioners.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) [25] has achieved wide-spread
popularity as a tool for compressing the information stored
inside a large pretrained “teacher” network into a much
more compact and efficient “student” network. The goal of
KD is to train the student to mimic the soft-target outputs (or
internal features) of the teacher when presented with similar inputs, which has been shown to often produce a better
performing student than training on the task directly. One
particular advantage of KD over other model compression
techniques is its flexibility in the sense that it allows for the
teacher and student to be completely different network architectures (e.g., a vision transformer [14] distilled into a
convolutional neural network [22]).
In practice, one would ordinarily employ the same

23755

