This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging the Vision-Brain Gap with an Uncertainty-Aware Blur Prior
Haitao Wu1

Qing Li1,2

Changqing Zhang1 * Zhen He2 * Xiaomin Ying2 *

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences
{wuhaitao, liqing0315, zhangchangqing}@tju.edu.cn
hezhen.bio@gmail.com, yingxmbio@foxmail.com
1

Abstract

unraveling its structure and function over the past several
decades [27, 28, 36, 41, 48, 50, 54]. Vision, as the primary
sense for humans to perceive the world, involves approximately one-third of the cortical surface. Consequently, the
brain plays a crucial role in visual perception and cognition [39, 63, 64, 66]. To understand the mechanisms between human vision and brain activity, various brain imaging techniques such as Electroencephalogram (EEG), Magnetoencephalography (MEG) and Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), are utilized to measure brain responses to visual stimuli. EEG is a low-cost, portable
method for measuring brain activity by detecting voltage
changes caused by neuronal signals, offering high temporal
resolution. However, it suffers from a low signal-to-noise
ratio due to weak signals being influenced by the skull, external interference, and biological noise. MEG offers high
temporal resolution, but is limited by its high cost. In contrast, fMRI provides high spatial resolution by detecting
changes in blood oxygen levels, but its temporal resolution
is limited due to the slower hemodynamic response.
Recently, various methods for decoding brain signals
have been proposed [5, 10, 12, 15, 37, 57, 60, 62]. These
methods aim to retrieve and reconstruct the original visual
stimuli by aligning the representations of brain signals with
the visual stimuli. However, they fail to account for the
GAPs between brain signals and visual stimuli. Previous
studies [6, 7, 13, 51, 72] on human perceptual and cognitive
capacities have shown that the amount of visual information human can process and remember at any given moment
is limited and varies across individuals due to constrained
attentional resources [8, 17, 59], limitations in eye movements and scanning [33, 73], and the limited capacity of visual working memory [45]. When the digital image modality is transformed into the brain signal modality through human visual perception and cognitive processes, some information is unavoidably lost, which is called the System GAP
between human and machine. A key factor contributing to
this information loss is the structure of the human eye. As
shown in Fig. 1, when an individual observes an object, the

Can our brain signals faithfully reflect the original visual
stimuli, even including high-frequency details? Although
human perceptual and cognitive capacities enable us to process and remember visual information, these abilities are
constrained by several factors, such as limited attentional
resources and finite capacity of visual memory. When visual
stimuli are processed by human visual system into brain
signals, some information is inevitably lost, leading to a
discrepancy known as the System GAP. Additionally, perceptual and cognitive dynamics, along with technical noise
in signal acquisition, degrade the fidelity of brain signals
relative to the visual stimuli, known as the Random GAP.
When encoded brain representations are directly aligned
with the corresponding pretrained image features, the System GAP and Random GAP between paired data challenge
the model, requiring it to bridge these gaps. However, due
to limited paired data, these gaps are difficult for the model
to learn, leading to overfitting and poor generalization to
new data. To address these GAPs, we propose a simple
yet effective approach called the Uncertainty-aware Blur
Prior (UBP). It estimates the uncertainty within the paired
data, reflecting the mismatch between brain signals and visual stimuli. Based on uncertainty, UBP dynamically blurs
the high-frequency details of the original images, reducing the impact of mismatch and improving alignment. Our
method achieves a top-1 accuracy of 50.9% and a top-5 accuracy of 79.7% on the zero-shot brain-to-image retrieval
task, surpassing previous state-of-the-art methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/HaitaoWuTJU/
Uncertainty-aware-Blur-Prior.

1. Introduction
The human brain is one of the most complex things known
in the universe, and extensive studies have been devoted to
* Corresponding authors.

2246

