This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIR-DIFF: Sparse Image Sets Restoration with Multi-View Diffusion Model
Yucheng Mao1, *
1

Boyang Wang1, *

Nilesh Kulkarni1,2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

2

Jeong Joon Park1

Netflix

Figure 1. Sparse View Image Restoration. Our diffusion model takes multi-view images and jointly enhances their visual quality
while maintaining 3D consistency. (Top) Four motion-blurred input images are processed by our method, resulting in sharp outputs that
significantly outperform single-view restoration methods as shown in the corresponding purple boxes. (Bottom) Our method can consistently
restore multi-view images (4 out of 50 shown), leading to accurate 3D reconstructions.

Abstract

age and even video-based methods on image deblurring and
super-resolution tasks. Critically, our model is trained to
output 3D consistent images, making it a promising tool for
applications requiring robust multi-view integration, such
as 3D reconstruction or pose estimation. Project website:
https://myc634.github.io/sirdiff/

The computer vision community has developed numerous techniques for digitally restoring true scene information from single-view degraded photographs, an important
yet extremely ill-posed task. In this work, we tackle image
restoration from a different perspective by jointly denoising
multiple photographs of the same scene. Our core hypothesis
is that degraded images capturing a shared scene contain
complementary information that, when combined, better constrains the restoration problem. To this end, we implement
a powerful multi-view diffusion model that jointly generates uncorrupted views by extracting rich information from
multi-view relationships. Our experiments show that our
multi-view approach outperforms existing single-view im-

1. Introduction

* Equal contribution

Image restoration approaches [8, 16, 29, 53] typically process degraded images in isolation, confronting the challenge
of the original scene content. Yet in practice, we frequently
capture multiple photographs of meaningful moments, yielding a natural collection of views of the same scene, albeit
some degraded. This common behavior presents an untapped
opportunity: leveraging multiple captures to enhance image

21620

