This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-modal Causal Relation Alignment for Video Question Grounding
Weixing Chen1 Yang Liu1,4 * Binglin Chen1 Jiangdon Su1 Yongsen Zheng2 Liang Lin1,3,4
1
Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing
{chenwx228,chenblin9}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,liuy856@mail.sysu.edu.cn,jiandong.laurence.su@gmail.com
yongsen.zheng@ntu.edu.sg,linliang@ieee.org

(a)

Abstract
Video question grounding (VideoQG) requires models to answer the questions and simultaneously infer the relevant
video segments to support the answers. However, existing
VideoQG methods usually suffer from spurious cross-modal
correlations, leading to a failure to identify the dominant
visual scenes that align with the intended question. Moreover, vision-language models exhibit unfaithful generalization performance and lack robustness on challenging downstream tasks such as VideoQG. In this work, we propose
a novel VideoQG framework named Cross-modal Causal
Relation Alignment (CRA), to eliminate spurious correlations and improve the causal consistency between questionanswering and video temporal grounding. Our CRA involves three essential components: i) Gaussian Smoothing
Grounding (GSG) module for estimating the time interval
via cross-modal attention, which is de-noised by an adaptive Gaussian filter, ii) Cross-Modal Alignment (CMA) enhances the performance of weakly supervised VideoQG by
leveraging bidirectional contrastive learning between estimated video segments and QA features, iii) Explicit Causal
Intervention (ECI) module for multimodal deconfounding,
which involves front-door intervention for vision and backdoor intervention for language. Extensive experiments on
two VideoQG datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
CRA in discovering visually grounded content and achieving robust question reasoning. Codes are available at
https://github.com/WissingChen/CRA-GQA.

how does the woman help the baby at the start ?
B. kiss them
C. rock baby
A. catch back balloon
E. holds his hand
D. push the chair baby is in

Unfaithful Grounding
for Answer E.

Faithful Grounding
for Answer E.
(b)

(c)

Occurrence
Number
A.

B.

C.

D.

Distribution of segment ratio

Number in test set

Question mentions
“baby” & “woman”

E.

Test Set
Val Set

Ratio of segment w.r.t entire video

Figure 1. (a) A typical example of a VideoQG task, which adopts
the erroneous grounding and leads to the correct but unfaithful answer. (b) shows the occurrence number of different answers from
the questions that mention “baby” and “woman”. (c) shows the
distribution of the ratio between the video segment and full video
in the Test set and Val Set.

1. Introduction

rely on statistical biases (i.e., language/visual short-cut or
spurious vision-language correlation) in the training data
rather than genuine causal visual evidence (i.e., dominant
visual content relevant to the prediction) [37]. To ensure faithful performance enhancement, the Video Question Grounding (VideoQG) task has emerged to explicitly
provide visual evidence for the given answers [25] by highlighting the relevance between the visual grounding content
and the question reasoning process.
Generally, VideoQG models need to be trained using annotated time intervals derived from the VideoQA task [39].
Nevertheless, the adopted datasets often lack annotations related to video grounding due to the high labeling costs [37].
Although current video language models can also perform
zero-shot VideoQG [6, 32, 45], these capabilities largely
rely on extensive training with pre-aligned, curated video-

Recent advancements in vision-language models (VLMs)
have significantly improved the performance of Video
Question Answering (VideoQA) tasks [20, 42]. However,
these improvements are not always faithful, as models may
* Corresponding Author

24087

