This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-view Reconstruction via SfM-guided Monocular Depth Estimation
Haoyu Guo1→ He Zhu2→ Sida Peng1 Haotong Lin1 Yunzhi Yan1
Tao Xie1 Wenguan Wang1 Xiaowei Zhou1 Hujun Bao1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Beijing Normal Univeristy

Figure 1. We propose Murre, a new method for multi-view 3D reconstruction based on SfM-guided monocular depth estimation. Building
on Stable Diffusion [48], Murre demonstrates exceptional generalization capabilities after fine-tuning on a modest amount of synthetic
data. Murre is capable of achieving high-quality reconstructions for a variety of real-world scenarios, including object-level, indoor, street,
and aerial scenes.

Abstract

age, Murre bypasses the multi-view matching step and naturally resolves the issues of previous MVS-based methods. In
addition, the diffusion-based model can easily leverage the
powerful priors of 2D foundation models, achieving good
generalization ability across diverse real-world scenes. To
obtain multi-view consistent depth maps, our key design is
providing effective guidance on the diffusion model through
the SfM point cloud, which is a condensed form of multiview information, highlighting the scene’s salient structure,
and can be readily transformed into sparse depth maps to
drive the image-space estimation process. We evaluate the
reconstruction quality of Murre in various types of realworld datasets including indoor, streetscapes, and aerial
scenes, surpassing state-of-the-art MVS-based and implicit
neural reconstruction-based methods. The code and supplementary materials are available at https://zju3dv.
github.io/murre/.

This paper aims to reconstruct the scene geometry from
multi-view images with strong robustness and high quality.
Previous learning-based methods incorporate neural networks into the multi-view stereo matching and have shown
impressive reconstruction results. However, due to the reliance on matching across input images, they typically suffer from high GPU memory consumption and tend to fail
in sparse view scenarios. To overcome this problem, we
develop a new pipeline, named Murre, for multi-view geometry reconstruction of 3D scenes based on SfM-guided
monocular depth estimation. For input images, Murre first
recovers the SfM point cloud that captures the global scene
structure, and then use it to guide a conditional diffusion
model to produce multi-view metric depth maps for the final
TSDF fusion. By predicting the depth map from a single im→ Equal contribution

† Corresponding authors

5272

