This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent Normal Orientation for 3D Point Clouds via Least Squares on
Delaunay Graph
Rao Fu1 , Jianmin Zheng1,†, Liang Yu2
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,

2

Alibaba Group

rao.fu@ntu.edu.sg, asjmzheng@ntu.edu.sg, liangyu.yl@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The orientation of surface normals in 3D point cloud is
a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics.
Determining a globally consistent orientation solely from
the point cloud is however challenging due to the global
scope of the problem and the discrete nature of point cloud,
particularly in the presence of noise, outliers, holes, thin
structures, and complex topologies. This paper presents an
efficient, robust, and global algorithm for generating consistent normal orientation of a dense 3D point cloud. The
basic idea is to transform the original binary normal orientation problem to finding a relaxed sign field on a Delaunay graph, which can be achieved by solving a sparse
linear system. The Delaunay graph is constructed by triangulating a level set of an implicit function defined from
the input point cloud. The shape diameter function is estimated to serve as a prior for determining an appropriate
level value such that the level set implicitly defines the inner
and outer shells enclosing the input point clouds. As such,
our algorithm leverages the strengths of the shape diameter function, Delaunay triangulation, and the least-square
techniques, making the underlying processes take both geometry and topology into consideration, and thus provides
an efficient and robust solution for handling point clouds
with complicated geometry and topology. Extensive experiments on various shapes with noise and outliers confirm the
effectiveness and robustness of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Consistent normal vectors of 3D point clouds are important for understanding geometry and capturing the structures of 3D surfaces. Particularly, globally consistent oriented normals can enrich the information conveyed by point
clouds, enabling a wide range of computer vision and
graphics applications, including rendering [13,33,35,36,41,
48], surface reconstruction [24, 25, 52], registration [2, 22,
† Corresponding Author

23, 43], mesh processing [59, 60], and sampling [10, 18, 51].
While the estimation of unoriented normals has achieved
significant progress [3, 4, 7, 14, 15, 29, 34, 58], determining
their orientation with global consistency remains challenging in real industrial applications.
Orienting normal vectors across a 3D point cloud consistently presents several difficulties. Unlike estimating unoriented normals, which typically relies on local geometric
properties as in PCA [15] or jet fitting variants [3, 4, 58],
orienting these normals requires consideration of global coherence. The primary challenge lies in the inherently global
nature of normal orientation, whereas initial estimates are
typically derived from local patches, leading to unoriented
normals. Moreover, local methods for unoriented normal
estimation typically fit a surface patch using an Euclidean
neighborhood, whereas the actual surface may follow a
more geodesic form, which introduces further inconsistencies. Although data-driven methods like PCPNet [14] and
SHS-Net [31] can regress oriented normals directly using
ground-truth orientation as supervision, they cannot guarantee geometric and topological consistency.
Many normal orientation methods have been developed
and roughly they can be categorized into propagation-based,
volume-based, and learning-based approaches, each with
distinct strategies and limitations. Propagation-based methods [15, 27] start by orienting a seed point and then propagate this orientation to neighboring points on a graph,
such as a minimum spanning tree (MST), using various
strategies, which can be prone to errors. Global optimization techniques [20, 40, 45, 46, 55] could be implemented to
replace greedy propagation, but they rely heavily on Euclidean neighborhoods, making it difficult to handle thin
structures, varying densities, and sharp features. Volumebased approaches [1,39,42] solve for interior/exterior properties or a signed implicit function on a volumetric discretization. To enhance robustness on noisy point clouds,
iterative optimization processes are developed [16, 37, 56],
which are however not suitable or less effective for largescale point clouds, thin structures, and complex topologies.
Learning-based methods [31,40] have gained popularity re-

16932

