This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

USP-Gaussian: Unifying Spike-based Image Reconstruction, Pose Correction
and Gaussian Splatting
Kang Chen1,2 Jiyuan Zhang1,2 Zecheng Hao1,2 Yajing Zheng1,2 Tiejun Huang1,2,3 Zhaofei Yu1,3 *
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{mrchenkang,jyzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {haozecheng,yj.zheng,tjhuang,yuzf12}@pku.edu.cn
PSNR

22.3dB

24.5dB

GS w/o joint

Rec w/o joint

GS w/ joint

Rec w/ joint

26.4dB

Recon-Net

3DGS
Input

Operation Flow

27.1dB

Gradient Flow

Visual Comparison of the 3DGS and the Recon-Net
(w/ & w/o Joint Learning)

Figure 1. Left. Illustration of our USP-Gaussian framework, where the spike-based image Reconstruction Network (Recon-Net), camera
poses, and 3DGS are collaboratively optimized signified by . Mid. Visual ablation showcasing the performance of Recon-Net and 3DGS
with and without (w/ & w/o) the joint optimization strategy, with the ablation table depicted in Tab. 4 and the input formulated in Eq. (6).
Right. Training curve comparison for Recon-Net and 3DGS with and without joint optimization.

spike camera, our framework enables iterative optimization between the spike-to-image reconstruction network and
3DGS. Experiments on synthetic datasets demonstrate that
our method surpasses previous approaches by effectively
eliminating cascading errors. Moreover, in real-world scenarios, our method achieves robust 3D reconstruction benefiting from the integration of pose optimization. Our
code, data, and trained models are available at https:
//github.com/chenkang455/USP-Gaussian.

Abstract
Spike camera, as an innovative type of neuromorphic camera that captures scenes with 0-1 bit stream at 40 kHz, is
increasingly being employed for the novel view synthesis
task building on techniques such as Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). Previous spikebased approaches typically follow a three-stage pipeline: I.
Spike-to-image reconstruction based on established algorithms. II. Camera poses estimation. III. Novel view synthesis. However, the cascading framework suffers from substantial cumulative errors, i.e., the quality of the initially reconstructed images will impact pose estimation, ultimately
limiting the fidelity of the 3D reconstruction. To address
this limitation, we propose a synergistic optimization framework USP-Gaussian, which unifies spike-to-image reconstruction, pose correction, and gaussian splatting into an
end-to-end pipeline. Leveraging the multi-view consistency
afforded by 3DGS and the motion capture capability of the

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author.

Spike cameras [12], inspired by the human retina [49], introduce an innovative paradigm for encoding high-speed
dynamic scenes. In contrast to conventional imaging systems [22] that rely on fixed exposure intervals to integrate
visual information, spike cameras continuously sense dynamics by recording the spike stream with an impressive
firing rate of 40 kHz. Benefiting from the efficient bit representation of spikes, spike cameras can adeptly detect rapid
scenes with significantly diminished bandwidth compared

16609

