This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Gaussian Inpainting with Depth-Guided Cross-View Consistency
Sheng-Yu Huang1,† ,
1

Zi-Ting Chou2 ,

Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2,‡ ,

Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University
†

f08942095@ntu.edu.tw

‡

2

NVIDIA, Taiwan

frankwang@nvidia.com

Figure 1. Given multi-view images of a scene and the object masks describing the object to be removed, our 3D Gaussian Inpainting with
Depth-Guided Cross-View Consistency produces high-fidelity cross-view inpainting results. Compared with current state-of-the-arts such
as SPIn-NeRF [24], Gaussian Grouping [41], and GScream [35], inpainting results of our method not only preserve visible background
contents but also exhibit satisfactory consistency across camera views.

Abstract
When performing 3D inpainting using novel-view rendering
methods like Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) or 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), how to achieve texture and geometry
consistency across camera views has been a challenge. In
this paper, we propose a framework of 3D Gaussian Inpainting with Depth-Guided Cross-View Consistency (3DGIC)
for cross-view consistent 3D inpainting. Guided by the
rendered depth information from each training view, our
3DGIC exploits background pixels visible across different
views for updating the inpainting mask, allowing us to refine
the 3DGS for inpainting purposes. Through extensive experiments on benchmark datasets, we confirm that our 3DGIC
outperforms current state-of-the-art 3D inpainting methods
quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis for 3D scenes plays a vital role in
3D reconstruction and scene understanding. Recent advancements, such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [1,
4, 9, 21, 22, 26, 29, 32, 43] and 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [5, 14, 28, 41, 44], enable high-fidelity novel views

by modeling volumetric properties. However, practical
VR/AR applications [3, 20] require more than reconstruction: they need editing capabilities that these methods do
not fully address. Among editing challenges, object removal
and inpainting [17, 35] are particularly difficult, as direct
removal creates visible holes, compromising visual quality. While 2D inpainting [7, 19, 27, 31, 33, 38–40] across
multiple views is possible, maintaining consistency remains
problematic, leading to artifacts and reduced fidelity. Thus,
achieving seamless, multi-view-consistent inpainting for 3D
scenes is still an open challenge.
As a pioneering work in 3D scene inpainting, SPInNeRF [24] proposes to use a pre-trained segmentation network [10] to generate plausible 2D inpaint masks for multiview images with sparse human annotations of the object to be removed. However, as noted in subsequent research [17, 35], SPIn-NeRF and similar approaches [37, 42]
rely heavily on 2D inpainting of multiple views separately,
which hinders the cross-view consistency of the 3D inpainting results. To ensure cross-view consistency, RefNeRF [23]
projects the inpainted image from a specific reference view
onto other views using depth-guided projection, thereby ensuring more consistent inpainting results across views. Despite these advancements, these methods still require human-

26704

