This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShapeShifter: 3D Variations Using Multiscale and Sparse Point-Voxel Diffusion
Nissim Maruani

Wang Yifan

Matthew Fisher

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur
nissim.maruani@inria.fr

Adobe Research
yifwang@adobe.com

Adobe Research
matfishe@adobe.com

Pierre Alliez

Mathieu Desbrun

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur
pierre.alliez@inria.fr

Inria/X, IP Paris
mathieu.desbrun@inria.fr

Abstract

Input
Geometry

This paper proposes ShapeShifter, a new 3D generative
model that learns to synthesize shape variations based on
a single reference model. While generative methods for
3D objects have recently attracted much attention, current
techniques often lack geometric details and/or require long
training times and large resources. Our approach remedies
these issues by combining sparse voxel grids and point, normal, and color sampling within a multiscale neural architecture that can be trained efficiently and in parallel. We
show that our resulting variations better capture the fine
details of their original input and can handle more general
types of surfaces than previous SDF-based methods. Moreover, we offer interactive generation of 3D shape variants,
allowing more human control in the design loop if needed.

Generated Shapes

Training

Multiscale Diffusion Sampling

1. Introduction
Creating 3D content through generative models is currently
attracting significant attention. Traditional 3D modeling demands both time and specialized skills to create complex
shapes, whereas advancements in generative AI promise a
broader exploration of design possibilities, free from the
usual constraints of time or technical expertise. However,
current 3D generative models have numerous shortcomings
that limit their usefulness in applications such as movies,
gaming, and product design. First, state-of-the-art methods often struggle to produce the fine geometric details
and sharp features necessary for digital shapes in geometric
modeling. Additionally, these models require large, highquality 3D datasets, which are significantly more challenging to curate compared to image datasets, and involve long
training times and substantial computational resources.
In this paper, we tackle a task-specific, yet effective approach to synthesizing geometry: we propose generating
shape variations from a single high-quality example. This
lesser-explored generative method offers several benefits

Figure 1. ShapeShifter. Given a 3D exemplar, we propose to
train a hierarchical diffusion model to create variations preserving the geometric details and styles of the exemplar. By combining compact yet explicit 3D features (colored, oriented points)
with a sparse voxel grid, we shorten training times from hours to
minutes, while yielding significantly better geometric quality than
prior work. The hierarchical point representation and fast inference times further enable intuitive interactive editing.

beyond avoiding the curation of large training datasets: it
has the potential to provide a resource-efficient way to generate shape variants for retargeting or editing, automatically
inheriting the style, symmetries, semantics, and geometric details from the exemplar. Although existing generative
methods from exemplars are able to create varied 3D assets,
they struggle to produce clean and detailed geometry due
to their reliance on occupancy fields [50, 91, 105] or signed
distance functions [106] (which smooth out geometric features), or because they are supervised through volumetric

605

