This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Real-world BEV Perception: Depth Uncertainty Estimation
via Gaussian Splatting

1

Shu-Wei Lu1 Yi-Hsuan Tsai2 Yi-Ting Chen1 *
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 Atmanity Inc.

40

Abstract

PointBEV

Bird’s-eye view (BEV) perception has gained significant attention because it provides a unified representation to fuse
multiple view images and enables a wide range of downstream autonomous driving tasks, such as forecasting and
planning. Recent state-of-the-art models utilize projectionbased methods which formulate BEV perception as query
learning to bypass explicit depth estimation. While we observe promising advancements in this paradigm, they still
fall short of real-world applications because of the lack
of uncertainty modeling and expensive computational requirement. In this work, we introduce GaussianLSS, an
uncertainty-aware BEV perception framework that revisits
the unprojection-based method, specifically the Lift-SplatShoot (LSS) paradigm, and enhances it with depth uncertainty modeling. Our GaussianLSS represents spatial dispersion by learning a soft depth mean and computing the
variance of the depth distribution, which implicitly captures object extents. We then transform the depth distribution into 3D Gaussians and rasterize them to construct
uncertainty-aware BEV features. We evaluate GaussianLSS
on the nuScenes dataset, achieving state-of-the-art performance compared to unprojection-based methods. In particular, it provides significant advantages in speed, running
2x faster, and in memory efficiency, using 0.3x less memory compared to projection-based methods, while achieving competitive performance with only a 0.7% IoU difference. See our project page for more details: https://hcislab.github.io/GaussianLSS/.

38

GaussianLSS
SimpleBEV

36

Fiery
BEVFormer

34

Diameter
0.5 1.0

3.0 Mem Gib

32

CVT

30
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Inference Speed (FPS) (→)
2D unprojection

3D projection

Figure 1. Comparisons of 2D unprojection-based and 3D
projection-based methods on vehicle BEV segmentation.
GaussianLSS achieves state-of-the-art performance among 2D unprojection baselines. In addition, it also demonstrates competitive
performance compared to 3D projection-based methods, while offering significant advantages in memory efficiency and inference
speed.

1. Introduction

driving environment. BEV perception also plays a pivotal
role in downstream applications, including motion forecasting [5] and planning [9, 11, 12], where accurate spatial understanding is critical for safety and decision-making. In
addition, BEV facilitates effective multi-modality fusion by
providing a robust intermediate representation for sensor integration [7, 24].
Existing approaches for BEV perception can be broadly
categorized into two paradigms: (1) 2D unprojection methods, which estimate depth and unproject features into 3D
space [9, 24, 29], and (2) 3D projection methods, which
project predefined 3D coordinate volumes onto camera
views and aggregate image features [4, 7, 17]. While these
paradigms have driven significant progress, they often involve trade-offs in accuracy, computational cost, and scalability, limiting their applicability in real-world scenarios.
3D projection approaches represent the state-of-the-art in
terms of accuracy; however, their reliance on 3D grids leads
to high computational costs, making them less practical for

Bird’s-eye view (BEV) perception is an emerging and crucial technique in autonomous driving, offering a unified
spatial representation for integrating multiple sensor inputs.
It serves as a foundation for 3D perception tasks such as
3D object detection [17, 23, 35] and BEV segmentation
[4, 7, 9, 29, 37], which are essential for understanding the
* : Corresponding author.

17124

