This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Speedy-Splat: Fast 3D Gaussian Splatting with
Sparse Pixels and Sparse Primitives
Alex Hanson
Allen Tu
Matthias Zwicker

Geng Lin
Vasu Singla
Tom Goldstein

University of Maryland, College Park

GT

3DGS

Ours

2.6M Gaussians 25.39 PSNR 184.87 FPS

0.26M Gaussians 25.34 PSNR 1148.77 FPS

Figure 1. We reduce the number of Gaussians by over 90%, only marginally decrease PSNR, and accelerate rendering speed by 6.2× in
the Tanks & Temples truck scene when compared to 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS). Additionally, we speed up training time by 1.38×.

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) is a recent 3D scene reconstruction technique that enables real-time rendering of
novel views by modeling scenes as parametric point clouds
of differentiable 3D Gaussians. However, its rendering
speed and model size still present bottlenecks, especially
in resource-constrained settings. In this paper, we identify and address two key inefficiencies in 3D-GS to substantially improve rendering speed. These improvements also
yield the ancillary benefits of reduced model size and training time. First, we optimize the rendering pipeline to precisely localize Gaussians in the scene, boosting rendering
speed without altering visual fidelity. Second, we introduce
a novel pruning technique and integrate it into the training
pipeline, significantly reducing model size and training time
while further raising rendering speed. Our Speedy-Splat
approach combines these techniques to accelerate average
rendering speed by a drastic 6 .71 × across scenes from
the Mip-NeRF 360, Tanks & Temples, and Deep Blending
datasets. Code and additional visualizations are available
at https://speedysplat.github.io/.

nificant strides in photorealistic 3D scene reconstruction by
representing scenes as continuous neural volumetric models
that encode scene density and color at spatial coordinates.
However, despite recent efforts [4, 24, 29], fast rendering
in NeRF remains challenging because the volumetric sampling used in ray-marching is computationally expensive.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [14] has emerged
as a promising alternative that enables real-time rendering
by modeling scenes as parametric point clouds of differentiable 3D Gaussians. Nevertheless, its rendering speed
is still limited by high parameter counts and certain algorithmic inefficiencies. Efficient rendering is essential in applications such as virtual reality, networked systems, and
multi-view streaming. Real-time rendering on resourceconstrained edge devices, such as mobile phones, has yet
to be achieved [19].

1. Introduction

Although recent works on compressing 3D-GS models
[6, 7, 11, 25] achieve some speed-ups by reducing the number of parameters, few approaches directly target rendering
speed [8, 19]. In this paper, we specifically address this gap
by demonstrating that the rendering speed of 3D-GS models
can be drastically increased while maintaining competitive
image quality. Additionally, we show that our methods reduce training time and substantially decrease model size.

Fast rendering of photorealistic novel views has been a
long-standing goal in computer vision and graphics. Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] and its variants have made sig-

We begin by observing that the cost of 3D-GS rendering
is proportional to both the number of Gaussians in the scene
and the number of pixels processed per Gaussian. Our ap-

21537

