This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Visual and Downstream Performance of Low-Light Enhancer with
Vision Foundation Models Collaboration
Yuxuan Gu1 , Haoxuan Wang1 , Pengyang Ling1,2 , Zhixiang Wei1 ,
Huaian Chen1† , Yi Jin1† , and Enhong Chen1
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
In this paper, we observe that the collaboration of
various foundation models can perceive semantic and degraded information within images, thereby guiding the lowlight enhancement process. Specifically, we propose a selfsupervised low-light enhancement framework based on the
multiple foundation models collaboration (dubbed FoCo),
aimed at improving both the visual quality of enhanced images and the performance in high-level applications. At the
feature level, FoCo leverages the rich features from various
foundation models to enhance the model’s semantic perception during training, thereby reducing the gap between enhanced results and high-quality images from a high-level
perspective. At the task level, we exploit the robustnessgap between strong foundation models and weak models,
applying high-level task guidance to the low-light enhancement training process. Through the collaboration of multiple foundation models, the proposed framework shows better enhancement performance and adapts better to highlevel tasks. Extensive experiments across various enhancement and application benchmarks demonstrate the qualitative and quantitative superiority of the proposed method
over numerous state-of-the-art techniques.

Prior
Function

Loss

Noise? Color?
Lightning? Clarity?

(a) Prior­based
Framework

High
Level
Model

Loss

Which model is
representative?

(b) Previous High­for­Low
Framework

Foundation
Feature­space Align

Gap­driven Task­based
Alignment

Multiple foundation
Models can collaborate!

(c) Proposed Multi­Foundation model
Collaboration Framework

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The proposed approach demonstrates substantial improvements over existing unsupervised methods in terms of enhancement tasks (PSNR, SSIM) and application tasks (classification/Acc, face detection/AP, and instance segmentation/mAP) ,
attributed to the proposed Multi-VFM Collaboration Framework.
Compared with previous unsupervised LIE learning paradigms (a)
and (b), the proposed framework (c) can make full use of the foundation models from a collaborative perspective to improve visual
quality and downstream task performance.

Images taken under short exposure or low-light conditions frequently suffer from significant degradation, including loss of color information and the introduction of
substantial noise. Such degradation severely impacts the
performance of downstream tasks [19, 36]. Low-light image enhancement (LIE) aims to restore input images captured in low-light environments to high-quality, well-lit images. With the advancement of deep learning technology
in computer vision, recent research [2, 25, 31, 33, 34, 39]
has achieved low-light image enhancement through supervised training on paired datasets. However, collecting
† Corresponding authors.

the substantial amount of paired images required for these
methods is both time-consuming and costly, which highlights the broad potential applications of self-supervised approaches [6, 7, 13, 18]. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), early selfsupervised training paradigms mainly relied on manually
defined priors, such as smoothness priors, brightness priors, or histogram equalization. The drawback of such priorbased frameworks is their lack of connection with semantic

16071

