This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spherical Manifold Guided Diffusion Model for Panoramic Image Generation
Xiancheng Sun1

Mai Xu1

Shengxi Li1 * Senmao Ma1 Xin Deng1
1
Beihang University 2 China Tower

Lai Jiang1

Gang Shen2

Figure 1. A subjective comparison of zero-shot text-conditioned panoramic image generation between our SMGD model and the state-ofthe-art method PanFusion [53]. Our model demonstrates superior performance in generating images with superior overall natural content,
enhanced subjective quality, and better alignment with the text description, while benefiting reduced model parameters.

Abstract

the shortest sampling time in the text-conditioned panoramic
image generation task. Codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/chronos123/SMGD.

Panoramic image essentially acts as a pivotal role in
emerging virtual reality and augmented reality scenarios;
however, the generation of panoramic images are essentially challenging due to the intrinsic spherical geometry
and spherical distortions caused by equirectangular projection (ERP). To address this, we start from the very basics
of S 2 manifold inherent to panoramic images, and propose
a novel spherical manifold convolution (SMConv) on S 2
manifold. Based on the SMConv operation, we propose
a spherical manifold guided diffusion (SMGD) model for
text-conditioned panoramic image generation, which can
well accommodate the spherical geometry during generation. We further develop a novel evaluation method by
calculating grouped Fréchet inception distance (FID) on
cube-map projections, which can well reflect the quality of
generated panoramic images, compared to existing methods that randomly crop ERP-distorted content. Experiment
results demonstrate that our SMGD model achieves the stateof-the-art generation quality and accuracy, whilst retaining

1. Introduction
Being able to be controlled by text descriptions, panoramic
image generation with a full 360◦ horizontal and 180◦ vertical field-of-view [44] opens a new avenue for various applications in virtual reality [48], augmented reality [47], autonomous driving [46], etc. Although recent developments
in deep probabilistic models including generative adversarial networks (GANs) [14, 20, 34, 57] and diffusion models
[10, 32, 33] have been acting as the workhorse in generating
photo-realistic images, panoramic image generation still remains challenging due to their intrinsic spherical geometry
property and distorted scene structures. In particular, the
equirectangular projection (ERP) [50] employed to convert
the panoramic content into a planar rectangular format, introduces spherical distortions and breaks the continuity at
the left and right edges. Within the ERP format, rectangular
panoramic images with an aspect ratio of 1 : 2 exhibit a

* Corresponding author.

5824

