This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E NERGY M O G EN: Compositional Human Motion Generation with
Energy-Based Diffusion Model in Latent Space
Jianrong Zhang1 , Hehe Fan2,† , Yi Yang2
†
1

Corresponding author

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney

2

CCAI, Zhejiang University

https://jiro-zhang.github.io/EnergyMoGen/

Abstract
Diffusion models, particularly latent diffusion models,
have demonstrated remarkable success in text-driven human motion generation. However, it remains challenging
for latent diffusion models to effectively compose multiple
semantic concepts into a single, coherent motion sequence.
To address this issue, we propose EnergyMoGen, which includes two spectrums of Energy-Based Models: ❶ We interpret the diffusion model as a latent-aware energy-based
model that generates motions by composing a set of diffusion models in latent space; ❷ We introduce a semanticaware energy model based on cross-attention, which enables semantic composition and adaptive gradient descent
for text embeddings. To overcome the challenges of semantic inconsistency and motion distortion across these two
spectrums, we introduce Synergistic Energy Fusion. This
design allows the motion latent diffusion model to synthesize high-quality, complex motions by combining multiple energy terms corresponding to textual descriptions.
Experiments show that our approach outperforms existing
state-of-the-art models on various motion generation tasks,
including text-to-motion generation, compositional motion
generation, and multi-concept motion generation. Additionally, we demonstrate that our method can be used to
extend motion datasets and improve the text-to-motion task.

1. Introduction
Composition of complex ideas out of simple ones.
– John Locke (1632 - 1704) [4]

Generating human motions that are both visually appealing
and physically plausible is a longstanding goal in computer
animation. Recently, the remarkable success of diffusion
models [24, 54, 57] stimulates the emergence of diffusionbased solutions for generating human motion [60, 62, 72,
73] from a single text prompt.
Humans are masters of motion composition. For ex-

ample, with the mind of “raising both arms” and “walking forward”, we can blend these simple concepts to perform complex motions simultaneously based on our experiences. To achieve this capability, past efforts, such as PriorMDM [55] and GMD [33], have made significant strides
in temporal [2] and spatial [3] human motion compositions
using pre-trained skeleton-based diffusion models. These
models operate directly on skeletons, thus enabling precise
control over joint feature distributions to generate realistic
motions from multiple textual descriptions.
In this work, we are interested in the motion latent diffusion model [54, 66], which is another important formulation
of diffusion models operating in continuous latent space.
However, such models are not feasible for composing motion through algorithms proposed in skeleton-based diffusion models. As latent diffusion models usually use one
(or a fixed number of) latent vector(s) to represent variablelength motions (e.g., ranging from 40 to 196 frames), the
following issues naturally arise: i) Lack of explicit correspondence (e.g., one-to-one or one-to-many mapping) between latent vectors and motions; ii) It is challenging for
latent vectors to support per-frame composition.
Tackling these two issues can offer valuable insights into
compositional motion generation algorithms and motivate
us to reconsider this task from an energy view. The idea of
“energy” is intrinsic to Energy-Based Models (EBMs) [36].
Research on EBMs has a long history, yet it gets overlooked
nowadays in human motion generation. The energy function defines a potential field to shape the energy surface by
assigning low energies to desired configurations and high
energies to other configurations [76]. With this perspective [7–9, 11, 45], we delve into two spectrums of EBMs
for compositional motion generation: ❶ latent-aware and
❷ semantic-aware. By formulating the generative process
of latent diffusion models as an energy combination problem, we can compose complex motions from simple components through two compositional operations: conjunction
and negation (Figure 1 (a), (b), (c), more visual results are
provided in § 5.4 and on the project page).

17592

