This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UNEM: UNrolled Generalized EM for Transductive Few-Shot Learning
Long Zhou1,3 , Fereshteh Shakeri2 , Aymen Sadraoui3 ,
Mounir Kaaniche3,4 , Jean-Christophe Pesquet3 , Ismail Ben Ayed2
1

Politecnico di Milano
2
ÉTS Montréal
3
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CentraleSupélec, CVN
4
Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, L2TI, UR 3043

Abstract

Transductive few-shot learning has recently triggered
wide attention in computer vision. Yet, current methods
introduce key hyper-parameters, which control the prediction statistics of the test batches, such as the level of
class balance, affecting performances significantly. Such
hyper-parameters are empirically grid-searched over validation data, and their configurations may vary substantially with the target dataset and pre-training model, making such empirical searches both sub-optimal and computationally intractable. In this work, we advocate and introduce the unrolling paradigm, also referred to as “learning
to optimize”, in the context of few-shot learning, thereby
learning efficiently and effectively a set of optimized hyperparameters. Specifically, we unroll a generalization of the
ubiquitous Expectation-Maximization (EM) optimizer into
a neural network architecture, mapping each of its iterates
to a layer and learning a set of key hyper-parameters over
validation data. Our unrolling approach covers various
statistical feature distributions and pre-training paradigms,
including recent foundational vision-language models and
standard vision-only classifiers. We report comprehensive
experiments, which cover a breadth of fine-grained downstream image classification tasks, showing significant gains
brought by the proposed unrolled EM algorithm over iterative variants. The achieved improvements reach up to 10%
and 7.5% on vision-only and vision-language benchmarks,
respectively. The source code and learned parameters are
available at https://github.com/ZhouLong0/
UNEM-Transductive.

Figure 1. Impact of the class-balance hyperparameter ω on the
accuracy of transductive few-shot classification. The accuracy results are obtained using the EM-Dirichlet algorithm [33] applied
to vision-language models (with 4-shots). The plot shows that
the choice of ω has a strong impact on the performance, and that
the optimal ω (indicated with the star symbol) might vary by orders of magnitudes, depending on the target downstream dataset
(e.g., the ten very different fine-grained classification datasets).
Further comments on the optimal ω values and the values chosen in [33] are provided in Section 4. The values of the learned
hyper-parameters based on the proposed unrolled algorithm are illustrated and analyzed in Appendix D.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has transfigured computer vision, driving
substantial progress in tasks such as image classification,
captioning, object detection and segmentation. However,
these successes often come with a high cost: the requirement for large amounts of labeled data. Additionally, the
generalization of these models is seriously challenged when
evaluated on new classes (concepts), unseen during pre-

9665

